I'm so happy you're here today I had a dream last night that you would come. I was not told your name in my dream but I dreamt that you had the long curly, dark hair you have and the outfit you have on now, you also had that same outfit on in my dream. You know, I've already started getting things from Magic here, my crystal ball, typically it can take a few waves of the wand but you're giving me energy already and I like that. First of all, I see a man. He looks like he's your age, so it's not your father or grandpa or anything like that, he must be your future husband. Yes, as a matter of fact, I'm getting a husband in your future. You're going to get married this year, it looks like. because he's bent down on one knee giving you something. I guess he could be begging you for something, but I see something shiny in his hand. Yup, it's a ring! Girl, you're getting married this year! Not sure of what he looks like, to be honest, but he's a very handsome man from what I can see. 

With my second wave of the hand over Magic, the crystal ball, I see that you are going places. You're going to the mall, you're going to the movies, you're going to the beach....totally kidding. You're going to be someone really big soon, I can tell. Have you ever thought about reality TV? Most people get their start from there, maybe you should try it. But you are certainly getting very far this year, whatever that may be, with not only a new man but possibly even fame and fortune. Wait a second! I believe I can see even further now! 

You're going to have your OWN reality TV show! Something like the Bachelorette and that explains the handsome, shirtless man bowing down to you holding something shiny for you! Wow! You're seriously on a roll girl and I would love to have your luck today. New man, new reality show, new ring, I mean what could be better? So glad you stopped by, but your time is now up and I don't see anything else in Magic so unless you have another $40 per hour, I think you should go! 

Thanks again for coming by!
