Thomas looked down at his plate. The steaming gray mush on top was still, in fact, steaming gray mush. The plate was still hot from when the server had placed it down. It definitely didn't look like something he wanted to put in his mouth. Moreover, it definitely didn't look like what he ordered. He wrestled with his thoughts. Did he really want to go through the hassle of getting the order corrected? He specifically did things like go out to restaurants alone so he wouldn't have to deal with people -- and also so that he wouldn't face any social ridicule if he decided on his own accord to leave something like this alone. But, he was kind of hungry, he conceded. He didn't place a reservation and get all dressed up just to not eat what they served. He made up his mind.

"Excuse me, Elizabeth?" Thomas called over as his server passed his table. She responded with a sharp stop to her quick walk and tilted her head back in his direction.
"Hm?" was all she could muster.
"Um, look, I don't normally do this, but . . ."
"No, you can't buy me a drink after my shift ends," she interrupted with a roll of her eyes. This was something she'd heard all too often.
"No, it's not that," said Thomas with a little bit of red showing on his cheeks.
"Oh," said Elizabeth surprised. She turned fully towards him. "In that case, how can I help you?"
"Well, it's just that this isn't what I ordered."
"Isn't it?"
"No, it isn't."
"I'm sorry about that. I thought you ordered the casserole."
"I did."
"This is the casserole," she said matter-of-factly. "Enjoy."
"This isn't a casserole. This is . . . mush, I think," Thomas said with disgust.
"Well, this is what they gave me at the window. And I didn't put it in wrong so . . ." she let the word trail. Thomas was frustrated. All he wanted was a nice quiet night out alone.
"If you could go back there and explain I don't want this, can I get something else?"
"If you lower your standards for things, can you get a date for a night out like this?"
"What?" he stammered.
"Same answer," she shrugged.
