We're laying under the stars, the glow of the moon reflecting in her hair. With the getaway car long abandoned and our wheezing breath slowing to a gentle rhythm, a sense of calm washes over me. I'm free. Finally free. In sync with each of my breaths, I watch her head rise and fall with my chest, and we are at peace. There is nothing but the world in front of us now. 

But my voice pierces through the silence with a quiver of fear that I'm unable to release. "What if he finds me?" 

There is no hesitation in Anisse's response. 

"He won't." 

How can she be so sure? Even in the best of times, I am never so certain about anything, let alone my fate. Especially when it is in the hands of other people. She can feel my heart begin to speed up again, and she responds by resting a hand over it. "Close your eyes," she instructs, firm but gentle in her tone.

I do. Her breath begins to slow and grow louder. Breathe in, slowly... I count along with it, tapping a finger on her arm. We make it to four before she holds the breath. Another four beats pass. We exhale again to the count of four. The process repeats until my heart has calmed to a resting pace. 

"You did the right thing. We did the right thing." As it always does, her voice works to melt away my worries. Slowly opening my eyes, I lean down to press my lips to her head, where her softly reflective hair drapes over her ears. I could admire the way she looks in the dim glow of the full moon for a lifetime, but she would grow tired of it.

Reaching into the pocket of my loose jeans, I fiddle with the button that clicks my pen, twisting it between my fingers. As the last reminder of my mother, I could feel the love surging through the object. Mundane as it was, it would stay with me for however long the rest of my life would be. It had to. 

When I noticed Anisse's eyes fluttering shut, I removed the pen from my pocket. It only took a couple of small twisting motions before I could read the engraving across the pen.

'Only the gods can judge me now.'
