The Texas House of Representatives has shockingly voted to impeach third-term Republican Attorney General Ken Paxton.

Despite the people voting him back into office time and again, a collection of peers have now stripped the will of the citizens. Under state law, Paxton is now temporarily suspended from his duties as attorney general and will await a Senate trial. The vote was 121-23, with two members voting “present.”

Even more shocking, this was primarily a case of Texas conservatives investigating one of their own.  Rep. Andrew Murr, chair of the General Investigating Committee, is allegedly a Republican. His committee recommended 20 counts of impeachment against Paxton.

Even Democrat Rep. Harold Dutton had doubts. Dutton was one of the members voting present. He said the impeachment vote had been rushed. “The process by which we’re getting this done seems to be abbreviated to the point that it just encroaches on due process,” said Dutton.

Paxton denied wrongdoing in a blistering Friday news conference. He focused his statements against the impeachment on his record as a key opponent of President Joe Biden. Paxton’s office has filed dozens of lawsuits against the Biden administration.

The now-suspended attorney general called the impeachment a “politically motivated sham” in a statement just minutes after the vote. “The ugly spectacle in the Texas House today confirmed the outrageous impeachment plot against me was never meant to be fair or just,” he said.

There is plenty of evidence supporting the idea the proceedings were rigged. Paxton said he was never given a chance to present evidence refuting the findings of an investigation that he abused his office. Paxton has pointed out House Speaker Dade Phelan, is quite possibly a “liberal.” saying, “Phelan’s coalition of Democrats and liberal Republicans is now in lockstep with the Biden Administration, the abortion industry, anti-gun zealots, and woke corporations.”

The Office of the Attorney General issued its own “comprehensive report” about the allegations following the impeachment vote, saying it “unequivocally refutes incorrect testimony” against Paxton. The office also released a report it commissioned from an outside law firm, although the report from Lewis Brisbois Bisgaard and Smith LLP notes it is based only on information and testimony provided by the attorney general’s office.

The impeachment vote had its origins in an investigation launched in March by the General Investigating Committee of the Texas House after Paxton had asked the legislature to approve $3.3 million in government funds to settle a lawsuit with four whistleblowers who were fired from his office.

Opponents of the impeachment largely declined to address the allegations against him, instead focusing on the investigation leading up to the proceedings. “I don’t think today is about whether there’s guilt or innocence. It’s about the process,” said Rep. Tony Tinderholt.

“I’m not here to defend Ken Paxton,” Rep. John T. Smithee stated on the floor. He went on to say, “What you’re being asked to do today is to impeach without evidence. It is all rumor. It is all innuendo. It is all speculation.”

Many cannot help but wonder if the time and effort was worth it here, given his massive popularity. Paxton had earlier fought off multiple opponents for the GOP nomination, including Bush family scion George P. Bush, the state land commissioner, whom he easily bested in a runoff.

Some might wonder if this was borne of jealousy from less popular members of the Texas legislative branch. Paxton has long been close with former President Donald Trump, and led a lawsuit in 2020 seeking to overturn Joe Biden’s victory in the presidential election. 

Just like with the voters, Paxton retains plenty of support within the highest ranks of true Texas GOP leaders. In a statement Friday, state party chairman Matt Rinaldi blasted Phelan for what he called a “sham impeachment.”

“The voters have supported General Paxton through three elections – and his popularity has only grown despite millions of dollars spent to try to defeat him. Now the Texas House is trying to overturn the election results,” Rinaldi said, adding that he was looking to the “principled leadership” of the Senate to “restore sanity and reason for our state.”

It’s not yet clear when the Senate, where Republicans have a 19-12 majority over Democrats, will conduct its trial. This may all be merely an attempt for low level Texas RINOs to gain attention for themselves.
