It was a warm Saturday evening, shortly before 10 pm and I was out for my evening stroll in my neighbourhood of Victoria Park, east London. To my delight, I spied a house with an open door. I could hear the sound of the television blaring out from the lounge and as I peered through the window, I saw a couple relaxing in front of Britain's Got Talent. They seemed very preoccupied, so I decided to take a closer look and go inside.

I padded into the house, through the open door and made my way upstairs. There, I saw two babies sleeping soundly in a cot. They looked about nine months old. I was curious about these human children and decided to take a closer inspection. However, I accidentally clawed one of the babies on its arms and face, and the baby started to bleed heavily. There was blood everywhere, but I certainly didn't mean to harm the human child. I think the baby was startled by my presence and she began to make a hideous wailing noise. Before I could make my escape, I heard footsteps coming up the stairs and felt an adult human presence entering the room. Then, a glaring light lit up everything and I was so shocked, I just froze. I stared in horror at the lady who was in front of me. I looked her right in the eye and she glared back at me. 

Then, I fled back down the stairs, leaping and bounding two at a time, until I was in the garden, and I sheltered behind a thick hedge. From my vantage point, I heard a terrible commotion coming from the upstairs bedroom. A female voice shrieked and yelled. I heard the sound of a loud siren and an ambulance appeared. Two men jumped out hurriedly and raced inside, in an emergency. After a few minutes, the men reappeared, grasping a baby, followed by a sobbing woman and they all drove off in the ambulance. There had been such an uproar that many people had come out of their houses to see what was happening. A man was shouting that a vicious fox had attacked and seriously injured his baby. I thought that was an extremely unfair accusation, and untrue. I am not a vicious fox. I would never attack an innocent child. What happened was an accident. Sometimes, I forget how sharp my claws are.

However, I noticed from that time on, that all doors and windows in the neighbourhood were firmly closed. There was no opportunity to enter these homes. Moreover, humans began to behave uncharacteristically and cruelly. Sadly, a tragedy happened and one of my friends was murdered. He was caught in a trap left out by one of these humans. From that time on, it was a war between foxes and humans.
