It was a balmy summer day and the sun shone brightly over the grounds of the X-Men compound. Cyclops sat in a lounge chair near the pool soaking in the sun while reading the daily newspaper and sipping on a pink lemonade. It was a rare moment of peace and tranquility for the X-Men's de facto team leader.

Until a ball came crashing down on his side table spilling his drink all over the ground. Charging up from his chair, Cyclops turned left and then right searching for the offending object. Finding a ball just about to roll into the pool, Cyclops bounded over and grabbed it just in the nick of time.

"Hey Slim, you gonna toss that back?" a voice called to him. A voice Cyclops knew all too well.

"Don't you have any manners, Wolverine?" Cyclops replied.

"Manners? That's rich coming from you. Sorry to ruin your little party." Wolverine said.

"That's it, Logan, that is too far!" Cyclops tossed the ball with all his might. The Canuck, completely unphased, grabbed it in one palm and slowly extended his adamantium claws on the same hand. 

"You sure you want this fight, Scott? Ain't no professor here to save you."

Cyclops walked straight up to Wolverine, standing several inches above him, and stared daggers into his eyes. "This has been a long time coming, I'm not scared of you or your claws, little man."

Snarling, Wolverine clenched his jaw as something else overtook him. His left eyebrow arched curiously and his eyes drooped towards his toes. "Jean wouldn't want this, she'd never forgive me if I hurt you."

Jean Grey. The love of Cyclops's life. The one name that could stun him back from the edge of violence.

Gulping down a lump in his throat, Cyclops said to Wolverine. "Don't you dare, Logan! Don't you dare make me think of her again. She was... she was the best of both of us. Better than both of us."

Wolverine retracted his claws from the hand holding the ball. "You know what slim, this ball here. It's a basketball, what's say you and me settle this on the court."

"Best to 10?"

"You got it bub, I'll even let you take the ball out first."
