Breaking news: International controversy has sprung up after British climber David Sharp was reported dead while on a solo climb to the top of Mount Everest on 15 May. The story has apparently grown beyond the scope of the mountaineering community as many have been interviewed by the media. Allegations and critiques have come from many sources. Have climbers in the 2006 season left a man to die when he still had a chance to be saved? Sources say that Sharp tried to climb the mountain by himself with no guides, and it's said he even brought fewer oxygen bottles than normal. His guide firm in Nepal was a low-budget service that provided him service as far as Base Camp, but after that point, they expect climbers to continue as a "loose group," which allows for a great deal of independence. The manager told us that Sharp didn't have enough oxygen with him for his climb and chose not to have a Sherpa guide. The question is who knew that Sharp was in trouble? If they did know, were they even qualified or capable of helping him? 

One fellow climber, a double-amputee named Mark Inglis, claims that his party, along with several others, passed Sharp on their trek. He was reportedly sheltering beneath a rock overhang that was 450 metres below the summit, but none attempted a rescue. Inglis also said that 40 people had passed Sharp, but they might not have noticed him and instead thought he was the corpse nicknamed "Green Boots." What Inglis didn't know was that a party of Turkish climbers did try to help Sharp, even though they were already helping an injured woman (Turkish Burçak Poçan). Himex has also been discussed in the commentary on Inglis and Sharp. It's interesting to note that Inglis later revises his story, claiming that at the time he was first interviewed, he was "...physically and mentally exhausted, and in a lot of pain. He had suffered severe frostbite--he later had five fingertips amputated." A search of Sharp's possessions found a receipt for US$7,490 which is thought to be his entire cost for the climb. Most expeditions cost between $35,000 and $100,000, not to mention an additional $20,000 in other expenses like gear and bonuses. It is believed that Sharp summited on 14 May before beginning his descent, but on 15 May he encountered trouble. At this point, he was being passed by other climbers, and it's believed that he was experiencing hypoxia at around 300 metres from the summit.

Beck Weathers, who participated in the 1996 Mount Everest expedition that ended in disaster, claims that those who are dying tend to be left behind. Apparently, he had been left for dead himself on two separate occasions but had been able to keep walking and save himself. The Tribune of Chandigarh, India describes Sharp's predicament as "the most shameful act in the history of mountaineering." Nine other climbers also died in 2006, including Sherpas working for guide firms. 

The Discovery Channel captures a lot of the controversy in their television program Everest: Beyond the Limit. One very important piece of  Sharp's story is shown in the program when an early-returning climber named Maxim Chaya radioed his base camp manager (Russell Brice) to say that he had found a frostbitten and unconscious climber in distress. Chaya couldn't identify Sharp because he had chosen to not identify himself to other climbers. Instead of sending help, the base camp manager assumed that Sharp was a member of a group that had already abandoned him. He told Chaya that he wouldn't be able to help Sharp on his own, so Chaya left him. Sharp's condition continued to worsen and his chances of rescue grew smaller as climbers continue to pass him in their descent. The frostbite was making his legs and feet curl, preventing him from walking, and later descending climbers were low on oxygen and strength themselves. As the day continued, time ran out for Sherpas to come back and rescue him. 

Sharp's body remained where it was, just below the summit on the Chinese side, next to "Green Boots." They shared a small rock cave that also acted as their tomb. The BBC reports that Sharp's body was removed in 2007, and Green Boots has been missing since 2014, likely moved or buried.
