Here are some suggestions for shopping apps that offer cash back. 

1. DollarSprout Rewards - DollarSprout Rewards can be installed on your desktop browser as an extension. It works by automatically recognizing when you are about to purchase from a participating merchant such as Walgreens, Walmart, or Old Navy, and it prompts you to claim your cashback reward. Once you accumulate $5 in earnings after any amount of time, they pay out through the user's PayPal account the following month. 

2. Capital One Shopping - Capital One Shopping is an online browser extension as well as an app that applies coupons every time you check out. It lets you earn credits for shopping locally and informs you when there's a better price from another retailer. Users also have the option to add items to their Capital One Shopping watchlist so they can track prices and be notified when there's a better deal out there for them. 

3. Dosh - This cashback shopping app rewards you with everyday shopping both online and in-store. All you have to do is link your card to the app once and then enjoy the cash-back benefits over time as you shop. The great thing about the app is that it doesn't control or pressure you into making purchases you don't need simply because something is on sale. 

4. Rakuten - This popular shopping app issues cash back for shopping at popular online stores and a few local stores as well. Shopping on Rakuten is easy and you can do it both on the dedicated app or on your home computer. All you have to do to get started is open the Rakuten app on your phone and search the store of your choice using the search bar. Then click on any referral link to visit the store of your choosing and go about your normal shopping activities. 

5. Drop - Drop is an app that is similar to Rakuten which issues cash back for purchases made through qualifying links. The main difference is that Drop will pay you back in gift cards instead of in cash. But if you like the idea of gaining credits toward gift cards to your favorite stores then this would be a great option for you. After you accumulate 5,000 points on Drop, you can redeem them for a $5 gift card of your choice.
