Sure! Here are some ideas to raise money for a sorority cancer walk:

1. Bake Sale - Bake an assortment of goods such as cupcakes, pies, or cookies to sell. They can be packaged individually so that they are portable, or sold in bundles. 
2. Ice A Member - Participants can pay a fee to dump ice on a member. Price ranges can vary for a cup of ice, a bag of ice, or a bucket of ice.
3. Pie A Member - Participants can pay a fee to pie a member in the face. To lower cost, a "pie" can be a paper plate with a pile of whipped cream on top.
4. Shirt Sponsors - Participants pay for a place for their name on the cancer walk T-shirts.
5. Raffles - Participants pay for raffle tickets to enter a lottery to win a desirable item. Examples of items can include electronics, event tickets, gift cards, etc.
6. Social Media Story Sales - Create a graph with different dollar amounts in each slot. A slot will range in price from $1 - $10. Followers will donate an amount based on with slot they want to occupy. Once a slot is filled, replace the slot with the name of the person who donated the respective amount. Repost the graph on the story each time a slot is filled so it continues to pop up on followers' feeds.
7. Partnering with Franchises - Reach out to a local food franchise in your community and propose the idea of a fundraising partnership. The business will agree to share a percentage of sales from the date of the fundraising event with the cause. It's important to create flyers and spread the word about the event so that supporters are encouraged to eat that the franchise to increase sales.
8.  Car Wash - Either partner with a local business or set up your own car wash in your driveway.
9. Care Baskets - First create a theme for the care package. It can be related to an upcoming holiday or a relevant topic like Self Care. Visit an economic store to collect the supplies that the baskets will contain. Organize the baskets in an aesthetically pleasing manner and then resell them to supporters to make a fundraising profit.
10. Spin to Win - A small spinning wheel can be purchased online. Now decide what prizes you would like to assign to each spot on the wheel. Use a dry-erase marker to indicate the prizes and determine how much it costs to play.
