No problem, here are three class archetypes in RPGs!

1. Warrior - Warriors are possibly the most used class in RPGs. It is often known as the default choice and the warrior is typically known for their strength and ability to wield a sword. The warrior normally dons armor made out of some form of metal and also wields a sword and sometimes a shield. They have a muscular build compared to other members of the party and sometimes their opponents. They are not the most clever but can certainly get the job done, most of the time with brute force. 

Edelgard from Fire Emblem Three Houses is a more recent example of the Warrior class.

2. Mage - Mages are probably the 2nd most common class. They typically wield a stave, staff, or some wand-type object but can also sometimes wield different weapons such as a hammer or knives. Their armor is typically a cloak and their defense is oftentimes weaker than other characters. Their magic is often consumable and can run out so they will either need to rest at an inn or use an ether to restore their MP. Black mages typically use offensive magic against their opponents such as fire or lightning while white mages use healing magic like Cure and can also heal status ailments such as poison.

Vivi in Final Fantasy IX is one of the most iconic characters in the RPG genre.

3. Thief - Thieves are most well-known for their speed as well as their ability to steal. This is typically a command that they will have from the moment they join your party. They are normally a more slender build and typically wield knives. They wear cloaks, sometimes with hoods and often prefer to hide and may also want to hide their identity. They are known much more for their support abilities than being able to attack like a Warrior, for instance. In certain games, thieves can steal very rare pieces of equipment from bosses or difficult enemies. Thieves have also been known to poison their enemies.

Therion in Octopath Traveler 1 is an example of a thief. He can steal from enemies while you're in towns, which can be very helpful.
