Who am I? You ask. To understand that, you first have to understand who my boyfriend and friends are. I first met my boyfriend, Christopher Michael Bradley, at the skating rink on September 26, 1992. I'll always remember the day he asked me out for the first time. Our very first date was to go see the movie Aladdin together at Eastland Mall. He's sweet and funny and very special. My other best friends are Melina, Kisha, Kim, and Leighann. I love hanging out with them, and I love it when Kim does my nails most of all. Sometimes we get out in Kisha's Jeep and just drive all around town with nowhere to go. We love to go to the movies together, have sleepovers, go out and eat, dance, and try to meet cute guys. 

That brings me to who I am. I'm a girl who is really good at writing things -- stories, essays, plays, and poems, for example. I sing high soprano in the school ensemble, and I love playing the piano. I'm good with kids and animals and great at doing hair and makeup. I also love doodling all over everything, even if I'm not really good at art. If you look in my locker, you'll see pieces of who I am: all of my school books, my cheerleading uniform, juice, Aqua-Net hairspray, a ton of makeup in my Caboodle, fresh white socks (always have extras), other people's clothes, notes from Kisha, and whatever I happen to be selling to raise money for STUCO. 

The things I love also tell a story about who I am. My favorite thing to wear is a green velvet dress. I love wide-legged jeans, palazzo pants,  short shorts, rompers, empire waist tops, and my black-and-white polka dot bikini. I adore a steamy romance novel, going to basketball games, and listening to alternative music after midnight on the college radio station. My favorite perfumes are Love's Baby Soft, Vanilla Fields, and Calvin Klein Obsession. Most importantly, my favorite class is English because I love writing essays like these. In conclusion, who I am is just a regular girl who loves her friends and the English language. I suppose I'm pretty boring, after all.
