You know Coca-Cola right? It first came into the market in 1886, and oh, what an exciting year that was! It used to be promoted a bit differently, though. John S Pemberton was getting everybody worked up over it because the drink contained caffeine and, you're not going to believe this, cocaine! Eeek, what a start! The cocaine stayed in the recipe for 17 years until it was removed in 1903. That's when it became a staple in America. So cool!

Coca-Cola has evolved since then and people found several unusual uses for this acidic drink along the way. This famous soda has a pH of about 2.7 (say what?), so no wonder it got people's creative juices flowing. Can you guess what they came up with? I bet you can't; these ideas are really out there.

Okay, here is #1: Use Coca-Cola to clean your toilet. No, I'm not kidding, Coke can be a toilet cleaner. Pour it along the edges of the toilet bowl and leave it overnight. By the time morning rolls around you'll have a spotless toilet. OMG, this is just amazing!

Now we come to #2: Coca-Cola as a garden fertilizer. You read that right, gardenias, azaleas and grass love Coke just as much as you. Pour it around the base of these plants to give them some extra nutrients and they'll grow like crazy. Yay! So easy. And for your lawn, the CO2 in Coke will help, as well as some other minerals that soda drinks contain which help plants grow.

Here comes #3: Braise your meat with Coca-Cola. Yep, Coca-Cola can be a great help in the kitchen, especially when you bring the BBQ into the game. Make your usual braise and then add Coke to it instead of things like red wine. It's amazing for a pot roast and will add just the right amount of sweetness. It will be to die for! And if you reduce the liquid after you remove the meat you'll get an even more intense flavour.

Here is the last one: #4: Coca-Cola will help you remove rust and loosen bolts. I bet you've had this problem before where you just couldn't unscrew that one stubborn screw and it was driving you bananas. Ugh, so annoying. Well, Coca-Cola can dissolve metal oxides and break up rust with its bubbly goodness. It's a slower process than using normal rust remover, but it's just that much more exciting to tell all your friends that you just used Coke to get that screw loose. Ha! Worth it.
Here are the steps to follow to remove rust:
1. Pour Coke onto the rust and rub rub rub it with some aluminum foil.
2. When pieces of rust start to come off, get a sponge and do the same thing again with the sponge. Easy!
3. Once you removed the rust (yay!) just clean the Coca-Cola off with soap and water. And you're done! Ta-dah! Perfect result.
