Bipolar disorder is a mental health condition where a person can experience really high periods of happiness and then have periods of extreme sadness. These periods can last from days to weeks. Mania is a term used to describe really severe happy periods or periods where the person is also seeing and hearing things that aren't actually there. Hypomania is a term used when those periods are less severe. When a person is experiencing mania they may have higher than normal levels of energy, make rash decisions without thinking, and will have trouble falling asleep at night. During depressive periods, a person may have a poor outlook on life and will try to avoid eye contact with others. 6% of individuals with bipolar disorder will die by suicide, while another 30-40% will hurt themselves. Anxiety and substance abuse is also commonly associated with bipolar disorder. 

The causes for these mood episodes are unknown, but genetics and the environment are understood to play a role. Each gene, with its individual small effects, may contribute to the development of bipolar disorder. They account for about 70-90% of the risk of developing the disorder. Long-term stress and childhood abuse are environmental risk factors. Bipolar I disorder is a classification used to describe the disorder if there has been at least one manic episode, with or without depressive episodes. Bipolar II disorder is used if there has been one hypomanic episode and a major depressive episode. Cyclothymia is a term used for classification if there are hypomanic episodes with periods of depression that don't meet the criteria for major depressive episodes. If drugs or other medical problems are causing the symptoms, then the diagnosis cannot be bipolar disorder. Similar conditions to bipolar disorder include schizophrenia, personality disorders, and substance use disorder. Blood tests and imaging can help rule out other diagnoses, but overall medical testing is not required to make a bipolar diagnosis.
