Old man (OM) talking to young man (YM):

OM: Okay, so you applied to the FBI. Now what?
YM: I have yet to hear back from them.
OM: Well, I guess you just have to be patient now.
YM: You went through this process, didn't you?
OM: Yes.
YM: What's it like? Is it long?
OM: Pretty long. Expect the whole process to take about a year.
YM: Tell me again what the process is like. But tell me in detail.
OM: Okay. Well, first you submit your application and you wait to hear back from them. The first thing you'll hear from them if you've been accepted is that you will be invited to take a proctored computer test at one of the locations closest to you. You'll be informed immediately of the results of the test and whether you've made it to the next phase of the process. If you passed, you will be invited at a later time to attend an interview with a board consisting of agents who will ask you questions about who you are, what your goals are, and scenarios that showcase your decision-making skills. At the same time, you will also take another test, but this test will be a larger one that tests your reasoning skills and will include writing responses to given scenarios. If you pass the interview and written test during this phase, I will be invited to do the physical agility test, submit to a polygraph exam and drug test, and fill out a personal history questionnaire which will be used by field agents for your background check. If you've passed everything after all this, you will be invited to attend the next available Basic Agent Training class and will be an FBI agent; however, you must also pass another physical agility test within two weeks of reporting for Basic Agent Training. Of all the steps in this process, the one you have complete control over is the physical agility test. You have to do as many situps and pushups within a given time, run a timed 300-meter sprint, and a timed 1.5-mile run, and do as many pullups as you can.
YM: I get so excited thinking about all of this...but also feel a little overwhelmed!
OM: I'm excited for you. Just enjoy the process!
