1. Michael Sendivogius was a Polish alchemist and an early worker in chemistry. He worked on developing ways of purifying and creating various chemical compounds, including various acids and metals. Sendivogius discovered that the air that we breathe contained a substance he called "food of life," later named oxygen, by heating saltpeter. He was born on February 2, 1566, in Lokowica, Poland, and died in 1636 in what is now the Czech Republic. He attended or visited many European universities including the University of Vienna, the University of Altdorf, the University of Leipzig, as well as the University of Cambridge. 

2. Daniel Gabriel Fahrenheit was born in Poland on May 24, 1686, to a family of German descent. As a glassblower, he invented the thermometer by putting mercury in glass. He also developed the Fahrenheit scale for measuring temperature. Fahrenheit was interested in science and he began studies and experimentation by contact with other scientists including Ole Rømer, Christian Wolff, and Gottfried Leibniz and by visiting Berlin, Leipzig, Dresden, and Copenhagen. He was very knowledgeable in chemistry and in 1718, he began lecturing in Amsterdam. He was named a Fellow of the Royal Society in 1724. He died in 1736, at the age of 50. His funeral was held at the Kloosterkerk in The Hague. 

3. Wojciech Jastrzębowski was born in Poland on April 19, 1799. He passed his exam at the Warsaw Lyceum and became a scientist, naturalist and professor of botany, physics, zoology, and horticulture at the Polytechnic and Agricultural and Forestry Institute (Instytut Rolniczo-Leśnyin) in Warsaw. Jastrzebowski wrote on the study of humans at work and was the first person to use the term "ergonomics". He died on December 30, 1882. 

4. Jędrzej Śniadecki was born in Poland on November 30, 1768. He graduated from the Chief Crown School in Krakow and in 1797, was named Chair of Chemistry at the Main School in Vilnius Lithuania. He was the first to show that rickets developed from a lack of sunlight.  Śniadecki wrote a book, The Beginnings of Chemistry, that was so important that it was used in Polish universities into the 20th century.
