Matchmaker: Matchbreaker, the being who spreads evil, and fear in the hearts of lovers everywhere. Here to corrupt another teddy bear?

Matchbreaker: Out of my way, you lovestruck buffoon. Your understanding of relationships will prove folly very soon.

Matchmaker: I doubt so, for I'm the one who gives them birth. You, on the other hand, destroy all my efforts, like a disaster on this earth.

Matchbreaker: My schemes serve a greater aim. From two-faced dames to men with misleading claims, the world is filled with loathsome lovers who are just in it for the game. I identify these nefarious names and free their mates from their shallow endgames

Matchmaker: By doing so, you break everyone's heart. Everyone blurts something that hurts. I bring the loners closer to bliss, so the loveness they miss is soon replaced by a kiss. I mend their hearts and invigorate their souls while you break them down, leaving much to console.

Matchbreaker: Say what you may, Matchmaker, but it cannot be denied that your perception of love is oversimplified. Under the wrong influence, the innocent are left mortified. Not everyone can fix their broken happiness with a lullaby, so I sever their misused feeling from the evil eye before I see their precious hearts die

Matchmaker: Are all your services in favor of the misguided victims? I know you often get hired by the scheming kind, like paranoid guardians and jealous minds. You profit off their spiteful gaze, while they stalk their friends and family in the pettiest ways. How can you stand for the deceitful emotions their face displays?

Matchbreaker: If I may be so bold, you have a point. The envy that these hearts hold aches my joint. I continue to suffer them, I don't know how but it's about time I raise an eyebrow and question my customers before I choose to bow

Matchmaker: I must admit I'm also humbled. I once thought your schemes were twisted and cruel but now I must apologize for my ridicule. Now that you've opened my mind, I see that your wisdom cannot be overruled. Love is difficult to give and find. Anyone who simplifies it is a fool.

Matchbreaker: Today, your words have enabled me to observe that I should stop diminishing love from those who deserve to have their happiness preserved.
