Sure! Here is a list of common early pregnancy symptoms that may take place within the first trimester: 

1) Missed period- If you have missed your expected period start date by a week or more, odds are that this might mean you are pregnant. This may be less reliable if you have a consistently irregular menstrual cycle.
2) Tender, swollen breasts- Your breasts may feel generally sensitive or sore or you may experience sharp pains in your breasts and/or nipples. This symptom may lessen after a few weeks.
3) Nausea with or without vomiting- This is often referred to as morning sickness, although it can occur at any time of day. It will usually begin 1-2 months into pregnancy.
4) Increased urination- This is likely because, with increased blood, your kidneys produce more fluid and this fluid ends up in your bladder.
5) Fatigue- No one knows for certain what causes sleepiness during the first trimester of pregnancy although, a rapid rise in the levels of the hormone progesterone during early pregnancy might contribute. 
6) Moodiness- You may be unusually emotional and weepy or experience mood swings.
7) Bloating- This is also due to hormonal changes. It may be similar to what you have experienced at the start of a regular menstrual period.
8) Light spotting- Light spotting may be normal in the first 12 weeks, especially around the time that your period would have started. Spotting at this point is known as implantation bleeding. It happens when the fertilized egg attaches to the lining of the uterus — about 10 to 14 days after conception. Not all women will experience this.
9) Cramping- Some women experience mild uterine cramping early in pregnancy, similar to those of your menstrual cycle, although they may feel quite different.
10) Constipation- Hormonal changes cause your digestive system to slow down, which can lead to constipation.
11) Food aversions- You might become more sensitive to certain odors and your sense of taste might change. 
12) Nasal congestion- Increasing hormone levels and blood production can cause the mucous membranes in your nose to swell, dry out and bleed easily. This might cause you to have a stuffy or runny nose.
