1. Sleep Aid Devices: As a new parent, sleep may be more challenging to come by than ever before in his life. Consider giving your husband a sleep aid device – like a white noise machine – that will help him fall asleep quickly when he has a few minutes to a few hours before the next feeding.

2.	Coffee (Or tea/hot chocolate) Gift Baskets: If the sleep aid device is insufficient and he still needs extra caffeine create a gift basket of flavorful caffeinated beverages. This can include coffee, tea, and hot chocolate. You may want special mugs, stirring spoons, and a new coffee maker or kettle. If he spends much time away from home, you can also include gift cards to his favorite coffee houses.

3.	Personalized Father Keychain: Personalized gifts are always a fantastic idea. Whether money is tight or you want to get him one more small gift, a keychain that says Father or Dad is a great idea. You can also get one from your child that says something like Daddy, I love you and the child’s name.

4.	A daddy/baby matching outfit. This could be a t-shirt or t-shirt or sweatshirt for dad and a matching onesie or sleep-and-play for the baby. It is super cute when they go out or spend time together.

5.	Matching sports jerseys for daddy and baby. If daddy wants to watch football with their baby every Sunday, you should encourage him and get them matching jerseys. But them Brady, Mahomes, Allen, or Rodgers jerseys (or whoever his favorite quarterback or other player is). Of course, suppose your husband prefers hockey, baseball, basketball, soccer, or another sport. In that case, you can also get those types of matching jerseys.

6.	Apple Air Tags: Becoming a parent can have many confusing or frazzled moments. This can include forgetting where you put essentials like your keys, phone, or wallet. Apple Air Tags are the answer to that issue! If he is not an Apple customer, you can get him Tile Mates, instead.

7.	Food Gifts: Most dads will not say no to chocolate and snacks like mothers. Create him a gift basket of his favorite treats, or get him a nice box of chocolates.

8.	A Book of Dad Jokes: Now that he is a father, it is time to learn the secret language of dads and master the dad joke.
