The captain scanned the horizon in the bright morning sun. There were reports of pirates in the area, and his duty was to catch them. He adjusted his binoculars and stopped. "There. Ten degrees off the starboard bow. Helmsman, change course to overtake that ship. Gunner's mate, prepare to fire on my order!"
The PT boat raced across the waves, guns at the ready, flag flying high. The captain lowered his binoculars and smiled. It might be a World War II relic, but nothing the navy had nowadays could match the patrol boat's speed and firepower.
"Captain! They're running!" the executive officer called out.
The ships were close enough that the captain no longer needed his binoculars to watch the pirates loading their guns. "Take evasive action," he ordered. "Gunnery, fire at will. Let's sink that ship!"
The gunner's mate nodded and looked through the site. He waited until he had a clear line on the ship then fired. The large shell just missed the target and plunged into the sea. Now, he grabbed the machine gun and fired a hail of bullets at the ship. The pirates shot back, the metal bullets making a ringing sound on the walls before dropping to the deck. 
His fingers never left the trigger. He pressed faster and faster, pausing to reload, dodging bullets but still getting hit. He glanced at his screen and saw his health fade. He pressed the fire button incessantly, determined to kill the pirate before he...
"Michael!" He jumped off the stool in surprise, hands falling away from the controls. "Come on! This is the third time I called you. We're done shopping. Let's go."
"But mom," he wailed, glancing back at the screen in time to see his ship get blown up by a grenade. "Great! You just made me lose the game!"
His mother tapped her foot in frustration. "It's just a game. You can play it again the next time we come here. Get your stuff, and let's go."
He took a last dishearted look at the "Game Over" message on the screen, grabbed his backpack and slowly followed his mother.
It was over.
He had lost.
