Homer downed another swig of his Duff beer before setting it down and picking up his bowling ball.  Stepping into his stance, his arm bending back ever so slightly, he shot the ball toward the pins and with a crash, they all fell over. That was his 11th strike in a row and the nerves were starting to set in. One away from a perfect game.

"Way to go, Homer, you got this!" Lenny shouted.

"Yeah Homer, you're the man!" Earl said to him as well.

Homer could feel the support of all his bowling buddies and a small crowd was even starting to form.  He could even hear them chanting his name ever so softly, "Homer, Homer, Homer!"

Taking a quick rest while waiting on his ball to return, Homer sat down to polish off his beer. He looked around trying to appreciate the moment but one thing was missing, Marge. She wasn't here because she was at home waiting on him for their anniversary. A pang of guilt hit him then as he realized how late he was running. 

Rising, Homer looked at his bowling ball and saw reflected on it his face. And it wasn't a happy face, it was a sad face despite the big moment  Still, he gulped down his regret, picked up the ball, and approached the bowling lane. Scanning the crowd once more he didn't know what he was looking for but something was missing.

Homer shook off his jitters, and cocked his arm, preparing to send the ball once more down the line hoping it'd find its quarry. That's when he saw it from the corner of his eye, a shock of blue above the crowd. His footsteps stumbled, the ball wobbled, then it fell before limply ending up in the gutter.

The crowd was in shock as Marge pushed her way through them to confront Homer. He ran towards her in kind.

"Homer! Homer! Am I too late? Lenny called me and said I had to get down here right away," Marge said to him. "Oh no, did I ruin it?"

"You didn't ruin anything, honey," Homer replied as he hugged her close, his face once more reflecting from a mirrored surface, but this time it had a very warm and very big smile.
