I cannot believe it! I sit atop this shimmering pile of gold, silver, jewels, and gemstones, tucked away inside my cave high in the misty mountains. I mind my own business, read my books, take naps, and occasionally do a little hunting because a dragon's got to eat, right? I don't bother anybody. They come to bother me instead.

I should have known another so-called "hero" would show up. The weather is shifting to warmer days, and frequent rain keeps the streams flowing with plenty of fish and fresh water. Young men get the urge in springtime to prove themselves, probably to impress some maiden in the valley. "Come with! I shall slay the dragon and take its treasure, giving each of you his fair share!" he'll say to his companions who are eager to claim a bit of his fame and fortune.

And here he is. Tiny little thing, really, in comparison to myself, especially since I gained some pounds this winter.

"Oi, you there! You have two choices: leave peacefully and bestow your treasures upon my companions and me, or feel the burn of my sword's blade as it sinks into the soft spot of your belly, after which I will take the treasure anyway!" He shouts way louder than he needs to. Stupid heroes don't realize how sharp a dragon's hearing really is.

"You there, young hero," I yawn. "What do they call you?"

"I am Chad of Pleasant Villa, and I have come to defeat you!"

"Well, Chad, your town's name sounds like a retirement village. I think I'm going to call you 'Bad Chad.' Didn't your parents teach you not to steal?"

"From where, you giant crunchy lizard, did you acquire all this treasure, huh?"

I stop and think. I remember it being here when my father and my grandfather were alive, but I really don't know the treasure's origins. It may have been ill-gotten gain; after all, Grandpa did have a reputation. And come to think of it, what purpose does it serve anyway?

"You know what, Bad Chad? What do I need with this overflowing pile of bling? Give me 10 minutes to pack my books and a small bag of coins to last my lifetime, and I'm outta here. Time to go somewhere tropical to enjoy some seafood!"
