Chondroitin sulfate consists of repeating chains of molecules called glycosaminoglycans
(GAGs). Chondroitin sulfate is a major constituent of cartilage, providing structure, holding water and
nutrients, and allowing other molecules to move through cartilage—an important property,
as there is no blood supply to cartilage.
Where is it found?
The only significant food source of chondroitin sulfate is animal cartilage.
Chondroitin sulfate has
been used in connection with the following conditions (refer to the
individual health concern for complete information):
Who is likely to be deficient?
Because the body makes chondroitin, the possibility of a dietary deficiency remains
uncertain. Nevertheless, chondroitin sulfate may be reduced in joint cartilage affected by osteoarthritis and possibly other forms of
How much is usually taken?
For atherosclerosis, researchers have
sometimes started therapy using very high amounts, such as 5 grams twice per day with meals,
lowering the amount to 500 mg three times per day after a few months. Before taking such high
amounts, people should consult a doctor. For
osteoarthritis, a typical level is 400 mg three times per day. Oral chondroitin sulfate is
rapidly absorbed in humans when it is dissolved in water prior to ingestion. Approximately 12%
of chondroitin sulfate taken by mouth becomes available to the joint tissues from the
Are there any side effects or interactions?
Nausea may occur at intakes greater than 10 grams per day. No other adverse effects have
One doctor has raised a concern that chondroitin sulfate should not be used by men with prostate cancer. This concern is based upon two
studies. In one, the concentration of chondroitin sulfate was found to be higher in cancerous
prostate tissue as compared to normal prostate tissue.2 In the other study, it was
shown that higher concentrations of chondroitin sulfate in the tissue surrounding a cancerous
prostate tumor predict a higher rate of recurrence of the cancer after surgery.3 However, no studies
to date have addressed the question of whether taking chondroitin sulfate supplements could
promote the development of prostate cancer. Simply because a substance is present in or around
cancerous tissue does not by itself suggest that that substance is causing the cancer. For
example, calcium is a component of
atherosclerotic plaques that harden the arteries; however, there is no evidence that taking
calcium supplements causes atherosclerosis. To provide meaningful information, further studies
would need to track the incidence of prostate cancer in men taking chondroitin supplements.
Until then, most nutritionally-oriented doctors remain unconcerned about this issue.
It is not known whether taking glucosamine
sulfate and chondroitin sulfate in combination is a more effective treatment for osteoarthritis than taking either one by itself.
At the time of writing, there were no well-known drug interactions
with chondroitin sulfate.
1. Ronca F, Palmieri L, Panicucci P, Ronca G. Anti-inflammatory activity
of chondroitin sulfate. Osteoarthritis Cartilage 1998;6(Supplement
2. De Klerk DP, Lee DV, Human HJ. Glycosaminoglycans of human prostatic
cancer. J Urol 1984;131:1008–12.
3. Ricciardelli C, Quinn DI, Raymond WA, et al. Elevated levels of
peritumoral chondroitin sulfate are predictive of poor prognosis in patients treated by
radical prostatectomy for early-stage prostate cancer. Cancer Res