The Australian population based on July 2013 estimated 22,262,501 peoples with age structure as follows:
In Australia, around one in five adults with diabetes do not know they have the condition, a new report from the Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS) shows. From survey, around four per cent of Australian adults have been told they have diabetes.
The survey also showed that obesity was a major risk factor for other chronic health conditions, such as diabetes and liver disease. In 2011–12, obese adults were seven times more likely to have diabetes and four times more likely to have signs of liver disease than normal weight or underweight adults.
Eastern teachings should be understood as part of general knowledges to improve human life quality. The challenge is most of these 'energy teachings' are not supported by science yet.
Basically, every human being has their own natural metabolism which can be divided into two main processes, physical body and etheric body. Scientist do the research on the physical body side and on the other side eastern teachings are more focus on the non-physical area - meta physics, or also known as 'mind and spirit'. Hopefully, one day we can combine both of these knowledges to improve human life quality in general.
Merpati Putih teachings can be accepted easily, it does not belong to any faith, sects or certain belief system.
The core practice is the combination of physical and etheric body energy development.
Immediate and visible results.
The method can be explained in such away as common sense, not a "magic" thing.
Merpati Putih, is respectfully supported and utilised by Indonesia's army special forses (Kopasus) and police special forces (Dansus88). The programs focuses on Object Detection and Vibration Awareness courses.
If you watch this video or most Merpati Putih videos on youtube you will see MP students shows breaking the metals stuff. Breaking stuff is not Merpati Putih goal. It is only our tools to measure the student inner power / energy development level.