Network & Internet Access
Find Your Network Address
Most networked devices have (at least) two addresses—the hardware or network address (also known as a “MAC address”) and the IP address.
Most laptop computers have two sets of hardware and IP addresses:
- a MAC address and an IP address for the wireless network adapter, and
- a MAC address and an IP address for the wired network adapter (for plugging into an Ethernet wall port).
The MAC, or Network, Address
The “MAC” address, also known as a “network card address” or “physical address,” uniquely identifies your computer or device to the UVA network.
Note that the Network Card Address/Physical Address/MAC Address is an alphanumeric value, which is listed in six groups of two hexadecimal digits, separated by hyphens (-) or colons (:), e.g., 01-2B-C5-67-89-ab or 01:2B:C5:67:89:ab.
The hardware MAC address is required to register a device on the UVA network, and must be entered before your device can connect to the University network. Knowing it can be very useful in network troubleshooting, as well. See also Wikipedia on MAC Addresses.
How Do I Find My Device’s Network Address?
Please use an Internet search to find up-to-date instructions on how to locate the MAC address of your computer or other device. It will make your search more accurate if you include your operating system and/or your game console or mobile device’s model information in the search terms.
The IP Address
The IP address is a numerical label assigned to each computer or device which identifies it and allows it to communicate with other devices on a network. See also Wikipedia on IP Addresses.
The IP address may be needed in order to troubleshoot stolen or duplicated IP addresses. See also IP Address Space at UVA (NetBadge access required).
How Do I Find My Device’s IP Address?
See What Is My IP Address or use an Internet search to find up-to-date instructions. It will make your search more accurate if you include your operating system and/or your mobile device’s model information in the search terms.