Haga Palace. Drawing by Princess Eugenia (daughter of Oscar I and Queen Josefina).
Gustav III's palace building - the ruin The history of Haga differs somewhat to that of the other Royal retreats. At Drottningholm, for example, the palace was built first and then surrounded by extensive grounds.
At Haga, the original feature is the park, which over time has gradually been joined by buildings of various different characters. Gustav III's dream palace was never completed and today it is known as the ruin, with only the cellar and foundations finished.
Gustav III's Pavilion. Photo: Charless Hammarsten, IBL.
Gustav III's Pavilion Gustav III's Pavilion (originally the King's Pavilion) could be regarded as The King's private residence at Haga and was intended to complement the official palace that was never finished. Today this pavilion is an excellent example of Gustavian architecture and interiors.
Haga Palace Gustav III's Pavilion in Haga Park was often used by Gustav III's son and successor, Gustav IV Adolf.
Gustav IV Adolf ordered the construction of a second pavilion close by for his wife, Queen Fredrika, and their children. This building, which is now called Haga Palace, was erected between the years 1802 and 1805 according to plans drawn by the architect Carl Christoffer Gjörwell. Haga is slightly different in this respect as well. The palace was constructed as a home at Haga for the Queen and her children, and not as an official residence. It is also around the time of Gustav IV Adolf and his family that we get a first glimpse of family life in the modern sense.
Italian villa style In terms of its style, the palace building is most like an Italian villa, where family life is focused around the central living room. The white colouring and the temple-like design of the central part, with its temple gables and classic columns, emphasise the Italian nature of the building
Haga Palace and the Bernadotte dynasty Haga Palace has been a much-used and loved home for the Bernadotte dynasty. Oskar I and his family often stayed at Haga and for several years the palace was occupied by King Oskar's son, the 'song Prince' Gustaf. Prince Gustaf's youngest brother August and his wife Theresia lived at Haga for many years, and the first interior photographs from their home were taken during their time there in the late 19th century. These images convey a feeling of homeliness according to the ideal that was characteristic of the end of the 19th century.
The Green salon at Haga Palace. Photo: the Royal Court
The Haga princesses In 1932, heir presumptive Prince Gustaf Adolf married Princess Sibylla of Sachsen Coburg and Gotha and Haga Palace was renovated in order to function as their family home. The building underwent a transformation, which meant that the interiors reflected the more functional style of the time rather than the historical heritage of the early 19th century. Family photographs from Haga that were published in books and magazines, and perhaps even more so shown on cinema newsreels, spread the image of a royal family idyll at Haga.
Guest house for Swedish government Haga Palace functioned as the Swedish government's guest house for distinguished visitors between 1964 and 2009. In 2009, the government transferred the royal right of disposal to Haga Palace back to H.M. The King and the palace was placed at the disposal of the Crown Princess Couple for use as a home following the wedding on 19 June, 2010.
For further information about Haga Palace and Haga in general, see 'Haga: a Royal Cultural Heritage', from the book series, 'The Royal Palaces', published 2010.