We live in a world that places so much emphasis on appearances, achievements, and competition that ‘humility’ is considered to be a weakness.
But this couldn’t be further from the truth. Being humble is actually a show of strength.
If you can learn to be humble, not only will it make you more successful in life, it will also help you achieve inner peace too.
Here’s what humility is, and how to increase it.
Importance of humility
Humility is important as it makes you appreciate and acknowledge other people. Not only will you learn from other people but it will allow you to better understand your own strengths and limitations.
You’re values will change as you’ll recognize that desiring material things is meaningless. You’ll come to the profound conclusion that real wealth is found in loved ones and inner peace.
How to be humble
Embrace your humanness
Humility teaches us about unconditional acceptance. We can begin this teaching at a young age. Care givers should give their children secure attachment so that they know even when things are not going as expected, they will be accepted and loved.
This teaches us to embrace intrinsic human values. By valuing humans according to their values and not external achievements we will be humble. We should consider failure as a stepping stone to progress and not as something that someone should be ashamed of.
Cultivate mindfulness and self-compassion
Mindfulness and self-compassion are key in developing humility. Through mindfulness, you’ll be able to take a step back from your thoughts so you can analyze them from an observer’s perspective. You’ll begin to realize that you’re far more than your superficial desires and you’ll learn to be accepting of who you truly are.
You will be able to know the areas of your life that need to be changed. And again through self-compassion, you will be able to correct yourself with respect and patience. You will not be hard on yourself but instead will be accepting and understanding.
Humble people always express gratitude for the gifts they receive from others. Showing gratitude means that you are less self-focused and more focused on the people around you. It shows that you acknowledge that all people go through hard times and you will be less likely to judge.
Thinking more of others compared to yourself is the key to humility.