Managers have many choices when it comes to accounting for inventory. Regardless of whether your small business uses a periodic or perpetual system, you must establish a method to determine the cost of the inventory. The price paid for inventory will inevitably vary with each purchase, and it's usually not feasible to discover the original purchase price of each item sold. For this reason, companies rely on a general method to determine the cost of goods sold. The most common cost accounting methods for inventory are averaging, “First In, First Out” and “Last In, First Out.”
Periodic Inventory Systems
In a periodic inventory system, inventory is updated on a monthly or an annual basis. Managers will know inventory counts at the end of each interval, but won't record inventory additions or depletion as they occur. Fledgling businesses with fewer resources prefer a periodic system because it means a simpler accounting system. However, there are substantial drawbacks to a periodic system. If managers only know inventory counts on a periodic basis, they have less information at their disposal. This creates a major constraint to analyzing sales, theft or spoilage data in the inventory system.
Perpetual Inventory Systems
A perpetual inventory system is the alternative to a periodic system. As the name indicates, a perpetual inventory system is constantly updated as inventory increases and decreases. Perpetual inventory systems need more recordkeeping compared to a periodic system. However, this system may not create much additional work if the company already has computerized infrastructure and accounting systems. By using bar codes and scanners, every sale and purchase can update inventory count. Keep in mind that even a perpetual inventory system should be manually counted on a periodic basis.
Averaging your inventory costs is the simplest way to calculate your cost of goods sold. For a periodic system, add all purchases in the period and divide by the number of units to find the average cost per unit. If you run a perpetual system, calculate the average based on purchases prior to the date of the sale. A perpetual system average cost will vary depending on the date of the sale and is referred to as a “moving average.”
Last In, First Out
If you choose Last In, First Out, or LIFO, the most recent inventory purchases are considered the first sold. LIFO requires more recordkeeping because it creates more layers of inventory to keep track of. However, LIFO is extremely popular among larger companies in the United States for tax purposes. During periods of inflation, LIFO accounting decreases net profit and subsequently decreases tax liability. Because of this potential for tax abuse, countries that use the International Financial Reporting Standards have disallowed the use of LIFO inventory accounting.
First In, First Out
Under First in, First out, or FIFO, the first items purchased are considered the first items sold. This means the remaining inventory is comprised of the newest items purchased. Because old items are moved out first, FIFO requires less recordkeeping compared to LIFO. FIFO is a realistic accounting system; most businesses do choose to sell their oldest inventory first to avoid obsolescence and spoilage. Because of this, most experts agree that FIFO provides a more accurate indication of inventory value compared to LIFO.
- Hemera Technologies/AbleStock.com/Getty Images