These are some of the works and a quote Shakespeare created.
"To be or not to be: that is the question" is one of Shakespeare's most famous quotes.
"LOVE ALL, TRUST FEW, DO WRONG TO NO ONE" is a quote that many use as advice or a motto for their daily lives.
Only a small portion out of many quotes we say in our daily lives that are by Shakespeare.
Thesis: Shakespeare was an amazing actor, writer, and producer.
Quote#1: "His plays have been a vital part of the theater in the Western world since they were written about 400 years ago. Through the years, most serious actors and actresses have considered the major roles of Shakespeare to be the supreme test of their art." (Lander)
Commentary: Shakespeare's plays were written about 400 years ago, but they are still famous today. Even the most serious actors and actresses are inspired by Shakespeare. William's famous plays have been a vital part of the theater in the Western world since they were written; despite their time.
Quote#2: "During a Broadway season in the 1980's, one critic estimated that if Shakespeare were alive, he would be receiving $25,000 a week in royalties for a production of Orthello alone." (Holt Literature)
Commentary: According to the article, one production would have him be earning an estimate of $25,000 a week. Earning so much money from only one production alone is remarkable. Even though Shakespeare's time has passed, his fame and inspiration still lives on today.
Quote#3: "By 1594, he was a charter member of the theatrical company called the Lord Chamberlain's Men, which was later to become the King's Men." (Holt Literature)
Commentary: The article states that Shakespeare worked the rest of his life with a group called the Lord Chamberlain's Men. The name was later on changed to the King's Men due to the group having King James' support. Shakespeare's group was good enough to have King James' support. To have a King's support was a big deal, which means Shakespeare's group must have been extremely talented.
Quote#4: "He is the most famous writer in the world, but he left us no journals or letters--he left us only his poems and his plays." (Holt Literature)
Commentary: Shakespeare is one of the most famous writers in the world based on the poems and plays he left us. Even though we only know him through church and legal documents--a baptismal registration, a marriage license, and records of real estate transactions, we know that he was a very talented writer.
Quote#5: "Shakespeare wrote at least 38 plays, two major narrative poems, a sequence of sonnets, and several short poems. His works have been translated into a remarkable number of languages, and his plays are performed throughout the world." (Lander)
Commentary: Shakespeare's works have been translated to share throughout the world. His plays and works are still acknowledged today. It's amazing that someone who passed such a long time ago, still has such a strong impact on the world today. Yet many still have no idea how much of an impact Shakespeare has made in their daily lives.
Quote#6: "They were part of the cultural life of the American Colonies and provided entertainment in the mining camps of the Old West. Today, there are theaters in many nations dedicated to staging Shakespeare’s works" (Lander)
Commentary: To be a daily part of American cultural life in the colonies must mean that William's plays have made an impact on Americans in both the past and present today. Several theaters in many nations are dedicated to staging Shakespeare's works.
Quote#7: "His works have helped shape the literature of all English-speaking countries. His work has also had an important effect on the literary cultures of such countries as Germany and Russia. In addition, his widespread presence in popular culture extends to motion pictures, television, cartoons, and even songs." (Lander)
Commentary: Not only did he have an important effect on the literary cultures, but his works alone have helped shape the literature of all English-speaking countries. If his works have helped shaped a language for many countries, words from him could be spoken almost every day. He could be a part of many people's daily lives without the people knowing it.
Quote#8: "William Shakespeare also wrote some of the greatest love poems in English. All of these pale alongside the sonnets, which, in an age of outstanding love poetry, attain a depth, suggestiveness, and power rarely duplicated in the history of humankind’s passionate struggle to match desire with words." (Waller)
Commentary: Many state that Shakespeare is the greatest to write in English. Others say that they struggle to match their desires towards his works with words. All of this would mean that his works have the ability for individuals to fall speechless.
Quote#9: "Since his death Shakespeare's plays have been almost continually performed, in non-English-speaking nations as well as those where English is the native tongue; they are quoted more than the works of any other single author." (Columbia Electronic Encyclopedia)
Commentary: Phrases and quotes from Shakespeare are widely spoken in English-speaking nations, but his influence and impacts didn't stop at just that. His impacts and influences are also spread throughout non-English-speaking nations as well. In fact, his plays have been almost continually preformed and his works are quoted much more than any other individual author.
Quote#10: "In 1599, Burbage's theater was torn down and its timbers were used by Shakespeare and his company to build the Globe Theatre. This was the theater for which Shakespeare wrote most of his plays." (Anderson)
Commentary: Shakespeare and his company created their own theater from old timbers for his plays. This would hint at the idea of Shakespeare being a writer and actor.
Quote#11: "Many words and phrases that first appeared in his plays and poems have become part of our everyday speech. Shakespeare has so saturated modern culture that many people who have never read a line of his work or seen one of his plays performed can identify lines and passages as his." (Lander)
Commentary: Shakespeare's words and phrases are a part of our everyday speech. We speak his phrases and words so often that people who have never read or seen any of his works would know some lines or passages that are his. This would mean that he is famous enough to not only impact the past cultural societies, but modern culture and our daily lives as well.
Quote#12: "His plays and poems have long been a required part of a liberal education. Generations of people have absorbed his ideas concerning heroism, romantic love, loyalty, and the nature of tragedy as well as his portraits of particular historical characters. To this day, most people imagine Julius Caesar, Mark Antony, Cleopatra, and Richard III as Shakespeare portrayed them." (Lander)
Commentary: He has made enough of an influence to be a required part of liberal education. This caused generations of people to learn his ideas of heroism, love, loyalty, tragedy, and particular historical characters. For instance, to this day, people have the idea of Richard III, Cleopatra, Mark Antony, and Julius Caesar as Shakespeare imagined them.
Anderson, Robert. “Shakespeare and His Theater: A Perfect Match.” Holt Literature & Language Arts: Mastering the California Standards: Reading, Writing, Listening, Speaking, by G. Kylene Beers et al., Austin, Holt, Rinehart & Winston, 2003, pp. 778-80.
---. “William Shakespeare’s Life: A Genius from Stratford.” Holt Literature & Language Arts: Mastering the California Standards: Reading, Writing, Listening, Speaking, by G. Kylene Beers et al., Austin, Holt, Rinehart & Winston, 2003, pp. 776-77.
Baker, William. “Shakespeare, William.” In Baker, William, and Kenneth Womack, eds. The Facts On File Companion to Shakespeare. New York: Facts On File, Inc., 2012. Bloom’s Literature. Facts On File, Inc. www.fofweb.com/activelink2.asp?ItemID=WE54&WID=103800&SID=5&iPin=CS0001&SingleRecord=True.
Lander, Jesse M. “Shakespeare, William.” World Book Advanced. World Book, 2016. Web. 30 Nov. 2016.
Waller, Gary F. “William Shakespeare: The Poet.” Critical Survey Of Poetry, Second Revised Edition (2002): 1-7. Literary Reference Center. Web. 30 Nov. 2016.
“William Shakespeare.” Columbia Electronic Encyclopedia, 6Th Edition (2016): 1-4. Literary Reference Center. Web. 30 Nov. 2016.