Calories in Fruit
In addition to calories, you will also find carbohydrate values.
The link to the vegetables chart awaits you at the bottom of this page.
These charts give the number of calories and carbohydrates in fresh fruit.
It's best to avoid sweetened, canned, or dried fruit.
Most dried fruit has sugar added during processing.
Dried fruits are not part of a weight loss diet.
Even berries such as blueberries and cranberries often have added sugar when bought as dried.
The calorie counts are then approximately the same as dried raisins.
If you shop around, it is possible to buy sugar-free dried fruit.
These charts can be helpful for maintaining weight loss as well as losing weight initially.
If you are able to afford it, organic fruit is the better choice.
The above chart gives you both the calories and carbohydrates in fruit. Please remember that what is critical is carbohydrates -- rather than calories. If you really restrict carbohydrates and eat plenty of protein and fat from natural sources, it's unlikely that you will need to worry about calories at all.
Because Mother Nature designed our bodies to flourish on clean water and natural sources of proteins and fats, they often don't handle carbohydrates well. So it's generally best to limit consumption of all fruit, even including fruits such as berries that are often highly nutritious.
For this reason, since fruits are often very high in carbohydrates, it's usually better to focus more on leafy green "vegetables" rather than "fruits and vegetables." In many ways, although sometimes prompted with the best of intentions, government programs that have pushed the "fruits and vegetables" dogma have been counter-productive.
In other words, what really matter is not the calories in fruit but the carbohydrates in fruit.
Web pages to help you further
Now that you have the carbohydrate and calorie counts for fruit, see the following pages of our website to help you further:
Calories in Vegetables
Calories in VegetablesAlternatively, use the link at the bottom of this page to return to CALORIES PER DAY, which is the first page in the calories section of our website
Recommended books for this page
Here are reading suggestions about eating well.
These books are available at Amazon.com (for the USA) and Amazon.co.uk (for the UK).
Useful external article
Even when counting calories you don't need to give up all fruit. Fruits and vegetables are loaded with phytonutrients and fiber. Low calorie fruits, preferably organic, are a good choice for health. Below is a useful Stanford School of Medicine article about using fruits and vegetables to reduce the risk of cancer.
If you now looking for more, you can search this website or the whole web.