The Best Influences On Your 8th Grade Science Experiments
It’s stunning when students realize this, but teachers are real people. When they spot us shopping or driving around town, they may stare in bewilderment because teachers are never supposed to be anywhere but at school teaching and getting ready for 8th grade science experiments.
As wrong as that perception is, they’re still right about something- being a teacher of 8th grade science experiments carries over into every other part of our lives, just as every other part of our lives affects us as teachers. What books are you reading? Or are you reading anything at all? If you’re not reading at least one challenging non-fiction book a month then you’re not doing the very thing that we as educators stress is so important to our students. If reading a book seems too boring, then you’re reading the wrong things because a good book is hard to put down. And one good book will lead to others. Each book will teach you something valuable, and soon you’ll see growth and improvement in your life.
The Best Time To Use 8th grade science experiments
Which is better- to do interactive 8th grade science experiments at the beginning or the end of a chapter? Which would you guess? In most cases you’re better off using demonstrations at the beginning of the chapter because:
- Demonstrations allow you to introduce 8th grade science experiments with more interest, when it’s really needed, and that causes
- Less stress and anxiety sometimes associated with a new chapter
- And now you have the rest of the chapter to refer back to the demonstration for review or to show how newer concepts apply
Realistic 8th Grade Science Experiments
I hope one thing noticeably missing from my 8th grade science experiments are the words “easy” and “simple” (I’m not a fan of exclamation points either!!!!!). Nowadays those two words tend to be overused, and in most cases they exaggerate a claim. If you’ve ever had trouble assembling something that the directions said to just “simply” do, then you understand where I’m coming from.
The other reason I try to avoid the words “easy” and “simple” is that there’s nothing particularly easy and simple about well-done 8th grade science experiments. Easy and simple 8th grade science experiments amount to giving students a worksheet or pushing “play” on the video player. Guiding a class of 30 students through a 45 minute journey through a topic in which everyone in the room learns something meaningful is actually pretty hard to do.
8th grade science experiments- All Fun?
With 8th grade science experiments, being interactive is important, but I want to do more than just entertain your students. The neat thing is that after experiencing a good demonstration, students actually crave a good explanation. That’s why my teacher videos strongly emphasize you being mentally prepared. You should never walk into your classroom not having a clue what you’re doing that day. If that’s your habit, you might occasionally have a good day of learning, but you and your students are missing out on many more.
Step 1, then, is going in with knowing what you’re doing. And step 2 then would be deciding what kinds of things you’ll say during the 8th grade science experiments. If you seldom give thought to your words before a lesson, try it and see what happens during your next 8th grade science experiments. Everyone wants to be part of a great lesson, but it’s usually the unseen work and mental preparation that make it successful.
Great Questions During 8th Grade Science Experiments
They’re rare hard to find, but they make all the difference in 8th grade science experiments. I’m referring to great questions. One great question is powerful enough to carry an entire activity- it gives you something to build around and up to. Or you can leave it with your students to chew on for a homework assignment that wraps on into tomorrow.
My 8th grade science experiments include some great questions, but you can come up with more of your own by going through the activity in your mind beforehand.
And don’t forget the importance of good mental preparation before the activity. Plan a series of leading questions that culminate in that one special question that you almost can’t wait to get to. Since great questions seldom pop up out of nowhere, you should invest time in the activity before the activity, as described in my Yellow Sheet. By doing this you’ll give yourself a chance to come up with some great questions of your own.
8th grade science experiments Your Students Will Buy Into
What’s the hardest part of any 8th grade science experiments? For most of us it’s capturing our students’ attention. Since worksheets usually aren’t that breathtaking, I’ve found that a different approach works better. My 8th grade science experiments were designed to be interactive with your students- to provide a reason for them to listen as well as give you a centerpiece you can build on. An involved student will pay attention and take ownership in the activity, which fuels their interest even more. And that’s what causes them to “buy into it”.
“Letting Go” In 8th grade science experiments
To your relief, none of my 8th grade science experiments will ask you to do every thing for every student. In fact, you’ll notice a complete shift of who does what in my 8th grade science experiments. Students, not you, are the ones doing things. Your job is to stand back and make sure people do what they’re supposed to do, and the outcomes are what they’re supposed to be. Then you can move in with dialogue when their minds are primed and ready. This method may be uncomfortable for you at first. But the rewards are worth it.
By handing over the best part of your 8th grade science experiments to students- the demonstration- you’re showing trust. Most students will respond to this by rewarding you (and themselves) with a higher level of maturity, and now everyone’s winning. In my 8th grade science experiments your role is to give students enough clear instruction so they know what to do. But always leave some “play” room that they can use to discover things for themselves. Having come upon something amazing with their own hands, they will naturally go further and manipulate variables, enriching the discussion even more. Now that is real science.