Florida, in the United States of America. It includes a widely diverse area from quiet, unpopulated central areas with "Old Florida" feel to vibrant resort cities.
The climate of South Florida, due to its situation just above the Tropic of Cancer, is subtropical. During most of the year, there is substantial warmth and humidity, due to the common rainfall in the area. However, winter is much drier, and is prone to cold snaps that could bring the temperature as low as the 20sF. In the wintertime, weather is generally around 75F and nights are around 57F, with low humidity, and occasional very cold temperatures (as mentioned above) that kills tropical foliage, like coconut palms, and animals. The water temperature at this time is about 70F. Spring sees higher humidity and some more rain, with temperatures around 80F and nighttime lows in the 60s, with water temperatures of 75F. Summer is the most humid time of year due to frequent rainstorms, and sees temperatures around 90F, with water temperatures of 85F and nighttime lows of 80F. Fall has slightly less humidity, with water temperatures of around 80F, and similar weather to springtime ,though nights tend to be warmer, in the 70sF. However, fall is more likely to be affected by hurricanes and tropical storms, thus, still being pretty muggy.
Some of the major cities in South Florida are:
 Other destinations
South Florida has a subtropical wet-and-dry climate, which essentially means cold fronts from November through March are to be expected, and most of the year is warm and humid. The dry season begins in October and lasts through the third week in May, with famously mild winters. The hurricane season officially runs from June 1 through November 30, with the most likely time for South Florida to be hit being mid August through early October.
A wide variety of languages are commonly spoken throughout South Florida with increasing diversity near the major cities. The City of Miami for example has three official languages: English, Spanish, and Haitian Creole. English, however, dominates and is the preferred language in South Florida.
Even in areas where English is not the native language, most people will be bilingual in the other language (although generally not the other way around for native English speakers). The simplest way to get treated in English is to use the "approach rule." Most locals will respond only in the language they were summoned in unless they are not able to speak it. This rule can be used on anyone whether or not they were originally speaking Spanish, English, or any other language. In general the more south you go in South Florida (for instance, Miami-Dade), the more Spanish speakers there will be.
Occasionally, you may run into someone who is not fluent in English. If this happens, simply speak slowly and use only simple English. In a few places, especially near Miami, you may find someone that cannot speak any English. Even when encountering a local who does not speak English, one could easily find another local to help with translation if needed without much effort, since most of the population is fluently bilingual.
 Get in
 By plane
Miami International Airport, one of the busiest international airports in the world, is the main airport serving the Miami metropolitan area. Fort Lauderdale and Fort Myers, West Palm Beach, and Sarasota also have large airports.
 By train
Amtrak provides inter-city rail service through all the major cities in South Florida. Two trains provide daily service, starting in Miami, making stops in Hollywood, Fort Lauderdale, Deerfield Beach, and West Palm Beach, continuing north to Tampa, Orlando, Jacksonville, and eventually Washington D.C., Baltimore, Philadelphia, with both trains terminating at New York City's Penn Station. All of South Florida's Amtrak stations (except Miami) share platforms with the regional commuter rail service, Tri-Rail. The Miami Amtrak Station is located in the industrial suburb of Hialeah on NW 32nd Ave, just north of NW 72nd St.
 By boat
Coastal cities have excellent year-round marina facilities, often serving some of the largest and most luxurious yachts in the world. Miami is home to the Port of Miami, the largest cruise ship port in the world. Fort Lauderdale also has a cruise port.
 By bus
Greyhound, America's major inter-city bus service provider, has stations at all the major cities in South Florida. At the West Palm Beach and Miami North (Golden Glades) stations, direct connections are available to South Florida's commuter rail service, Tri-Rail. The Miami Greyhound station is located on Le Juene Road (NW 42nd Ave), directly across from Miami International Airport. Service continues further south from Miami, all the way to Key West at the end of US Route 1.
 By car
 Get around
Public transportation - Local public transportation includes Metrobus, Metromover, and Metrorail—an elevated rapid transit system—each operated by Miami-Dade Transit. There is also an commuter rail system named Tri-Rail, that runs north to south, from MIA all the way to West Palm Beach, making a stop at all three of the Gold Coast's international airports.
Hire a car to explore the unique countryside areas.
[add listing] See
[add listing] Do
[add listing] Eat
Enjoy such meals such as a Cuban dish of ropa vieja (shredded flank steak in a tomato sauce base), black beans, yellow rice, plantains and fried yuca with beer.
 Get out