Published on : Aug 18, 2016
As per a new study published by the University of Montreal Hospital Research Centre, the individuals having a chronic kidney disease are at a greater risk of having diabetes. Their study reveals that one amongst the waste products, called urea, easily makes up on failure of kidney and may also impact the secretion of insulin.
Kidney Transplant or Dialysis Required for Patients having CKD
Chronic kidney disease (CKD) involves an irreversible and progressive functioning of the kidney and hence results in the waste products’ accumulation within the blood owing to improper filtering of these kidneys. Owing to the fact that this waste product is toxic in nature and can impact other organs, the patients suffering from chronic kidney disease often have to undergo a kidney transplant or dialysis for properly eliminating blood toxins.
A number of studies also opine that chronic kidney disease can also be caused owing to type 2 diabetes and also that the opposite can also hold true. A number of researchers were also startled by the studies stating that around 50% of all the patients have CKD encountered abnormal sugar levels. Further, by utilizing mice models it was found that pancreatic beta cells that produced insulin were also impaired, as similar to the patients having diabetes.
Urea Affects Functioning of PFK1 Protein
In addition, the pancreatic cells that were isolated from the patients suffering from chronic kidney disease also suffered from the same levels of secretion of insulin due to the excessive accumulation of urea, as found by researchers. It was also found that urea has an impact on the functioning of a specific kind of protein, named phophofrutokinase 1 (PFK1) which is used in glucose metabolism. This accumulation also resulted in high quantity of glycosilation and oxidative stress of PFK1, hence leading to an imbalance of the blood glucose levels, resulting in diabetes.
The researchers concluded by saying that a number of more finding are needed for validating the same thing in human beings. If these findings get confirmed, then it will display that people suffering from non-diabetic chronic kidney disease are at a huge risk of having diabetes.