National Geographic : 1892 Mar 26
Extent of the Signal Service. through the Signal service, was the only country which had endeavored to follow the line of obligation agreed on for inter national use in publication. If for no other reason, meteorology owes its debt of gratitude to an officer of the army, the late General Myer, from whose mind in August, 1873, proceeded the idea of an exchange of interna tional telegraphic weather reports as widely as possible, and to whose initiative in connection with the congress at Vienna is due the unparalleled, important and successful international meteorological work. During thirteen years, 1875 to 1887 inclusive, the land obser vations of this service covered the countries of almost the entire northern hemisphere and a part of the southern hemisphere, and reports were also received from regular -naval and merchant marine vessels of the principal countries of the northern hemis phere. More than 150,000 monthly reports, representing up wards of 5,000,000 daily simultaneous observations, were re ceived, collected, and published or charted by the Signal office. The number of vessel reports reached 600, and the foreign land stations increased to a total of 459, exclusive of the interna tional polar stations. The following countries cooperated dur ing a part or a whole of the period 1875 to 1887: Algeria, Australia, Austria-Hungary, Belgium, Brazil, Great Britain. Canada, Cape Colony, Chili, China, Costa Rica, Denmark, Egypt, France, Germany, Greece, Hawaiian islands, India, Italy, Japan, Mauritius, Mexico, the Netherlands, Norway, Russia, Scotland, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey. In addition to the reports furnished by the regular services of the several countries, obser vations were made and forwarded from the islands of the north ern Atlantic ocean, of Central America and northern South America, and from Bering island, the Aleutian islands, Alaska, Greenland and Iceland. The international publications of the Signal service, which commenced with the regular issue of the daily bulletin of simul taneous ooservations in July, 1875, embodied data whose value cannot be overestimated. The network of stations which covered the northern hemisphere for a period of years furnished a vast number of reliable observations, the study of which has in no small measure contributed to recent discoveries and advances in meteorology, and in future investigations these observations will be invaluable.
1892 May 15
1892 Feb 19