Background Lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex (LGBTI) persons represent an underserved-population susceptible to health-care inequalities. Homosexuality is now accepted as a normal variant of human-sexuality, but homophobia among health-care professionals is not well documented. Establishment of trustful doctor–patient relationships is impossible in the presence of homophobia. Therefore in this study, it is aimed to determine whether homophobia existed and how it is effected in a sample of the first and last year medical students (FLYMS), future doctors.
Methods In this descriptive study data is collected with a questionnaire on socio demographics, Hudson and Ricketts Scale (HRHS), some experiences with LGBTI individuals from FLYMS in a university via their internet groups.
Results Out of 802 students, 28,9% participated (56,0% last year). Average age is 22,0 ± 0,9 and 24,0 ± 1,0, and share of the female students is 47,8% first year and 50,4% last year respectively. 52,8% of the students read a book, 62,7% watched a movie, and 53,6% educated on LGBTI before the survey. Frequency of a LGBTI member in the family is 3,3%, and 43,3% (repeated cases) among friends. 3 student declared their sexual identity as LGBTI. Average score of HRHS is 81,06 ± 30,6 (comparatively high-indicating homophobia). There is no difference between classes in terms of HRHS score medians. Female students’ scores is high (p < 0.001) than males, 45,9% declared LGBTI patient will not affect their service provision, 36,4% are not sure how to communicate with LGBTI persons. When a student have t interpersonal contact with LGBTI friends, watched movie and read a book about LGBTI persons and untied to traditions, HRHS score decreases (p < 0.001) ie, these are associated with positive attitudes.
Conclusions Medical students’ homophobia if left unchallenged, will hinder care provided to LGBTI patients. Physician homophobia may disallow a health doctor-patient relationship and may cause a decrease in patient’s ability to disclose sensitive issues. Students should be trained on to respect and conscious about LGBTI person’s health rights, and equity to health service access. Activities of student groups on sexual orientation and sexual identity should be supported.
- transgender and intersex (LGBTI) persons
- Future physicians
Statistics from Altmetric.com
If you wish to reuse any or all of this article please use the link below which will take you to the Copyright Clearance Center’s RightsLink service. You will be able to get a quick price and instant permission to reuse the content in many different ways.