Dr. Lilian Gonzalez, a Hialeah Dentist, would like to talk to you about crowns and bridges. Crowns are used in dentistry to cover or “cap” a tooth in order to restore its normal size and shape. Crowns can strengthen teeth with large fillings when there’s not enough remaining tooth to hold a filling in place. Crowns are also used to protect weak teeth from breaking, restore teeth that are already broken, or to attach bridges (prosthetic devices that are used for replacement of missing teeth).
When Does Dr. Gonzalez Recommend Getting a Crown?
A Hialeah dentist may recommend getting a crown for a variety of reasons. Crowns can protect a weaker tooth from fracturing or restore a tooth once it’s already fractured. They can be used to attach a bridge or cover poorly shaped or discolored teeth. Crowns may be used to cover dental implants or to cover teeth that have had root canals.
How are Crowns Made?
Before a crown can be made, a tooth has to decrease in size in order for a crown or bridge to fit over it. A Hialeah dentist will reduce the tooth before taking an impression to create the exact mold needed for a crown or bridge. If porcelain is being used, the dentist will first choose the exact shade so that the new crown or bridge will perfectly match your existing teeth’s color. The impression will be used by the Dental American Group to create a crown or bridge, using the material specified by your dentist. A temporary bridge or crown will be placed in your mouth to cover the reduced tooth while a permanent crown is being made. Once the permanent bridge or crown is ready, Dr. Gonzalez will remove the temporary device, and cement the new bridge or crown over the prepared teeth or tooth.
What Happens After the Crown or Bridge is in Place?
It’s normal for a patient to experience some soreness or sensitivity after their crown or bridge has been placed. During the healing process, they may experience increased sensitivity to both hot and cold. The gums that surround the restorations might be sore for several days. This soreness can be managed by taking ibuprofen.
How Long do Bridges and Crowns Last?
Although bridges and crowns are designed to last a lifetime, sometimes they can either fall out or become loose. Bridges can lose their support if the bone or teeth that hold it in place become damaged by dental disease. It’s very important to keep your teeth and gums healthy so that your crowns can last for a very long time. Patients should floss daily and brush their teeth twice a day with fluoride toothpaste. Patients should also see a hygienist and dentist regularly for professional cleanings and checkups.
Dr. Lilian Gonzalez and the entire staff of Dental American Group are committed to the dental health of their patients. Contact one of their six offices if you are thinking about getting a crown or a bridge.