Homemade Mosquito Repellent Recipe
Here in Florida families are outside all year long. We want to enjoy the beauty of the lovely weather that Florida offers. There is an enemy that we all battle and some of us battle more than others and that is the disease carrying mosquito. The worst thing for me is that I love the outdoors and my body is a mosquito magnet, if there is a mosquito within 25 miles I am sure that it will find me and suck my blood.
I am in the pest control industry as my full time profession but I do not like putting chemicals on my body such as DEET or any other form of chemical prevention. I work hard to keep the chemicals that I use on a daily basis off my body so why would I want to spray harmful chemical repellents on my skin or clothes to keep mosquito’s away.
Why do mosquito’s bite?
Most people do not know what attacks mosquito’s to bite them and why some people are more attacked to being bit by mosquito’s while others don’t get bit. It is true and not a myth that only the female mosquito is what bites and has a blood meal. The mosquito needs this blood meal in order for her to finish the development part of the cycle in order for her to deposit her eggs. A female mosquito can deposit up to 200 eggs at a time
Many of us ask why do mosquito’s bite me and not the person next to me. The answer is still being tested by scientist in universities but one answer that they all pretty much agree upon is that mosquito’s and other biting insects are attracted to the carbon dioxide and heat that our bodies put off. Scientist also state that genetics account for a 85% of our susceptibility to mosquito bites. WebMD
What happens when a mosquito bites us?
Mosquitoes “bite” by injecting an anticoagulating saliva that irritates the skin. These bites can hurt, welt up, become red in the immediate area, itch and/or become infected. Some people have allergic reactions to the bites. Diseases obtained from blood meals on other animals can be spread to humans when mosquitoes take a human blood meal. Cases of mosquito borne diseases such as encephalitis and West Nile Virus are currently on the rise and constitute a serious public health threat to people all over the globe. Here in Florida we see bill boards, hear news reports and listen to our government officials talk about the deadly disease that is transmitted by mosquitos called the Zika Virus.
What can we do to prevent mosquito bites naturally?
Here is a recipe that I came across that really does work for me. If you are prone to being eaten alive by mosquito’s like I am then you may want to try this recipe before putting DEET all over your skin.
2 tablespoons Neem seed oil
1 tablespoon olive oil
1 tablespoon coconut oil
10-15 drops of citronella essential oil
If necessary, melt coconut oil. Mix together all ingredients and store in a small jar with an eye dropper top. To use, rub sparingly onto exposed skin.
Note: You should not use Neem seed oil if you are pregnant or trying to get pregnant, as it is an abortifacient.
Now this may not work for you but it has done a fantastic job keeping mosquito’s away from me. Everybody’s body chemistry is different and this may not be the recipe that works for you. If you come across a natural recipe that works great for you we would love to hear about it, drop us a line in the comment section and share your discovery.
Find more interesting articles and videos on our Facebook Page