Why not add wild sardines to this diet? Sardines are low on the food chain, contain omega'3s, large amount of natural b12. I'm contemplating about whether to add sardines to my diet.
Fish are not a health food. https://www.drmcdougall.com/2013/09/19/fish-are-not-health-food/
Fish are not health food. Please leave them in the ocean, lakes, and streams. In terms of your health: a muscle is a muscle is a muscle – whether it moves a limb, flaps a wing, or swishes a tail. Muscles consist of health damaging amounts of fat, protein, and cholesterol; mixed with infectious microbes and poisonous environmental chemicals.
Its amazing how people fall for these marketing scams over & over again. New & Improved Cheerios with added Protein, Omega 3s, Whole Grains, Calcium, etc. Companies create these games by taking things we get plenty of, but are harmful in excess & make them look like essential selling points.
Why is omega3 such a huge thing, when no one cared before? What will the nutrient scam be for 2017? What happens everytime is that more interest leads to more study & we realize more = bad & what people need is enough & less of other stuff.
You will likely be shocked to find out Omega 3’s are not considered safe & have dangerous side effects:
Omega-3 may increase the risk of bleeding, particularly at doses of three grams daily or greater. Caution is advised in people with bleeding disorders or those taking drugs that may increase the risk of bleeding. Dosing adjustments may be necessary.
Omega-3 may affect blood sugar levels. Caution is advised in people with diabetes or hypoglycemia and in those taking drugs, herbs, or supplements that affect blood sugar. Blood glucose levels may need to be monitored by a qualified healthcare professional, including a pharmacist, and medication adjustments may be necessary.
Omega-3 may cause low blood pressure. Caution is advised in people taking drugs or herbs and supplements that lower blood pressure.
Use cautiously in all people, as omega-3 may affect levels of cholesterol and may cause vitamin E deficiency.
Use cautiously in people who are at risk for hormone imbalance or those undergoing hormone replacement therapy.
Use cautiously in people who have abnormal heart rhythms, asthma, and inflammatory bowel disease, as worsened outcomes have been reported with omega-3 use.
Use cautiously in people with liver disease or those using agents that may be toxic to the liver. Changes in liver function tests have been reported with omega-3 use.
Use cautiously in people who are at risk for colon cancer. Fish oils may increase the risk of colon cancer.
Use cautiously in large amounts, as vitamin A and D toxicity may occur.
Use cautiously in children and in pregnant or breastfeeding women, due to the potential that fish meat may contain mercury.
Avoid fish-derived omega-3 supplements if allergic or sensitive to fish, fish oil, or omega-3 fatty acid products derived from fish. Avoid plant-derived omega-3 supplements if allergic or sensitive to nuts, seeds, or plants from which they are derived.
Omega-3 may also cause abnormal heart rhythm, abnormally high urination, acid reflux, anemia, anorexia, bad breath, bad taste in the mouth, bloating, bloody urine, blurred vision, burping, cancer, changes in energy and physical activity (in infants whose mothers received supplementation), changes in homocysteine levels, the common cold, constipation, diarrhea, dizziness, excess fat in the stool, fainting (in pregnant women at birth), a feeling of ants crawling on the skin, a feeling of burning or prickling, a feeling of lifelessness, fever, fishy hiccups, gas, headache, heart attack, hospitalization (chest pain, congestive heart failure, or nervous system problems), increased risk of stroke, indigestion, intolerance to capsule number or size, mania, memory problems, muscle pain or swelling, nausea, the need for surgery (coronary revascularization), nervous system toxicity, nosebleed, restlessness, sleep problems, sudden cardiac death, skin problems (irritation, itching, rashes), stomach pain, throat pain, tiredness, vomiting, and weight gain.
To reverse EFA deficiency a small amount of safflower oil can be rubbed on the skin. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/1266788
So why do you think you are deficient? & why the fuck would you eat a fish? Stop listening to chicken littles on youtube. Get health information from Dr’s that have a track record of helping people.