The Advantage of Being a Furball: Diversification of Mammals. Differences between Reptiles and Mammals. Reptiles No milk Small brain case Jaw contains more than one bone Simple teeth One ear bone Continual growth Variable temperature Scales or knobby skin. Mammals Milk
Diversification of Mammals
Small brain case
Jaw contains more than one bone
One ear bone
Scales or knobby skin
Expanded brain case
Jaw contains only one bone
Three ear bones
Limited growth (stop growing
Among the earliest of the mammal-like reptiles were the
pelycosaurs (evolved From anapsids by Early Permian)
Retain sprawling posture of primitive Anapsids
Distinguished by their sail
Both carnivorous and herbivorous forms
Succeeding the pelycosaurs were the therapsids or mammal-like reptiles.
Got off to a pretty good start, diversified in the mid-to-late Permian - things went downhill from there !
Therapsids themselves hard-hit by end-Permian mass extinction, then again by the End-Triassic extinction, and totally wiped out by early Cretaceous
Cynognathus (a cynodont)
Primitive mammal-like reptiles had decidedly reptilian characteristics
More advanced mammal-like reptiles have sprawling stance, but very mammal-like in many other skeletal features (pits in skulls of some forms even suggest whiskers !)
By a stroke of luck, one group of therapsids gave rise to mammals during the Triassic
(The first true mammals appeared on Earth together with the earliest dinosaurs during the Triassic)
Hadrocodium (Early Jurassic)
Member of extinct group of early mammals
A few early groups of mammals lived during Mesozoic, but
went extinct by Early Cenozoic
The remaining group, the “Therian” mammals, which originated during the Jurassic survive today
3 major groups of living mammals (the Therians):
1) Monotremes – egg-laying mammals
2) Marsupials – pouched mammals
3) Placentals – mammals with placenta
Monotreme (e.g. Echidna) originated during the Jurassic survive today
Marsupial (e.g. Kangaroo Rat)
Placental (e.g. Flying Squirrel)
Reptiles to Mammals: hearing with our jawbones originated during the Jurassic survive today
(an important example of skeletal modification)
Evolution of Ear: stapes acquires “stirrup” shape
articular bone in jaw becomes malleus
quadrate bone in jaw becomes incus
Note also increasing sophistication of teeth as mammals evolve!
Phylogeny of Therian Mammals originated during the Jurassic survive today
Other early mammal groups (now extinct)
MARSUPIAL MAMMALS originated during the Jurassic survive today
Mammal groups show
Mammalian Milestones originated during the Jurassic survive today
Illustrated by mammalian evolution
But two factors are now clear.
1. The process is slow by ecological standards,
because entire ecosystems have been destroyed
beyond recognition, as many or even most of their
species have become extinct.
2. The process is extremely fast by evolutionary standards,
showing that exceptional conditions are in effect,
promoting extraordinarily rapid evolution.
The link between these two factors is that ecosystems are
reconstituted anew after mass extinctions
Post-Cretaceous Recovery beautifully
Dominant land vertebrates of the Late Cretaceous
(the dinosaurs) are not replaced for 5 to 10 million years.
During that time there are no large herbivores, and few predators
of any size at all.
Yet by the early Tertiary there are several different
lineages of 4- to 5-ton herbivorous mammals, which
are of different ancestry on the separate continents;
and there are large carnivorous birds.
No mosasaurs, ichthyosaurs, or plesiosaurs
survive the K-T extinction, but by Eocene times there
are very large mammals eating fish in the oceans
The incumbency effect beautifully
There is a major conservative effect in evolutionary ecology:
the incumbency effect.
It is difficult to remove an incumbent politician (i.e. one who is
already in power), and in much the same way it is
difficult for a species to evolve to displace a species
which is already well adapted to its niche.
Typically, it is invaders that can displace incumbents, rather than
species evolving in the same ecosystem.
The Force of Incumbency beautifully
Obviously, the force of incumbency is much diminished if an ecosystem is drastically affected in a mass extinction.
Little wonder that we have subdivided the geologic time on this basis, with the P-Tr and the K-T extinctions marking the ends of eras.
The “Big 5”
Cretaceous - Tertiary
Ordovician - Silurian
Mass Extinctions Reset the Clock beautifully
So mass extinctions indirectly bring about major renewals in
the history of life, by bringing about major catastrophes.
This is not a political statement: but it is a statement of
In particular, the processes of renewal after mass extinctions
are overdue for studies as detailed as those that have
been devoted to the extinctions.
That's likely to be a major item on the evolutionary agenda
over the next twenty years.
Relative Abundances of Large Land Animals beautifully
1. Mammal-like reptiles suffer from T-J extinction,
replaced by dinos.
2. It took a mass extinction to oust dinos and replaces them
with diminutive mammals that evolved from mammal-like
Land Vertebrates: A Little More Complex beautifully
The Mesozoic World was warm, with poorly defined latitudinal
Land bridges were widespread despite many inland seas (sea level fall at end of Cretaceous aided in land bridge formation too)
END OF LECTURE beautifully