Preservation of Earth's resources focus for forum
The University of Notre Dame, Fremantle Campus
A more efficient use of the Earth’s resources to preserve the environment for future generations was the focus of a forum held on climate change at Notre Dame’s Fremantle Campus in October.
Dr Lucy Morris, Chief Executive Officer of Baptistcare; Jim Smith, Project Manager Western Australia of Catholic Earthcare Australia and Dr Michael O’Leary, Lecturer in Geography at The University of Notre Dame Australia, were guest speakers at Notre Dame’s Conversations on Tap event titled: Morality of Climate Change...who cares?
This was the final in a series of events held by Notre Dame which looked at a range of issues associated with the debate on climate change. It follows the Lang Hancock Annual Lecture delivered by Lord Christopher Monckton and a presentation on the impacts of carbon pricing by John Connor, CEO of The Climate Institute.
On this occasion, speakers considered the moral implications associated with the impact of climate change. They discussed who was responsible for the Earth’s environment and its preservation for future generations. A proponent of a more “respectful” use of the Earth’s resources to support future generations, Mr Smith says climate change can be better understood when people realise the impact their carbon footprints have on the global communities around them.
Dr Morris spoke on the globalised concept that the ‘world was for sale’ which she argued created cultures of exclusion bound by greed, dispossession and scarcity.
She argued that globalisation transformed all beings and resources into commodities and robbed people of their rightful share of ecological, cultural, economic and political space.
“Poverty is the great leveller of humanity, and while people are seen as worthless and disposable we will not see the relationship between humanity and its total integration in the health of the planet,” Dr Morris said during her presentation.
“Our language and our behaviour expresses our deepest, unconscious beliefs, which is, that everyone and everything is disposable so only the wealthy will survive and the climate will be a victim along with everything and everyone else. The morality of such a stance is unacceptable.” Notre Dame Campus Minister, Tom Gannon, thanked the guest speakers and audience members for their participation in the final Conversations on Tap event for 2011.
Notre Dame’s Campus Ministry in Fremantle is calling for suggestions to be considered for the 2012 Conversations on Tap series.
For more information or to submit a topic, please contact Stacie O’Neill on 9433 0581 or visit the Student Life Office located in the University’s Bateman’s Courtyard. MEDIA CONTACT: Michelle Ebbs, Tel (08) 9433 0569, Mob 0408 959 138 Leigh Dawson, Tel (08) 9433 0569, Mob 0405 441 093
Dawson, Leigh, "Preservation of Earth's resources focus for forum" (2011). Media Release Archive. 326.