Add a description pWhat is the construction waste? The insiders explain it as follows. The construction wastes mean the spoil, waste materials and other salvaged materials produced in the process of new construction, renovation, expansion, maintenance, renovation and demolitions, including muck, waste bricks, waste watts construction, waste concrete, mortar and concrete scattered, as well as a small amount of steel, wood, glass, plastic, various packaging materials. As we all know, the construction industry is the pillar industry of China s national economy. About 5.6 trillion yuan fixed investments of GDP in China are achieved depending on the construction industry. However, in recent years, with the vigorously development of construction industry in our country, there is no doubt that non-quantitative construction waste has been produced. For example, the construction of the high speed rail, the rural urbanization construction, urban renovation of old urban districts and the improvement of ecological environment, all of those activities will produce large numbers of construction waste. The development of our country makes us excited, but behind the development, how to dispose the construction waste has become a noteworthy issue.The mobile crusher produced by Henan Hongxing Mining Machinery Co., Ltd.
has a strong power in disposing the construction. It can be run freely in a difficult operating environment with high working efficiency and low running cost. It not only has excellent performance on disposing the construction waste, but also has great performance on disposing the waste in dam mine.In recent years, the transportation networks of urban construction waste in China are maturing day by day, the disposal capacity of waste continues to increase, and the urban environment in general has been greatly improved. However, it should be noted that due to the rapid development of urbanization, the urban construction waste is surging, the disposal capacity for construction waste is relatively insufficient. Some cities are facing the plight of being surrounded by waste, which serious affects the urban environment and social stability. We should fully understand the importance and urgency of strengthening municipal solid waste disposal, further unify our thinking, raise the consciousness, and put all kinds of policies and measures into practice to promote the work of municipal solid waste disposal, to create a good living environment and promote the sustainable urban development.