Machinery Safety Information
OSHA Safety Regulations for Industrial Machines and Equipment
OSHA Regulations -- A List
OverviewIn 1970, Congress passed the Occupational Health and Safety Act to "encourage employers and employees efforts to reduce the number of occupational safety and health hazards at their places of employment, and to stimulate employers and employees to institute new and to perfect existing programs for providing safe and healthful working conditions." (OSHA Act of 1970, Section 2 (b) (1)).
As part of that act, Congress established the Occupational Health and Safety Administration (OSHA) to enforce the worker safety regulations associated with this act. The Occupational Health and Safety Standards in the United States are defined in Title 29 of the Federal Regulations Part 1910. Subpart O, for example, deals specifically with Machinery and Machine Guarding. It defines the general requirements for all machinery (1910.212), as well as specific requirements for certain types of machinery.
A List of OSHA RegulationsOSHA Regulations form the framework for Manufacturing Safety within the United States:
Subpart O deals specifically with Machinery and Machine Guarding. It defines the general requirements for all machinery (1910.212). Subpart I deals specifically with Personal Protective Equipment. Subpart S deals specifically with Electrical equipment and electrical hazards. Section 147 deals specifically with The Control of Hazardous Energy (Lockout/Tagout) Section 146 deals with Permit Required Confined Spaces Section 145 deals with the Specification for Accident Prevention Sign and Tags
Further Information and LinksClick here a detailed overview of: OSHA Regulations for Machine Guarding
Click here a detailed overview of: OSHA Regulations for Lockout Tagout
Click here a detailed overview of: OSHA Regulations for Personal Protective Equipment (PPE)
Click here a detailed overview of: OSHA Regulations for Noise
Other sections within the OSHA regulations deal with additional issues. The online OSHA documents are the actual OSHA regulation which are currently applicable to machinery and equipment within the United States.
To link to the Table of Contents for all 1910 OSHA Regulations, click here. It is a good starting point when working through the OSHA regulations.
Training & Seminars
Advanced, high-level training Customized to your machines On-site at your facility Personalized to your needs Taught by a machine safety expert
The most useful links, and the most helpful info for those using machinery and automated equipment.
There is a wealth of information within this site...
OSHA Regulations: OSHA's complete set of regulations for general industry.
OSHA App: An iPhone app with all OSHA Regulations.
Expert Witness: An Expert in Machines, Manufacturing, and Automated Equipment.