Avian Influenza (Bird Flu) | Situation
Avian influenza is
a viral disease transmitted by birds usually through feces or saliva. It is
not usually passed on to humans, although it has been contracted by people who
have handled infected birds or touched surfaces contaminated by the birds. In
fact, avian (or H5N1) flu normally infects only birds and pigs.
There are many different types of viruses and of these viruses, there are 15
subtypes. These form various combinations that are constantly changing. Our
bodies develop immunity to these viruses and when we receive our annual flu
shot, this boosts our immunity. But when a virus such as H5N1 comes along, it
may merge with a flu that a human body already has and develop (or mutate) into
a whole other subtype for which our body has not built immunity. This, then,
is what has prompted the concerns of the public health community.
The H5N1 virus is particularly contagious among birds and some strains are resistant
to antiviral drugs. It has developed into an outbreak in domestic birds
in many Asian countries. Among the humans
who have been diagnosed with the disease, the mortality rate is almost 50%.
The first sign of this flu is sudden, unexplained fever. What follows is slightly
different for each person: For some, its body aches, cough and runny nose.
For others, its diarrhea and vomiting. Several days after the first symptoms,
respiratory problems will develop.
There are currently no vaccines on the market to combat avian influenza. Two
antiviral medications are used to treat the symptoms, but their effectiveness
is uncertain. These medications are Oseltamivir (Tamiflu) and zanamivir (Relenza).
The Florida Department of Health has prepared a plan for protecting the citizens
of our state in the event there is an actual pandemic (worldwide flu epidemic).
Portions of this plan include working with county health departments to provide
local assistance; participating in the national stockpile initiative so that
Tamiflu and Relenza are ready and waiting for distribution prior to an emergency;
and ensuring our emergency communications system is up and running so public
health officials and first responders will get real-time information they can
For the latest, most trustworthy information about avian influenza, stay tuned
to this Bureau of Epidemiology website, and these related links: