Do our students think that their liberal education proves valuable in regard to their careers and finances in later life? A purely economic indicator seems to show that their answer to that question is Yes.
Parents, in difficult economic times it is tempting to steer sons and daughters to focus, narrow their interests, and learn a specific set of skills that seem designed for a particular job. To thrive in the world ahead, much more is needed.
Students interested in liberal arts subjects ought to be encouraged to pursue these subjects, since we know that interest is generally a key component of success, both in completing a college degree and in acquiring the skills the graduates of today will need for the jobs of tomorrow.
The Founding Fathers envisioned a Republic with an enlightened citizenry educated in "all philosophical Experiments that Light into the Nature of Things ... and multiply the Conveniences or Pleasures of Life" -- not just technical training for jobs that pay well.
Students will not show their true stuff unless they find what their "wow" factor is. They have to find the arena -- the discipline that engages them so that they do their best work -- because it interests them. Round pegs don't go in square holes.
Parents and students expect real results from the four-year undergraduate curriculum. This is not unreasonable. Scholarly studies have shown that programs like Global Citizen Year do deliver real educational outcomes.
Efforts to encourage innovation should stretch well beyond science and technology. Graduates in the fine arts, humanities and social sciences have roles to play. We need their creativity, ability to express important ideas, and understanding of societal needs.
At most liberal arts colleges, the majority of classes have fewer than 20 students. In this environment, faculty can guide students in sharing perspectives, debating ideas and making discoveries in ways that are just not possible when enrollments number in the hundreds or thousands.
It is on a college or university campus that students learn and strengthens an ability to live together as part of a community in a concrete and irreversible way: to give and take, to solve disagreements maturely.
Liberal arts courses are offered at art schools not only to satisfy the requirements for a college degree. They inform and provide greater depth to the art that a student is creating and will make in the future.