ANWR: Producing American Energy and Creating American Jobs
Map of northern Alaska showing locations of the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge,
the 1002 area, and the National Petroleum Reserve—Alaska (NPRA).
Source: U.S. Geological Survey
Chairman Doc Hastings recently announced plans to recommend increased offshore and onshore drilling – including in the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge (ANWR) in Alaska - to the Joint Select Committee as a way to help reach their deficit reduction goals. Responsible energy production on less than three percent of ANWR’s total land could create thousands of jobs, generate billions in new revenue and help reduce our dependence on foreign sources of oil.
Small Area = Big Energy Potential
The North Slope of ANWR, known as “Area 1002”, was specifically set aside by Congress and President Carter in 1980 for oil and natural development. This area is not designated as Wilderness.
A plan developing 500,000 acres—less than three percent of ANWR’s acreage—would provide access to the majority of ANWR’s resources.
Supplying America’s Families and Businesses with American Energy
According to U.S. Geological Survey estimates, the North Slope contains an estimated 10.4 billion barrels of oil.
This is more than the known oil reserves of entire countries that the U.S. currently imports oil from, including: Mexico, Angola, Azerbaijan, Norway, India, Indonesia, Malaysia, Egypt, Australia and New Zealand, Turkmenistan, and Uzbekistan.
At peak production, ANWR could supply up to 1.45 million barrels of oil per day.
This is more than the U.S. imports from Saudi Arabia every day.
Alternatively, 1.45 million barrels of oil per day is over one quarter of what the U.S. imports from OPEC countries each year.
Reducing the Debt, Generating New Federal Revenue
Developing ANWR’s resources could generate approximately $150 billion to $296 billion in new federal revenue – a substantial amount that would help pay down our Nation’s debt.
Total government revenue, including leases, royalties, and state local and federal taxes for the life of ANWR field production, could be as much as $440 billion.
Creating American Jobs, Growing the Economy
Opening a small portion of ANWR to energy production would create tens of thousands of American jobs and contribute to significant economic growth.
Studies have shown ANWR job creation ranging from 55,000 to 130,000 jobs.
Increasing Our National Security
Responsibly developing our own American energy resources in ANWR will help reduce our dependence on oil from hostile countries and lower foreign imports.
According to the Energy Information Administration, crude oil imports will decline by one barrel for every barrel of ANWR oil production.
Protecting the Environment Through New Technology
Extended reach drilling allows for one single platform to cover a 28,000 foot radius,
which is larger than the size of Washington, D.C.
Advancements in technology allow for energy production to occur safely and with minimal environmental impact.
For example, new extended reach drilling allows for one single drilling platform to cover a 28,000 ft radius—larger than the size of Washington D.C. (see map).
Supporting Local Communities
Many Alaska Natives support energy production in ANWR and recognize the jobs and economic benefits it will bring to their communities. It has strong support from the Village of Kaktovik - the only town within the coastal plain of ANWR.