Disability and Social Media
Global Perspectives – Edited by Katie Ellis, Mike Kent © 2017 – Routledge 340 pages
Social media is popularly seen as an important media for people with disability in terms of communication, exchange and activism. These sites potentially increase both employment and leisure opportunities for one of the most traditionally isolated groups in society. However, the offline inaccessible environment has, to a certain degree, been replicated online and particularly in social networking sites. Social media is becoming an increasingly important part of our lives yet the impact on people with disabilities has gone largely unscrutinised. Similarly, while social media and disability are often both observed through a focus on the Western, developed and English-speaking world, different global perspectives are often overlooked. This collection explores the opportunities and challenges social media represents for the social inclusion of people with disabilities from a variety of different global perspectives that include Africa, Arabia and Asia along with European, American and Australasian perspectives and experiences.
Disability in the Global South
The Critical Handbook – Editors: Grech, Shaun, Soldatic, Karen (Eds.) © 2016
This first-of-its kind volume spans the breadth of disability research and practice specifically focusing on the global South. Established and emerging scholars alongside advocates adopt a critical and interdisciplinary stance to probe, challenge and shift common held social understandings of disability in established discourses, epistemologies and practices, including those in prominent areas such as global health, disability studies and international development. Motivated by decolonizing approaches, contributors carefully weave the lived and embodied experiences of disabled people, families and communities through contextual, cultural, spatial, racial, economic, identity and geopolitical complexities and heterogeneities. Dispatches from Ghana, Lebanon, Sri Lanka, Cambodia, Venezuela among many others spotlight the complex uncertainties of modern geopolitics of coloniality; emergent forms of governance including neoliberal globalization, war and conflicts; the interstices of gender, race, ethnicity, space and religion; structural barriers to redistribution and realization of rights; and processes of disability representation.
A Different Way of Seeing
Lois Strachan (Author) – October 30, 2016
Have you ever wondered how a blind person pours a cup of coffee? Or how they and their guide dog know when it’s safe to cross a busy road? When Lois Strachan lost her sight at the age of 21 years she had to learn the answers to these and countless other questions of how to live as a blind person in a sighted world. In this delightfully quirky and entertaining book Lois shares some of the secrets she discovered about how to live an “ordinary” life in an extraordinary way despite her blindness. “An entertaining, informative and educational read that gives you an insight into the life of an inspirational woman who lives life to the fullest. Well worth reading.” Gail Glover – Executive Director, South African Guide-Dogs Association for the Blind “A must-read for anyone, with or without a disability.” Hanif Kruger –Resource Centre Manager, South African National Council for the Blind “Lois’s stories provide insights on how to positively deal with the challenges in life to emerge victorious.” Bob “Idea Man Hooey – author of “Why didn’t I THINK of that?” .“In her fascinating account of the life of a blind person, Lois Strachan lifts the lid on aspects of life that most of us take for granted.”
Valley of Victory: A true story of trials, tribulations and triumphs
Val Rankin Prinsloo (Author), Vijay Kumar (Editor)
Val is a girl raised in apartheid South Africa. Her family is financially well-off, there is an abundance of everything except harmony. As a child, she is hurt, as a teen insulted, and as a woman, abused and discarded. Haunted by her extreme obesity, Val slips into a world of reckless debauchery and alcoholism and substance abuse of all kinds. All other kinds discord ran like wild fire through her life in much the same destructive manner. Is there hope for her? Can she redeem herself? The only soul she can turn to is her childhood friend, who is in fact a local servant girl. Can her friend guide and mentor her, and eventually pull her out of her bottomless pit of despair? With an epic sweep that spans well over forty years, Valley of Victory is a touching tale of one individual’s fight against the society, its hypocrisy and a system that is rotten to the core. It is the moving story of a woman’s determination to take charge, change herself and the world around her. And along the journey, Valley of Victory asks questions that are as simple as their answers are complex. Who are we? Why are we here? What is our connection with our Higher Power?