The history of Argentina has been heavily influenced by European art, architecture, literature and lifestyle, but at the same time keeps its own unique image. Famous writers such as Jorge Luis Borges and Manuel Puig created their image, whose writings have put Argentina on the map. The culture of Argentina is embodied in the tango. Argentina is the place that discovered and made tango into the famous dance that it is today. You may be inclined to follow the pilgrimage to Carlos Gardel's life size statue, the famous tango singer, to pay homage to his impeccable artistic tango abilities. The liveliness of their famous prose combined with their electrifying music, dance and romantic language culminates into a unique place to experience and explore.
Here are some facts about Argentina. It is believed that Argentina was inhabited 13,000 years ago. You can trust that archaeologists are still exploring and studying the evidence. Ferdinand de Magellan touched the shores of Patagonia in 1520 before discovering the strait that connects the Atlantic and Pacific oceans. And in 1536 Pedro de Mendoza found the settlement of Santa Maria del Buen Aire, which is today the Buenos Airesthe capital of Argentina. Interestingly enough Buenos Aires did not become the capital until 1776, which marked their independence from Spain.
Argentina like many countries during the 1800s were involved in the slave trade. And it is said that in 1810, African Americans in Buenos Aires and surrounding cities made 30% of the population. However, by the end of the century this demographic had reduced dramatically to 2%.
Argentina continued to grow and prosper well into the twentieth century becoming one of the richest countries in the world. Argentina people were heavily dominated by the Europeans. However Argentina took a turn for the worse in 1930, when the first military coup began. And in 1943 Juan Domingo Peron emerged as the leader of Argentina, but who was also at the forefront of the coup. He and his charismatic wife Evita Peron, a champion of the social welfare programs asserted their popularity on the masses, which evidently led to the demise of their economic prowess. After 1955, he was overthrown as president. The years that followed the military coup are referred to as the years of the Dirty War, which brought the disappearance of some 30,000 Argentina people. The most famous victims were the Mothers of Plaza de Mayo. Fortunately the history of Argentina and the culture of Argentina were resilient and strong. And now their economy is back on the rise, while their poverty has been reducing since 2004.
Argentina is still today a prosperous country, and although they have had their downfalls, they have had many successes as well. Argentina people are proud of their heritage and will welcome to share their scars and achievements with anyone who asks. Not to mention that they are also happy to play soccer as long as you show an interest and have athletic feet to keep up. This is a vibrant country to visit that is sure to leave lasting memories.