I do a lesson with tints and shades that requires no drawing skills.
The kids make a large triangular banner using their first or last
initial-usually 24x18 or 24x36 if you have that sized paper.
They make the letter on a piece of 9x12 size paper. They can embellish a
simple block or puffy letter with a few swirls or whatever, but keep it
simple enough to paint in the shape with whatever their color choice is.
Then transfer the letter onto the triangle, near the center of the upper
part of the wide end. I have them tape the letter in place behind the
triangle and trace through on the light box or at the window.
This is a monochromatic painting the way I do it with my 3rd graders. the
choose one color and use it straight from the bottle to paint the letter
shape. This is the only shape with unmixed colors.
Then they divide the background behind the letter into large shapes using
straight or curved lines (nothing too nervous, if you know what I mean. Just
simple lines). I usually limit the number of extra shapes to about 10-12 and
remind the kids that the letter is the star of this show, not the background
Then they start with tints (color plus white) and paint in half the shapes.
Do the same with shades (color plus black) to finish the background area.
when dry, we outline with a wide sharpie marker to neaten up the painted
edges between shapes and around the letter. Sometimes we edge the whole
thing with colored construction paper strips to make the banner a bit more
Concepts used are always mixing from light to dark to avoid needing gallons
of white paint to lighten up a dark blue, for example. Start with the
lightest tint and paint a shape, progressing darker by adding into that bowl
more of the prime color. Same with shades, starting with a drop of black
into the prime color, painting a shape, and progressing with more black til
all the shapes are done. Saves a lot of paint that way!
The kids usually pick a color that will match their bedroom at home . My
third graders love this project and look forward to it each year. If you
need a photo, I can take one and send it tomorrow. I am off Mondays.