We are reaching record breaking temperatures across the globe, record breaking ice melts and unusual storms and weather phenomenons. And yet some people say that global warming is just a myth. Whatever you believe, if global warming is or is not man-made, the result of high temperatures will affect you. It might devastate your house just like the stormy Sandy did, it might not allow you to feed yourself as you desire due to high droughts just like the U.S experienced last year. Your food prices will go up and your standard of living down. Or worst, you may die as the result of it. And it’s not only your children that will suffer but you, right now, directly. That being said, let’s look at some technologies that can help us solve or at least reduce the problem. If you know other solutions and have a video, please share.
1 – Making More Clouds Machine
If the reflectivity of clouds could be increased slightly, sufficient sunlight would be reflected to compensate for any future release of CO2 into the atmosphere. One method of doing this would be to eject seawater spray into the air using a fleet of automated ships. It’s estimated that 50 ships costing a few million dollars each could spray enough seawater to do the job.
2 – Space Lenses
This is an interesting proposition which is about placing a space shield with millions of circular shields. My only concern is space pollution, how do we collect those shields back? Check out more here about this solution.
3 – Sulfur Launched Into Stratosphere
A scientist believes the key to cutting global warming lies in a project to cover the sky with a thick blanket of sulpur with the help of hundreds of rockets.
4 – Ocean Fertilization
A scientist has a strong argument for injecting the ocean with nitrogen to help combat global warming. Can a component of urine really hold the key to the conservation of the planet?
5 – Artificial Trees
A group of scientists attempt to combat rising sea levels and an overdose of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere by creating artificial trees.
6 – Pressuring Financially Polluting Companies
The Environmental Investment Organisation is proposing an alternative way to put financial pressure on companies round the world to reign in their carbon emissions.
7 – Eliminating Cement Production
Cement is one of the most consumed materials on the planet. It’s the foundation for our roads, our sidewalks and our cities. It’s also one of the biggest contributors to global warming.
8 – Artificial Photosynthesis System
An Artificial Photosynthesis System developed by Panasonic could solve global warming and energy issues. Efficiency levels on a par with plants have been achieved, with CO2 being converted into useful organic substances.
9 – Turning Plastic Back Into Oil
Burning plastic releases tons of CO2 into the atmosphere contributing to global warming. If plastic is just oil, why don’t we simply turn it back into what it was.
10 – Micro Mirrors Sprayed by Airplanes
I don’t know if this one is the most reliable solutions but the proposition is interesting. It is very similar to the sulfur injection into stratosphere but delivered in a different way.
Understanding Climate Change In Simple Terms
David Roberts is staff writer at Grist.org. In “Climate Change is Simple” he describes the causes and effects of climate change in blunt, plain terms.
Space Weather Affecting Climate
1) The climate change is real, and there is more to it than CO2 and ‘global warming’ – it is all extremes.
2) The entire solar system appears to be changing simultaneously.
3) The magnetic changes on earth began hundreds of years ago, and need to be tracked more effectively.
4) Weather modification appears to be implemented, and IMHO it is a zero-sum game.
Global Dimming Documentary
A BBC documentary about how unintentional increased reflectance due to man made pollution has actually hidden the affects of increased carbon dioxide in the atmosphere.
Microalgae Lamp which Absorbs CO2
Shamengo pioneer Pierre Calleja has invented something truly remarkable–an algae lamp that absorbs CO2 in the air–at the rate of 1 ton PER YEAR, or what a tree absorbs over its entire lifetime! While development is still needed to make a cost-effective product, the microalgae streetlamp has the potential to provide significantly cleaner air in urban areas and revolutionize the cityscape.