1. Transform Anxiety Into Action
After all, what is the feeling of anxiety?
Common descriptors include:
In its unqualified state, anxiety is simply an emotion.
Anxiety is not uniformly "good" or "bad"".
It is not necessarily dysfunctional.
Nor, in fact, does it always require treatment.
Anxiety - like every emotion - has its positive side.
It propels action.
But what action needs to be taken?
2. Act to Address Anxiety's Core
Anxious, nervous energy can be wasted on furtive, superficial tasks.
This is the essence of procrastination.
Expending energy on trifling, superficial activities.
While avoiding its deeper source.
3. Avoidance Amplifies Anxiety
Attempting to avoid anxiety is ultimately futile.
Avoidance simply amplifies the sensation of anxiety.
Dark spaces - mental, emotional, and physical alike - may appear innocuous on the surface.
But - just as seemingly functional, old and neglected basement walls permit mold to thrive unchecked beneath the surface - such a superficially healthy veneer may conceal a hidden underbelly of dysfunction.
If not frank, festering disease.
When neglect has permitted such advanced mold encroachment, no simple remedy will suffice.
The old walls must be torn down.
Regardless of how sturdy, functional, or healthy they may appear on the surface.
The mold must be exposed.
And its source eradicated.
Attempting to ignore or delay facing anxiety is no different.
Avoidance amplifies anxiety.
Urging you, with ever-increasing insistence, to take action.
At this point, you have two choices.
Address the source of the anxiety.
Or suppress it.
4. Symptomatic Suppression Breeds Deeper Disease
Shun symptomatic suppression.
Avoid anxiety avoidance.
Suppression permits symptoms such as anxiety to be ignored.
But ultimately breeding deeper, chronic, and more severe dysfunction and disease.
After all, anxiety - like any symptom - represents an important physiological feedback system.
Suppressing, numbing, or shutting down such a feedback system is dangerous.
Like Congential Insensitivity to Pain, what superficially appears as beneficial can, in fact, produce great harm.
This is why eczema drugs such as tacrolimus (Protopic) and pimecrolimus (Elidel) include cancer among their side effects.
Yet such associations - and the FDA black-box warnings they have propagated - merely scratch the surface of the problem.
Anything - when applied symptomatically, superficially, and suppressively - can and, given enough time, will instigate deeper disease.
In the specific case of anxiety, suppression can occur via anything that masks, numbs, relieves, or superficially treats anxiety - without addressing its underlying cause.
The source of anxiety must be addressed - not suppressed.
5. Act to Address Anxiety at its Core
But how can one address this source?
Particularly as it is typically obscure and hidden?
Break down old walls.
Old, forgotten, neglected, and/or subconscious mental constructs represent a suppressive force rivalling, if not exceeding, that of any exogenous substance.
Like the anxiety itself, such constructs were once perfectly functional and healthy.
Indeed, they still often appear so - on the surface.
However, they have now long outlived their usefulness.
And - regardless of how functional and robust their superficial appearance may be - they conceal an old, dysfunctional core.
Such walls must be cleared.
Permitting new, functional, healthy structures to be constructed in their stead.
But, as mentioned above, such structures often superficially appear perfectly functional and healthy.
How can one identify, and ultimately clear, those at the core of anxiety?
6. Naturopathic Treatments to Clear Anxiety's Core
Several naturopathic treatments exist which permit the underlying cause of anxiety to be identified and treated.
And very effectively.
Such treatment techniques include:
- The Neuroemotional Technique (NET)
- The Neuromodulation Technique (NMT)
- The Neural Organizational Technique (NOT)
- Individualized, Constitutional Homeopathy
The deepest, most effective treatment for anxiety incorporates elements of each of these techniques.
And much more.
Producing a whole which is greater than the sum of its parts.
I have coined the term the Samadhi Technique to describe the system I have developed (or perhaps energetically downloaded?) over my years of practice.
Fusing the common principles of nature underlying all the above techniques with many innovations (downloads?) of my own.
Generating a single, simple, and elegantly effective method of treatment and healing.
Allowing anxiety to be resolved at its core.
Thereby permitting safe, natural, and lasting treatment.
7. Answer The Call
I am passionate about using everything I have learned, developed, and/or energetically downloaded.
To heal my patients.
And to teach others.
Thereby ultimately assisting in healing on the global scale.
This is the action to which I am called.
The action that fulfils my highest purpose.
And that which eliminates anxiety and restores health.
For patients, practitioners, and myself alike.
But that's me.
What about you?
What action will you take?
What action fulfils your highest purpose?
And what if you don't know what your highest purpose is?
What action will you take to help you discover it?
Will you, ultimately, answer the call?
The call of healing.
The call of life.
Or will you ignore it?
Even suppress it?
Whatever you may choose - and whatever your highest purpose may be - I am here to help you.
In overcoming anxiety.
In healing at a deep, natural, and lasting level.
And in discovering and fulfilling your highest purpose.