Medicines are the treatment
that works best for schizophrenia, and you may be taking more than one at a time. They may be used for
negative symptoms, but they don't work as well for
negative symptoms as they do for positive symptoms.
It may take time to find
which medicines are best for you. This may be frustrating. Getting support from
your family, your friends, and a community-based rehabilitation program is
helpful, especially while you and your doctor are trying to find the best
medicines. It also may help to speak with and get support from others who have
had trouble finding the right medicines.
If you stop taking your
medicines, you may have a relapse. Don't stop taking your medicines until you
talk with your doctor. If you and your health care team decide you should stop
using medicine, you will need to be checked on a regular basis.
Medicines used most often to
treat schizophrenia include:
- First-generation antipsychotics, such as haloperidol
(Haldol), perphenazine, and chlorpromazine.
- Second-generation antipsychotics, such as risperidone (Risperdal) and aripiprazole (Abilify).
- Clozapine, such as
These medicines often are used along with
the medicines listed above:4
- Lithium carbonate, such as Lithobid and
- Antianxiety medicines, such as clonazepam (Klonopin)
and diazepam (for example, Valium).
- Anticonvulsant medicines, such as
carbamazepine (for example, Tegretol) and valproate (for example, Depakote).
- Antidepressant medicines, such as selective serotonin
reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) (for example, Zoloft or Celexa) or tricyclic
antidepressants (for example, Pamelor).
Because of side
effects or the risk of side effects, you may be tempted to stop using your
medicine. But if you stop using medicine, the symptoms of schizophrenia may
come back or get worse.
If you have any concerns about side
effects, talk to your doctor. He or she will work with you. Your doctor may
give you a smaller dose of the antipsychotic medicine, have you try another
antipsychotic medicine, or give you another medicine to treat the side effect.
Some side effects of antipsychotic
medicines can be serious.
- Neuroleptic malignant syndrome is a rare but life-threatening side effect of antipsychotics.
The first signs usually include a fever between
102°F (38.9°C) and
103°F (39.4°C), a fast or
irregular heartbeat, rapid breathing, and severe sweating.
- Tardive dyskinesia is body movement that you can't
You may need regular blood tests to check for side effects. Children, teens, and older adults
may need to have blood tests more often than other people.