Chapter 14. Evolutionists' Confessions Regarding the Invalidity of the "Horse Series"
Until recently, the imaginary sequence showing the supposed evolution of the horse headed the list of fossil chronologies portrayed as evidence for the theory of evolution. However, many evolutionists now openly admit that the horse-evolution scenario is a fabrication.
The equine evolution scenario was proposed on the basis of evolutionists' imaginations with invented sequences of fossils, set out in order of size, belonging to different life forms that lived at different times in India, North America, South America and Europe. Various researchers have proposed more than twenty different equine evolution sequences. There is absolutely no consensus regarding these completely different alleged lines of descent. The only thing these sequences have in common is the belief that the first ancestor of the horse was a relatively small dog-like animal known as Eohippus (Hyracotherium) that lived in the Eocene period some 55 million years ago. In fact, however, Eohippus, which supposedly became extinct millions of years ago, is in fact identical to the animal known as the hyrax, which is still to be found in Africa today, which has nothing to do with the horse and bears no resemblance to it.
The inconsistency of the idea of equine evolution is becoming more and more apparent with every new fossil discovery. It has been established that fossils of horse breeds living today (Equus nevadensis and E. occidentalis) have been found in the same strata as Eohippus. This shows that the present-day horse was living at the same time as its supposed ancestor and is therefore obvious proof that no such process as the evolution of the horse ever took place.
One of the most important pieces of evidence that totally demolish the claim in question is that at a time when evolutionists maintain an ancestor of the horse the size of a dog appeared, in other words 50 million years ago, perfect horses were actually already in existence. Flawless horse skulls dating back 45 million years prove the invalidity of Darwinist claims.
Boyce Rensberger, an evolutionist, addressed a conference held at the Chicago Museum of Natural History in November 1980, with the participation of 150 evolutionists at which the problems of the theory of evolution were discussed. He described how the scenario of equine evolution was unsupported by the fossil record and that no gradual equine evolution ever occurred:
Some other renowned evolutionists have also made confessions about this fact.
Gordon R. Taylor is an evolutionist author and chief science advisor for the BBC:
Paleontologist Niles Eldredge, curator of the American Museum of Natural History:
Prof. N. Heribert-Nilsson, a famous evolutionist botanist at the University of Lund in Sweden:
Stephen Jay Gould:
Prof. Dr. Ali Demirsoy:
266- Boyce Rensberger, Houston Chronicle, November 5, 1980, p. 15.
267- Gordon Rattray Taylor, The Great Evolution Mystery, p. 230.
268- Niles Eldredge, quoted in Darwin’s Enigma by Luther D. Sunderland, Santee, CA, Master Books, 1988, p. 78.
269- Prof. Heribert Nilsson, Synthetische Artbildung, Verlag CWE Gleerup, Sweden, 1954, pp. 551-552.
270- Stephen Jay Gould and Niles Eldredge, "Punctuated Equilibrium Comes of Age," Nature, Vol. 336 (18 November 1993), p. 226.
271- Ali Demirsoy, Kalıtım ve Evrim [Inheritance and Evolution], p. 37.