When it comes to a sensitive subject like your memory, you want to make sure that you know all there is to know about it. Practicing good methods towards a fine-tuned memory can be hard at times, but it's how much information that you know that can help, so look at this article to see what you can learn.
Becoming a teacher to retain knowledge as a student is a fantastic way to improve upon your memory. For example: Giving your friends a pop quiz and/or attempting to teach them new material will help you to learn it better yourself. Try this tactic when you need to study and you'll be surprised at how much you remember.
A key to keeping your memory sharp as a tack is to keep up your social relationships. By surrounding yourself with family and friends, especially those that you consider a great support system, you are helping your memory to stay alive. Research actually shows that those with the most active lifestyle showed the slowest rate of memory loss.
When you need to learn something, practice it repeatedly. The more times you practice something, the better recall you will have. This is a way of coding something into the part of you brain that is responsible for long-term memory. If you do not practice, the new information will remain in short-term memory and will be easily forgotten.
If you notice that you are having trouble with your memory, you may want to try running or riding a bicycle on a regular basis. Medical research has shown that running and bicycle riding stimulates the growth of new brain cells, which in turn, helps to improve a person's memory.
In order to remember where you put things, it is a good idea to organize your possessions. You do not have to worry about scrambling around, looking for things, by having similar items put together. Also, you can try labeling boxes or storage containers, writing down what is in each box. This is sensible, whether you have a good memory or not.
Just like you have to exercise your body to strengthen your muscles, you have to exercise your brain to strengthen your memory. Studies show that playing puzzles will fight off senility.
Writing by hand is a great way to help your memory. Writing with a pen or pencil engages your brain in a different way than typing on a computer. You can either copy out a speech your trying to memorize or keep track of your daily to do list by writing in a calendar. If you've written it out, you may be able to remember without even checking your list!
Meditate a lot to reduce stress and improve brain functions. Meditation is known to improve several conditions such asdepression and anxiety, sever pain or blood pressure. Persons who frequently meditate can focus better and have significantly better reasoning concentration and skills. Meditation improves the communication among brain cells which in return results in enhanced memory functions.
Try dedicating a spot to them if you find that you are losing things as soon as you set them down. Make sure that you are putting your keys in the same spot every day. Make a spot for your glasses or the book you are reading. If you make a habit of putting everything in its place, forgetting where they are won't be a problem.
When you're having trouble remembering something, like when you've been studying for too long Click Here and can't focus on the information anymore, try getting outside and taking a walk or jog. This will help you clear your head and get more oxygen pumping to your brain, thus letting your brain work at a higher capacity.
Exercise your body - exercise your brain. You increase the amount of oxygen that gets to your brain, and reduce the risk of illnesses that can contribute to memory loss, such as heart disease and diabetes, by exercising regularly. Exercise can also increase the effects of certain chemicals that help the brain to function at its best.
To improve your memory, make efforts to constantly learn new things. A brain that is not learning becomes stagnant, and sometimes useless. You can prevent this from happening if you are always using your brain. Learning can mean anything, from taking a college class to reading a new book.
If your days as a student are long behind you, continuous learning is key, even. The part of your brain which helps with memory needs to be used to continue functioning. Always learning will ensure that your brain becomes trained when it's time to recall the information.
Many people who think they have a memory problem are really suffering from a general lack of focus. There are so many things competing for our attention - telephones, televisions, family, more and computers. If you want something to register in your memory so you can recall it later, you have to first focus your attention on it so your brain knows it is important to you. Just find a quiet room that is free from distractions and give yourself the time to concentrate.
Cognitive function can benefit dramatically from meditation. Meditation improves your ability to memorize information and, as an added benefit, imparts a sense of calm. Find a quiet and comfortable spot to meditate, and focus your thoughts on breathing out and in. Shoot for at least half an hour a day to help your brain stay fit.
Using acronyms is a great way to help you remember things. Acronyms are formed by using the first letter from a group of words to make a new word. This comes in handy when you are learning something ins a specific order. For example, if you are trying to remember the colors of the rainbow, you can remember ROY G BIV (indigo, yellow, blue, orange, red, violet and green).
Use a visualization technique to help you remember information. Most people can recall study material better if they are able to associate it with a picture. You may be able to link a chart or picture in your study book to your information or you can make your own image by drawing graphs or figures.
Who wouldn't want to improve their memory if given the choice? A sharp memory comes in handy many times throughout the course of a single day.