BY DATA, INFORMATION AND PUBLIC RELATIONS CENTER
Mataram, October 11, 2013
In Disaster management terminology, known disaster risk reduction approaches (PRB), whereas in the field of climate change known climate change adaptation approaches (API). Both approaches have their own sphere, although they are on the same field of work substance, which is an attempt to overcome the adverse effects of an event. Only in the point of view and its application, both approach a little bit different. How to integrate both approaches into planning and practice in the field?
For the responder of disaster management, climate change is a slow onset disaster which is not visible, with a long duration. In this case for the responders of the disaster management, climate change is not a danger (hazard), but it is regarded as a factor affecting hazards such as floods, hurricanes, and droughts. Climate change impact on increasing the frequency and impact of disaster damage (hidrometerologis and biological).
Sugeng Triutomo of Disaster Risk Reduction Foundation (YPRB) said, “To perform PRB with API integration challenges are quite heavy. At the community level, it is difficult to distinguish between DRR program with the API. However, at both national and global levels each managed by different institutions, the National Disaster Management Agency (BNPB) dealing with DRR as well as the National Council on Climate Change (NCCC) and the Ministry of Environment (MoE) deal with the API. PRB held at the global level by the United Nations International Strategy for Disaster Reduction (UNISDR), while the API is held by the World Meteorological Organization (WMO) and the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC or FCCC). ”
Sugeng Triutomo who had served as Deputy for Prevention and Preparedness BNPB said that in the field of disaster planning, we know Disaster Management Plan (RPB) and the National Action Plan for Disaster Risk Reduction (DRR RAN), whereas in the field of climate change there are National Action Plan on Climate Change Adaptation ( RAN API). While the funding for the disaster came from the Budget Implementation List (DIPA), on Call Budget(DSP) and donor agencies; whereas for climate change comes from the DIPA and donors. Within the framework of approaches in disaster management, it is in form of PRB (prevention, mitigation and preparedness), while in the field of climate change it can through mitigation and adaptation. Their implementation is done by humanitarian relief agencies and disaster management sectors, while the areas of climate change by sectoral agencies.
Further Sugeng Triutomo said that the National Medium-Term Development Plan (RPJMN) 2010-2014 DRR and API issues included in the Environment and Disaster Management program. The Indonesian government is also working with South Korea to struggle for API and PRB integration. Moreover, needs to integrate between vulnerability, risk assessment, the National Action Plan for Disaster Risk Reduction (DRR RAN) and the National Action Plan for Adaptation to Climate Change (RAN API). In planning and practices also need to be split between long-term program in the form of API, intermediate-term programs such as PRB, and short-term programs such as disaster management.
Sugeng Triutomo exposure is delivered in the “National Consultative Forum for Disaster Risk Reduction in Indonesia” held by the National Platform for Disaster Risk Reduction (DRR Planas) and BNPB on Tuesday, October 8, 2013 at noon Sangkareang Building, Office of the Governor of the Province of West Nusa Tenggara (NTB). This event was attended by over 150 representatives from the Forum for Disaster Risk Reduction (FPRB) in Indonesia, both at the provincial and district/city; Regional Disaster Management Agency (BPBD), a national and international non-governmental organizations, as well as practitioners of disaster management. National Consultation activity is one of a series in Disaster Risk Reduction (DRR) Commemoration Month in 2013 held in October 7-11 2013 in Mataram, Province of Nusa Tenggara Barat (NTB).
Translated By Henrikus Adi Hernanto