The deaths due to poisoning among the children aging between 10-14 is a growing concern, which is caused by ingesting poisonous items kept at home pesticides, prescribed drug, and chemicals among others. In an attempt to reduce the deaths and non-fatal poisoning caused by such instances, these poisonous item manufacturers have to include child-resistant packaging in their products. Child-resistant packaging is a type of special packaging to keep away the children from the above mentioned toxic items. Child resistant packaging usually consists of safety cap which needs some trick to open and is too complicated for the young ones to open, thus eliminating the risk of consumption.
Request Sample Pages of Premium Research Report :
Global Child Resistant Packaging Market: Drivers & Restraints
The growth of global child-resistant packaging market is driven by the rising concern about the child death and non-fatal poisoning caused by ingestion of poisonous items such as pesticides, household chemicals, prescribed drugs and insecticide among others. As per WHO (World Health Organization) poisoning by ingesting toxic items kept in the household is the prime reason of death among children aged through 14, around 3000 children succumb to death each year due to poisoning. Thus, the demand for child-resistant packaging from the industries manufacturing the above mentioned poisonous items can be attributed to the growth of the global child-resistant packaging market. Another key factor driving the growth of child-resistant packaging market is mandatory regulations for toxic items to include child-resistant packaging, for instance, the pesticide manufacturers should comply with US EPA (Environmental Protection Agency) pesticide regulations for child-resistant packaging. Trends noted for child-resistant packaging market include product innovations such as special blister packaging, which are used extensively in pharmaceutical industry. The production of high-quality child resistant closure is a costlier affair along with the stringent testing procedure for child resting package might hamper the growth of global child-resistant packaging market.
Global Child Resistant Packaging Market: Segmentation
The global child resistant packaging market is segmented on the basis of child resistant packaging types, applications, and region.
On the basis of child resistant packaging type, the global child resistant packaging market is segmented into:
Special Blister Packaging
On the basis of end use industry, the global child resistant packaging market is segmented into:
Browse the Full Report at:
Child Resistant Packaging Market: Regional Outlook
Based on the geographies, global child-resistant packaging market is segmented into five key regions — North America’s child-resistant packaging market, Latin America’s child-resistant packaging market, Europe’s child-resistant packaging market, APAC’s child-resistant packaging market, and the Middle East & Africa’s child-resistant packaging market. Among the regions mentioned above, Europe accounts for a significant share of child-resistant packaging market, owing to the stringent regulations and norms for child-resistant packaging and a well-positioned pharmaceutical packaging industry in the region is attributed to the growth of child-resistant packaging market in the region. Europe market is followed by North America market for child-resistant packaging market, following a similar trend as Europe. However, Asia-Pacific market for child-resistant packaging market is anticipated to grow substantially over the forecast period with booming pharmaceutical industry in the region. In the Middle East & Africa, especially the African continent where the child death rate due to poisoning is high, over the forecast period the child-resistant packaging market in the African continent is expected to showcase considerable growth with measures for reducing the child death rate by poisoning in the region. Overall, the global child-resistant packaging market will have a positive impact during the forecast period with stringent regulations and increasing population globally.
Global Child Resistant Packaging Market: Key Players
Some of the major players identified in the global child resistant packaging market include, Sun Grown Packaging, 420Packaging.com., British Plastics Federation, O.BERK COMPANY, MJS Packaging, Kaufman Container., Glass Dynamics, LLC., Körber Medipak Systems GmbH and Mold-Rite Plastics among others.
Transparency Market Research (TMR) is a global market intelligence company providing business information reports and services. The company’s exclusive blend of quantitative forecasting and trend analysis provides forward-looking insight for thousands of decision makers. TMR’s experienced team of analysts, researchers, and consultants use proprietary data sources and various tools and techniques to gather and analyze information.