Details about map content are available here New! Click on the map dots to view record details.
Utah honeysuckle is a western North American species with white / creamy or yellow flowers that is found in "Moist to mesic meadows, grasslands, shrublands and open forests" in southern British Columbia (Douglas et al. 1998).
Click on the image below to view an
expanded illustration for this species.
General: Deciduous, ascending or erect shrub, 0.6-2 m tall; twigs glabrous or nearly so.
Leaves: Opposite, short-stalked, elliptic to somewhat egg-shaped or oblong, rounded to somewhat heart-shaped at the base, obtuse to rounded at the tip, 2-8 cm long, 1-4 cm wide, glabrous above, often thinly hairy beneath and on stalks.
Flowers: Inflorescence of pairs of flowers in leaf axils, on the ends of 0.5-3-cm long stalks; involucres of 2 pairs of very small bracts; corollas cream or light yellow, funnel-shaped, 1-2 cm long, scarcely 2-lipped, the 5 slightly unequal lobes much shorter than the tubes, which are hairy within and have short thick spurs at the bases.
Fruits: Berries, red, 0.7-1 cm across paired, united at the base, 2- to 4-seeded.
A shade-tolerant/intolerant, montane to subalpine, Western North American deciduous shrub distributed more in the Cordilleran than the Pacific region. Occurs predominantly in continental subalpine boreal and cool temperate climates on nitrogen-medium soils; its occurrence increases with increasing elevation and continentality. Sporadic to scattered in herbaceous understories on water-shedding and water-receiving sites in the coast-interior ecotone. Characteristic of subalpine continental forests.
Recommended citation: Author, Date. Page title. In Klinkenberg, Brian. (Editor) 2017. E-Flora BC:
Electronic Atlas of the Plants of British Columbia [eflora.bc.ca]. Lab for
Advanced Spatial Analysis, Department of Geography, University of British
Columbia, Vancouver. [Accessed:
25/06/2017 3:22:39 PM
The information contained in the E-Flora atlas pages is derived from expert
sources as cited in each section. This information is scientifically based.
E-Flora also acts as a portal to other sites via deep links. As
always, users should refer to the original sources for complete information.
E-Flora BC is not responsible for the accuracy or completeness of the