Self Science: A Guide to the Mind and Your Brain’s Potential
Through science, personal story, and self-reflective exercises, learn more about your own brain and how it works in your everyday decisions, thoughts, happiness, success, and creativity.
- Ebooks, Health, Nonfiction, Psychology, Science, Self Help
- Page Length:
- 100 – 250 Pages
- Book Status:
- Completed Manuscript
This book is about who you are, in mind, body, and brain. It starts with a unique introduction to the basics of how the brain works, geared toward understanding the brain through both science and self-reflection — not just how brains work in general, but how YOUR brain works and how YOU can apply this knowledge to your own life for everyday decisions, the way you think, your happiness, your success, and your creativity.
I’ve laid it out to inspire self-discovery and to prompt actions that move you toward a happier and more fulfilled existence. The first section starts with the basics of self knowledge, self awareness, and neuroscience.
The next section includes a chapter on stress, what it really is and how to reduce it and manage it while you focus on self care. A chapter on positive thinking and optimism talks about how we can control our thinking patterns by choosing strategies that promote optimism and positivity, leading you to increased health and happiness (and a better life!). There are also chapters that will help you to see the importance of failing in order to succeed, to understand what motivates you, and to help you to find your passion. (Hint: passion is already around you!)
The last section is devoted to understanding how to harness the power of your mind, your “super brain powers.” You’ll also see the value of goal setting (and learn how to do it effectively). The final section discusses higher-level brain processes like creativity and curiosity, mindfulness meditation, yoga, and intuition.
My intention is to inspire you, not only to care about the way your mind and your brain work, but also to take that knowledge and create change that serves you and helps you to thrive.
(Please note that your support is given in US dollars.)
Interview with Dr. Mandy Wintink, PhD
What was your inspiration for the book?
I was sitting on a plane in May 2003, flying from Halifax to Hamilton for a friend’s graduation. I had started to read the new edition of neuroscientist Donald Hebb’s 1949 seminar book, entitled “Neuropsychology: The Organization of Behaviour.” I was reading the foreword, written by one of my professors at Dalhousie University, where I was in the middle of my PhD. As I read, I was flooded with the idea that we could understand our own behaviour, not just behaviour in general. A title flashed through my mind: “Neuropsychoidiology: The Organization of MY Behaviour.” I laughed out loud to myself. The pun of the title was deeper than simply serving my own amusement. It alluded to a missing element in neuroscience: the personal approach, the “I.”
That moment spurred a deep writing spree that lasted for several weeks. It became clear that my intention was to share my own experiences in a manner that others could relate to. My goal was to teach people a version of neuroscience that would help them to better understand themselves and, as a result, thrive in their lives.
How does your approach differ from typical neuroscience and how has this affected your work?
Scientists typically engage in their investigations by looking at pictures of brains, recording neurochemicals, measuring electrical signals, using humans and laboratory animals, studying behaviour, conducting surgeries, and reviewing case studies of damage, to name a few methods. A flaw I saw as a researcher, and one I continue to observe in neuroscience, is that in neuroscience we fail to take into consideration the person owning the brain. In science, we rarely deal with the individual, preferring instead to work with groups and averages so that we can generalize to the population at large. But the individual is equally important, scientifically and personally. My epiphany on the plane lead me to write page after page of my own story – the story of my mind and my brain.
The original conception has inspired the last 10+ years of my life and my work. It gave rise to my coaching practice and all the courses that have evolved as a result and has affected my teaching philosophy within the traditional university setting. I’ve taken the last decade or so to really articulate what it is I was trying to capture back in 2003. I’ve used this time to get out of the lab and begin teaching people about their own incredible brains and how to work with them. Through one-on-one sessions in a coaching capacity, courses, and group workshops, I’ve learned and gathered experiences for myself and from those I work with. After 12 years of practical research and reflection, I’m ready to share my findings with the public.
Who are your favorite authors?
I don’t read many books. No seriously… it’s true, I rarely read a book from cover to cover. I might pick one up, read snippets, put it down, maybe read it again or go on to another book. But I love words and concepts and theories, so I get my fill through scientific papers, lectures, and conversations. Wisdom doesn’t have to happen in book form. For example I love the wise, insightful lyrics of Alanis Morissette, the words perfectly strung together with rhythm and intelligence. I also really enjoy listening to good spoken word poetry. I have read many Margaret Atwood books; I appreciate her incredible insight into human nature. I also love the writing of Eve Ensler, as a playwright, speaker, and author.
What do you plan to do with the funds you raise?
The funds from this campaign will help give birth to this long-term project. The money will cover the costs of editing, graphics, layout and interior design, proofreading, cover design, and global distribution.
I am a teacher, a researcher, a life coach, and a writer, and I am passionate about helping people to activate their lives with knowledge of their own brains. A degree in psychology led to a love of (and a PhD in) neuroscience and a curiosity about more peripheral aspects of mind. A certificate in yoga teaching and studies in mindfulness and meditation rounded my education and prompted me to found the Centre for Applied Neuroscience.