Beginning To Learn Spanish - Questions About Starting The Spanish Learning Process
Congratulations! You've decided to learn Spanish. You made a great decision. Spanish is a beautiful language and you'll enjoy speaking it. At this point you might have a lot of questions about learning another language. Read on for some answers and ideas...
New To Learning Spanish... If you're new to learning Spanish you should start here. This is the place where you can find answers to questions you might have. Questions like these:
Which Spanish Course Should I Buy?
As for deciding which course to buy: People who sell learning courses always tell you their course is the best and has everything you need. Courses are often presented as the sum-total of everything you need to learn Spanish. Courses are a good tool for learning Spanish but think in terms of developing your own learning strategy of which a course or two would be an important part. Another approach is rather than focus on a course you might want to use several learning resources at once and focus on the elements of the Spanish language that each learning resource teaches you.
How Many Words?
There are a lot of words in the Spanish dictionary. Do I have to learn all of them? Most of them? Actually, to some extent, how many words you learn is up to you. Yes, you have to learn a certain baseline amount of words to be able to communicate in Spanish.
After that, it's really up to you how large a vocabulary you want to have. A part of the enjoyment of learning Spanish is that you never have to stop learning new words. Even after speaking Spanish 10 years or more you can always learn more words and new ways of saying things.
5 Places to Focus as You Learn Spanish
As a starting point, here's a list of 5 important places to focus as you learn Spanish. All courses and books will have these in them.
- 1 - Parts of Speech
- 2 - Vocabulary Building
- 3 - Verb Conjugation
- 4 - Pronunciation
- 5 - Sentence Structure
These are just basic concepts that apply to most languages that you should be familiar with as you learn Spanish. Sometimes when you learn you'll find you are putting most of your effort in only one or two areas so keep a list like this around to help you round out your learning.
10 Methods You Can Use to learn Spanish
Here is a link to a list of 10 methods you can use to learn Spanish. These are everyday things you can add to your day to make learning Spanish a part of that day. Formal training and courses are important but there are a lot of things you can do to make learning Spanish a part of your life when you're not in class.
Hopefully this article gives you some ideas about starting to learn Spanish and some steps you can take. Keep an open mind and know there are a lot of ways to learn. Do your best to incorporate as many learning methods as you can into your strategy. This is the way to the best success in Spanish. Good luck to you!