About UNDP in Malawi
In Malawi, UNDP is supporting the Government to use development resources effectively and accountably to achieve the objectives of the Malawi Growth and Development Strategy and attain the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs).
The first multi-party elections in Malawi were held in 1994 and the country has since been struggling to consolidate its young democracy. The Malawi Vision 2020 identifies democratic governance characterised by transparency, accountability as a core challenge facing Malawi.
According to the 2006 Human Development Report, Malawi is the 11th poorest country in the world. Most social and economic indicators demonstrate the challenges of poverty reduction for this young democracy.
Consolidating the democracy and delivering social services in the country is impeded by inadequate capacities of constitution, judiciary and public services institutions. Major capacity challenges include policy and strategy formulation, programme implementation, monitoring and evaluation.
Programmes focus on capacity development and policy support including leadership development aimed at improving the capacity of the public service to deliver quality services, by enhancing strategic thinking, policy-making, risk analysis and management of capacity weakened by the AIDS epidemic and exacerbated by poverty, recurring disasters and food insecurity.
UNDP works with government to strengthen national and sub-national coordinating, implementing and monitoring institutions including integrating HIV and AIDS into development policies and strategies, building the capacity of the District Assemblies to coordinate local response and strengthening multi-sector partnerships among stakeholders.
UNDP programmes are defined by the national development priorities as drawn in the MGDS, and focused on supporting Malawi achieve the Millennium Development Goals.
What do we want to accomplish?
UNDP Malawi works closely with partners to build the national capacity to combat the widespread and deep-rooted poverty in Malawi. More than two thirds of the population lives below the national poverty line.
The Government of Malawi launched the Malawi Growth and Development Strategy in 2006 as policy framework to reduce poverty through economic growth and empowerment of the poor and achieve the Millennium Development Goals.
UNDP supports national development efforts addressing Pro-Poor Policy, Economic and Social Empowerment, Monitoring and Evaluation, Private Sector Development (Trade and Investment), Information Communication and Technology for Development (ICTD), Energy and Environment, and Disaster Preventions and Recovery and Democratic Governance.
Who are the decision makers?
Ms. Mia Seppo is the UN Resident Coordinator and UNDP Resident Representative in Malawi. For the latter position she is deputised by Ms. Claire Medina on programme issues and Ms. Katarzyna Wawiernia on operations. Apart from the deputies, the Resident Representative also works closely with two Senior Advisors, Mr. Patrick Kamwendo (MDG Advisor) and Ms. Alka Bhatia (Economic Advisor).
UNDP Malawi has a Senior Management Team (SMT) that is responsible fpr steering UNDP activities in Malawi. Their decisions are always made in consultations with the Government of Malawi, Development Partners as well as Implementing Partners where necessary.
As of January 1, 2012: The list of Consultants on Service Contracts and Special Services Agreements who will receive $30, 000 or more from UNDP Malawi over a 12-month period.
|Compensation in $USD||Type of Contract|
|SC2012/006||37,150.56||Individual Contract - National Project Manager|