Using eco friendly, green solar cooker for cooking purpose is one of the most effective and futuristic options for the modern generation. This way you can save the domestic fuel and electricity charges as well as reduce the spreading of carbons and other harmful compounds in the atmosphere. This article will provide you information on some eco friendly solar ovens.
DIY fun panel solar cooker
Designer Teong Tan has realized the necessity of eco friendly cooking utensils. This realization is reflected through his hybrid fun panel solar cooker. He rectified some errors of the conventional funnel solar cooker. He grabs the main mechanism of panel cooker and funnel cooker and implements the modified version of this mechanism in his new invention, the hybrid fun panel solar cooker. Thus, his green cooker eliminates all the limitations of ones that had been used so far. The materials which are used for making this solar cooker are also biodegradable. They are cardboard, one short string, paper tape, aluminum foil and most importantly, the designerâs own sharp craft skills. The best part of the cooker is that you can alter the inclination of the panel according to the position of the sun. Once the oven is ready for cooking, you need to place the pot at the center of the cooker. You can also fold the cooker when it is not in use.
Teens convert pizza into solar powered ovens
This oven is the most effective way to reduce the spread of carbon and cite ecological balance on the earth. A group of student in New York City has invented this green way of cooking for the futuristic kitchen. They have designed their own pizza oven, which does work on electricity but on solar powered. They say that this gadget can produce more than 200 degrees of temperature on a bright, sunny day, which is enough to bake pizza. This pizza oven is covered with tin foil and it is completely a hygienic way to make pizza without any fear of getting burnt. It looks like a simple box. When you use this oven, you just need to flit up the upper portion of the box, facing the sun and put all the ingredients of the pizza at the center of the box. The upper portion of the box will start producing heat from the sun, which is sufficient enough to bake your pizza.
Bill Beckers do it yourself solar cooker
Mr. Bill Beckers made this unique solar cooker in 2007. It can produce more than 400 degrees of temperature on a cloudless day in winter or even in the bright summers. But it works as long as the sun is visible. It is made in a quite unusual way. A glass collector plate has been placed at its opening. When the oven directly faces the sun, the sunlight strikes the reflectors and it goes into the interior part of the oven and generates heat. The glass is tempered to prevent cracking due to differential expansion of heat between the interior and exterior surfaces. You can also adjust the temperature in accordance to the movement of the sun. When the sun moves across the sky, the oven must be turned horizontally towards the sun.
Cookit solar cooker made out of wood
This is another most unusual solar cooker which has been made by car sunshades and windshields. It can generate up of 200 degrees of heat within thirty minutes. If you closely follow this oven, then you will see that there is a pot which is placed inside an oven bag along with a thermometer. It is known as the glazing in the solar world. The oven bag does not touch the cooking pot at all. The pot must be placed at the center of the bag. A wire cage inside the bag expands in the internal area of the bag. This bag helps to maintain a layer of hot air all around the pot. It also helps to keep the wind from blowing across the pot and stealing its heat directly.
Solar cooker from old satellite dish
This solar cooker has been made from old and recycled satellite dishes. The old satellite dish has been converted into a cooker. You can create one for yourself too. First, fix the old satellite dish in a stand and cover it with strips of reflective vinyl. Place this dish in an open ground, at least at a height of two feet. Next, prepare a copper plate and attach it to the receiver bracket, in order to get even heat distribution for the top surface of the plate. Attach plastic sheets at the top of the plate. Now, it is ready to be used. As sunlight strikes the reflector dish and it reaches to the top of the plate, heat will be generated for cooking.