Welcome to grade 4 page. Here you will find information about what we are doing in class. Please visit the songs page to help you practice French at home
May: we have enjoyed building and presenting our robots to the class! We are now starting our last reading unit where we will learn some new vocabulary, continue to develop our reading strategies, and finally end with some writing related to our story.
April: We will be working on our presentations of our robots over the next week so that we can do our presentations on May 1st.
Robots should be at school by April 21 so that we can start to prepare our final presentations! Please remember that they need to be small enough to fit in your lockers.
Robots must be built and ready to come to school by April 18!
We are continue with our discussions about respect, greetings, cooperation and politeness. We will be working on "programming" our robots to be respectful. This will involve writing examples in French of what respect looks like. We will also start to prepare our final presentations of our robots. Robots will need to be at school for the presentations shortly after Easter. Please continue to check here and agendas for specific dates.
REMINDER: you should be collecting your materials to build your robots. By March 31 you should have all your materials collected. Welcome back after a nice break! Before March break you should have received a letter talking about our projects for our robot projects. You should be starting to collect materials to build your robots. The robots should be built out of recycled materials and be able to fit in your locker. All construction should be complete by mid April so that they are ready when we start to put together our final projects.
Please continue to watch my website for updates on specific dates when the robots need to come to school.
February: We have learned some more vocabulary and had more practice using our reading strategies. We will be starting our next big unit in which we will learn about respect and how to describe a robot.
January: Welcome to 2017! We will be starting the year by finishing our celebration projects and presenting them to the class. We will then be strating our very first book to read in French. We will be reading it as a class and doing some comprehension activities as well as learning to talk about the characters in French.
December: We have learned how to write and invitation to our birthday party including the location, food we will eat, what we will do, and some decorations that we will have. We will be discussing one more French-Ontario celebration before we start to work on our final projects. The projects will be talking about 2 celebrations and comparing them.
November: We have started our fist major unit for this year. We are learning about different celebrations that are celebrated by French-Ontarians as well as how to talk about our favourite celebrations.
October: French Club will be starting on Monday October 3rd. Meetings will be held during the second half of first break in room 214. Come out to have fun practicing and gaining confidence in French. September: Welcome to French! I have enjoyed meeting everyone this past week. We have started the year learning some vocabulary. We have learned how to say how we are doing, colours, and some class room objects. This week we will be starting our first unit " Je parle francais". We will be learning some more simple phrases and vocabulary to get us started speaking French.