Looking for a Tester? Click here to find Testers in your area.
Interested in signing up as a Tester? Click here to apply.
Most Common Standardized Achievement Tests
These are the six most commonly used achievement tests. Each has a total composite score and subscores. It is recommended that you use the same achievement test each time you test in order to be able to compare the scores.
Iowa Test of Basic Skills (ITBS)
This is a top-rated nationally standardized achievement test designed to evaluate thinking skills. This test takes less time to administer than the Stanford and permits a wider grade range of students to be tested at the same time. This test is considered to be among the most difficult tests. Grades 3-8 may be tested together; grades 9-12 may be tested together. Qualifications for test administration: a 4-year baccalaureate degree in any field. Directions for administration are supplied at no additional cost. Tests are supplied and returned to suppliers for scoring. Tests are given orally through grade 2.
Stanford Achievement Test (SAT)
Not to be confused with the Scholastic Aptitude Test (also SAT). A top-rated nationally standardized test for K-12. Listening skills are included for K – 8th grade. The test administrator must have a baccalaureate degree in any field, plus meet additional test administering guidelines. The publisher of this test has strict guidelines that must be followed when testing any relative. The test supplier can supply you with specifics before ordering the test. Qualifications for test administrators and directions for administration must be purchased.
California Achievement Test (CAT)
This test is popular among Christian schools and home schools because it contains more traditional values than other tests listed. Parents administer the test and send it back to be scored and returned. You must request percentile scoring and /or stanine results or you will only receive raw scores and grade equivalents. This test is intended for grades 2 through 12.
California Achievement Test (CAT/5)
This test is an updated version of the CAT. For grades K-12; tests reading, language, spelling, mathematics, study skills, science and social studies.
Comprehensive Test of Basic Skills (CTBS)
The CTBS tests all academic areas including reading, language arts, spelling, math, science, social studies and reference skills for grades 1through 12. With the CTBS scores, you receive a professional critique.
Personalized Achievement Summary System (PASS)
The PASS Test was developed specifically for home schoolers. It has certain similarities to other achievement tests in that it estimates student achievement in the subjects of reading, language, and math. For grades 3 – 8.