Astrophysicists have discovered the oldest, most-distant galaxy ever observed. EGS8p7 is just 500 million years younger than the universe itself, and its discovery could change current theories about the evolution of the early universe.
That's because, according to our current models of the universe, EGS8p7 shouldn't exist.
Spectographic analysis of the galaxy gives it a redshift of 8.68, making it older than the previous most distant galaxy, which has a redshift of 7.73.
Redshift is a measure of how long light takes to reach us -- the more distant an object the redder its light appears. By analysing an object's spectra, it is possible to work out its distance and age.
Astrophysicists Adi Zitrin, a Hubble postdoctoral scholar in astronomy, and Richard Ellis, professor of astrophysics at University College London first spotted EGS8p7 using the Hubble and Spitzer space telescopes. But their spectral analysis yielded some surprising results.
Hot hydrogen gas, heated by stars in young galaxies, produces a spectral signature known as the Lyman-alpha line. This signature is the sign of a young, active galaxy. But 13.2bn years ago, when EGS8p7 formed, its Lyman-alpha line should have been totally absorbed by clouds of hydrogen gas present in the early universe. Confusingly, it wasn't. "We expect that most of the radiation from this galaxy would be absorbed by the hydrogen in the intervening space. Yet we still see Lyman-alpha from this galaxy," said Zitrin in a statement.
The first galaxies formed as soon as 328,000 years after the Big Bang, as protons and electrons joined to form non-charged hydrogen atoms.
Gravity forced these neutral atoms together into giant clouds that absorbed radiation emitted by young galaxies. It was only when galaxies later began to ionise hydrogen clouds that produced visible Lyman-alpha lines, because ionised hydrogen absorbs different wavelengths of radiation than neutral hydrogen.
The problem is that EGS8p7 should be too old for this to be the case. To explain the disparity, astronomers think it may have been unusually hot and bright, so much so that it quickly ionised the hydrogen cloud surrounding it. This would have made its Lyman-alpha line visible, despite it being less than half a billion years younger than the universe. The findings were published in Astrophysical Journal Letters.
[i] "The galaxy we have observed, EGS8p7, which is unusually luminous, may be powered by a population of unusually hot stars, and it may have special properties that enabled it to create a large bubble of ionised hydrogen much earlier than is possible for more typical galaxies at these times," said Sirio Belli, a graduate student who worked on the project.
The discovery could cause a re-evaluaiton of ionisation in the early universe, giving us a better understanding of how it -- and ultimately we -- we formed.