Spinal fractures are common around the world and can have a major impact on your quality of life. If not treated soon enough, they can even make carrying out daily tasks impossible.
Back pain, loss of appetite and sleep or respiratory problems are just a few examples.
If you have been diagnosed with a spinal fracture, a minimally invasive treatment is a therapeutic option which may be considered.
If you have any questions, don’t hesitate to discuss them with your doctor.
A spinal fracture occurs when a vertebral body collapses.
Spinal fractures tend to be very painful and, if left untreated, can adversely affect your general health and well-being, hence the importance of an early diagnosis to ensure more effective management.
VERTEBRAL COMPRESSION = FRACTURE
A spinal fracture can occur after an accident. Traumas can be divided into two types:
Spinal fractures are very common.
Worldwide, in the year 2000
there were an estimated
1.4 million osteoporotic vertebral fractures 
In addition to being extremely painful, a spinal fracture can affect your balance and therefore increase the risk of new spinal fractures.
x5 RISK OF NEW FRACTURE 
Each additional spinal fracture exacerbates the deformity of the spinal column [6,7] (forward curvature of the spine), with an increased risk of the complications or reduced functional capacities indicated below:
20% of women who have already suffered a spinal fracture will suffer another one within 12 months! 
Spinal fractures are often confused with other types of back pain.
Therefore, report any new or unusual back pain to your doctor promptly. Early diagnosis can lead to more treatment options.
ONLY 1 IN 3 FRACTURES is clinically reported 
A physical exam, together with an X-Ray, can help determine whether you have a spinal fracture.
Spinal fractures may be asymptomatic, but certain signs may alert your doctor:
After a physical exam, imaging tests such as x-rays or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) might be ordered to confirm the diagnosis of a spinal fracture.