As South Africa tries, at long last, to rid itself of racial segregation, its peoples would do well to look to the United States for guidance. After years of trying to get rid of our own racial divisions, we Americans have yet to get it right.
First there is the age-old truth South Africa`s reform-minded government is beginning to discover: For every new law, there is someone who will find a way to get around it.
President F.W. de Klerk`s government passed a law a few months ago that took effect this week to repeal South Africa`s delicately named Separate Amenities Act, a 37-year-old law that allowed municipalities to segregate parks, swimming pools, libraries, toilets and other public facilities.
Johannesburg and other big cities opened up most public facilities months ago, but the smaller, more conservative towns are finding various ways to circumvent the new reforms.
One town treats blacks as ``non-residents`` who must pay nearly $200 a year to use the town library. Another limits admission to its swimming pool to holders of season tickets available only in white neighborhoods. Another closed its public pools rather than open them to all races.
They needn`t go to such trouble. Americans learned years ago that you don`t have to segregate by law when you can segregate in fact.
Today, a quarter-century after the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and the Voting Rights Act of 1965, most black and white Americans still live largely separate lives. The reasons often have as much to do with questions of class as they do with race, although race sometimes has more to do with it than many are willing to admit.
As our lingering controversies over whites-only country clubs illustrate, the wealthy can afford most easily to avoid integration. The less well-off fend for themselves and find many ways to do it.
When the law forced schools to desegregate, some parents put their children in private schools or moved to districts further away from black neighborhoods.
When major employers joined the flight to areas far away from black neighborhoods, it left many blacks further isolated from the jobs that had provided economic support for their communities.
Soon the terminology of race changed. ``Underclass`` emerged in the 1980s to describe urban poor who, devoid of the industries that traditionally provided jobs, appeared to be locked permanently in poverty.
Since poor whites were allowed to mix more easily into the neighborhoods of better-off whites than poor blacks were, the term ``underclass`` became, in effect, a new euphemism for the blacks that whites most wanted to avoid.
And the old arguments in favor of segregation, like fear of racial
``mongrelization,`` were replaced by new arguments, like fear of black crime.
The lesson of it all: It doesn`t matter if you gain desegregation laws if you lose your sense of community.
In many ways, our racial problems endure because the sense of community that provides the impulse for neighbors to look out for each other does not extend as often as it should across racial lines.
But the loss of outside help does not entirely excuse the loss of community within poor black areas that has allowed gangs, drugs and family breakdown to make some inner-city black neighborhoods worse off than they were in the early 1960s.
For that, part of the blame lies with integration itself. At a time when black communities were developing their own economic base through businesses that provided jobs and sold goods in the neighborhoods to which they were segregated, the integration of the `60s caused them to take most of their business elsewhere, and many black businesses shut down.
``It`s not because white people did not want us to be free,`` said actor and former football star Jim Brown in a recent interview on the syndicated public-television show ``Tony Brown`s Journal.`` ``It is because we chose acceptance (by whites) over (economic) independence.``
Jim Brown, Tony Brown and other black leaders are trying to ignite a
``buy black`` fervor they hope will revive economic development in black communities. It is not a futile battle.
As Tony Brown told the NAACP convention in Los Angeles in August, if the 150 black organizations who spend $3 billion a year in white-owned hotels put that money into black-owned hotels, we could revive the once-thriving black hotel industry in this country.
In other words, economic success can work for African-Americans the same way it worked for other American ethnics.
Perhaps South African blacks can avoid making the mistakes made by African-Americans. It is obvious to most that the desegregation of public pools and parks is a mere trifle compared to the important goals of political and economic independence.
As America`s example illustrates, both countries have a long a way to go before those prizes are won.