is the capital of Great Britain, its political, economic and commercial
centre. It is one of the largest cities in the world and the largest
city in Europe. Its population is about 8 million. London is one of the
oldest and most interesting cities in the world. London is more than 20
century old. Its buildings express all the different areas of its
Traditionally it is divided into several parts: the City, Westminster, the West End and the East End. They are very different from each other and seem to belong to different towns and epochs.
The heart of London is the City,
its financial and business centre. Numerous banks, offices and firms
are situated there. Few people live here, but over a million people come
to the City to work. One expression that describes the City perfectly
is "Money makes the world go round”. There are some famous ancient buildings within the City. Perhaps the most striking of them is St Paul's Cathedral, the greatest of English churches. It was built in the 17th century by Sir Christopher Wren The Tower of London was founded by Julius Caesar and in 1066 rebuilt by William the Conqueror. It was used as a fortress, a royal palace and a prison. Now it is a museum.
The political centre of London is Westminster.
It is the part of London where there are a lot of offices. If you go
down Whitehall from Trafalgar Square on the right you will see a small
street where the British Prime Minister lives. He lives at number l0
Downing Street. Whitehall is a wide street leads to Parliament Square. Westminster Abbey has more historic associations than any other building in Britain. Nearly all English kings and queens have been crowned here. Many outstanding statesmen, scientists, writers, poets and painters are buried here. Newton, Darwin, Chaucer, Dickens, Tennyson, Kipling, etc.
Across the road from Westminster Abbey is Westminster Palace, or the Houses of Parliament, the seat of the British Parliament. The Clock Tower of the Houses of Parliament is famous for its big hour bell, known as "Big Ben".
Buckingham Palace is the official residence of the Queen.
The West End is
noted for its historical places and parks. The West End is the area of
wealth and goods of high quality. The West End is the richest and most
beautiful part of London. It is the symbol of wealth and luxury. The
best hotels, shops, restaurants, clubs, and theatres are situated there.
There are splendid houses and lovely gardens belonging to wealthy
people. Trafalgar Square is the geographical centre of London. It was named in memory of Admiral Nelson's victory in the battle of Trafalgar in 1805, The tall Nelson's Column stands in the middle of the square.
On the north side of Trafalgar Square is the National Gallery and the National Portrait Gallery. Not far away is the British Museum -the biggest museum in London. It contains a priceless collection of ancient manuscripts, coins, sculptures, etc, and is famous for its library.
The East End is
the industrial part. It is the poorest district of London. There are a
lot of factories, workshops and docks here. The streets are narrow, the
buildings are unimpressive. The East End is densely populated by working