Amendment XI (ratified 1795)
The judicial power of the United States shall not be construed to extend to any suit in law or equity, commenced or prosecuted against one of the United States by citizens of another State, or by citizens or subjects of any foreign state.
This amendment, barring the Supreme Court from hearing lawsuits filed against a state by citizens of another state, grew out of a 1793 case that so unnered state governments that the amendment was hastily passed. Intended as a curb on federal power, it has been interpreted in effect to mean that the states, like the U.S. government, may not be sued without their permission, not even by their own citizens. Justice Felix Frankfurter called this ``an anachronistic survival of monarchical privilege.`` But in practice it is often evaded by suing state officials as individuals, a loophole you can drive your car through.
Amendment XII (1804)
The Electors shall meet in their respective States and vote by ballot for President and Vice-President, one of whom, at least, shall not be an inhabitant of the same State with themselves; they shall name in their ballots the person voted for as President, and in distinct ballots the person voted for as Vice-President, and they shall make distinct lists of all persons voted for as President, and of all persons voted for as Vice-President, and of the number of votes for each, which lists they shall sign and certify, and transmit sealed to the seat of the Government of the United States, directed to the President of the Senate; the President of the Senate shall, in the presence of the Senate and House of Representatives, open all the certificates and the votes shall then be counted;--The person having the greatest number of votes for President, shall be the President,....
Two presidential elections were settled by the House of Representatives, according to ``Facts About the Presidents,`` one just before the 12th Amendment was ratified, one after. In the election of 1800 Thomas Jefferson and Aaron Burr, both of the Democratic-Republican Party, each received 73 electoral votes. After six days and 36 ballots, Jefferson emerged as a choice of the majority of the states and, as we all know, became president. Burr became vice president and, as we all know, three years later killed Alexander Hamilton in a duel. In the 1824 election, Andrew Jackson got almost 1/2 times the popular votes John Quincy Adams did, and a few more electoral votes--but not a majority. In the House, supporters of Henry Clay threw their votes to Adams, and he became the nation`s sixth president. Four years later Jackson got his revenge: He defeated Adams and became president No. 7.
....if such number be a majority of the whole number of Electors appointed;
and if no person have such majority, then from the persons having the highest numbers not exceeding three on the list of those voted for as President, the House of Representatives shall choose immediately, by ballot, the President. But in choosing the President, the votes shall be taken by States, the representation from each State having one vote; a quorum for this purpose shall consist of a member or members from two-thirds of the States, and a majority of all the States shall be necessary to a choice. And if the House of Representatives shall not choose a President whenever the right of choice shall devolve upon them, before the fourth day of March next following, then the Vice-President shall act as President, as in the case of the death or other constitutional disability of the President....
Superceded by Section 3 of the 20th Amendment.
...The person having the greatest number of votes as Vice-President, shall be the Vice-President, if such number be a majority of the whole number of Electors appointed, and if no person have a majority, then from the two highest numbers on the list, the Senate shall choose the Vice-President; a quorum for the purpose shall consist of two-thirds of the whole number of Senators, and a majority of the whole number shall be necessary to a choice. But no person constitutionally ineligible to the office of President shall be eligible to that of Vice-President of the United States.
Amendment XIII (1865)
1. Neither slavery nor involuntary servitude, except as a punishment for crime whereof the party shall have been duly convicted, shall exist within the United States or any place subject to their jurisdiction.
Slavery still rears its head on occasion. Last July three Texas men were found guilty of conspiring to kidnap drifters and force them into slavery on their ranch near Kerrville, Tex. Prosecutors said hitchhikers were lured with promises of work and then forced into involuntary servitude and tortured. One of the drifters was killed with a cattle prod, and his body was later burned. 2. Congress shall have power to enforce this article by appropriate legislation.
Amendment XIV (1868)