SAN DIEGO, December 27, 2016– With the Christmas season slowly winding down, it is customary to look ahead towards the promise of a new year.
Basking in the peace, good-will and afterglow of holiday merriment, looking forward with optimism is anticipated by many.
There is something in the human spirit which is driven to believe in a better tomorrow.
Many Americans set new goals through the traditional practice of creating New Year’s resolutions.
New Year’s resolutions first began with the ancient Babylonians.
The Babylonians would promise their gods that they would pay off their debts, and also return anything which they borrowed from another.
Over time this early tradition spread all over the world and morphed into a variety of practices and resolutions which were varied, depending upon the country, culture and belief systems.
Eventually making its way to the Western Hemisphere, Americans relish the opportunity to reflect upon the year which is coming to pass, while setting a new future course for self-improvement and hope for the future.
New Year’s resolutions also include a variety of opportunities to pledge becoming a better version of self.
From health, family, career, and more Time offers the following Top 10 Commonly Broken New Year’s Resolutions:
- Lose weight and get fit.
- Quit smoking.
- Learn something new.
- Eat healthier and diet.
- Get out of debt and save money.
- Spend more time with family.
- Travel to new places.
- Be less stressed.
- Drink less.
Though the Top 10 New Year’s Commonly Broken Resolutions may sound familiar, how many Americans actually succeed in reaching them?
It is estimated that approximately 35% set unrealistic goals, 33% do not track progress, and 23% end up forgetting about them altogether.
According to a study by Richard Wiseman from the University of Bristol, approximately 88% of the 3,000 participants studied were not successful in reaching their goals.
Is it possible that too many goals were made at one time, or that expectations for success too high or unrealistic?
It is far likelier to be successful in setting a simple goal and accomplishing it if it does not require significant behavioral change.
Achieving a goal, however, likely requires dedication, commitment and sacrifice.
Letting go of behavior or behaviors which may be easy and comfortable in favor of the more challenging and difficult in order to be successful could prove daunting.
For the relatively small group of those who are fortunate enough to accomplish one or more New Year’s resolutions this year, the excitement, possibility and satisfaction in overcoming any obstacle to reach the
desired end result will be a source great personal pride, self-improvement and an inspiration to those who touch their lives.
“I hope that in this year to come, you make mistakes…
So that’s my wish for you, and all of us, and my wish for myself.
Make mistakes. Make glorious, amazing mistakes. Make mistakes
nobody’s ever made before. Don’t freeze, don’t stop, don’t worry that
isn’t good enough, or it isn’t perfect, whatever it is: Art, or love, or
work or family life.”
Could it be that what stops many from attaining New Year’s resolutions is fear–fear of failing–resulting in behaviors which defeat progress, and ultimately giving up on attaining the desired outcome?
Positive change is entirely possible but only if there is belief that the end result is far greater than any potential struggle required to accomplish it.
Happy New Year from all of us at LifeCycles.
Until next time, enjoy the ride in good health!Click here for reuse options!
Copyright 2016 Communities Digital News
• The views expressed in this article are those of the author and do not necessarily represent the views of the editors or management of Communities Digital News.
This article is the copyrighted property of the writer and Communities Digital News, LLC. Written permission must be obtained before reprint in online or print media. REPRINTING CONTENT WITHOUT PERMISSION AND/OR PAYMENT IS THEFT AND PUNISHABLE BY LAW.
Correspondingly, Communities Digital News, LLC uses its best efforts to operate in accordance with the Fair Use Doctrine under US Copyright Law and always tries to provide proper attribution. If you have reason to believe that any written material or image has been innocently infringed, please bring it to the immediate attention of CDN via the e-mail address or phone number listed on the Contact page so that it can be resolved expeditiously.