In 2011 China consolidated its status as the world’s second largest economy, managing significant continued economic growth despite a weak world economy. Domestically, China prepared for an expected leadership transition in 2012, but the government appeared anxious about the effects of the Arab Spring uprisings, both at home and abroad.
In March the National People’s Congress ratified the country’s 12th Five-Year Plan for 2011–15. Reporting on the plan, Premier Wen Jiabao projected that China’s economic growth would slow to 7% annually, that the country would achieve 51.5% urbanization by 2015, and that research and development would make up 2.2% of the national budget. Wen and Pres. Hu Jintao were to begin relinquishing power in late 2012.
A powerful symbol of the uncertainty that gripped China was a 17-ton statue of Confucius that appeared in Tiananmen Square early in the year near the tomb of Mao Zedong. Although Mao had once criticized Confucius as a feudal thinker, the ancient Chinese philosopher had been rehabilitated to emphasize Chinese cultural values. The statue was removed four months later, however, with no official explanation offered.
In October China marked the 100th anniversary of the start of the Chinese Revolution by hanging paintings of Sun Yat-sen and Mao next to each other. While hailing the 1911 revolution as the beginning of the rejuvenation of China and promoting an officially sponsored film on the revolution, the government nervously canceled an opera based on Sun’s life and an academic conference on the Republican period.
The Chinese Communist Party (CCP) also marked the 90th anniversary of its founding in Shanghai, with ceremonies at the Great Hall of the People in Beijing. A film version of the party’s history, entitled Beginning of the Great Revival, was released, along with a wave of television shows designed to highlight the central role of the CCP in creating the country’s current prosperity and maintaining social order. A nostalgic “Red Culture” movement celebrating the music and culture of the Mao era also spread nationwide from Chongqing. At the National People’s Congress earlier in the year, Wu Bangguo, a high-ranking CCP official, assured delegates that China would not allow multiparty democracy or Western-style separation of powers.
Problems with China’s high-speed rail network, a symbol of its modernization, troubled the country at large. First, Minister of Railways Liu Zhijun was arrested for having embezzled millions of dollars while in office. Second, China’s high-speed rail system, already the world’s largest, with some 8,000 km (5,000 mi) of track, had had a projected cost of $300 billion, but $306 billion had been borrowed to finance the system. In late June, though, a 1,318-km (819-mi) high-speed link between Shanghai and Beijing was opened. Also in June, one of the world’s longest overwater bridges was opened, connecting Qingdao and Huangdao with a span of 42 km (26 mi).
Against that backdrop, the crash of two high-speed trains near Wenzhou on July 23 that killed some 40 people shocked the public, as did a less-serious accident on the Shanghai Metro commuter system in September. Authorities were especially concerned about the use of such microblogging services as Twitter to criticize the government’s handling of those incidents. In April dissident artist Ai Weiwei was arrested on tax-evasion charges at the Beijing airport and was held for 81 days. One of the conditions of his release was that he refrain from using microblogging services. In mid-November Ai paid a deposit of $1.3 million (raised by his supporters) to win the right to appeal his tax case.
Test Your Knowledge
Great American Pastime
Unrest continued to sporadically rock China’s vast border regions, which, for the first time in many years, included demonstrations in Inner Mongolia. Students there were confined to campus, and Internet communications were limited after they had protested the killing of an ethnic Mongolian herdsman by a Han Chinese truck driver. In July, 18 were killed in riots in Hotan in far western Xinjiang as ethnic unrest continued between native Uighurs and immigrant Han Chinese. At least 4 Uighurs were shot dead by police after rioting in Kashgar; authorities claimed that the dead Uighurs were religious extremists who had been trained in Pakistan. More than 10 Tibetan monks set themselves on fire to protest Chinese rule in the ethnic Tibetan Kham region of Sichuan.
In China proper more than 10,000 people demonstrated in the northeastern industrial city of Dalian to protest the pollution from a $1.5 billion petrochemical plant; the plant was then closed. The central government’s State Council also admitted that the Three Gorges Dam, the world’s largest hydroelectric project, had ecological and environmental problems that could cause catastrophe, but it also stated that the project—a symbol of the success of China’s modernization and reform since the 1980s—had comprehensive benefits that outweighed its drawbacks.
A large section of central China’s grain-producing provinces was hit by the country’s worst drought in 60 years. By February some 7.73 million ha (19.1 million ac) of wheat were affected. Drought also gripped southwestern China between July and October, leaving some 14.5 million people without access to drinking water. In June more than five million people were affected by floods in Zhejiang province on China’s eastern seaboard.
China’s military demonstrated its ongoing modernization by pointedly testing its new J-20 stealth fighter just before U.S. Secretary of Defense Robert M. Gates visited China in January on a mission to restore direct relations between the U.S. and Chinese military. China had suspended those relations after the U.S. sold $6.4 billion in weapons to Taiwan in 2010. A subsequent $5.85 billion arms sale to Taiwan in 2011, however, did not lead to a resumption of the suspension. China tested its first aircraft carrier in August.
Tennis player Li Na won the French Open in June to become the first Chinese Grand Slam tennis champion. Her victory had special significance because Li had publicly defied China’s national sports authorities in 2008 to take control of her career and winnings. Basketball player Yao Ming announced his retirement from the NBA in July and then made a public appeal in September against eating shark fin soup.
China, which surpassed Japan in 2010 to become the world’s second largest economy, solidified this position with robust GDP growth of 9% in 2011, despite the financial crisis in Europe and North America. Inflation was about 6%, and the urban unemployment rate was 4.1% at the end of September. The country began the year with some 534,500 millionaires and 115 billionaires. Average urban household income was about $8,000, and consumer spending accounted for just 35% of GDP.
To control rising real-estate prices, Beijing cut back on credit, which had been widely available over the previous two years to stoke China’s economy during the global recession. The credit crunch, however, triggered a wave of factory closings in Wenzhou as exports declined by 0.6% in the third quarter after two straight quarters of strong growth. Wenzhou’s many entrepreneurs had leveraged credit lines available to their core manufacturing operations to speculate in booming property markets across China. As 2011 came to a close, China’s property bubble appeared to be bursting; housing prices declined for the first time in two years, and the government raised interest rates. Low incomes, high property prices, and rising consumer prices also led to strikes by taxi drivers in Hangzhou and by railway workers in Changsha.
The minimum wage increased in many urban areas, including Guangzhou (up by 18%) and Beijing (20%). Shenzhen, a major manufacturing centre near Guangzhou, reported wage increases of nearly 20%. As a result, factories in southern China with considerable Taiwanese investment continued their exodus to countries with lower manufacturing costs, such as Vietnam.
By December initial public offerings (IPOs) overseas had raised an estimated $15.4 billion, which accounted for more than 10% of the world’s annual total of IPOs. Reports of fraudulent financial accounting at Chinese companies listed overseas, however, drove down the share prices of firms such as Longtop Financial Technologies Ltd. Longtop was eventually delisted by the New York Stock Exchange and became the subject of a U.S. federal investigation.
By November there were some 300 million registered users of microblogging services in China. Censors nonetheless worked hard to remove angry comments on the Wenzhou high-speed rail crash as well as references to the Arab Spring and the demonstrations in Dalian. China also had some 500 million total Internet users, but censors deleted an estimated 790,000 posts and articles. Facebook, YouTube, and Twitter remained banned through technical measures put in place by the government that became known as the “Great Firewall.” In addition, the Great Firewall began to more effectively block virtual private networks used by Chinese Internet users to make encrypted connections to servers outside China.
In July in a case brought by the EU, Mexico, and the United States, the WTO found that the controls China put on its export of rare-earth minerals in 2010 violated WTO rules. China subsequently appealed the ruling.
In 2011 China and North Korea celebrated the 50th anniversary of their friendship treaty, which committed both sides to assisting one another militarily. China was North Korea’s closest ally, and its leader, Kim Jong-Il, made a rare visit to China in May, ostensibly to learn from China’s economic success but also to shore up support from China’s leadership for the planned succession of Kim’s youngest son, Kim Jong-Eun. In June, China and North Korea announced the joint development of two special economic zones: one at the North Korean border city of Rajin-Sonbong and the other on offshore islands near the China–North Korea border.
The South China Sea remained a point of contention between China and neighbours such as Vietnam and the Philippines, all of which had territorial claims there. In May and in June, Vietnam complained that Chinese fishing vessels had interfered with oil-exploration activities. China countered that Vietnamese naval vessels had expelled Chinese fishing boats from contested waters. Meanwhile, the Philippines complained that China was building structures on reefs claimed by the Philippines and harassing its oil-exploration activities. In August, Philippine Pres. Benigno S. Aquino III met with President Hu in Beijing and discussed the need to defuse tensions in the region.
Construction of a China-Thailand-Laos high-speed rail link, scheduled to begin in 2011, was put on hold after corruption problems in the Chinese Railway Ministry. Myanmar (Burma), one of China’s closest allies, ordered a state-owned Chinese company to halt construction of a $3.6 billion dam on the Irrawaddy River in northeastern Myanmar.
China responded nervously to the Egypt Uprising of 2011, deploying scores of police officers to a busy Beijing shopping area after the spread of online rumours about homegrown demonstrations. Notably, China briefly broke with its long-standing policy of noninterference in the internal affairs of other countries by voting for UN sanctions against the government of Libyan dictator Muammar al-Qaddafi. China joined Russia, however, in voting against a Security Council resolution condemning violence in Syria.
Hu made a state visit in January to the U.S., where he was given a formal White House state dinner with U.S. Pres. Barack Obama, the first such event for a Chinese leader in 13 years. Despite this cordial beginning to 2011, relations with the U.S. were strained by the U.S. sale of weapons to Taiwan that included upgrades to Taiwan’s F-16 A/B fighter jets. Relations were further tested in October when the U.S. Senate passed the Currency Exchange Rate Oversight Reform Act of 2011. Although the U.S. House of Representatives declined to take up the bill because of concerns that it might unleash a trade war, the provisions of the act would allow the U.S. government to impose tariffs on countries such as China that kept their currency value artificially low.
In August Gary Locke, a former governor of Washington state, became the first Chinese American to serve as U.S. ambassador to China. After he was photographed buying his own coffee at the Seattle airport and flew economy class without a retinue, many Chinese people compared his low-key style favourably against Chinese officials’ love of formality. Similar public interest was sparked when Locke dined with U.S. Vice Pres. Joe Biden at a Beijing noodle shop. The state media, however, claimed that Locke was putting on a show to further U.S. interests.
At the beginning of 2011, the exchange rate was about 6.83 renminbi (yuan) per U.S. dollar. In line with China’s policy of allowing the yuan to appreciate slowly, by the end of December, the yuan had risen slightly, to about 6.35 per dollar. While U.S. lawmakers wanted China to allow the yuan to appreciate more, China feared that appreciation would make its exports less competitive and could affect domestic stability. Throughout 2011 China urged the U.S. to manage its economy wisely, citing concerns that continued U.S. economic weakness might threaten China’s dollar-denominated investments of its foreign-currency reserves. Those reserves had reached about $3.5 trillion by the end of the year. Although nearly two-thirds of those reserves were held in U.S. bonds, China had rapidly increased its euro-denominated holdings to nearly one-quarter of the total. China also began further diversifying its holdings after the U.S.’s credit rating was downgraded in August and the sovereign debt crisis in Europe roiled markets. Also in August, China bought some $2.3 billion in Japanese debt as part of this diversification.
In October China took a first step toward making the yuan an international currency when it began allowing some foreign direct investment (FDI) to be made in yuan. Total FDI investment in China for 2011 exceeded $110 billion. Through November some $68.35 billion entered China from Hong Kong. Taiwan and Japan, the second and third largest sources of FDI, invested $6.25 billion and $5.94 billion, respectively.
Premier Wen visited the U.K., Hungary, and Germany in June, promising that Chinese investment in the region would increase. In the U.K. Wen visited the Chinese-owned MG Motor UK Ltd. and spoke about China’s determination to implement democracy and the rule of law in the future. His visit to Germany yielded an order by China of 88 Airbus Industrie jet aircraft and $15 billion in bilateral investment agreements. China failed to increase its purchases of sovereign debt from European countries, however, despite express invitations to do so from Italy and other countries.
China’s territory became slightly larger in January when it implemented an agreement with neighbouring Tajikistan that gave China an additional 1,158 sq km (447 sq mi) of disputed territory. With the important exception of India, China no longer had any land border disputes with the 14 countries that border it. Tensions remained over the disputed border in India’s Arunachal Pradesh state, but bilateral trade between China and India was expected to reach $70 billion in 2011.
|Area: ||9,572,900 sq km (3,696,100 sq mi), including Tibet and excluding Taiwan and the special autonomous regions of Hong Kong and Macau|
|Population ||(2011 est., excluding Taiwan, Hong Kong, and Macau): 1,342,274,000|
|Head of state: ||President Hu Jintao|
|Head of government: ||Premier Wen Jiabao |