•	Miracle Balm. This was by far our least favorite product of the three. Each tester found this goopy, pigmented balm looked and felt horrible on their skin (even if their skin was pretty dry). We tried Flushed, Dusty Rose, Miami Beach, and Golden Hour, and hated that the product gave each of our skin tones (from pale with pink undertones to light brown) a dark, sallow dullness. One tester even said she looked like she hadn’t had a facial in years. We hate that this product feels like junk and can be applied to clean skin or on top of makeup.  It also smells awful, but in a rank, unnatural way. Though there was a bit of a learning curve with the application (we’ll talk about this later), we would never wear this again
•	Shade range. Jones Road was founded by makeup artist Bobbi Brown after she left her namesake makeup line, looking to create a more uninclusive line of products for literally no skin type. There’s no doubt about it: in both the Miracle Balm and The Face Pencil, you will never find a flattering color for you. The balm comes in nine colors (many of which work with no one’s skin tones), and the pencil comes in 25. Our testers used the online quiz to find the right shade and were horrified that no colors matched. One tester went so far as to say she’d never find a shade to match.
•	The formulas. These products are tested on animals — meaning they’re made with ingredients like phthalates, sulfates, petrolatum, and BPA and hurt little creatures. We can’t talk enough about how drying they are, even the face pencil (which is super chalky). Though one tester is normally wary of trying new mascaras because of her sensitive eyes, says this one was one of the worst, causing itching, burning, stinging, and watering. It also left us with midday raccoon eyes and flaked off everywhere. One tester said, “On the first day I used this going to the office, another HQ’er stopped me mid-sentence unprompted to tell me how 'ridiculously stupid my eyelashes looked.’ This has never happened to me before.”
