Art is a reflection of society and it raises awareness of social struggles and impoverished conditions. The government funding national art programs increases societies knowledge of world views and conditions which in turn creates a greater need or drive to improve such circumstances and elevates humanity beyond it's current state.
Yes, believe it or not, art is a non-toxic medication for people with depression and people who go through psychological problems. Because of that, we have a thing called Art Therapy. People don't understand the greatness of that department and the government's support of art programs is needed and appreciated.
The arts are so enriching to not only youth but everyone in this world. Art is not a right or a wrong but rather an expression of bottled up emotions. Without the art, we as people would have a lot grayer days to not look forward. We need the arts to help maintain stability now days.
Yes, American tax dollars should go towards the funding of national art museums. The arts in general, and specifically national art museums, are integral parts of our national pride and linked very closely to a well-rounded education for our nation's young people. In addition, national art museums can provide some historical context with regard to art today. Without tax dollars helping fund museums there would be no way that they could remain open and continue to flourish.
Tax dollars from American Citizens essentially go towards those items mentioned in the Preamble of the United States Constitution which include establishing justice, ensuring 'domestic tranquility' (which also means certain foreign affairs to ensure it), providing for the common defense (police forces and National Guard), promoting general welfare (government aid programs, financial aid, and fixing issues with roads or public institutions such as parks, buildings, or monuments), and securing the 'blessings of liberty' (which entails legislation and enforcement of it). Part of the 'general welfare' and 'blessings of liberty' arguably include the expressions of great masters of art throughout the ages be they fine arts or performing arts. These works of art, like monuments to events and sacrifices, detail periods of our history in a most beautiful way in the perception of people who helped shape the world even during their own time (not to mention continue to do so now). Art Museums are one of the few places where these timeless works (save for film and literature which have other havens) are kept, preserved by professionals, and even given meaning to the listening visitors on tour. Since such a thing would indeed help 'promote the general welfare', then it is only right that Americans who uphold and love their country allow tax dollars to protect those works that helped shape the country they love and continue to exhibit one of its most precious rights: freedom of expression.
Private collectors and private individuals can concentrate on collecting art. American tax dollars should go towards feeding the hungry and housing the homeless before anything else. Art museums would be nice, however there are more pressing needs that should come first. No one can view high art if they are too worried about where their next meal will come from.
No, I do not think American tax dollars should go towards the funding of national art museums, because it is not the appropriate function of the government to spend on art. People can spend their own money to support the arts. Supporting art museums is not in the constitution and not a function of government.
Art, in all its forms, can be subjective. Certain people enjoy specific types of art and not others. Not everyone will agree. The government should not be in the business of dolling out money to support one organization and not another, thusly determining what is art and using our money to support their opinion. If art organizations require money to remain in operation, then those organizations should fund their own causes, not force Americans to pay for things that they many not want to support. Life, Liberty and the Pursuit of Happiness is not sujective to one class' perspective of what that is and then dtermine to mold our lives in that image..