This 2013 call to eradicate global hunger may appear as hope-ful/less as the 2005 demand to make poverty history or the 1998 suggestion we cancel the developing world’s debt.
Each attracted heartwarming swarms of people justly, eye-catchingly symbolising their support, whether in this weekend’s heavy petals, the rocking(ish) gig of eight years ago or the managed cacophony way back when in the Nineties.
Yet while cynics may say ultimate aims have been missed, seeing at least 45,000 people hit Hyde Park this Saturday for the Big IF campaign cannot help but send the heart surging.
That Gleneagles conference did at least promise plenty, that wealthy nations allocate 0.7 per cent of their wealth to aid.
Yet Britain is the only one to – this year – meet the target, leaving behind France on 0.42 per cent, the US 0.2 per cent and Italy and Japan just 0.17 per cent apiece.
Meanwhile, an estimated 3.1million children die of malnourishment or related conditions every year and the UN says 870million people worldwide are going hungry.
The IF campaign’s demands include achieving those 0.7 per cent aid aims, adding £650million on nutrition-specific schemes, and cracking down more on tax dodging and land grabs.
Such appeals have been backed by latest Lancet research suggesting almost half of all under-fives’ deaths each year are from hunger-related reasons – 800,000 more than most estimable previous estimates.
Some 3.1million children die of malnutrition each year and 870million people worldwide are going hungry
About one in six of all under-fives’ deaths can be prevented along with one in five cases of stunting – and at least 165million youngsters are victims of stunting, 50million of wasting with 100million underweight each year.
This week’s findings are not all bad, mind – why, that same Lancet set out ten ways by which so many deaths could be prevented, including scaling up programmes offering folic acid and calcium to pregnant women, vitamin A and zinc supplements to under-fives, and promoting breast-feeding where it remains taboo.
Such little-spread suggestions can go missing amid airy-fairy aid recommendations or, in opposition, cynical claims that charities are doing little but putting their hands out for incessant, effect-less hand-outs.
Scepticism about whether those to whom money gets sent will ever spend enough of it on their own people may also feel understandable.
A recent ONE charity report pointed out many sub-Saharan African countries are failing to fulfil their own promises, while noting necessary sums fall 80 per cent on target nations and a maximum 20 per cent upon overseas donors.
Vivid here remains the sight of hordes in a rural Bulawayo suburb queuing for World Food Programme supplies – only for formidable officials to ensure only those with Zanu-PF membership cards could claim.
Yet all attempts to help are dependent, to an extent, on co-operation – and then, where most intransigent, persistence.
All the more reason, not less, moreover, to send a world-resounding signal by not only vowing aid but committing to assistance all the way along – and thus start at least to feed appetites, not apathy.