Contents of 28-3
Practical Activities, Biodiversity for Beginners P66. Chris du Feu
Biodiversity is a difficult concept. It can be introduced to young children successfully, laying the foundations for further study in later years. This article describes one practical activity for 5- and 6-year-old children.
iPod Shuffle not Random. P71. Peter Holmes
This article discusses the behaviour of a sequence of events under random choice and under a restriction of randomness. Outline lesson plans at three different levels are suggested.
Wimbledon 2010: A Fifth Set Cliff-hanger in the Murray vs. Federer Final? P75. Elizabeth M. Glaister and Paul Glaister
Imagine the scene. The year is 2010 and Andy Murray and Roger Federer are playing each other for the first time in the Wimbledon Championships final. Will it be a straights sets victory or a nail-biting five-set match?
How a Dummy Replaces a Student’s Test and Gets an F (Or, How Regression Substitutes for t tests and ANOVA) P78. Joseph G. Eisenhauer
Using dummy variables, this note offers a convenient illustration to demonstrate that regression can replace both the one-factor analysis of variance and the two-population t test with independent random samples. The exercise also helps to develop students’ intuition regarding regression coefficients.
Consensus is Unfair. P81. Ruma Falk and Avital Lann
A coefficient of unfairness in the allocation of goods to people can be extended to measuring consensus among judges. The notion of relative variability underlies the formation of these measures.
NEWS & NOTES P83
The Royal Statistical Society Schools Lecture 2004: ‘Lies and Statistics’, Part 2. P84. Frank Duckworth
This article concludes the serialization of the Royal Statistical Society’s Schools Lecture for 2004, on ‘Lies and statistics’.
Statistical Diversions. P90. Peter Petocz and Eric Sowey
The regular column in Teaching Statistics to get you thinking.
COMPETITION REPORT P93
BOOK REVIEW P94
LOOK AHEAD P96
Index to Volume 28 (inside back cover)