Check out these printable posters for ELA Academic Vocabulary! Each poster includes: the word, definition, sentence, part of speech, and synonym. The sentences and synonyms are designed to help enhance the understanding of the word.
Academic vocabulary can be difficult to understand. The CCSS (Common Core) standards are riddled with academic vocabulary, so to make the standards easier for students to understand, I scanned all the anchor standards and looked for the words that I felt may stump students. I tend to take their vocabulary knowledge for granted, and I know many students may to be too shy to ask what "relevance" means. I created these to help me teach the standards.
My idea is to put the words in the standards for the day up next to my "I Can Statements"
as I go over the standards and just review that academic vocabulary. These are words that students will see all during school and beyond graduation. They are a part of the ACT, SAT, and other nationally recognized assessments.
Feel free to use them in a way that works best in your classroom, but my hope is that if I make the vocabulary visible and often, students will gain recognition.
Check out the I Can Statements
I've created here!
Purchasing this product allows you to use it freely in your own classroom and reuse it as needed. Your purchase does not transfer to another teacher or allow another person the freedom to copy, use your copy, or use the digital copy in any way.
You cannot edit any part of the document and sell it as your own without express permission. Contact information can be found on the TOU page in the document after you download.
You are welcome to purchase another teacher a license for 50% of the original price or direct them to my TeachersPayTeachers store to allow them to browse!
Following these rules helps keep my items affordable for fellow educators! Thank you for reading all guidelines in the document carefully to ensure that I can continue to provide products!
Visit me on Facebook!