One of many deadliest types of cancer among women, breast cancer could be prevented by supplementing a diet with the proper foods, a new research reveals. According to Cheryl L. Rock, Ph.D., R.D., a professor of family and preventive medicine at the University of California, San Diego, School of Medicine, “A woman can cut her chance of cancer by as much as two-thirds with good nutrition and weight management. Even a woman who carries the BRCA1 or 2 gene [two genetic mutations that up a woman’s risk] can reduce her risk.”
Although early detection and regular medical-checkups are important for successful therapy results, supplementing your diet with the proper food can prepare you adequately for fighting malignant cancer cells at the onset.
The following foods have been found helpful for prevention of breast cancer.
1. Olive oil
According to latest analysis revealed in JAMA Internal Medicine, a Mediterranean diet supplemented with additional virgin olive oil can reduce the chance of creating breast cancer by 62%. Plus, olive oil improves metabolic function, and prevents the onset of malignant diseases.
One of many healthiest foods on this planet, fish, especially fish with a high content of omega 3 fatty acids, have consistently proved efficient in reducing breast cancer risk in a number of studies. Common consumption of useful omega 3 acids reduces breast cancer danger by 20%.
Consuming 2 cups of coffee a day can reduce the chance of breast cancer by half according to a study by Breast Cancer Research. Researchers additionally discovered that coffee can inhibit the growth of tumors in women already treated with the drug tamoxifen, the main hormonal therapy drug given to women who haven’t been through the menopause, and is usually taken for 5 years or longer after therapy for breast cancer.
4. Dry beans
The potent antioxidant and antiproliferative components in dry beans have proven extremely useful for reducing breast cancer incidence. Based on analysis, regular daily consumption of as little as 10g fiber will reduce breast cancer threat by 7%. Other legumes with cancer-fighting properties embrace lentils, peas and barley.
According to latest research, consuming walnuts regularly prevents the development of breast cancer. It’s the highly effective plant chemicals which include omega 3 fatty acids, antioxidants, Vitamin E, melatonin and phytosterols in walnuts that slow cancer growth. By consuming a minimum of 50 g walnuts a day you provide your body with enough cancer-fighting ingredients to stop the development of breast cancer.