If you read Part 1 of "Nitrogen Gas Pressure Resistance-What's the big deal?" you will have concluded that all resistances that are used for the muscles to contract against to create adaptive features are not all equal. Since it can be observed that weights, bows, bands, springs, and any other form of resistance all have different force deliveries and characteristics of force absorption and rebound. Whether the force is gravity, torsion, tension, friction, compression, etc., it has characteristics and can be reflected in the adaptions of the neuromuscular system. Changing our physical attributes don't always equate to physical skills, talent, and abilities. So let's be very clear, physical attributes such as low body fat and additional muscle may "look" better and be more healthy for the human body, but it does not automatically equate to increased skill, ability, or talent. It's important to make that distinction and I will add that enhancing attributes does increase the likelihood, or possibility, that skills and talent could be elevated. There is an association between attributes and talent, but that is not cause and effect.
The N-gas spring is a very interesting choice as a force "capturing" device. That is pretty much what all the other devices or forms of resistance are doing, capturing muscular forces and returning them with a concentric/eccentric repetition cycle. As novel as this might seem you can look no further than most motorized vehicles and see this application for the suspension systems. The vehicle and the ground must have a connection and the suspension system is capturing and returning forces between the ground and the vehicle. These suspension systems can be "tuned" for various specifications of performance. In the previous article the N-gas spring was shown to have different specifications that were inherited by design and what they felt like. Comparing other types of springs and how they "feel" and then understanding why the N-gas spring does not exhibit these unwanted characteristics. N-gas was also compared to weights and how velocity is affected with the inertia and momentum forces of weights as compared to N-gas forces which don't change relative to speed. This advantage can easily be translated into safety aspects when attempting to perform high speed sports simulated movements.
Taking a deeper look at the safety aspects of how weights and N-gas responds to concentric/eccentric rep cycles. Very little data has been measured with N-gas pressure devices and repetitions from a humans. The N-gas spring has plenty of research and testing in other applications. However, a very close resistance mechanism that is similar to N-gas sprigs has been tested with humans using air pressure. Keiser Air Power systems uses compressed air instead of N-gas (air is 78% nitrogen) and measured force productions of several speeds of a simple leg extension and compared weights and air pressure. As the author of this article I have experienced N-gas and Keiser Air pressure and they are remarkably similar in how they feel and exhibit resistance. The graphs comparing weights verses air pressure reveal so much more than what can be written and described. Instead of duplicating the testing comparison of air verse weight, I like to give credit where credit is due, and reading the full article at this link is worth it. https://www2.keiser.com/downloads/pdf/Science_of_Resistance.pdf
The discovery and point is that inertia and momentum are additional forces from weights that can impede necessary velocities needed for training throwing, swinging, batting, and kicking motions effectively. And if weights are used for these movements, it can be seen that it isn't the speed of the movement that is the problem of creating injuries, it was the impact that resulted from excessive inertia and momentum from the velocities by the weights at the wrong time and position of the limbs and muscles. What does all this mean? Hard to describe, but if asked these questions, you will understand what we are getting at. Ever swing an ax at a tree attempting to chop it down? If "YES", ever miss the tree with the ax? If you did miss the tree with the ax, it wasn't fun was it? Can you imagine what would happen if you were to swing a 40 pound sledgehammer like a golf club that has 100 mph at the head? First it is not likely that is even possible, but the forces required to do it, if you could, would cause serious damage to your body. Get the picture?
And that is an important point about high velocity sport specific motions and training with weights in general. Performance and safety. Training for speed requires that you imitate the movement speed AND increase resistance. The movement speed is necessary for the correct neurological impulse signals (rate code frequencies of action potentials) to create the correct muscle movement sequence timing. The increased resistance is required to induce a higher amount of motor unit activation (increased muscle for more force production). As you can see, weights have a serious physics problem and injury is likely if higher resistance and speed are combined. So with weights you separate these two variables and train movement speed with a lighter weight, and train muscle recruitment with heavier weights. Hopefully when you do the actual sport specific movement they combine and better performance occurs. However, we know this isn't the case. There must be something missing in the dynamics of combining velocity and resistance pertaining to physiological adaptations. That something missing is likely to be found within the physiology and how the various components of the nervous system are assembling all the subconscious information.
To fix this problem of having to separate training movement speed and force production is to remove the mass, but keep the resistance. This would allow the safety and performance problem to be solved because inertia and momentum forces are attached to the mass. It is not real obvious that a 50 pound dumbbell and 50 pounds of gas pressure hooked to a cable drive would be so different. Even observing it with the naked eye can be misleading. Watching a experienced athlete do 50 pound dumbbell presses as fast as possible will show that 10 reps in 10 seconds is pretty fast. With n-gas pressure the same athlete will do 10 reps in 3 seconds. In 10 seconds the athlete can do about 25 reps with the same 50 pounds of N-gas pressure. The advantages are not apparent until you see the athlete coordinate these movements to a similar motion called a punch. Which athlete would you pick in an MMA fight? The athlete that can punch 2.5 X more with 300% more speed is the obvious pick. Now it should be noted that any specific movement could be trained that way.
The summary, or take away here, is that that understanding our goals for fitness training should be taking into account that the tools we use should not be generalized. The training for sports has gotten so specialized it is almost prescription like. But the "tools" which are being used are not precisely used and it is almost ridiculous to have so many specialized programs without the same resistance tools. You just can't use a "hammer" for all your construction needs to build a house. Maybe all the different programs are confusing and the tools are not really thought to matter. After reading this, it should have brought to light that "resistance" has characteristics and it can shape or harm the person in the process. Maybe the "tool" is more important than the "program".
In Part 3 and 4 of this series of articles, the N-gas spring will be the champion for something other than athletes looking to get bigger, faster, and quicker. It will focus on how the compression and extension forces radically change the game for muscle building, fat burning, and anti-aging applications. As it turns o