Pet Vaccinations in Matthews
Vaccinating your pet on a regular basis is one of the most important ways to keep them healthy. Vaccines protect against viruses and diseases, including rabies, Bordetella, and feline leukemia. The likelihood of your pet’s exposure to certain diseases increases if you take them to areas such as boarding kennels, grooming salons, daycare facilities, and dog parks.
We typically recommend that all dogs and cats get started on a vaccination plan when they’re puppies/kittens. Vaccinating should continue through adulthood as well. We can recommend a specific vaccination schedule for your pet based on factors such as age, breed, species, and lifestyle. Our doctor will be happy to discuss these with you during your pet’s annual wellness visit.
Canine Influenza Virus
The canine influenza virus (CIV) is spreading throughout North Carolina. This virus can be fatal if left untreated, so prevention is key. Here at Caring Hearts Animal Hospital, we carry vaccines to protect pets from both strains of the virus: H3N8, and H3N2. For pets receiving these vaccinations for the first time, a subsequent booster is needed 3 weeks after the first injection is given.
CIV is very contagious and spreads quickly. Please give us a call today if you have questions about CIV and our vaccines, and be sure to schedule an appointment to have your canine companion vaccinated. We want your loved ones to be safe!
Core Vaccines for Dogs and Cats
Many vaccines are available for dogs and cats, but only some of them are considered essential. These are called core pet vaccines. Non-core vaccines are not essential but may be recommended based on your pet’s lifestyle and risk of exposure to certain diseases.
Core vaccines recommended for dogs:
- Rabies: Rabies is a virus that can be fatal. All mammals are susceptible to infection. Most states require that dogs receive regular rabies vaccinations.
- DHPP: This is commonly called the “distemper shot.” It’s a combination vaccine that provides protection against four diseases: distemper, hepatitis, parainfluenza, and parvovirus.
Core vaccines recommended for cats:
- Rabies: (see description above)
- FVRCP: This is a combination vaccine that protects against three diseases: feline viral rhinotracheitis, calicivirus, and panleukopenia (which is sometimes called “feline distemper”).
Schedule an Appointment
We understand that your pet is unique and that no single vaccine protocol will be ideal for all pets in all situations. At Caring Hearts Animal Hospital, our goal is to work with you to develop a vaccination schedule and ongoing booster routine that takes into account your pet’s lifestyle, overall health, and risk for exposure to infectious diseases. Vaccines help pets live longer, healthier lives, and protecting your pet is our number one priority. Call us today at 704-893-2799 to set up an appointment to discuss your pet’s vaccination needs.