Opposed to the popular belief, armored vehicles or bulletproof vehicle are only meant for the important personnel’s like politicians or celebrities, who wants to avoid the inquisitive eyes of the media and public. However, the notion is totally wrong. As armored vehicles or bulletproof cars are being used by various organizations and institutions, in order to transport precious or cash from one location to another.
Security is a national concern of any country. One cannot deny the fact that a wide range of security measures are taken for ensuring the security and safety of important persons. Studies have shown that the utilization of bulletproof vehicles like cars, trucks, etc are increasingly used for safe transportation of goods and as well as individuals.
There are many armored vehicles manufacturing companies who are coming up with a wide range of armored vehicles by catering to the needs of the people. Basically, they design the vehicles taking into consideration all the safety features so that it can easily meet the safety standards.
Bulletproof cars or vehicles are designed in such a way that it can withstand extreme temperatures. In fact, they can easily take away the occupants from the place of attack safely. Well it can be stated that bulletproof cars vastly differ from a standard car.
- Bulletproof vehicles can function on deflated tires
Armored vehicles like armored vans or trucks are designed in such a way that it can even move ahead at a great speed on deflated tires. This can help to transport a person or a precious item safely, in the event of the vehicle being attacked.
Steel bumpers can be used to destroy roadblocks.
- Bulletproof Vehicles Are Sufficiently Armed
Armored vehicles are adequately armed in order to protect the passengers. For example, it can contain a bar railing in between the driver’s seat and passenger compartment.
If you are wondering how you must go through rest of the blog.
There is huge difference in raw materials that goes into the creation of a bulletproof car that makes it armored. All the exterior part of the vehicles is made of galvanized and stainless steel. These materials make the vehicle a safe means of transport. Studies have shown that the steel is safe from any kind of rust. They are hardened to make it ballistic resistance.
For standard cars, sleek design and safety is given equal level of importance. However, sometimes one can gain antecedence over others. But for the manufacturing of armored or bulletproof vehicle, the main objective is always the safety of the valuables or the passengers. Care is taken to make the vehicle ballistic resistance. Hardened steel and bulletproof glass is usually used. However, the thickness level of the glass or the steel depends on the level of resistance required. Well, one will not get to see bulletproof glass or hardened steel, for standard cars.
The advancement of technology has made it possible to make the vehicles lightweight while making it strong and resistant. A bulletproof car or a truck can ensure safety and security of the people.