Honduran National Anthem (Tu bandera, tu bandera un lampo de cielo) for Brass Quintet (MFAO World National Anthem Series)
The "National Anthem of Honduras" arranged here for Brass Quintet (Spanish Himno Nacional de Honduras); was adopted under presidential decree 42 in 1915. The lyrics were written by Augusto Constancio Coello and the music composed by Carlos Hartling.
In its entirety, the anthem is a brief chronology of Honduran history. The anthem consists of the chorus and seven verses. For official acts, only the chorus and the seventh are sung. The chorus, which is sung before and after the seventh verse, is a description of Honduras’ chief national symbols, the flag and the coat of arms. The eighth verse, is a patriotic call to duty to Hondurans to defend the flag and the nation.
By the time Hondurans complete their sixth year of elementary education, they will have memorized and been taught the meaning of all eight verses. Unofficially, the anthem is sometimes called "Tu bandera es un lampo de cielo" (Spanish for "Your flag is a splendor of sky") which is also the first line of the chorus. For Graduations in middle school, High school, University, or another type of graduation, an exam will be done based on a questionnaire of the National Anthem.
Carlos Hartling (2 September 1869 – 1920) was a German-born composer from Honduras, who composed the music for the National Anthem of Honduras, adopted as the country’s national anthem in 1915. Their parents were Georg Friedrich Hartlíng and Johanne Henriete Wilhemine Hartling. He realized his studies in the Weimar and Leipzing Conservatory. In September 1896, he went to Tegucigalpa because of a contract on 27 June 1896 to be a Music teacher, and a Band teacher. He sang for the first time on 23 September. In 1903, he received the honor to write the music of a poem written by Augusto Cesar Coello Ramos. He was married to Guadalupe Ferrari Guardiola. Since the second administration of the General Manuel Bonilla in February 1912, the lyrics and the music was popularized and was sung in every official act.
Need an anthem fast? They are ALL in my store! All my anthem arrangements are also available for Orchestra, Recorders, Saxophones, Wind, Brass and Flexible band. If you need an anthem urgently for an instrumentation not in my store, let me know via e-mail, and I will arrange it for you FOC if possible! email@example.com
Buy this score now!
You have already purchased this score. To download and print the PDF file of this score, click the 'Print' button below.
The purchases page in your account also shows your items available to print.
This score is free!
Which method of viewing music should I use?
Score Exchange has two methods to display previews of music: seView which uses regular html and javascipt and the Scorch plug-in from Avid which needs to be downloaded and installed onto your computer. Both have advantages and disadvantages:
You do not need to install any additional software to use seView.
Scorch is a free plug-in from Avid for displaying and printing music. It can also play the music that you're seeing. As modern web browsers are updated, Scorch is no longer compatible with many browsers. Scorch has never been compatible with mobile devices and some web browsers on Mac computers.
If your web browser does not install Scorch automatically, you can click here to download and install scorch manually.
In order to submit this score to ScoreExchange.com Keith Terrett has declared that they own the copyright to this work in its entirety or that they have been granted permission from the copyright holder to use their work. If you believe that this score should be not available here because it infringes your or someone elses copyright, please report this score using the copyright abuse form.