Look for the square that is the front of this box. Is it in the upper left of the picture or the bottom right? Can you see it either way? Can you see it both ways at once?
Our brain (especially the right neocortex) seeks familiar patterns in holistic ways to move through and interact with the world–or the Web. Backstage in the brain, trillions of neural networks compete to produce what we see, sense, feel, and think–projecting expectations from prior experiences, along with fears and desires.
In this case, the brain leaps from one box image to another, but wants to choose between them, not see them both at the same time. Your inner brain theatre (or cinema) projects one 3D box or the other onto the same 2D set of lines.
Also, you might shade this box, so that it’s not translucent, and imagine what’s inside that you fear or desire….
Look for a young woman and an old woman in this picture. Do you see both? Can you see both at the same time? Is your mind projecting an image and identity (with age features) onto this collection of lines?
One woman is looking away from you, one is looking down. What does that evoke? Does she remind you of anyone you know?
When you see someone at a distance you think you know, walking toward you, you see her face. But as she gets closer, the face may change into someone else. You saw a familiar face on her before, because your brain’s theatre projected it.
Look at this as a whole (using more of your right brain) and then hold a straight-edged piece of paper, or the black border at the top here, along the lines near the center (evoking more of your left brain) to see how you initially projected onto it.
Context is key here. The arrangement of light and dark boxes affects how we see the lines. This happens in the theatre of everyday life, too. Various neural areas interact, backstage in your brain’s theatre–involving deep goal and conceptual contexts, plus the audience of memory traces as Other to your Self–to produce what you perceive as reality, staged within your mind as personal experience. But they are also interacting with your outer environment, the social context of the current moment and your past cultural training, which shaped your present neural networks.
Most of this is unconscious. BUT it can become MORE CONSCIOUS, like the animal passions that sometimes arise and make us do strange things: lust, fear, hunger, rage, and so on. MAYBE the more AWARE we are of the animals, stagehands, and audiences in our brain, the better we can perceive, feel, think, and act in the outer theatres of various social contexts in our lives. I HOPE THIS BLOG WILL HELP YOU that way. (Being able to laugh at your Self helps, too.) Let me know if it does….
(Some of the images and terms I’m using here come from PHANTOMS IN THE BRAIN, by VS Ramachandran and Sandra Blakeslee, and IN THE THEATER OF CONSCIOUSNESS, by Bernard Baars, both of which I highly recommend.)
Look at these tables as a whole (using more of your right brain) and consider whether the table tops are the same. Then measure the table top edges (using more left brain) to see how you initially projected onto them, through your experience and expectations of 3D tables.
Seeing is believing. But believing is also seeing–often unconsciously.
We experience reality, dreams, and conscious fantasy worlds (or share them in various media)–through the theatre of the mind. Close your eyes for a moment to imagine the world around you, and then open your eyes to see if it’s the same. What we experience as reality seems more solid than what we remember or imagine inside our heads. But our interactions with the world around us involve projections from that inner theatre. Each of our senses gets feedback from the world in dialog with what we expect or desire.
So there’s an inner theatre of the mind’s expectations and wishes while awake, like the inner theatre of dreams, that shapes how we experience “reality.” We’re often not in the present moment, but thinking back in time through memory fragments to form expectations of what might happen next. Or, especially when traveling to new, disorienting places, we get a handle on the NOW by recalling what it’s like in our past and imagining how we’ll describe it to someone in the future. We put a frame around the present by narrating it through the remembered past and possible future. So there’s a symbolic frame and imaginary layering on our present “reality.” We dream it, so some degree.
But this theatre of the MIND is also based on a theatre of the BRAIN, the neural structures that we inherit from our animal-to-human ancestry and our particular social experiences. The brain’s theatre “stages” our conscious experience of ideas and perceptions through numerous unconscious networks of brain cells, competing for the stage and our SELF awareness.
See the other links under the photo at the top here FOR MORE INSIGHTS ABOUT YOUR INNER THEATRES
trees and mountains behind the stage
at the ancient Greek theatre of Epidauros