Just like people, plants sometimes do better with companions. So-called "companion plants" are those that enhance one another's health and growth when planted together. Companion planting can improve the growth of each plant, and reduce problems with pests. Heathers and heaths are relatively easy to grow, preferring light, well-drained acidic soil and protection from the wind. You can distinguish between heaths and heathers by their blooming seasons and foliage. Heathers bloom in summer and fall, with scale-like evergreen leaves. Heaths bloom between March and late May, with evergreen needle-shaped leaves.
Dwarf pines are known as good companion plants to heaths and heathers. Hardy in U.S. Department of Agriculture zones 3 to 10, dwarf pines are taller than heathers and heaths. The height of the dwarf pines can shelter heaths and heathers from the wind, if the pines are planted toward the prevailing wind direction. Dwarf pines, heaths and heathers prefer the same growing conditions -- acidic soil and sunny conditions. Aesthetically, dwarf pines are attractive planted with heaths and heathers, as the difference in height adds texture and perspective to the garden.
Ericaceous Family Plants
Heaths and heathers are members of the Ericaceous plant family. The members of the Ericaceous family all prefer acidic, light soil, and therefore make good companion plants for each other. Rhododendron, mountain laurel, azalea and Japanese pieris are all Ericaceous family plants, and make good companion plants for heaths or heathers. When planted together, these Ericaceous family plants thrive when fed with leaf-mold, sand and peat as needed. Do not add lime to the soil near these plants, as this will decrease the acidity favored by the Ericaceous family.
Ferns and Other Plants
Ferns, like heather, typically prefer acidic soil and light watering only. The European lady fern (Athyrium filix-femina) is a deciduous fern hardy in USDA plant hardiness zones 4 through 9. The Japanese painted fern (Athyrium niponicum "Pictum") is likewise hardy in zones 4 through 9, and adds color and texture through its multicolored deciduous fern leaves. Primroses and gentians are also suitable companion plants for heaths and heathers.
Heaths and Heathers as Companion Plants
Heaths or heathers work well as companion plants for blueberries. Blueberries (Vaccinium corymbosum) are versatile as a food crop or a landscape plant. In the fall, blueberry leaves turn bright scarlet, contrasting with the evergreen foliage of heaths or the fall blooms of heathers. Heaths or heathers work well when planted as a border in a landscape bed also containing blueberry plants. Like heaths and heathers, blueberries prefer acidic and well-drained soil.
- Jupiterimages/Photos.com/Getty Images