School may be out for the summer, but ten-year-old Bishop Curry of McKinney, Texas will be spending his days developing his idea to help stop deaths connected to hot cars.
Bishop calls his invention, “oasis” and to the help of a GoFundMe project, he has already raised over $20,000 to begin creating the device.
His idea looks like a tiny box with air ducts in a honeycomb pattern. Once it gets past a certain temperature, a sensing unit would inform the device to begin blowing the cool air. Then, an antenna would inform local authorities and parents to come to the child’s aid.
He intends for it to be put on the backseat headrests of the driver and passenger or to be placed on a car seat.
Curry informed South Florida News 11 that his patent ought to be approved within the year and he and his family members have some manufacturers ready to build it.
He presently has a 3D-model of his design. He described his inspiration behind the idea saying,
“When a baby named Fern died down the street (from a hot car death), I came up with the idea because it was on the news and everything.”
712 children have actually died from heat stroke after being left in a hot automobile since 1998. This year alone, 12 deaths have been reported, according to a San Jose State University research.
Jan Null, a meteorologist by profession, helped to organize the research and says legislation enforcement in addition to child safety experts have utilized his research.
“Sadly it has remained flat,” Null said in regards to the trend in hot car deaths. “There really hasn’t been (change) in the overall numbers of 37 average deaths per year in the U.S., that number hasn’t changed much.”
Null would certainly caution the efficiency of a device like Curry’s however still believes it’s a wonderful concept for a 5th grader. “The whole discussion needs to be put into context. Every device that saves a life is obviously a good one. The amount of penetration that they can have and the good they can do is minimized by how many can get put into cars.”
Curry says his good friends and schoolmates are interested in the idea also. “They want to work for me.”