Most moms and dads would say instilling kindness in their kids is one of, if not the most, important parenting priorities. But most children are getting a different message, according to a Harvard study.
For the university's Making Caring Common project, researchers spoke with 10,000 middle and high school students around the country in 2013 and 2014, and interviewed hundreds of parents. The overwhelming majority of kids — nearly 80% — said that their parents taught them that personal happiness and high achievement were more important than caring for people. In turn, about 80% of kids said that they valued aspects of success (achievement and happiness) over concern for others.
"Our conversations with and observations of parents also suggest that the power and frequency of parents' daily messages about achievement and happiness are drowning out their messages about concern for others," explains the report. "At the root of this problem may be … a gap between what parents and other adults say are their top priorities and the real messages they convey in their behavior day to day."
This is bad news, because when kids and their peers don't make caring and fairness a priority, they're at greater risk of harmful behaviors. Need proof? Half of high school students admit to cheating on tests, and 75% copy others' homework. In the 2010 school year, nearly 30% of middle and high school students reported being bullied. And that same year, more than half of girls in grades 7-12 said they experienced at least one episode of sexual harassment at school.
Ironically, pressuring kids to succeed or be happy doesn't make them any more likely to do either. Researchers point out that letting kids fail instead of protecting their happiness gives them coping strategies — that ultimately make them happier. And teaching kids to care for others helps their relationship skills, which often leads to success and overall well-being.
Kids do believe kindness is important, though — about two-thirds of students said it was one of their top three values. To tap into this, the study outlines ways to raise children who genuinely value kindness:
1. Adults need to take responsibility.
For starters, say researchers, parents and teachers need "to stop passing the buck." The greatest challenge to kids' moral development is getting mixed messages, so grown-ups need to take a hard look at whether their words line up with their actions.
2. Give kids opportunities to practice caring and helpfulness.
The study says children are not simply born good or bad. Kindness is learned like an instrument: with daily practice and increasing challenges. From helping a friend with homework to pitching in around the house, they can hone their kindness reflexes.
3. Teach the skills to find perspective.
First, they need to learn to "zoom in" — listening well and caring for people in their close circle. Second, they can learn to "zoom out" to consider the bigger picture and see other perspectives in their community. Zooming out enables kids to notice — and connect with — outsiders, like the new kid in class. Both these tools can "expand their circle of concern," researchers say.
4. Provide strong moral role models.
That doesn't mean being perfect or having all the right answers. But researchers encourage parents to acknowledge mistakes, listen to children, and demonstrate empathy when helping kids understand the world.
5. Help kids manage destructive feelings.
Anger, shame, and envy can hinder the ability to be kind and empathetic. Children need to know that these are normal emotions — but there are helpful and harmful ways to handle them. Children are "moral philosophers," says the report. "When adults spark children's thinking with ethical questions they put issues of injustice on children's radar and help children learn how to weigh their various responsibilities to others and themselves."