American Indians education
Indigenous American languages
American Indian nations
This article has been archived from the now-defunct MSU E-Museum (http://www.mnsu.edu/emuseum/)
for educational purposes. Please visit our Article Archive Index for
further information. If the author of this article would like to make changes to it, or if you are the author of another article you would
like us to add to our archives, please contact us.
The Lenape call themselves the Lenni Lenape, which means "original people." There are three divisions of the tribe.
Their flag carries many symbols that reflect their culture. The mask in the center of the flag represents Mesingw, the "Masked Spirit", who is the guardian of the creatures of the forest. The forest animals were as important to the Lenape as the buffalo were to the natives of the plains.
European settlers pushed the nation from Delaware through 16 states, including Ontario, to Oklahoma where many of them live today.
They used copper to make pipes and ornaments. These were traded along with pottery, dressed deerskin, beads, and feather mantels. They used their pottery to store corn, beans and tobacco, which they grew along with sweet potatoes and squash.
Dyes from certain vegetables and minerals were used for picture writing to record history and communicate and to paint themselves for ceremonies and battle.
In the beginning, the nation was at ease with the new settlers, but when the settlers began to take what was theirs, the warriors took action. The Lenni Lenape Historical Society and Museum has records of these events.
The Flag of the Lenni Lenape or Eastern Delaware
The Lenni Lenape Historical Society and Museum
Indian Tribes of New Jersey
Return to our main Native American Indian cultures site
Read our article submission guidelines
Language of the day: Uto Aztecan languages
Art of Indians
Native American ancestry
Cherokee Indian genealogy
Would you like to help support our organization's work with endangered American Indian languages?