- slide 1 of 2
Not only can handprints be used to create all types of seasonal craft projects, but they can also be used to learn and practice math skills. Tracing and cutting out hand prints really gives those fine motor skills a work out as well! It is easier to work on these crafts in small groups. Allow your preschools to trace and cut out their handprints. You can trim up handprints if needed. Here are just a few craft ideas to begin with.
Stained Glass Butterflies - Trace handprints on a piece of dark heavy construction paper with a pencil. Trace over pencil line with a fat marker. Cut around the inside line first, then around the outside line. Glue the thumbs together with fingers pointing outward. Glue colorful tissue paper to the back of the handprint. Hang on a window or from the ceiling.
Seasonal Wreaths - Have preschoolers trace and cut out several sets of handprints in colors appropriate to the season. Red, white, and blue for a 4th of July wreath, red and green for a Christmas wreath, and red and pink for a Valentine wreath. Glue to a poster board wreath.
All About Me Book Covers - Cut one set of handprints from heavy paper or poster board and several sets of handprints from regular paper. Lay handprints on top of each other, with poster board print on the top and bottom. Punch two holes through handprints. String a ribbon through holes and tie.
Reindeer Ornament - For this project you will need to trace and cut out a shoe print from dark brown construction paper and one set of handprints from light brown construction paper. The shoe is reindeer's head. Glue handprints to the top of the head. These are your antlers. Have preschoolers decorate the face. It's fun to add a red pompom nose. Punch a hole between the antlers, add a ribbon and hang.
- slide 2 of 2
Use Your Fingers: Handprint Math Ideas
Handprints can be used to develop math skills as well.
Comparison - Have each preschooler cut out one handprint. During circle time, guide them in comparing the size of everyone's hand. This works really well if everyone has used a different color of paper for their handprint.
Ordering - Preschoolers can order handprints from largest to smallest, smallest to largest.
Measurement - Measure each child's handprint from base of hand to the tip of the tallest finger.
Counting - How many thumbs are in the class? Pinkies? How many fingers in total? Are there more girl than boy fingers?
These are just a few ideas of what you can do with handprints. Happy Handprinting!