An international study released Wednesday shows that many species that are not considered threatened are "highly climate change vulnerable" and may require additional conservation measures to protect them.
A group of more than 100 scientists associated with the International Union for Conservation of Nature found that up to 41 percent of bird species, 29 percent of amphibians and 22 percent of corals fall under this category.
Conservationists and scientists were surprised by the result because they expected more overlap between species currently threatened and species likely to be affected by climate change.
"The tragedy of this is that we need to make a lot of decisions about conservation ... before we know what will happen," said Chris Thomas, a biology professor at England's York University who was not involved in the study.
The biggest causes of extinction now are habitat loss, overexploitation and invasive species, but this may change as the world warms.
Nonthreatened species vulnerable to global warming include the emperor penguin, the little owl, Rose's rain frog and the imitator salamander. Areas of concern include the Amazon rainforest and ocean waters off the coast of Indonesia, home to species of common corals (Alister Doyle, Reuters, June 12).
Reprinted from ClimateWire with permission from Environment & Energy Publishing, LLC. 202-628-6500. E&E Publishing is the leading source for comprehensive, daily coverage of environmental and energy issues. Click here to start a free trial to E&E's information services.
Thunderstorms have the potential to impact Independence Day fireworks and outings in parts of the central and eastern United States, while dry weather will raise fire safety concerns in the West.
Batches of rain and thunderstorms will swing through Wales and England on Wednesday, continuing the threat for flash flooding and localised travel delays.
A second landslide has stalled rescue efforts following a deadly landslide in China over the weekend.
Audrey, the strongest hurricane ever recorded in the month of June, killed at least 390 people in the southern United States and caused an estimated $150 million in damage.
Here are five easy, survival expert-approved ways to prepare a campfire without a lighter or match.
April-like temperatures and heavy rain last week have been replaced by uncomfortable heat and humidity across Beijing and northeastern China this week.
Areas across Arizona are so hot that cactus are dying, food is baking and plastic is melting.
A slow-moving storm system will unleash several days of dangerous weather across Germany this week.