Incorporating Sustainability into yourConstruction Project
Building green means incorporating environmental considerations and resource efficiency into every step of the
home building and land development process to minimize environmental impact.
At Gary Rosard Architect we are focused on quality construction that will help you to minimize
home energy consumption, and provide a healthy indoor environment
Think of your Home as a 'System'
Using a “whole house approach” when designing is crucial when using green design techniques. We consider design materials for their beauty, functionality, energy efficiency and their health impact.
Start with the Building Envelope
New homes and existing homes can both benefit from the latest advances in building materials and methods. We continually research products and update our details to make the most efficient building envelope, including siding, windows, roof and insulation. For existing homes we recommend starting with a Home Energy Assessment
Focus on Energy Efficiency and Lowering Utility Bills
Energy use from electronics, appliances and lighting can account for 25% of your energy usage. Heating and cooling systems can use up to 50% of your home’s energy. We will help you to avoid “oversizing” your system in order to keep energy costs down.
Using LEDs results in fewer replacement bulbs (=less waste), cost savings on energy consumption and less heat gain from your built-in lighting. Consider thebenefits of incorporating LEDsinto your project.
Efficient lighting can drastically reduce energy costs.
Create a Healthier Indoor Environment
Using materials required in the building process that are free of contaminants will produce a safer and healthier indoor environment. Many of these do not add cost to the project. We integrate non-toxic and low VOC materials into all of our projects.
Use water saving fixtures
You can choose low flow shower heads and efficient plumbing fixtures without compromising your desired comfort or aesthetics.
Like all the materials chosen during the design process, we will consider each selection as it works with the ‘system’ of the house, in function and design.
There’s Always More to Learn About Residential Green Building
Find more information at:
The Rutgers Center for Green Building. New Jersey Green Building Manual Best Practice Guidelines for Residential and Commercial Buildings. New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection. 2012. At http://greenmanual.rutgers.edu
U.S. Green Building Council’s Green Home Guide
Connecting you to ideas, advice and green home professionals