Can you tell when someone is looking at the same photo and hearing the same music as you? This experiment involves two people, and takes about five minutes to complete.
How it works
One person registers both of you, gives the pair a group name and a password. Both participants then log on to the experiment at a prearranged time. You can use the same group name and password to do this test repeatedly. When you log on, you will be asked to do a sound test to make sure that your computer can play the sound tracks. If it cannot, you can still do the test, but you will be doing it with the pictures only and not the music.
In each trial, both people are shown a picture, and each picture has a particular piece of music associated with it. Depending on a randomizer, in each trial you will either be shown the same picture and hear the same music as your partner, or see a different picture and hear different music.
After 20 seconds, one of you will be asked, "Was your partner looking at the same picture?" Immediately after making each guess, half the time (determined randomly) you will be told whether your partner was shown the same picture or a different picture. After each 12-trial test, you will be told your score.
Notes for teachers, group leaders and family-group participants
These experiments can be done with students as an assignment or as a research projects. The lookers and subjects should be in separate buildings, or in in the same building, in separate rooms, beyond the range of sight and hearing. Families can try this test with different pairings of parents, children and siblings.
You can retrieve the details of your group's tests in a detailed table of data online. Please contact us for details of how to do this.
If the server is busy the experiment may "time out" during one of the runs, returning a "page not found" error. In this situation, you may be able to recover by pressing the reload button on your browser then carrying on as usual. If this fails, close all browsers for all participants, then open a new browser for each and login to restart the experiment.
If you experience any problem running the experiment, kindly contact us with the details about your pair's group name, internet browser and most importantly the URL at which the error occurred along with a brief description of the problem.