Herpes is a terribly negative word for you, right? Almost everyone is well aware about the name in United States, but who wants to talk about it? Literally telling- no one. If it is that bad, from where we read so many stories of herpes patients on internet? Everybody knows it, more than half of us are infected, but nobody is ready to accept it as an infection. The real contributors behind this herpes stigma are the jokes cracked in every other movie, and also the myths revolving around us. There are least facts available on internet also based on herpes virus, and more myths. Boosting those myths is only possible when every herpes patients and an infected person get the factual knowledge about herpes. This article is the ultimate herpes guide for all those who want concrete and complete information about herpes infection & herpes cure. It is tremendously necessary for all those who are suffering from the infection currently and even more useful for those who are not yet infected as the information in the article can influence their infection status in future as we also talk about the prevention and avoidance of transmission of herpes simplex.
The symptoms of herpes may vary from person to person. One infected with herpes may die without even realizing what he was carrying in his body, and other may spend his entire life taking an antiviral everyday because of acutely painful symptoms. Before clarifying the symptoms of the disease, it is important to know that there are two types of herpes infections, one is oral herpes and other on is genital herpes. There is a hairline difference between the two. Generally there are two types of herpes viruses causing herpes, i.e. HSV Type 1 and HSV Type 2. Genital herpes is believed to be caused by herpes simplex type 2 virus, in which the symptoms are visible on the parts of body below the abdomen. Oral herpes is very commonly known as cold sores, fever blisters, sun blisters. Some of its uncommon names are oro-facial herpes, herpes labialis and herpes febrilis. In oral herpes a group of fluid-filled blisters starts appearing on the red swollen areas of the skin or on the mucous membranes. Just before the pimple like lesions are developed an itching and burning sensation is felt which is generally ignored due to its mildness. The areas can be tender and painful. The blisters heal without scarring but they have a tendency of reoccurring. This type of lesions will reoccur again and again with random frequency but generally on the same place of the body. These painful episodes are caused by a very common viral infection known as herpes, due to the presence of herpes simplex virus in human body. Herpes on genitals is called genital herpes. The transmission of this disease can be due to unprotected vaginal or anal sex, having oral sex with a person who gets cold sores, sharing sex toys and having genital contact with an infected person in any possible way. If a mother infected with herpes delivers a child then there is strong possibility of the child being infected. It causes blisters or groups of small ulcers on and around the genitals in both men and women. Most people having herpes have mild symptoms.
BEING SURE OF HAVING HERPES
Even if you are pretty sure about the presence of herpes simplex virus, you should go for proper diagnosis. There are two cases, one is you have the infection and also your body is experiencing the symptoms of herpes. Second one is you have the virus inside your body but the virus is dormant not showing any signs of its presence. It the former case you should reach the doctor soon as the diagnosis of herpes is easier when the infection is still present. In the later case, you cannot help yourself in any way as you are not at all aware of what is going on inside you body. There are two general methods for detecting the disease. One is testing the swab sample of fluid from the infected area. But if results are negative it does not necessarily indicate the absence of herpes. Confirmation is more likely if the patient has subsequent recurrences. Blood tests can also be used to find out if a person is infected or not. However, blood tests may miss very recent infections. Following any of the above discussed methods the doctor will hand you over a report stating whether you are infected with herpes simplex, or it was something else bothering you. If it was something else, you would be more than happy. But in case it is herpes, what to do now? At this point of time you need more guidance than medicines. Only diagnosis is not enough, you should be aware of the entire process of infection, its treatment methods. Living with myths sometimes misleads you and may also lead to complications. You can get medicines anywhere and everywhere, but guidance would be really tough to get, that do authentic one is nearly impossible. Following is very valuable information on how to balance your emotions and get out of the stigma.
HOW TO ACCEPT YOU HAVE HERPES
We not at all are ready to accept the truth that we have herpes. Acceptance is important as it makes things settled and easy. Once you know the truth, accept it and do not try to run away from it. What if you have herpes? It is nothing more than a medical condition that could happen to anyone. You are not the only one to get the virus in the world. Remember that there are millions of sufferers and they tell the world or not, they are infected. Hiding the facts does not change the truth in any way. You should stop cursing immediately and do not blame anyone for the disease. It is not you fate or something, it is just a medical state that anyone of us can get. I bet you would not find it much difficult to find herpes patients as there are many out there. Talking to them, knowing their condition, and sharing your experience make things common. You may not feel alone, and also can get really helpful tips to tackle with your outbreaks. If you are not comfortable with face to face talking, then there are many internet forums that you can choose as medium. Closing the doors for hope and optimism is the worst thing to do and almost all the herpes patients land themselves into the same situation. You should never loose hope and try to give it a tough fight, no matter how tough the situation is.
- Acyclovir: Oldest antiviral medicine available since 1982.
- Valacyclovir: A newer version that efficiently delivers acyclovir into human body.
- Famciclovir: It stops HSV from replicating inside the human body.
This is something you do not even need to search for, but to find the consequences of these medicines on your health, you need to try hard. Acyclovir being the oldest has a larger number of side effects. Starting from nausea, it may cause vomiting, diarrhea and headache. And wait, it is not going to stop here, you may also feel agitation, confusion, rashes, anemia, and muscle pain, hypersensitivity reactions, seizures, agitation, and hepatitis. Valtrex, also called Valacyclovir, is the most common name on the doctor’s prescription list if you go for treatment of herpes. Side effects of Valtrex may include headache, dizziness, tired feeling, depression, nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, joint pain, menstrual pain, skin rash, stuffy nose, or sore throat and the list is still not complete.
Apart from all the medications available on the doctor’s prescription, there are some very successful and effective, side effect free home remedies that can provide you the same results. The major benefit of using homemade remedies to treat herpes is that your body is not harmed by any type of side effects as all the products used will be natural. One more advantage is its easy availability and cost effectiveness. Let us have a look at the very common products that we use in our day to day life and can be used as a substitute of medicines.
Baking soda is an effective treatment for getting rid of herpes fast. It provides relief in the itchy and painful sores. Take a cotton ball and damp it in baking soda. Apply it directly on the infected area. It helps to dry out the oozing blisters.
Manuka honey, a special type of honey found in New Zealand, however, offers additional healing benefits not found in other honeys; hence it is best suited for our purpose. Side effects of antiviral like local itching were overcome by using honey. Manuka honey has anti-bacterial and anti-viral properties. It helps in quick healing of herpes blisters and cold sores. You just need to apply some manuka honey directly on the infected area.
Licorice roots consist of therapeutic properties, which are helpful for the treatment of herpes infection. Licorice has glycyrrhizic acid, which fights against the herpes virus. For the treatment of herpes, the extracts of licorice roots can be effective.
To heal the herpes sores outbreak, tea tree oil is a useful remedy. Take some water in a glass. Add few drops of tea tree oil and gargle to remove ulcers from mouth. For genital herpes, use an eye-dropper to put drops on the infected area.
In experiments, peppermint oil has stopped a number of viruses from reproducing, including herpes. However, it is not clear till now whether peppermint oil would have any effect on the herpes virus in humans. Read more to know details about peppermint oil and herpes.
Herbal tea is an effective solution for avoiding any type of skin diseases. For treating pain and itching arising due to herpes, herbal teas, like lemon, ginger, cinnamon, and chamomile are very effective.
Aloevera is the best remedy with its natural healing properties. It can be effective for herpes blisters. To soothe the itching and redness, pure aloevera gel should be used on sores. Else, take a fresh leaf of aloevera. Cut it into two halves. Apply one of the gelled parts directly on the infected area.
Ice pack can give you instant relief if applied for adequate amount of time. Ice cubes can be sued to reduce the swelling or pain or the redness of the herpes. It can be applied every 3 to 4 hours to reduce the pain and redness of sores.
It has flavonoids, phenolic acid, and rosmarinic acid, which helps in healing the sores or blisters. Prepare a lemon balm tea. Let it steep for some time. Then, soak a cotton ball in it and apply directly on the sores.
Must be thinking what is the need of herpes cure when we have already discussed herpes treatment methods that can very well substitute traditional medications and also do not have any added side effects? What else is left for curing herpes? There is a lot of difference between treating herpes and curing herpes. Herpes treatment is like masking the symptoms temporarily until the virus is active. This is not a holistic and permanent removal of virus from your body and mind. But herpes cure is something that has the capability to eliminate every traces of the virus from human body. If you want to get rid of herpes virus instantly and permanently just try HSV Eraser. This e book not only guides you on how to deal with herpes physically, but also is an emotional healer, which is why it is my favorite. It has everything any herpes patient would need.
The Erase Herpes Program is here to assist you get rid of herpes virus. Click here to know more about it.