Warm-up What would you want to know if you were reading a story about the playoff football game on Friday?
Log into the Dallas Morning News at nie.dallasnews.com Password = 75002
The 5 w’s and h = 6 news questions Who What When Where Why How Every news story will include answers to these 6 questions. When you begin writing stories, you will be looking for answers to these questions.
Who? Who is involved? Who does/did the situation affect? Who said so?
What? What is happening? What did happen? What are the consequences? What is different about this? What are the choices?
When? When did or when will this happen? When was this discovered?
How? How did it or will it happen? How much does it cost? How many people does this affect? How do or will people feel about this?
Example 1 – Identify the who, what, when, where, why and how To give his students a feel for the Cold War, Hartford Public High School teacher Robert Abate is sending them on a trip: to the long-neglected fallout shelter in the basement. Dateline: Hartford, Connecticut
Who – teacher and students What – taking a trip to the shelter When – n/a Where – Hartford Why – to give students a feel for the Cold War How – by traveling to a fall-out shelter
Example 2 Hurricane Bertha churned toward the Atlantic seaboard with 100 mph winds yesterday and barely a hint of making its predicted turn toward the north. Nearly 1 million residents and tourists were urged to pack up and leave. Dateline: Jacksonville, Florida
Who – residents What – residents being urged to evacuate When- yesterday Where – Florida Why – because of hurricane How – not included
Example 3 A devastating wildfire, costliest in Alaska history, raged out of control today as crews fought to protect more homes and a main road. Dateline: USA Today
Who – wildfire crews What – crews are fighting to protect homes When – today Where – Alaska Why – because of wildfire How – not included
Example 4 To make way for the latest addition to the updated Times Square – a 25 screen movie complex, a developer plans to literally pick up a historic 42 nd Street burlesque house and move it 30 feet down the street. Dateline: New York City
Who – 42 nd Street burlesque house What – house is being moved down the street When – Where – New York City Why – Because developer wants the space for movie complex How – pick it up as a whole
What are the 5w’s and h? The six essential news questions Crucial to any news story The first step to writing a summary news lead
Today’s Assignment Log into the Dallas Morning News at nie.dallasnews.com Last Name = Juntunen; Password = 75002 Complete 5w’s and h assignment individually