Summary: Jesus during His ministry on earth, had compassion on many occasions. Find out those times when He was moved to service by compassion, in this message.
Compassion For The Blind
In Matthew 20:29-34 (quickview) And as they departed from Jericho, a great multitude followed him. And, behold, two blind men sitting by the way side, when they heard that Jesus passed by, cried out, saying, Have mercy on us, O Lord, thou Son of David. And the multitude rebuked them, because they should hold their peace: but they cried the more, saying, Have mercy on us, O
Lord, thou Son of David. And Jesus stood still, and called them, and said, What will ye that I shall do unto you? They say unto him, Lord, that our eyes may be opened. So Jesus had compassion on them, and touched their eyes: and immediately their eyes received sight, and they followed him.
Jesus had compassion for the blind. Many blind people received their sight at His touch. But there is another thought here I would like to pass on to you. Many are blind among us, not in the physical sense, but spiritually blind. Jesus can touch both, the physical and the spiritual. Jesus has compassion on you if you are blind my friend, and He will open your eyes to His person if you will come with a penitent heart and receive his gift of eternal life.
Compassion On The Unclean
Mark 1:40-42 (quickview) And there came a leper to him, beseeching him, and kneeling down to him, and saying unto him, If thou wilt, thou canst make me clean. And Jesus, moved with compassion, put forth his hand, and touched him, and saith unto him, I will; be thou clean. And as soon as he had spoken, immediately the leprosy departed from him, and he was cleansed.
Leprosy is a affliction that makes the physical body unclean. It is caused by sin in one’s life. Many who had rebelled against God were stricken with this unclean disease. One such person was Moses sister,
became leprous, white as snow: and Aaron looked upon Miriam, and, behold, she was leprous.
The Lord Jesus has compassion on the unclean of the world, and especially the unclean in spirit. His blood cleanses us from all uncleanness.
Compassion For The Sorrowful
Luke 7:13-14 (quickview) And when the Lord saw her, he had compassion on her, and said unto her, Weep not. And he came and touched the bier: and they that bare him stood still. And he said, Young man, I say unto thee, Arise.
If you have ever had a loved one die, you know something of the plight of this widow woman. Her son had died, and when the Lord Jesus saw her, he had compassion on her. He didn’t have compassion on the dead lad, but his mother. He knew her sorrow, He knew her tears, and His compassion caused Him to raise the woman’s son from the dead.
Jesus know and has compassion on you too, when you have great sorrow. Trust in His great love and have faith in Him during your sorrow.
He has compassion toward you and me too! In Matthew 11:28-30 (quickview) Come unto me, all ye that labour and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest. Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me; for I am meek and lowly in heart: and ye shall find rest unto your souls.For my yoke is easy, and my burden is light.