Presentation on theme: "Mrs. Williams’ Literature Study. Day 1: Journal Prompt How did you feel the first day of school? Did you know anyone in your new class? Tell me all about."— Presentation transcript:
Day 1: Journal Prompt How did you feel the first day of school? Did you know anyone in your new class? Tell me all about your first day of school.
Narrative narrative writing tells a true story about an event or a series of events. It can be about a personal experience or something that happened to somebody else, such as a parent or friend. A hint that it is a narrative is the word “I”
Chapter 1 Vocabulary ferocious: marked by extreme and violent energy triumphant: joyful and proud especially because of triumph or success fuming: be mad, angry, or furious
Day 2: Journal Prompt Danny is bullying Ramona at school. Have you ever been picked on? Tell about it.
Chapter 2 Vocabulary horrid: extremely disagreeable; offensive, dreadful. dismount: 1. To get off or down, as from a horse. 2. To get out of a vehicle. seized: to grasp suddenly and forcibly; take or grab, or to take custody of.
Contractions A contraction is a shortened form when two words are put together. Some of the letters are left out and are replaced by an apostrophe. should not = shouldn’t The “o” in not is replaced by an apostrophe.
Compare and Contrast Ramona Me Both of us Writing in complete sentences compare you to Ramona.
Chapter 3 Vocabulary fad: popular at the time aloof: distant physically or emotionally; reserved and remote: commotion: disturbance or upheaval
Compound Words A compound word is a word that is formed by two words that are put together. The compound word usually gets its meaning from the two combined words. sand sandbox a box with sand in itbox
Day 4: Journal Prompt Have you ever eaten anything unusual? Are there any unusual foods that you would like to try?
Chapter 4 Vocabulary quarrel: an dispute or an argument cross: angry or mad
Day 5: Journal Prompt Would you like to make a meal for your parents? What would you make?
Chapter 5 Vocabulary complimented: an expression of praise, admiration, or congratulation. edible: fit to be eaten, especially by humans frantic: highly excited with strong emotion or frustration
Past or Present Tense Verbs Present tense are verbs that are happening right now. Examples: walks eating Past tense verbs are verbs that happened in the past. Examples: walked ate
Chapter 6 Vocabulary sober: plain or serious scant: barely sufficient or falling short pediatrician: a doctor for children
Quotation Marks Quotation marks are used to show when someone is talking. When writing, quotation marks go around the part that is being said. Add quotation marks to the right places in these statements: I’m playing my video game replied Brad Hello, Sara he said How are you
Chapter 7 Vocabulary indignant: angered at something unjust, unfair, or wrong installment: a portion of something brooded: to be deep in thought or depressed
Personification Personification is a type of language that gives human characteristics to things that are not human. Examples: My computer hates me. The camera loves me. The sun greeted me this morning. The flowers were crying for my attention. The stars winked at me.
Chapter 8 Vocabulary thrive: to grow vigorously; flourish beckoned: to make a signaling or summoning gesture or to be inviting. accuracy: precision; exactness mischievous: playful in a naughty or teasing way.
Chapter 9 Vocabulary dismal: gloomy; miserable sullenly: in a bad-humored way, not happily, gloomily pelting: beating against again and again balked: to stop short and refuse to go on