A guide to terms used on this website and by those working in housing and social care for older people.
Alzheimer's Disease is a dementing illness - a physical disease affecting the brain which is the most commonly known cause of dementia.
Early stages of the condition may begin with minor memory problems and difficulty saying the right words. As the condition develops it may lead to confusion and personality changes, however treatment can slow down its development.
A form of housing with care designed for older people. At Housing & Care 21 is also known as Extra Care.
Technology to help older or disabled people with tasks they would otherwise find difficult, such as memory aids, automatic lighting and Telecare sensors.
A welfare benefit paid by the government.
It is paid to people 65 and over, who have certain personal care or supervision needs. It is tax free and not means tested.
A free assessment by Social Services of carers or people who may need community care services.
Also called Needs Assessments.
Care Quality Commission (CQC)
The Care Quality Commission (CQC) regulates all health and adult social care services.
Cognitive Stimulation Therapy (CST)
CST is a treatment for people with mild to moderate dementia. It involves 14 sessions of themed activities, which aim to actively stimulate and engage people, whilst providing an optimal learning environment and the social benefits of a group.
Community alarms enable people to call for help in case of emergency 24 hours a day, 7 days a week.
Community Care Services
Community Care Services include home care, respite care, day care, provision of disability aids and meals on wheels.
Each local authority sets its own eligibility criteria for these services and can charge for services they provide or arrange.
Our schemes are known as courts. They may include facilities including restaurants, health suites, hairdressers or shops.
Dementia causes the loss of mental abilities and lead to loss of memory, confusion, and changes in personality, mood and behaviour. It is not a disease, but a group of symptoms that may accompany some diseases or conditions affecting the brain.
Dementia usually affects older people and becomes more common with age, but is not a normal part of growing old.
Direct payments are cash payments made to individuals who have been assessed as needing services. They enable a person to buy their own care services.
Domiciliary Care or Home Care
Help given to people in their own homes which can include personal care and practical help with household tasks.
Housing with care designed for older people. Extra Care is also known as assisted living.
Home Care or Domiciliary Care
Help given to people in their own homes which can include personal care, and practical help with household tasks.
Independent not-for-profit organisation which provides affordable homes to rent and buy.
Housing benefit is paid by the council to help people pay their rent and some service charges. Universal Credit is being trialled in some areas of England and will include all benefits in future.
Leasehold is a type of tenure - when you purchase a leasehold property, you are buying the right to live in the property for a fixed period. You don't own the land surrounding your home or the building that your home is in.
The lease states who is responsible for maintenance and repairs to the property and any conditions you must meet as a resident.
Most of our properties have leases that run from 99 to 125 years
A free assessment by Social Services of carers or people who appear to need community care services.
They are also called Care Assessments.
Includes help with dressing, feeding and personal hygiene, advice and psychological support.
Private Finance Initiative (PFI)
Developed by the Government, the Private Finance Initiative (PFI) provides a way in which the public and private sectors can work together on the design, build or refurbishment and management of facilities and services to the general public.
Contracts typically last for 30 years, during which time the building is leased by a public authority.
Public Private Partnership (PPP)
An alliance between public bodies, local authorities or central government, and private companies to deliver a public project or service.
Includes help with every day tasks such as laundry, cleaning, shopping, preparing food and arranging social activities.
Registered Social Landlord
Independent, not for profit housing organisations approved and regulated by Government.
A form of therapy which allows people with short-term memory loss to interact by recalling things from their past.
A resale property offers you the opportunity to buy a previously owned home.
Residential Care Home
A residential home where older people live and receive personal care.
Respite care provides carers with short-term, temporary relief from caring for someone.
Retirement Housing properties are self-contained flats, bungalows or houses in a community setting. A Court Manager is available to provide help and support your independence.
Person responsible for managing a retirement or sheltered housing scheme. At Housing & Care 21 they are known as Court Managers.
Service and support charges
Service charges cover the cost of services such as repairs and upkeep of communal areas.
Support charges cover the cost of providing personal support, such as helping you apply for a Concessionary TV Licence.
Shared ownership allows you to buy a share of a property and pay rent on the rest. We have new and resale properties available with 25 to 75% shares.
Telecare consists of alarm and monitoring devices to support people to live safely and independently at home.