The worldwide epidemic of addiction continues to grow each year and the addicts continue to get higher and higher. Alcohol, marijuana, cocaine, heroin, crystal meth, pills and psychedelics infiltrate young adults at its earliest convenience and strip the lives of numerous “would be good people”. “Substance use/abuse is a tremendous financial, economic, health, familial, and social liability and contributes to some of the leading causes of death in America “, (White, Wampler and Fisher, 2001, p. 20). People that become addicted to the substances begin doing things they never thought they would be doing. Stealing from loved ones, lying to people that care about them, selling off their property and prostitution are all ways that many drug addicts use to get whatever it is they need. Not to mention, the personal demoralization that transpires as addicts in the throes of addiction begin compromising their morals and values. It is difficult to pinpoint exact statistical data on the rise of addiction in the United States and globally due to the numerous ways we can approach obtaining this data. Some use self-reported usage statistics, others use the amount of arrests made each year due to drugs and alcohol while others simply rely on the amount of deaths caused by drug abuse and drug addiction. One thing is for sure, the numbers across all forms of data gathered are rising across the board. What is the best way to combat this problem?
Over the last century, many new methods have been explored in “curing’ or “recovering” from drug abuse, drug dependence and drug addiction. Which are the most effective ways for an addict to pull his or her self out of the never-ending cycle that has become addiction? Some argue that twelve step programs are most effective. Others declare that a scientific based approach works; others think psychotherapy or holistic approaches are best. This paper serves to discuss the various forms of recovery from addiction and the most effective ways to recover. “Two diverse views become evident when one reads what is written by those who treat addicts in recovery programs and the treatment strategies supported by empirically based, usually academically situated research programs. Substance abuse, as a field of inquiry and treatment, is probably unrivaled with respect to the disdain held by those providing treatment toward those researching treatment and vice versa”, (Bristow-Braitman, 1995, p. 415). Without question, the most common intervention known by the average American for treating addicts is participation in a 12-step program. “At present, Twelve-step fellowships provide such a resource, and importantly, place no requisite cost burden on government, insurers, or individual members”, (Galanter, p. 300). Other methods of recovery or abstinence from using alcohol and drugs are also available but can be costly. These articles takes a look at several of them, Check back tomorrow for part one!
by Chris Sobel, BHT Primary Therapist
Chris has been part of the Prescott House team since 2005 and an active member in the recovery community in Prescott since 2002. In his work with each client, he brings forthrightness, inspiring life experience, and a commitment to helping men recover from addiction. Chris has many passions including golf and NY Mets baseball, and – most importantly – spending time with his wife and two daughters.
Chris is also an amazing cook! Try some of his recipes: Easy Posole | Watermelon Salad
- Bristow-Braitman, A. (1995). Addiction recovery: 12-step programs and cognitive-behavioral psychology. Journal of Counseling & Development, 73(4), 414-418.
- Galanter, M. (2014). Alcoholics anonymous and twelve-step recovery: A model based on social and cognitive neuroscience. American Journal On Addictions, 23(3), 300-307.