Let's face it, most history textbooks are as dry as a mouth full of saltine crackers. This problem has left thousands of people without a solid grasp of the events of American history. Well it's time to stop wrestling with those tiresome texts and time to pick up your tablet!
My course is a digitally forward-thinking account of the origins of the American Revolution, the events that led up to the war, the key players and major battles, and how it affected America's future. The course is meant to be accessible to both students and adults and will bring American history to life in a way that will help you excel not only on tests, but at your friend's dinner parties as well! You should take this course because not only does it utilize a visual mix of HD video, pictures, and sound effects, but it is broken down into bite-sized chunks that are humorous, informative, easily digestible, and don't take too much time out of your day. Get familiar with one of the most pivotal moments in our nation's history in a fun and lively manner.
A brief overview of the developing colonies
An in-depth look at the unique personality of the New England Colonies
An in-depth look at the unique personality of the Middle Colonies.
An in-depth look at the unique personality of the Southern Colonies
Yeehaw! Let's take a good look at what is known as the backcountry!
What? An american identity before independence was declared? You've got to be kidding me.
A brief quiz on the differences between the various colonies
I am not saying that is completely the fault of the British, but boy did the British start making the colonists mad. Come find out why.
As the British start making the colonists mad, resistance begins to grow. Come find out exactly how and in what ways.
A brief look at the first battles of the Revolutionary War.
Watch as the Revolutionary movement continues to take shape and Independence is finally declared!
A brief quiz about the road to revolution
An overview of how divided America was as a nation when war breaks out and how the Continental Army was formed.
Watch and see how the Revolutionary War expands and engulfs the land.
Washington's army experiences some really low points during the war, but brave men keep the fight going on the frontier and on the sea!
The Revolutionary War finally comes to an end.
A brief quiz on Section 3
A brief look at why historians believe Americans defeated the French.
An in-depth look at the cost of the conflict. Not just the financial aspect, but the human toll as well.
A look at the idea of Republicanism that emerged after the Revolutionary War.
A brief quiz on Section 4
My name is Reid Volk. I am 28 years old and have a bachelor's degree in American History from UC Santa Cruz and a master's degree in American History from San Jose State University. I was born and raised in the heart of Turlock, Ca and have since spread my wings and taught in various areas to a wide-variety of students in the subjects of History and Technology. Along the way, I have attended many conferences regarding technology in the classroom and have done presentations at my own schools regarding how to better integrate technology and academics in order to enhance learning. Some teachers don't yet understand the transformative powers of technology in the classroom and I have been trying for years to change minds and open hearts to more cutting-edge approaches.
So as you can see, I love flexing my technological muscles in a fun yet informative way. I understand that people have little time nowadays and that the way we receive information is changing. I am hoping that with my courses, people can enjoy bite-sized chunks of vital information in a way that suits their lifestyle.
I am well-versed in a variety of applications and software that will help me keep my courses fresh, fun, but more importantly enlightening. I always make sure that I make myself available to students in order to answer questions and to clarify points that might be confusing at first.
Overall, I have a passion for teaching that has brought me much success in the classroom and I am excited to see how it impacts my students here at Udemy.