Serum iron is a test that measures how much iron is in your blood.
Fe+2; Ferric ion; Fe++; Ferrous ion; Iron - serum
How the test is performed:
A blood sample is needed. For information on how this is done, see: Venipuncture
Iron levels are highest in the morning. It's best to do this test in the morning.
How to prepare for the test:
Make sure your doctor knows about all the medications your are taking.
Drugs that can increase iron include estrogens, birth control pills, and methyldopa.
Drugs that can lower iron include cholestyramine, colchicine, deferoxamine, methicillin, allopurinol, and testosterone.
How the test will feel:
When the needle is inserted to draw blood, some people feel moderate pain. Others will feel only a prick or stinging sensation. Afterward, there may be some throbbing.
Why the test is performed:
Your doctor may order this test if you have signs of low iron (iron deficiency).
- Iron: 60-170 mcg/dL
TIBC : 240-450 mcg/dL
- Transferrin saturation: 20-50%
Note: mcg/dl = micrograms per deciliter
Note: Normal value ranges may vary slightly among different laboratories. Talk to your doctor about the meaning of your specific test results.
The examples above show the common measurements for results for these tests. Some laboratories use different measurements or may test different specimens.
What abnormal results mean:
Higher-than-normal levels may mean:
Lower-than-normal levels may mean:
Other conditions under which the test may be performed:
- Anemia of chronic disease
What the risks are:
There is very little risk involved with having your blood taken. Veins and arteries vary in size from one patient to another and from one side of the body to the other. Taking blood from some people may be more difficult than from others.
Other risks associated with having blood drawn are slight but may include:
- Excessive bleeding
- Fainting or feeling light-headed
- Hematoma (blood accumulating under the skin)
- Infection (a slight risk any time the skin is broken)
Ginder G. Microcytic and hypochromic anemias. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds. Cecil Medicine
. 24th ed. Philadelphia, Pa: Saunders Elsevier; 2011:chap 162.
Yee DL, Bollard CM, Geaghan SM. Appendix: Normal Blood Values: Selected Reference Values for Neonatal, Pediatric, And Adult Populations. In: Hoffman R, Benz EJ, Shattil SS, et al, eds. Hematology: Basic Principles and Practice. 5th ed. Philadelphia, Pa: Elsevier Churchill Livingstone; 2008:chap 164.
|Review Date: 2/8/2012|
Reviewed By: Todd Gersten, MD, Hematology/Oncology, Palm Beach Cancer Institute, West Palm Beach, FL. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by Linda J. Vorvick, MD, Medical Director and Director of Didactic Curriculum, MEDEX Northwest Division of Physician Assistant Studies, Department of Family Medicine, UW Medicine, School of Medicine, University of Washington; David Zieve, MD, MHA, Medical Director, A.D.A.M., Inc.
The information provided herein should not be used during any medical emergency or for the diagnosis or treatment of any medical condition. A licensed medical professional should be consulted for diagnosis and treatment of any and all medical conditions. Call 911 for all medical emergencies. Links to other sites are provided for information only -- they do not constitute endorsements of those other sites. © 1997-
A.D.A.M., Inc. Any duplication or distribution of the information contained herein is strictly prohibited.