Real-Life Math Volume 1 is not a simple collection of lesson ideas and examples of how math is used in real life. These lessons are activities that are ready for your students to actually participate in. These lessons are unique because I began by focusing on what my students are interested in and then brought math into their world. Bringing math into their world personalizes it in a way many students have not experienced before and creates a far greater interest in the subject. All twelve lessons include a teacher's guide that explains how to conduct the activity and a student worksheet that guides the student and poses problems. Each lesson also contains extensions with which you can make the lesson new and take it in a slightly different way. These extensions will allow you to use these lessons several times with the same students. These lessons were designed using common base standards for grades six, seven, and eight and are best served being used in these grades. These lessons have also been used successfully with grades four and five with more adult help. In these activities students will comparison shop with ratios, analyze cell phone plans with equations, examine the importance of a chorus in a song with unit rate, design clothing and then price it using substitution of variables, gain insights into data by collecting and analyzing it with measures of center, use polygons to make new and exciting things, examine where geometric figures are in the world around them, design a dream bedroom using area and scale factor, analyze pro-basketball player's basketball skills with fractions, discover how to find the percent of change in chewing gum, analyze pro-football quarterbacks using given equations to substitute into, and play Rock/Paper/Scissors and learn about it's probability. Get your students engaged in math today by using these relevant real-life math activities.
"synopsis" may belong to another edition of this title.
Matt Kitchen loves the subject of math and chose to get a B.S. in 4-9 Math Education and a M.Ed. in Instructional Practices to help students find a love for this subject at an earlier age than I did. He is a highly qualified teacher and has had the great privilege of speaking at conferences about this subject of real-life engaging math.
"About this title" may belong to another edition of this title.
(No Available Copies)
If you know the book but cannot find it on AbeBooks, we can automatically search for it on your behalf as new inventory is added. If it is added to AbeBooks by one of our member booksellers, we will notify you!Create a Want