Assignment 1: LASA 2—Substance Abuse Assessments Across the Lifespan
Substance abuse assessments have very different purposes for different populations. For instance, an assessment for treatment of victims will look different from a court-mandated assessment relating to criminal behavior. For another example, an assessment for an adolescent would likely emphasize peer influence more so than it would for an adult. These demographic factors significantly influence the assessment as it relates to treatment planning or other recommendations.
Use the module readings and the Argosy University online library resources to research types of substance abuse assessments for different demographics.
Select three substance abuse assessments for use in this assignment. Your choices should represent three different age populations such as the elderly, adults, adolescents, or children.
Review the American Society of Addiction Medicine (ASAM) patient placement criteria for the treatment of substance-related disorders at the following:
Complete the following:
- Describe the ASAM patient placement criteria for the treatment of substance-related disorders.
- Describe the three selected types of substance abuse assessments that you might use. Be sure that your choices represent three different age populations such as the elderly, adults, adolescents, or children.
- Compare and contrast the information being collected in each of the three assessments and describe the areas of concern. Ask, for example, does it include client presentation and functioning, current use and history, high-risk behavior, first exposure, consequences of addiction, culture, life skills, work, vocation, education, health, recreation, or spirituality? Present the comparison of the four types of substance abuse assessments in a table.
- Explain special considerations, including ethical issues, which would apply to the different populations selected.
- Evaluate the importance of having assessment tools for clients in each developmental life stage.
Create an 8–10 slide PowerPoint presentation to present your findings to other substance abuse counselors. Include the table comparing the three types of substance abuse assessments. Apply APA standards to citation of sources in your slides. Use the speaker notes in the slide show to further discuss the topics on each slide. In addition, make sure you have a title slide and a slide with references (in APA format).
Use the following file naming convention: LastnameFirstInitial_M5_A1.ppt.
By Monday, December 7, 2015, deliver your assignment to the M5: Assignment 1 Dropbox.
Course Project Grading Criteria and Rubric
|Assignment 1 Grading Criteria |
|Described the ASAM patient placement criteria for the treatment of substance-related disorders.|
|Described three assessments, each representing a different age population.|
|Compared and contrasted the information collected from each of the three assessments and identified the areas for concern.|
|Explained the special issues to be considered, which apply to the different populations selected.|
|Evaluated the importance of having assessment tools for clients in each developmental life stage.|
Usage and Mechanics (16)
APA Elements (24)