by Allen Wyatt
(last updated March 9, 2015)
Brian has two versions of Excel installed—2007 and 2010. Somehow Excel 2007 has become the default program for opening .XLSX and .XLSM files. The majority of Brian's work is done with Excel 2010 and that is the one he wants for the default. Brian wonders how to change it without uninstalling either version.
When you double-click on a file in Windows, it determines which program to use in order to open the file by consulting an internal "association" table. This table is basically a small database that says "if a file has ABC extension, then use program XYZ to open it."
In Brian's case, Windows has Excel 2007 associated with .XLSX and .XLSM files—when double-clicked, it is the Excel 2007 program that is called in to action. You can easily change the program associated with a particular file extension by following these steps if you are using Windows 2007:
Figure 1. The Open With dialog box.
At the top of the dialog box you see some variation of Excel as the recommended program with which to open the file. (On an Excel 2007 system it will likely say "Microsoft Office Excel," while on an Excel 2010 system it will likely say "Microsoft Excel.") The recommendation is always the current program associated with the type of file on which you right-clicked in step 2.
What you want to do is to find the program for Excel 2010. If it isn't visible on the screen (either in the Recommended Programs area or the Other Programs area), click the Browse button and navigate until you find the program file—probably in the c:\Program Files\Microsoft Office\Office14\ folder.
Select the file and then make sure the Always Use the Selected Program to Open this Kind of File check box is selected. When you click OK, Windows changes the association and Excel 2010 will now always open when you double-click that type of file.
The general procedure just described for Windows 7 systems is essentially the same with Windows 8 systems, but the steps and interface are different.
Figure 2. Information about the program associated with a file type.
At this point what you are seeing is essentially the programs (or "Apps") that Windows knows about on your system. You need to find the program for Excel 2010. It may be visible in the list, or you may need to click the Look for Another App On this PC option, at the very bottom of the program list.
Select the correct program and Windows updates the association.
Whether you are using Windows 7 or Windows 8 you will, of course, need to perform these steps for each file type understood by Excel: .XLSX, .XLSM, .XLS, .XLSB, .XLTX, etc. Because there are so many associations to change, you might find the second way of changing them. Follow these steps:
Figure 3. The Set Associations list.
This tip (13379) applies to Windows 7 and 8.
Windows implements a lot of visual effects that can make your screen and desktop look gorgeous. In Windows 7 those effects ...Discover More
Windows makes it easy to set your system to accurately reflect your regional settings. This tip sets you well on your way.Discover More
Need to lift the hood and look into the inner workings of Windows? One place you can do this easily is through the System ...Discover More
FREE SERVICE: Get tips like this every week in WindowsTips, a free productivity newsletter. Enter your address and click "Subscribe."