A circumstance, fact, or influence that contributes to a result or outcome
his legal problems were not a factor in his decision
she worked fast, conscious of the time factor
A gene that determines a hereditary characteristic
the Rhesus factor
A number or quantity that when multiplied with another produces a given number or expression
A number or algebraic expression by which another is exactly divisible
Any of a number of substances in the blood, mostly identified by numerals, which are involved in coagulation
A business agent; a merchant buying and selling on commission
A company that buys a manufacturer's invoices at a discount and takes responsibility for collecting the payments due on them
An agent, deputy, or representative
anything that contributes causally to a result; "a number of factors determined the outcome"
resolve into factors; "a quantum computer can factor the number 15"
be a contributing factor; "make things factor into a company's profitability"
component: an abstract part of something; "jealousy was a component of his character"; "two constituents of a musical composition are melody and harmony"; "the grammatical elements of a sentence"; "a key factor in her success"; "humor: an effective ingredient of a speech"
consider as relevant when making a decision; "You must factor in the recent developments"
divisor: one of two or more integers that can be exactly divided into another integer; "what are the 4 factors of 6?"
FACTOR (the Foundation to Assist Canadian Talent on Records) is a "private non-profit organization, ... dedicated to providing assistance toward the growth and development of the Canadian independent recording industry" (from).
A factor, from the Latin "he who does" (parallel to , from Latin agens), is a person who professionally acts as the representative of another individual or other legal entity, historically with his seat at a factory (trading post), notably in the following contexts: In a relatively large company ...
In music, a factor or chord factor is a member or component of a chord. These are named root, third, fifth, sixth, seventh, ninth, eleventh, thirteenth, and so on, for their generic interval above the root. ...
Factoring is a financial transaction whereby a business sells its accounts receivable (i.e., invoices) to a third party (called a factor) at a discount in exchange for immediate money with which to finance continued business. Factoring differs from a bank loan in three main ways. ...
In mathematics, a von Neumann algebra or W*-algebra is a *-algebra of bounded operators on a Hilbert space that is closed in the weak operator topology and contains the identity operator. ...
In graph theory, a factor of a graph G is a spanning subgraph, i.e., a subgraph that has the same vertex set as G. A k-factor of a graph is a spanning k-regular subgraph, and a k-factorization partitions the edges of the graph into disjoint k-factors. ...
A doer, maker; a person who does things for another person or organization; An integral part; Any of various objects multiplied together to form some whole; Influence; a phenomenon that affects the nature, the magnitude, and/or the timing of a consequence; To find all the factors of (a number ...
(“Factor S”) a substance in the cerebrospinal fluid that has sleep-inducing properties.
(Factors) Aassociated with Ppatient Aaggression
(Factors) Clusters of related knowledge, skills, and abilities evaluated as a single requirement. Factors occur only in postmaster and initial level supervisor selection.
(Factors) Making PM alternators from scratch is sort of a "black art"--there are many factors that enter in to it, we try to discuss some of them below. And then, you must add in another important factor, the design of the blades. We discuss that below also. ...
(factors (coagulation factors)) Protein constituents of blood, numbered according to the order in which they were discovered, which separate out in a traditional fractionation procedure (Cohn fractionation); Factor VIII, for example, is a blood serum protein involved in clot formation that is ...
(factors) A factor is a single discrete classification scheme for data, such that each item classified belongs to exactly one class (level) for that classification scheme. For example, in a drug experiment involving rats, sex (with levels male and female) or drug received could be factors. ...
(factors) men who traded in their own name, possessed the goods, and usually did not reveal the names of the people for whom they were acting, as opposed to an *agent
Coagulation factors are substances in the blood, such as proteins and minerals, that are necessary for clotting. Each clotting substance is designated with roman numerals I through XIII.
Factors were Scottish and English agents who sold colonial planters' crops, filled their orders for manufactured goods, and extended them credit. The factor system was very convenient for southern planters, but it prevented the development of a diversified economy in the South.
The insulating value of any material. Also known as conductivity.
A funding source that specializes in funding accounts receivable.
a protein in the blood that is needed to form the blood clot.