Developing Memory Skills in the Primary Classroom$56.99, Softcover
A highly practical book with all the guidance & resources a school needs to boost pupils' working memory.
Differentiating Through Learning Styles and Memory, 2ed$61.00, Paperback
This comprehensive resource provides the tools you need to create a brain-friendly learning environment and to differentiate content, process, and product for your students' diverse learning needs and strengths.
Essentials of Working Memory Assessment and Intervention$86.50, Paperback
Improve academic learning outcomes with accurate working memory assessment & evidence-based interventions
Helping Students Remember$92.95, Softcover (inc CD)
Practical, easy-to-implement, and evidence-based methods for working with children struggling with memory impairments.
Long Term Memory Problems in Children and Adolescents$78.95, Paperback
Written for for psychologists, school psychologists and special education teachers, this book offers guidance on the assessment tools, intervention programs and effective instruction programs for use with students experiencing long-term memory impairments
Memory At Work In The Classroom$44.95, Paperback
Support learners with instruction that responds effectively to their memory struggles
The Memory Handbook$96.99, Spiral Bound
This handbook is full of practical ideas to use with anyone, young or old, who is experiencing mild to severe memory difficulties.
The New IQ$19.99, Paperback
From one of the world's leading authorities comes this easy read to help you understand and improve working memory.
Short Term Memory Difficulties in Children$86.95, Spiral Bound
This practical resource provides a complete programme of ideas for developing a child's short-term memory skills.
Target Ladders Visual Perception$43.95, Softcover (inc CD)
This powerful new book offers a system for setting and monitoring targets which can replace or complement IEPs.
Understanding Working Memory, 2ed$68.00, Paperback
This book will make sure you are able to spot problems early and work with children to improve their working memory and ensure they reach their full potential.
Webber Photo Cards Occupations, 2ed
These card pairs are ideal for language or writing activities and for playing Memory, Match-up, Go Fish, and other games.
Webber Photo Cards, Around the Home
This Webber Photo Cards deck has CARD PAIRS – ideal for Memory, Match-up, and Go Fish games.
Webber Photo Cards, Foods
This Webber Photo Cards deck has CARD PAIRS – ideal for memory, match-up, and go fish games
Webber Photo Cards, Things to Wear
This Webber Photo Cards deck has CARD PAIRS – ideal for memory, match-up, and go fish games.
Webber Photo Cards, Verbs$57.95, Cards
This best selling Webber Photo Cards deck has CARD PAIRS – ideal for memory, match-up, and go fish games.
Working Memory$101.00, Paperback
Leading psychologists review the latest research on working memory and consider what role it plays in development and over the life span
Working Memory Activities$59.95, Softcover
A variety of highly engaging & inventive exercises that will help to improve your students' memory abilities.
Working Memory and Academic Learning$85.95, Paperback
This book enables you to identify how working memory relates to academic attainment and how to apply this knowledge in professional practice.
Working Memory and Learning$54.95, Paperback
This accessible guide provides a coherent overview of the role played by working memory in learning during the school years, and uses theory to inform good practice.
Working Memory, Thought, and Action$71.95, Paperback
From one of the pioneers in memory research this book discusses the developments that have occurred within the model in the past twenty years, and places it within a broader context.
Worksheets Don't Grow Dendrites$59.99, Softcover
Details twenty definitive brain-compatible techniques to maximise retention and minimise forgetting in learners of all ages.