The Beginner Writer Course provides an introduction to the 5 basic literary elements needed for great storytelling. This course is intended for novice writers who want to gain a better understanding of story structure in order to improve their own writing.
This course consists of:
This course is structured sequentially; it’s best to complete the modules in order because each concept builds upon the previous one. This course can be completed in one week—a module a day—or at your own leisure. It’s your preference. Whether you complete it in a week or in a month, you will a great foundation to begin writing your own manuscript.
This section is a course introduction. It consists of two videos, Introduction and How to Use, and one slideshow.
View the lecture on Characterization, then view the Characterization Slideshow. Once you feel comfortable with the material, complete the corresponding Character Sketches for both your protagonist and antagonist, as well as any supporting characters you wish to explore more in-depth.
View the lecture on Conflict, then view the Conflict Slideshow. Once you feel comfortable with the material, complete the corresponding Conflict Worksheet.
View the lecture on Plot Structure, then view the Plot Structure Slideshow. Once you feel comfortable with the material, complete the corresponding Plot Structure Diagram.
View the lecture on Theme, then view the Theme Slideshow. Once you feel comfortable with the material, complete the corresponding Theme Worksheet.
Thank you for completing The Beginner Writer Course!
This bonus video answers the question: What now?
Who I Am:
I'm a YA/Children's author and a teacher. Born and raised in Cleveland, Ohio, I am currently a middle school teacher and former professor of education. My credentials include a Bachelor's of Arts in English with a writing minor, as well as a Master's of Arts in Education with a reading endorsement. I am also an active member of SCBWI: Society of Children's Book Writers and Illustrators.
I have self-published 8 books as of 4/2016. The first novel to come to fruition,The Prophecy: The Lucia Chronicles Book 1, was written while participating in National Novel Writing Month 2013 with my 8th grade students. Since then I've won NaNoWriMo 4x and continue to participate every year.
Recently, I've been working on getting traditionally published, while simultaneously continuing to self-publish. My YouTube channel chronicles my writing journey and anything I learn along the way, in addition to some teaching strategies and random stuff like Comic Con. I like yoga, taking my dogs for walks, and watching Doctor Who. YA Sci-fi/fantasy is my genre of choice, and my guilty pleasure are books written by Janet Evanovich and Mitchell's Double Chocolate Chunk ice cream.