by Kelley Bergman
April 22, 2013
from OneRadioNetwork Website
|Kelley Bergman is a media consultant, critic and geopolitical investigator. She has worked as a journalist and writer, specializing in geostrategic issues around the globe.|
We are all seeing less of the Sun. If you were born before the 90s, you may remember a deep blue sky above the Earth, however those pristine clear skies are now only a memory.
The amount of solar energy reaching the Earth’s surface has been gradually falling partly due to artificial climate modification and geoengineering initiatives – a misguided attempt to cool the planet by reflecting the sun.
We have now lost 20 percent of the sun’s rays due to the consequences – global dimming, which is affecting our health and future.
Why in the World are They Spraying?
While geoengineers maintain that their models are only for the mitigation of global warming, it is now clear that they can be used as a way to consolidate an enormous amount of both monetary and political power into the hands of a few by the leverage that weather control gives certain corporations over the Earth’s natural systems.
This of course, is being done at the expense of every living thing on the planet.
Global dimming is the gradual reduction in the amount of global direct irradiance at the Earth’s surface that was observed for several decades after the start of systematic measurements in the 1950s. The effect varies by location, but worldwide it has been estimated to be of the order of a 5% reduction over the three decades from 1960-1990 and another 15-17% reduction from 1990 to present.
Much suspicion has been aroused by unusual cloud formations and abnormal jet trails in the upper atmosphere over the past decade.
They’ve been called,
…among many other terms.
The largest reports come from Canada and U.S. but it happens all over the world including countries such as,
the United Kingdom,
…among many others. If you live in these countries, just look above you as you’ll see them at some point throughout day or week.
Often these jets leave just a thick wisp of a trail or they leave a long line of dashed trails across the entire sky.
These events go unreported by the mainstream media and governments remain silent. This collusion, whether intentional or otherwise, keeps us in the dark with regard to a grand geo-engineering experiment that has the effect of hobbling our health and severely disrupting the natural environment. And we would have been lost but for the internet.
I have noticed Chemtrails in the sky increasing with greater frequency. I am concerned that these chemical sprays used to modify the weather also adversely affect the air we breathe, water we drink, and food we eat. It seems the majority of people are too busy in life to notice or care. Some very educated friends of mine argue chemtrails are merely contrails of commercial airliners. This would be a comforting explanation but obvious patterns of crossing white trails happen too often to be coincidence.
Our environment has suffered severely at the hands of big money, big industry, and progress. The on-going damages are in the name of money and greed for the global elite. Humanity must unify under one consciousness of truth and light, stand tall against the atrocities committed against Mother Nature. We are letting them destroy this beautiful planet for generations to come.
Please raise people’s awareness about Chemtrails and the potential damage they are doing to the environment. I am curious to know specifically about the chemical make up of Chemtrails? Please leave a comment with info about Chemetrails. Raise awareness!