Microwaves are very powerful pieces of equipment, capable of heating food to over 200 degrees Fahrenheit and emitting 2000 watts of electricity. They do have a controversy on whether they are entirely safe to be using or not. Do they cause cancer? Do they make food less nutrient-rich? Are they safe for heating water?
Microwaves do use radio waves to heat food and emit radiation. However, the type of radiation is non-ionizing and does not have the power to change your DNA, and is not as dangerous as an X-ray. 
There have been no sustained cases of microwaves causing cancer. Further, the FDA monitors the amount of radiation that manufacturers are allowed to have leaked from microwaves and it is minuscule. If your microwave is in disrepair the amount could be higher so it's best to replace them. It is also advised that people do not stand directly in front of microwaves while in use.
Making a cup of boiling water in the microwave might be more of a hazard than you think. If you are looking for a quick way to boil water it might be best to think again before popping it in the microwave. By doing so, the water can be superheated and when disturbed can erupt. The water may seem innocuous enough, but add in some instant coffee, stir it, or drop in a teabag and the water can suddenly, violently boil over. This has led to severe burns. Superheating occurs when liquids are quickly heated much past their boiling point. This makes it so that the liquid does not have time to release the steam. Watch out for this as it can cause injury.
It has been thought that microwaving foods cause them to lose their nutritional value. This has been thought because people who regularly use the microwave are generally less healthy than those that do so less often. Correlation does not equal causation in this case though. It seems that in general the health of those using the microwave is less because they are picking foods that are marketed for the microwave. These foods often have less nutritional value. When cooked in the microwave versus the stove food was found to have retained more nutritional value because it was cooked for a shorter period. 
Overall, take general precautions, use common sense and the microwave should be pretty safe.
