The Worm Moon of March was sometimes referred to by names associated with other signs of spring. The more northern Native American tribes knew the March full moon as the Crow Moon, when the cawing of crows signaled the end of winter; or the Crust Moon, because the snow cover becomes crusted from thawing by day and freezing at night, or the Sap Moon, marking the time of tapping maple trees. Other names include the Chaste Moon and the Death Moon. Christian settlers also called this the Lenten Moon and considered it the last moon of winter.
Full Moon names have been used by many cultures to describe the full moon throughout the year. Specifically, Native American tribes used moon phases and cycles to keep track of the seasons by giving a distinctive name to each recurring full moon. The unique full moon names were used to identify the entire month during which each occurred.
In astrology, planets and heavenly bodies are considered as energy beings, affecting the life and states of people on earth. Each planet is associated with a physical, emotional and mental quality. The placement of planets and their distances from earth in this case are important factors in determining the quality and intensity of their influence. The Full Moon symbolizes the mind & emotions and because of its closeness to earth it is one of the most influential heavenly bodies on the life of people on earth.
Full Moon: a time for goals to be signed, sealed, and stamped.
The full moon traditionally symbolizes abundance, harvest, wish-fulfillment, manifesting desires, sexuality, achieving all dreams, and protection. This is the time that our goals and intentions become signed, sealed, and stamped. Note that it is not necessarily delivered. (They may be, but if it is not, do not be discouraged. We still have two weeks to devote to this intentional period. Know that the intention is “out there” in the universe and time is gathering all the circumstances and other people’s intentions and time frame together to make this happen the best way for all concerned.)
FULL MOON in VIRGO
As the Earth rotates, different constellations appear overhead. In the Northern Hemisphere the Full Moon in Virgo happens in the spring (when crops are about to be planted), and the New Moon in Virgo happens in the fall (when crops are beginning to be harvested). In the Southern Hemisphere the seasons are reversed but the symbolism is the same. Virgo (archetypically, the maiden) is about fertility and its changing seasons – in other words, about growth and the change that comes with it.