Souviens Toi : Remember!
The notice at the entrance
to the ruins of Oradour
This website describes the history, background and
events leading up to the Nazi war-crime of the attack upon the martyr
village of Oradour-sur-Glane. This atrocity was carried out on Saturday
10th June 1944 by soldiers of the Der Führer
Regiment of the 2nd Waffen-SS Panzer Division Das Reich. On that day,
without giving any explanation, they killed a total of 642 men, women and children, leaving
only a few survivors. They then destroyed the
entire village and to this day there is no
universally accepted explanation for the massacre. The narrative, In a Ruined State, gives a full description of what happened on
the 10th June 1944 and reviews all the current explanations offered by
different authors for the attack on the village. In addition there are over 200
photographs in the Picture Gallery and
much supporting information in the Appendices, including advice on
how to get there and places to stay
during a visit. If short of time, read the
Summary and browse the Picture
Gallery, but for a fuller understanding it is recommended to read
all of, In a Ruined State and the Appendices, as they contain much
relevant detail about the background to the affair and what happened
afterwards to all those involved.
Sewing machine posed in the
ruins of Oradour
Memorial to the 642 victims
of the massacre
Oradour Church (main site for the killing
of the women and children)
The car of Doctor Desourteaux on the
Champ de Foire in Oradour
Contact the author Michael Williams at ...
In the literature, Oradour-sur-Glane is often spelled as, Oradour sur Glane (without the hyphens)
and is frequently referred to simply as, Oradour, see
the Oradours of France.
Note 2: The 10th of June 1944 was also the date for other war-crime killings by the
Waffen-SS in WWII, see the 10th of June as a date
in WWII history.
Note 3: There is an annual event in Oradour-sur-Glane to mark the anniversary
of the massacre, see
Note 4: All spelling and date formatting on this website follows the British
English conventions, see Dates, commonly
misspelled words & accents.
Note 5: The Favicon for this website, which
displayed in the address bar of your web browser, shows a cross of Lorraine
superimposed on a standard French flag.
Note 6: This website includes information about a range of persons, places and
organisations involved in the events at Oradour-sur-Glane, such as
a) French survivors who were present on the 10th of June 1944 and listed under
Dramatis Personae including, Robert Hébras,
Mathieu Borie, Clément Broussaudir, Jean-Marcel Darthout, Yvon Roby, Hubert
Desourteaux, Jacques Desourteaux, Jean Desourteaux, Roger Godfrin, the Pinède
children, Pierre-Henri Poutaraud, and Marguerite Rouffanche.
b) German forces personnel involved, were
those of the
members of the Der Führer Regiment of the 2nd SS-Panzer Division Das Reich
and include: Georg René Boos, Heinz Barth, Adolf Diekmann, Karl Gerlach, Otto Kahn, Helmut
Kämpfe, Heinrich Lammerding, Sylvester Stadler and Otto Weidinger.
c) Organisational information, such as, The Order of
Battle of Das Reich in June 1944 is shown, as is an example of the
SS rank structure and notes on
Hugo Sperrle, the Commander-in-Chief
West of the German armed forces and whose orders were used to justify the attack. In addition there are
notes on language and terms used during the
d) As well as the various personnel listed above, there are basic
notes on: Len Cotton (an RAF man shot down over
France and sheltered in Oradour) and Georges Guingouin a commander of the French
Resistance whose capture of Kämpfe triggered the attack.
Note 7: All unvisited links are shown in Blue and change colour
to Purple when visited.
Note 8: Site optimised for a 1280 x 1024 screen, with text size set to Medium in the View menu of Internet Explorer.
Note 9: There are no cookies or spyware of any kind at all on this website.
Note 10: Please report any broken links, or errors
Top of page
© Michael Williams ... Friday 10th March 2000 ... this page
was last updated on
Friday, 07 April 2017