dynasty(redirected from Political dynasty)
Also found in: Thesaurus, Legal, Encyclopedia.
n. pl. dy·nas·ties
1. A succession of rulers from the same family or line.
2. A family or group that maintains power for several generations: a political dynasty controlling the state.
[Middle English dynastie, from Old French, from Late Latin dynastīa, lordship, from Greek dunasteia, from dunastēs, lord; see dynast.]
dy·nas′tic (dī-năs′tĭk) adj.
n, pl -ties
1. a sequence of hereditary rulers: an Egyptian dynasty.
2. any sequence of powerful leaders of the same family: the Kennedy dynasty.
[C15: via Late Latin from Greek dunasteia, from dunastēs dynast]
dynastic, dyˈnastical adj
dy•nas•ty(ˈdaɪ nə sti; Brit. also ˈdɪn ə sti)
n., pl. -ties.
1. a sequence of rulers from the same family, stock, or group: the Ming dynasty.
2. the rule of such a family or group.
3. any succession of members of a powerful or influential family or group.
dy•nas′tic (-ˈnæs tɪk) dy•nas′ti•cal, adj.
Switch to new thesaurus
|Noun||1.||dynasty - a sequence of powerful leaders in the same family|
kinfolk, kinsfolk, phratry, family line, sept, folk, family - people descended from a common ancestor; "his family has lived in Massachusetts since the Mayflower"
Bourbon dynasty, Bourbon - a European royal line that ruled in France (from 1589-1793) and Spain and Naples and Sicily
Capetian dynasty - a Frankish dynasty founded by Hugh Capet that ruled from 987 to 1328
Carlovingian dynasty, Carolingian dynasty - a Frankish dynasty founded by Charlemagne's father that ruled from 751 to 987
Flavian dynasty - a dynasty of Roman Emperors from 69 to 96 including Vespasian and his sons Titus and Domitian
Han, Han dynasty - imperial dynasty that ruled China (most of the time from 206 BC to AD 220) and expanded its boundaries and developed its bureaucracy; remembered as one of the great eras of Chinese civilization
Hanoverian line, House of Hanover, Hanover - the English royal house that reigned from 1714 to 1901 (from George I to Victoria)
Habsburg, Hapsburg - a royal German family that provided rulers for several European states and wore the crown of the Holy Roman Empire from 1440 to 1806
Hohenzollern - a German noble family that ruled Brandenburg and Prussia
House of Lancaster, Lancastrian line, Lancaster - the English royal house that reigned from 1399 to 1461; its emblem was a red rose
Liao, Liao dynasty - the dynasty that ruled much of Manchuria and northeastern China from 947 to 1125
Merovingian dynasty, Merovingian - a Frankish dynasty founded by Clovis I that reigned in Gaul and Germany from about 500 to 750
Ottoman dynasty, Ottoman - the Turkish dynasty that ruled the Ottoman Empire from the 13th century to its dissolution after World War I
Plantagenet, Plantagenet line - the family name of a line of English kings that reigned from 1154 to 1485
Ptolemaic dynasty, Ptolemy - an ancient dynasty of Macedonian kings who ruled Egypt from 323 BC to 30 BC; founded by Ptolemy I and ended with Cleopatra
Ch'in, Ch'in dynasty, Qin, Qin dynasty - the Chinese dynasty (from 246 BC to 206 BC) that established the first centralized imperial government and built much of the Great Wall
Ch'ing, Ch'ing dynasty, Manchu dynasty, Qing, Qing dynasty, Manchu - the last imperial dynasty of China (from 1644 to 1912) which was overthrown by revolutionaries; during the Qing dynasty China was ruled by the Manchu
Saxe-Coburg-Gotha - the name of the royal family that ruled Great Britain from 1901-1917; the name was changed to Windsor in 1917 in response to anti-German feelings in World War I
Seljuk - any one of the Turkish dynasties that ruled Asia Minor from the 11th to the 13th centuries; they successfully invaded Byzantium and defended the Holy Land against Crusaders
Shang, Shang dynasty - the imperial dynasty ruling China from about the 18th to the 12th centuries BC
Stuart - the royal family that ruled Scotland from 1371-1714 and ruled England from 1603 to 1649 and again from 1660 to 1714
Song dynasty, Sung, Sung dynasty, Song - the imperial dynasty of China from 960 to 1279; noted for art and literature and philosophy
House of Tudor, Tudor - an English dynasty descended from Henry Tudor; Tudor monarchs ruled from Henry VII to Elizabeth I (from 1485 to 1603)
Valois - French royal house from 1328 to 1589
Wei, Wei dynasty - any of several imperial dynasties of China ruling from 220 to 265 and from 386 to 556
House of York, York - the English royal house (a branch of the Plantagenet line) that reigned from 1461 to 1485; its emblem was a white rose
dynasty[ˈdɪnəstɪ] N → dinastía f
dynasty[ˈdɪnəsti] n → dynastie f
n → Dynastie f
dynasty[ˈdɪnəstɪ, ɒm ˈdaɪnəstɪ] n → dinastia
dynasty(ˈdinəsti) , ((American) ˈdai-) – plural ˈdynasties – noun
a succession or series of rulers of the same family. the Ming dynasty. dinastie سُلالَه حاكِمَه династия dinastia dynastie die Dynastie dynasti δυναστείαdinastía dünastia سلسله dynastia dynastieשושלת राजवंश dinastija uralkodóház, dinasztia dinasti konungsætt; keisaraætt dinastia 王朝 왕조 dinastija dinastija dinasti dynastiedynasti, kongehusdynastia كورنۍ dinastia dinastie династия dynastia dinastija dinastija dynasti ราชวงศ์ hanedan 王朝，朝代 династія پشت در پشت سلسلہ triều đại 王朝，朝代dyˈnastic (-ˈnӕs-) adjective
dinasties خاص بِسُلالَه حاكِمَه династичен dinástico dynastický dynastisch dynasti- δυναστικός dinástico dünastiline وابسته به سلسله dynastinen dynastique שֶׁל שׁוֹשֶׁלֶת राजवंशीय dinastijski uralkodó családhoz tartozó menurut dinasti þjóðhöfðingjaættar- dinastico 王朝の 왕조의, 왕가의 dinastijos, dinastinis dinastijas- dinasti dynastiekdynastisk dynastyczny كورنۍ ته مربوط dinástico dinastic династический dynastický dinastičen dinastički dynastisk ที่เกี่ยวกับราชวงศ์ hanedana ait 王朝的，朝代的 династичний خاندانی thuộc triều đại 王朝的，朝代的