Biomedical visualization is the process of transforming medical data into user experience. It is a branch of bioinformatics with a specialization in the application of computer graphics software to scientific visualization of life sciences. This includes things such as the visualization of genomes, macromolecular protein structures, systems biology, microscopy, and magnetic resonance data.
Processing microscopy footage can be tedious if limited to traditional image processing software. More advanced applications are used to process imagery, resizing and sharpening details. Visual Effects software used to create cinematic special effects empower visualization scientists with a new set of investigational tools to bring scientific experiments to life.
Magnetic Resonance Imaging
The importance of understanding the 3-dimensional nature of patient anatomy is revolutionizing surgery. It can also provide important insights into patient trauma. Medical visualizations such as these make ideal courtroom trial exhibits to accompany testimonies.
Proteins are amazing. They come in all shapes and sizes, yet unbelievably small. Proteins are smaller than a photon’s wavelength making them invisible to optical detection. X-rays have just enough of a wavelength to use for detection. From refraction patterns captured through crystals, we can recreate proteins with 3-dimensional atomic precision using x-ray crystallography data. From these 3D reproductions of proteins, we create animated stories that look like shows you’d see on television and created from scientific data.
Mechanism of Action 3D Animations
Mechanism of Action 3D animations, sometimes referred to as MOAs, explain how medical treatments change pathology. Often times, medical treatments effect the body in ways we can’t see. MOAs help patients and doctors better understand treatments by creating a visual narrative to explain confusing and hidden information.
3D Printed Scientific Models
We don’t stop there. We bring data to life, as in “IRL.” 3D printing is revolutionizing education as well, turning 2-dimensional scientific data into 3-dimensional real-life engagement.
Are you publishing a new paper and need cutting-edge molecular illustrations? Are you working on new MOA 3D animation and in need of storyboards and characters for client review? Have a look at samples of our illustrations.