The difference between resignation and termination can be quite significant, especially when applying for another job. Understanding the differences between the two can make it easier for you to explain the reason why you left one place of employment to go to another, or why you are applying for a current job opening.
The first primary difference between termination and resignation is in who initiates the severance of employment. Both termination and resignation signify that the employment will end, but when someone is terminated it means that the employer has decided to sever the employment. In some cases, the employer can sever employment for any reason, so long as it is not based on issues of race, religion or the sex of the employee. In the case of resignation, the employee initiates the severance for various reasons such as a new employment opportunity or for other personal reasons.
Whether or not the employer of employee gives notice to the other party regarding the severance of the working relationship depends upon state law and the type of employment relationship that exists. For instance, in Illinois, where employment is "at-will employment," the relationship can be severed by the employer or employee for any reason without advance notice. Typically, a termination because of misconduct or poor job performance will result in immediate termination. However, if a company is severing employment for economic reasons, the company may provide the worker with advance notice so that the worker can make preparations for the future. Employees who leave for other job opportunities typically give a standard two-week notice, but this can be more or less depending on the situation.
In some cases when an employer severs the relationship with an employee, the employer provides some form of compensation to account for the job loss. Typically known as severance pay, this compensation varies depending upon the company and the reason for termination. This generally occurs when a company downsizes or is forced to lay off workers for economic reasons. Severance pay allows workers to have some reserve cash on hand once employment ends and while they seek new employment. When an employee resigns and gives proper notice, he can still receive his normal compensation up until his final day of employment.
Benefits are another major concern when the employer/employee relationship has been severed. Under the Consolidated Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act or COBRA, employees who have their employment terminated have the right to continue their health insurance benefits by continuing to pay the health insurance premium. Generally this includes paying the portion the employer had previously paid, also. The federal government sometimes offers premium reductions for those under COBRA during times of national economic difficulty.
- Jupiterimages/BananaStock/Getty Images