From its humble beginnings at the Grasshopper Club in 1897, the WTA Swiss Open has evolved to include women's divisions at their permanent home in Gstaad. The crowds were excited to return to normal in the 1972 game. They were ready for exciting world-class tennis, unlike anything that had ever been seen before. As they funneled into their seats, US's Pam Teeguarden was feeling her nerves get to her. She sat in her locker room, rattled from her flight. The American atmosphere was filled with tension, and she was closer than ever to their biggest enemy. While her mind was focused on something else, her opponent, Kazuko Sawamatsu was determined.

Kazuko had trained hard. She slammed tennis balls back and forth across the court as robots lobbed them at her with incredible speed. She felt the pain of their impact, she felt the scrapes as she skidded across the ground to hit barely-in-bounds returns, and she had honed her craft to new heights.

The day came. Sawamatsu didn't even look at the ref or the crowds. Her eyes stared fixated on her opponent. Pam caught sight of a Russian hat in the stands, and her spine went rigid. The first serve snapped her out of it. Pam was in the game. The balls soared across the net as the women played the best tennis of their lives. Kazuko's strong early lead got her through the first game without much trouble, but that night Pam regained her composure.

The next day Pam's furious serves rocked Sawamatsu. They had an erratic unpredictability to them that the cold machines she practiced with couldn't mimic. Stunned by Teeguarden's sudden shift, Sawamatsu dropped the second game to her rival.

The score was 1-1, but the points for each player showed a slight edge to Sawamatsu at 10-9. Kazuko harnessed all her power and swung. The ball caught fire as it flew through the air. Teegaurden hit the ball, but the impossibly fast shot melted her racket strings and impacted the ground, leaving a crater on the court. After a few more serves, Teeguarden tripped in the hole. She could still technically play, but it was over. Sawamatsu emerged victorious as the Women's Singles Champion of the 1972 WTA Swiss Open.
