Firefighters to get tested
Strathcona County firefighter Kelly Lehr blows into a spirometer to test his lung function after returning from fighting the wildfire that tore through Fort McMurray last May. Photo by Larry Wong/Postmedia Network
Strathcona County firefighters were some of the first on the ground when wildfires broke out in Fort McMurray last May — and potential health effects of that continue to be looked into.
Health impacts of battling “The Beast” blaze in Fort McMurray are being studied thanks to a two-year, $500,000 grant commitment from the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR), which will allow the investigation of wildfire health impacts on the estimated 3,500 responders who attended the destruction.
This isn’t the first round of tests being conducted; it’s simply more extensive.
When Strathcona County firefighters returned home from the Fort Mac front lines, University of Alberta epidemiologist Dr. Nicola Cherry, along with a research team, met the first responders to conduct respiratory tests.
The tests surrounded the potential impacts of heavy smoke and ash on their respiratory systems, and expanded throughout the province, as Cherry and her research team set up around a dozen mobile respiratory testing units that saw more than 350 firefighters tested.
“During the first few days, it was clear that fighting that fire was very stressful,” Cherry said.
“They weren’t getting any sleep. They were exhausted and often complained of breathing problems.”
Strathcona County firefighter Jason Biggeman was one of the local crew members tested.
“I didn’t think about it initially, but when I got back here, I found that it really did have an effect on me,” he said, noting he had spent three days working with very few breaks in Fort Mac, often in smoke-filled conditions.
“I could feel a little bit of a thickness in (my) throat and had to take a deep breath, things like that. I’m not feeling it as much anymore, but could definitely feel it initially.”
The added $500,000 in funding brings the total investment to $3.4 million through a partnership between the provincial and federal governments, the Canadian Red Cross, and CIHR.
“Part of the point of seeking the money to fund the (mobile unit) was to do studies of firefighters because we know that they are acutely exposed,” Cherry said.
The respiratory study is one of seven being funded through the initiative, five of which are being led through the University of Alberta.
Other studies include a study on pediatric resiliency to health impacts from those evacuated; chemical contaminants in foods from Fort McKay and Fort Chipewyan, before and after the wildfires; “Intervention to improve perinatal outcomes following the 2016 Alberta wildfires”; and, a study examining the health impacts of the wildfires on Indigenous people and communities.
When it comes to the respiratory angle, new initiatives propose contacting every Alberta-based firefighter who worked up in Fort McMurray.
“We will be comparing with a cohort of people who were equally healthy before the fire, who weren’t at the fire,” Cherry explained through the plan.
“Of the people who went to the fire, we want to know if they have any particular clusters of ill health that we didn’t see in comparison groups. Then, we’ll follow up every couple of years, looking at mental health.”
The study will also identify different safety factors in varying health outcomes, such as different types of masks worn by firefighters, and how long they were wearing them for.
“We are looking for the sort of things that could be changed at future fires,” she explained, noting similar practices will be taken when identifying mental health issues and the different services offered in various fire departments: “If one force seems to have something that is particularly good, we can recommend it to everybody else.
—With files from Postmedia Network