Microscopic examination showed groups of capillaries
of varying sizes in a lobular arrangement with bland spindle-like endothelial cells lining these capillary structures (Fig.
The best predictors were abnormal nailfold capillaries
and the presence of antinuclear antibodies (Arch.
3) and used as the initial data for 3-D demonstration of spatial arrangement of capillaries
inside the villi.
deform a significant portion of the ball volume under the face of the capillary to achieve the high strength required for a ball bonding process.
1) They usually originate in the capillaries
, but they sometimes arise in the venous vessels, as well.
It induces vasculogenesis from preendothelial cells and angiogenesis from preexisting capillaries
(Carmeliet 2000; Ferrara 1999).
Osterle, "Membrane Transport Characteristic of Ultrafine Capillaries
actually "leak" blood that begins to oxidize (through a process called hemoglobin degradation) .
In another joint test with a K & S customer, dozens of novel capillaries
were directly compared to a conventional capillary design-based process in a mass production volume of more than 45 million bonds and 30,000 device units.
This pain-t-sized detector combines the self-focusing capabilities of fused silica capillaries
with the high speed, high spatial resolution of Active Pixel Sensors, which are similar to those used in digital cameras or mobile phones.
in the fibrin gel were cultured in 5% FBSDMEM (0.
This had nothing to do with capillary electrophoresis, which came much later with the introduction of polyimide-clad, fused-silica capillaries
with inner diameters of 10-200 [micro]m (i.
Instead, it gathers in another artery and spreads into more capillaries
to nourish kidney tissues before it finally exits.
of glomeruli with cellular crescents were collapsed and showed few or no inflammatory cells.
Within a single experiment, the shear rate range can be extended by using different die-orifice diameters, or the formerly time-consuming triple-point Bagley-correction can be performed in one experiment using a set of capillaries
with the same orifice diameter but different lengths.