Wind energy is now the fastest-growing source of power in the United States, according to the Department of Energy, accounting for 43% of all new U.S. electric generation capacity in 2012. The Carolinas are well-known for capabilities in nuclear, hydro, gas and other generation sources. But a new wind-energy testing facility developed by Nick Rigas, a senior scientist at Clemson University, could help the Carolinas emerge as a leader in another facet of energy production.
In November, Clemson University dedicated the SCE&G Energy Innovation Center at the Clemson University Restoration Institute campus in Charleston, S.C. The center houses the world’s most-advanced wind turbine drive-train-testing facility, along with a 15-megawatt grid simulator, called the Duke Energy eGRID, that can simulate the electrical grid of any country in the world. The center was established with a $45 million Department of Energy grant, which spurred $140 million in other support.
Rigas was responsible for the design and construction of the facility. His work there ties together academic and industrial inputs as the energy sector moves to meet the DOE’s goal of generating 20% of the nation’s power from wind by 2030, up from less than 4% today. At the facility, companies test new mechanical and electrical components of turbines as they endeavor to make wind power a reliable source of energy.
What’s the case for wind power?
Once you get the project built, there’s no fuel cost. This facility allows companies to get their products to the market sooner and lower their risks. I don’t think wind technology is a panacea, but in the future we can have a more diverse supply of energy that doesn’t tie us to one resource or another. At some point, you have to put a value on an energy’s impact and sustainability. What’s the true cost of coal?
Why did Clemson build the facility?
In 2009, the Department of Energy put out an RFP to build a wind turbine drive-train-testing facility. Clemson got with its industry partners and submitted a proposal and was ultimately chosen. This was the largest competitive grant that Clemson had ever landed.
For the U.S. to be competitive with the Europeans, we need the capability to test our innovations. It’s cost-prohibitive for a single company to build such a facility, but they need it to show that their technology does what they say it’s going to do.
What makes the Carolinas a prime spot for developing wind power?
Clemson won the grant, in part, because it had built an international center for automotive research in Greenville where we do full systems testing of automotive drive trains. With wind turbine drive trains, it’s a different scale and different systems, but it’s still a drive system. Secondly, you cannot rule out the impact of having the facility located next to the port of Charleston. Wind turbine drive trains can weigh hundreds of tons. It’s easy to move them around on ships, but putting them on a train or truck and getting them inland is quite costly.
How difficult was it to bring this project to completion?
This was probably the hardest thing I’ve ever done. We were building equipment that had never been built before, and there were cost pressures. A project like this can get very political, and then there are companies saying, “Where is it? Where is it?” It was a real challenge because there were so many unknowns, but it has also been a very exciting project. We learned a lot of interesting stuff that many people never get to do in their careers.
What results are you hoping for?
Our hope is that we’ll see new and better technologies come to market faster with less risk that are more easily adopted by companies. That will lead to a lower cost of energy delivered to customers as well as more diversity in our energy mixture.