<meta name="keywords" content="keyword, keyword, 0a71df81b5c173f23562"/>
People read for different reasons, some for pleasure, or for understanding, and for some improving, their stock of knowledge. The companionship of a book is the best that we could get. Books may please us but rarely offend is ever.
Reading has a significant number of benefits. Just like any other muscle in the body the brain requires exercise to keep it strong and healthy. Reading keeps you mentally stimulated, reduces stress. It’s a fact that, “A man’s knowledge container is a bottomless pit”, so everything you read fills your head with new bits of information and you never know when it might come in handy. The more knowledge we have the better equipped we are to tackle any challenge. Reading also helps to expand our vocabulary and becoming articulate and well spoken is of great help. It improves our memory too. Again it can make our analytical thinking skills stronger. It improves focus and concentration. By reading, one can overcome themselves from mood disorders too. Reading has an incredible power to make oneself the gift of gab and can make a man perfect undoubtedly
Reading is really like taking a flight to great heights in pursuit of knowledge. Read one good book and you will know the joys of reading. Reading nourishes mind and gives us both information and knowledge.
School franchise given that reading is the means to gain knowledge, it’s important to inculcate the habit of reading right from childhood. The first encounter with reading is probably when children are read out to, from story books. By witnessing the interactions between the characters in the books, they are gaining valuable communication skills and also understand the joys books hold.
Reading can free up imaginations and open up exciting new worlds of fantasy or reality. They allow children to dream. Cbse school franchise planning them to give a good start on the road to reading as a lifelong source of pleasure.
Children when introduced to reading at an early age are seen to have a better understanding and acquire language skills with ease, have a richer vocabulary and posses greater cognitive abilities. Reading not only adds to their general knowledge, but also shapes their personalities with better understanding of self. The more they read about others lives and experiences, the higher the chances of them becoming a better decision-maker.
And to conclude with a queue of Charles William Eliot “Books are the quietest and most constant of friends; they are the most accessible and wisest of counselors, and the most patient of teachers”.
Photography Day is all about celebrating photography. Today is the day to embrace your love of photography, whether you see yourself as an Amateur, Hobbyist or Professional, it’s the day to show off what you can do. Photography has the ability to tell stories and inspire people and with the dawn of digital photography we can share memories across the world in seconds with the use of online galleries. Photography has changed the way we see the world and gives you the ability to share your perception on the world around you, so why not share it!
The first level facilitators training program for Edify Kids schools was conducted by MDN Edify Education Pvt.Ltd on June 5th and 6th, 2015 at DRSIS Hyderabad.
Co-ordinators,Centre Heads and Facilitators from Vellore,Banglore, Vijayawada, Vizag and Hyderabad with a great enthusiasm attended the two days training program.
The facilitators were familiarized with the other participants and were imbibed with vision and mission of Edify for holistic education. The facilitators were given an indepth insight on roles and responsibilities of pre -primary teachers and were equipped with 3C and Trans-disciplinary themes and a humanistic approach to progressive growth towards education was accentuated.
Emphasis was laid on 3C profiles, need of Parent connect programmes- Coffee Morning, Home Parent Teacher Meeting, Learner Synopsis Day, parents as resource persons, Usage of Knowledge bank, Classroom management, Classroom displays and Learning Centres in Kindergarten Class-room, Admission Process, Assessment and Report card. An excellent role play session on story telling,how to teach rhymes and to make effective use of Circle time,process of documentation,how to integrate gross motor, fine motor & cognitive skills while learning.The participants have taken back the tips on marketing and admissions and were enthralled to implement.
Session on Phonetics by external resource person from Google took back the participants to their childhood while playing whispering round.The session wasvery interactive and lot of enthusiasm was displayed by all the participants.
Finally the last day of training session ended up with the distribution of certificates to the participants.
Visit us for more details on: http://edifyschools.com/
CBSE school is a very popular school examination board, which is famous not only in India but in many foreign countries. This school board is famed for conducting the school examinations and for developing school syllabus for its affiliated schools.
It would be an understatement to talk about CBSE as an institution known to conduct exams only. CBSE has become an acronym for the best school standards in India. A good number of schools in India are known because of their affiliation with CBSE and their standards, as asked by the CBSE.
The syllabus developed by the central board (CBSE) has been highly appreciated and appraised by the education institutions, both local and international. The board also has been working upon the research and development in teaching methodologies and other aspects of learning.
CBSE School and Franchise options
There are just few reputed franchise agencies in India that provide CBSE school franchise. The CBSE school franchise gives a ready-to-use school operations business model to the franchisee. Any person or agency that buys CBSE school franchise can operate the school, either secondary or senior secondary school in India.
CBSE awards affiliations to schools and has a very strict policy regarding the rules that are to be followed by the affiliated schools. The board provides provisional as well as permanent affiliation to schools. Schools that are recommended have the advantage of quickly receiving the affiliation.
An individual can start a primary school and later on have the CBSE affiliation when the classes are expanded to include educating for class VIII onwards. However, if one establishes a CBSE school from the very beginning, it is guaranteed that quality education would be provided. In this way, CBSE performs the role of quality checker or quality control.
The public demand for CBSE in India is greatest. By acquiring a working CBSE school model, the franchisee has an edge over the competitors and his institution is expected to be delivering better results than non-affiliated schools. This fact is known by the CBSE as well as public schools or institutions offering such opportunities.
The schools follow the CBSE syllabus which can be integrated with the International Baccalaureate IB PYP Primary Years Programmes from Kindergarten to Grade V. The uniqueness of our schools largely lies in this blended approach of offering the best of Indian content using the best of the International Methodologies. The MDN Edify Schools follow the internationally approved convention of a 12:1 student teacher ratio to optimize the learning process.
Regular field trips are organized based on our 3C Curriculum to help children understand the Inquiry Module in progress. Throughout the learning process, both the students and teachers are actively involved in assessing the student’s progress. Students regularly assess their own work and reflect on their own learning process. Teachers support the students in assessing their own work by providing assessment criteria’s. Students go through all the assessment steps through the Pre-Assessment, Formative Assessment and Summative Assessment.
Parent teacher meetings are held regularly in which the teachers show through different mediums how the students perform and behave in the class and how the students have progressed over a time period and the parents too provide their perspective.
Students maintain what they consider their best work collectively in a student’s portfolio. This helps the students self-assess their performance and learning. The portfolio is shared by the students with their parents in a Student-Led Conference. This conference allows the students to play an active role in reporting their progress to their parents. The students also put – up an Exhibition in which they showcase their Inquiry Module which also shows the action they would take and it focuses on the global issues too.
The subjects are not compartmentalized and the curriculum offers a seamless integration of classroom activities with other essential Life-skills necessary for students to emerge as leaders in the real world. Equal importance is given to developing the cognitive and psychomotor skills of students. Differentiated and child specific teaching methods help the facilitators and students by letting them move away from regular bookish knowledge, to include the amazing world outside the campus. Instead of being tied down by information provided in the classroom, the students of Edify Schools are allowed to explore their intellectual facilities, by seeing and doing things themselves.