Alcohol is a DRUG
As simple as that.
May be all the readers will think they know all that they are going to read but… just in case they might have forgotten it all, in the middle of the Summer heat, the Summer holidays, the Summer parties, the wonderful Portuguese (not even expensive) wine… I will refresh your memories!
The term alcohol refers to ethanol, a psychoactive drug that is the relevant alcohol in alcoholic beverages and is produced by the fermentation of grains and fruits when yeast acts upon certain ingredients they contain.
Alcohol, besides being found in alcoholic beverages, has a long history of several uses worldwide as it is used as fuel and also has many scientific, medical, and industrial uses.
As everything else it is good or bad, depending on how it is used!
Although the amount of alcohol consumed determines the type of effect, it is classified as a depressant, meaning that it slows down vital functions, resulting in slurred speech, unsteady movements, disturbed perception and an inability to react quickly.
As for how it affects the mind, it is best understood as a drug that reduces a person’s ability to think rationally and distorts the judgment capacity.
Most people drink for the initial “stimulant” effect, such as a beer or glass of wine taken to “loosen up” as in low doses it causes euphoria, reduces anxiety and improves sociability. But the problem is that in higher doses, if a person consumes more than the body can handle, it causes intoxication and then they experience alcohol’s severe depressant effects and start to feel “stupid”, lose coordination and control (drunkenness), there is inability to feel pain, toxicity where the body vomits the poison, stupor and finally unconsciousness. Extreme levels of alcohol overdose consumption can lead to alcohol poisoning and death, as a result of the concentration in the blood stream and may also cause death, indirectly, by asphyxiation from vomit aspiration.
These reactions depend on how much is consumed and how quickly. Women are generally more sensitive to alcohol’s harmful physical and mental effects than men.
Long-term use can lead to alcohol abuse, physical dependence and alcoholism, a broad term for any drinking of alcohol that results… in problems. Cell membranes are highly permeable to alcohol, so once alcohol is in the bloodstream it can diffuse into nearly every cell in the body.
Factors for alcoholism
Environmental and genetics factors are both associated with alcoholism with about half the risk attributed to each, a 50/50 dangerous association. By having a parent or sibling with alcoholism you are three to four times more likely to be an alcoholic.
Environmental factors include social, cultural, and behavioral influences. High stress levels, anxiety, inexpensive easily accessible alcohol, high social acceptance of alcohol use (and even abuse), increases risk. People may continue to drink partly to prevent or improve symptoms of withdrawal. A low level of withdrawal may last for months following cessation.
Medically alcoholism is considered both a physical and mental illness.
Nevertheless drinking alcohol plays an important social role in many cultures turning alcohol into one of the most widely used recreational drugs in the world and, I repeat, widely considered as the adequate behavior in many social venues. If a person does not drink alcohol… that person will be out of context, not “belonging”. We all know that we cannot salute with water; it is not an acceptable social behavior.
Excessive alcohol use, including underage drinking and binge drinking, which is drinking 5 or more drinks on an occasion for men or 4 or more drinks on an occasion for women, can lead to increased risk of health problems such as injuries, violence, liver disease, and cancer.
The effects of alcohol can last longer than you think and even after alcohol has left the bloodstream, accidents are more likely to occur. In one study, 14 hours after drinking, two-thirds of a group of pilots could not perform routine tasks in a simulator, despite the fact that all the alcohol had left their system.
Accident victims who have been drinking suffer more serious injuries than those who have not.
When there is an accident and the injured person has been drinking, recovery from injury may be more difficult because alcohol affects the circulation and the immune system.
When a patient is drunk it is harder for doctors to diagnose serious conditions such as head injuries. Alcohol can interfere with anaesthetics and other medications, meaning operations and treatments may have to be delayed.
The short and long-term effects of alcohol can affect body, lifestyle and mental health, but being armed with the real facts and understanding the consequences, will help to make an informed choice about drinking.
The truth is that alcohol is a drug, a very dangerous one, one that is socially accepted and even promoted in many ways.
When will people, in general, understand these facts as a real threat?
Best health wishes,
Dr. Maria Alice
Consultant in General and Family Medicine
General and Medical Director- Luzdoc International Medical Service
Medical Director- Grupo Hospital Particular do Algarve