Automotive technology changes faster than you might think. Just as you’re getting comfortable with the features in your new car, new technology is rolled out that will change the way you look at vehicles forever. Understanding the changes that technology brings to cars won’t just change the way you think about your car today, but might change the way you look at driving in the future.
The Changes You Don’t Notice
Technology is integrated more deeply with vehicles than ever before. If you’ve been driving for years, you probably haven’t noticed the slow creep of computerized devices into your car, but it’s happened. Modern vehicles are full of technological features, from backup cameras to phone sync capabilities. Today’s cars don’t just work with technology, they’re made with technology in mind.
One of the biggest changes that technology has brought is the GPS. More drivers use GPS guidance than ever before, to the degree that it’s rarely thought of as a feature. Most drivers never have to crack open a map or stop to ask for directions – they can listen to the voice on their phone or in their dash guide them to a destination. This is a major change that hasn’t just helped millions to avoid getting lost, but that has irrevocably changed the way that drives interact with the world around them.
Some of the biggest changes that tech has brought to cars has been in terms of safety. If you think about it, most of the really noticeable changes in the past decades have always revolved around making vehicles safer – from seat belts to airbags to back-up cameras, these devices have made drivers’ lives easier and kept more people from dying in auto accidents.
New technology is likewise dedicated to making the roads safer. Some luxury brands now come with automatic parking assist, allowing drivers to avoid parallel parking disasters. There are also a few vehicles that now have lane-change assist, preventing drivers from losing control. Of course, even technology outside of vehicles is making the roads a bit safer – students can now use an online driving course to learn the rules of the road without putting others in danger.
Moving Towards Driverless
The big trend in tech, though, is taking drivers out of the equation altogether. There’s already a few features out there that take some decisions out of the hands of drivers, but the real magic is going to come when drivers are able to turn the wheel over to autonomous cars. While there’s always been a great deal of noise about autonomous cars from bleeding-edge designers like Tesla, the real surprise is how much work companies like Ford and Toyota are putting into the new concepts.
With autonomous driving will come entirely new ways to experience vehicles. Everything from the way we experience traffic to the way passengers interact with the interior of the car will be changing. Imagine a vehicle in which the driver doesn’t have to face front, or in which the car’s computer can provide tour-guide like running commentary on a trip – it’s not just fantasy any longer, but exactly the kind of thing major manufacturers are thinking about today.
Automotive technology is changing swiftly. In a few years, it’s entirely possible that the world of cars will be unrecognizable to today’s drivers. From better safety features to hands-free driving, cars are changing swiftly. Enjoy the way you drive today, but it looks like it will soon be a thing of the past. Better tools are coming, and they’ll make you look at cars in a whole new way.