Standing in Place
While Walking Fun Stuff
WHAT AND WHEN CAN I EAT BEFORE WALKING?
We deal with nutrition more thoroughly in our “Miscellaneous” section, however we suggest following a sensible diet. A little moderation can go a long way. By balancing the amount of carbohydrates, proteins, and fats in your diet you can feel great and walk well.
Too many people are on a "remove all fat from the diet", or “remove all carbohydrates from the diet” (Atkins) kick. While Americans generally eat too much fat, too little fat is not healthy either. Your body needs a certain amount of fat to operate properly. Similarly, exercising depletes glycogen storages in the muscles and the only source to replenish those storages is complex carbohydrates.
In general our advice is to eat a balance of complex carbohydrates, protein and fats. Based upon the how much exercise you have time for and your body’s genetics will determine the ratio with which you will want to balance these three core food sources . Try to eat fruits and vegetables every day and if you want a cookie, have a cookie. Just don't have the whole bag. Occasional small snacks aren't going to destroy a diet, and may allow you to continue with your diet program longer. In fact, the Olympic Training Center in addition to other licensed dieticians advocate eating several smaller meals rather than 2-3 major ones.
Every person is different. We can all tolerate different things in our diet and exercise program. It is very difficult to give generic advice about what and when a person can eat before working out. The best solution is to experiment and record what works for you. Do not try to mimic the elite athletes or one of your friends, because their needs may differ from yours.
Prior to working out, particularly in the morning, your body’s blood sugar level is usually running low. A small snack like a banana or PowerBar will elevate your blood sugar level and help prevent bonking. Since everyone is different, experiment with when to ingest foods prior to training.
As far as taking in food during exercise, there are many products that the elites use that we have found work well and are quickly digested by the body. Products such as flavored gels and nutritional bars are proven workout supplements. In general, you will want to look for something that your stomach can handle, is quickly digested by the body and is easy to manage while on the go.
You will want to use these for your longer workouts. Again, try them out and see what is best for you.