Education – Proper education is the cornerstone of oral health. Our team is committed to helping you learn about dental disease, prevention, treatment and restoration. We are more than happy to answer your questions and guide you in the right direction.
Comprehensive Exams – In our office we strive to deliver comprehensive oral health care to our patients. It starts with listening and performing a proper exam and diagnosis. We examine the jawbones, gums, teeth, lymph nodes, salivary glands, and screen for oral cancer. This thorough approach allows us to create a plan that will lead to a lifetime of health.
Prevention – An ounce of prevention is worth a pound of cure! We believe that if our team and our patients work together, we can prevent most dental disease. We create a preventive plan for each of our patients, tailored to your individual needs.
Sealants – Sealants are another great way to protect teeth and prevent decay. Sealing the natural grooves of the tooth prevents bacteria and food accumulation. We recommend sealants for most of our younger patients.
Periodontal/Gum Disease – Periodontal disease is a serious problem. It’s a disease that leads to bleeding, pain, swelling, breath odor, loss of tooth attachment, bone destruction, loose teeth and teeth falling out. Periodontal disease is a progressive disease that worsens over time, and once the damage occurs, it is very difficult to restore your mouth to the way it was before. This makes early diagnosis and treatment vital! We do periodontal screenings at each appointment, and do a formal charting once per year. We stay on top of your periodontal health! We offer treatment of periodontal disease and work closely with specialists to help you get the care you need.
Pediatric Care – We offer treatment and exams for children of all ages. The American Academy of Pediatric Dentistry recommends that children visit the dentist by one year of age. We also team up with local pediatric dentists when patients need specialized care.
X-rays – Dental radiographs are key for diagnosis, early treatment, and prevention. We use digital X-rays that deliver high quality images with low radiation. A lead safety vest is used when taking images. We also have a larger panoramic X-ray machine that views the jawbones, sinuses, wisdom teeth, etc.
Veneers – Veneers are a great way to transform your smile. We can change the color, size, shape and contour of you teeth for optimal long term esthetics. We do a consultation with diagnostic models and mock ups to achieve great results. It’s alway important to begin with the end in mind!
Orthodontic Care – We don’t provide orthodontics in our office, but we team up with orthodontic specialists to facilitate your treatment and help keep your teeth healthy before, during, and after treatment.
Root Canals – Root canals are done to treat painful or infected teeth. We provide simple root canal treatment in our office, for more complicated cases we team up with great root canal specialists. As with any emergency or infection, we will see you as soon as possible.
CEREC – We are proud to offer CEREC Same Day Restorations. CEREC uses a special camera to take pictures of the tooth and create a 3-dimensional model. From the model, we mill a tooth-colored restoration to fit your tooth. Your tooth is restored in a single appointment, with no temporary!