The nervous system is a very crucial part of a human body, as it controls all the cognitive movements of the body-communication, analysing, decision making, etc.
That makes this system extremely important. And just like other functioning systems of our body, the nervous system also requires regular attention. And as with every sort of fitness, a diet is an important part of that attention.
Also Read: 20 Foods To Increase Body Strength
Without proper nutrients, the nervous system can start malfunctioning, which can lead to numbness, pins and needles in toes, Alzheimer’s and some other severe issues.
The key to avoid this is to eat foods that are good for a healthy nervous system.
Vitamins B1, B6 and B12 are a mandatory part of a diet that is nervous-system friendly. Without Vitamin B1, neurons stop inner communication, which leads to a disease called beriberi.
Also Read: Foods For 8 Parts Of Your Body
Copper is also very necessary for the neural development, so foods that include these nutrients are best foods for your nervous system.
Also, it is important to have antioxidants to prevent nerve damage due to over-exhaustion. Omega-3 fatty acids are also a vital part of foods that are good for a healthy nervous system.
Here is a list of 12 best foods for your nervous system that you should opt for more often, take a look.
Dark Leafy Vegetables
Dark leafy veggies are rich in folate and vitamin B6, which break down homocysteine - a chemical that causes dementia, thinning of the artery walls, Alzheimer's disease, etc. Add ample amounts of leafy veggies like parsley, lettuce, cabbage, etc, in regular diet because these are the foods that are good for a healthy nervous system.
Enter the miracle food - spinach. Spinach is loaded with antioxidants and vitamin B1, which are the necessary nutrients for brain development and a longer brain functioning. Regular intake of spinach reduces chances of a nerve damage.
Rich in antioxidants, cocoa prevents Parkinson's disease, chronic fatigue syndrome, atherosclerosis, etc. It reduces oxidative stress in the brain, which helps the nervous system to work longer without burning out.
Whole grains and brown rice are natural sources of vitamin B6, which breaks homocysteine - a deteriorating factor for the brain function. Brown rice has magnesium that is an enhancer for cognitive functioning. As whole grains are easily available, they are one of the best foods for your nervous system.
Almonds and walnuts are rich in omega-3 fatty acids and natural antioxidants and naturally, one of those foods that are good for a healthy nervous system. Omega-3 fatty acid enhances the functioning of the brain, while antioxidants calm the nervous system.
Garlic removes cholesterol from blood, which helps to reduce stress in the brain. Also filled with antioxidants and anti-ageing elements, garlic reduces chances of nerve damage and keeps the brain healthy.
Filled with polyphenol, olive oil reduces cholesterol, improves blood circulation, etc, which enhances neural health and cognitive functioning of the brain. Add olive oil in your regular food intake, or with salads to get a healthier, more active nervous system.
Despite being an alcoholic beverage, red wine has some surprising health benefits. Being rich in antioxidants, omega-3 acids, etc, regular intake in measured amount of red wine can give rise to a longer active brain and healthy neurons.
Green tea is packed with antioxidants. Green tea can be consumed daily for reducing stress in the nervous system and a calm mind. As antioxidants remove rancid organics from the system, green tea can help to reduce oxidative stress and burnouts in the brain.
Sea fishes like sardine, tuna, herring, etc, are filled with minerals like magnesium, copper and phosphorus. All these minerals are catalysts for a better brain functioning, as they help to maintain the ion balance in the circulatory system.
Whey is a natural source of L-tryptophan, which is not produced in the human body. It is a vital essential amino acid that helps in the serotonin production. Serotonin is a neurotransmitter that maintains mental health.