Monday, November 19, 2012
Comics Lab Giveaway and Coffee Filter Books
With the holidays coming up this would make a great keepsake that students could make for their parents.
This would be a great format for research projects or subject reports, similar to the file folder books.
"Drawing Comics Lab" by Robyn Chapman is the latest book in the lab series.
Just like the previous lab books this one is full of practical information on how to draw comics.
- how to draw basic figures
- how to build characters
- page building
- what materials and techniques to try
- and publishing
Stay tuned to the end of the post for giveaway details.
- cone coffee filters, each one gives you 2 pages and a pocket
- cereal or cracker box, (chipboard)
- standard one hole punch
- any of the following for binding: o rings, jump rings, wire, binder clips, ribbon, string
- paper, cardstock
Choose how many filters you want to use. A good sized book will have 3 to 4.
It's a good idea to make a template to help cut your pages. I know, I know it says coffee fitter but you know what I meant! :)
Place a filter on the cardboard, trace around and cut out. Now you have a template to use over and over again.
Now your filter is not perfectly symmetrical. There is a rounded end and a pointy end. I like to have the pointy ends at the top of the book. Just keep that in mind when you are cutting your pages, you might need to turn the template over for some pages.
You can use a gluestick or regular glue.
I like a heavier weight cover for my book so using my template I cut 2 covers out of cereal box (chipboard).
I painted them black and then added some paper that was cut using the template and then trimmed a 1/4" all the way around. My covers do not have a filter so there is no pocket.
Now you need to punch holes in your pages and covers for the binding.
I start with the front cover. Punch your holes.
place one of the inner pages under the cover, mark where the holes are with a pencil and then punch them out on the page.
Repeat with all pages and the back cover.
You can also make extra pull out pages to stuff in. Use your template and then cut the page slightly smaller.
I try to vary the location of the pull.
An interesting paper you can make is stenciling designs on wax paper.
Use acrylic paint as it sticks well to the slippery surface. You then have a great patterned translucent paper.
I always attach translucent/transparent papers with Mod Podge. It dries clear, no cloudiness to be seen thru the paper.
I use a star shape sticking out from the page as the pull tab.
Then glue 1 star off the edge of the pull out page, add glue to the other star and glue it on the other side of the page, lining the stars up.
That eggshell tree was made using this method from a previous post. It was an idea sent in by Stephanie Brown and her daughter from NC.
They took the eggshell mosaic idea and used it to make Christmas cards. I think they turned out incredible!
I hope you give one of these coffee filter books a try.
If you are interested in winning your own copy of "Drawing Comics Lab" by Robyn Chapman please enter in one of the following ways:
- leave a comment on this post
- email me at email@example.com
- like or comment on this post on my Facebook page
I will be making the draw Friday Nov 23rd so have your entries in by Thursday at 11:59pm.
Canadian or US residents only please.
Thanks to my friends at Quarry Books for sponsoring this giveaway.
See you soon.