The last few decades have seen an upsurge of lifestyle diseases, including heart diseases, stroke, obesity, type 2 diabetes, metabolic syndrome, depression and renal failure among others. The unfolding events have also made more and more people realize the health benefits that comes with healthy eating.
While majority of people are shifting towards vegetarian diets for health reasons, some want to lose weight while others do it for fun. Essentially, there are three main types of vegetarians; the vegan, a lacto vegetarian, and the lacto-ovovegetarians. While the vegan strictly doesn’t consume meat, fish and poultry and dairy products, the lacto vegetarian doesn’t eat consume meat, fish and poultry. On the other hand, lacto-ovovegetarians exclude meat, poultry, and fish but include dairy products and eggs in their diet. in essence, a vegetarian diet has more fiber, which plays a major role on how the body handles the food we consume.
Though becoming a vegetarian remains a personal choice, those embracing the diet often find it difficult to discard meat, fish and poultry all of a sudden. It not only requires tact, but also dedication if the feat has to be accomplished. But before one commits, it’s important to familiarize one with what it entails to become a vegetarian. In addition, you need to focus on why you follow the vegetarian regime diet.
For starters, invest in a recommended vegetarian cookbook that guides you on the delights of vegetarian culinary. The second step is to reduce the amount of meat intake. Try and partake two to three vegetarian diets in a week at the same time steadily skipping over animal protein in your diet. As much as meat is the main source of protein, it also provides a lot of fat. The absence of fat greatly reduces the risk of heart disease, hypertension, diabetes and other diseases.
Winning yourself from meat, poultry and fish diet means your body will demand the equivalent. Seek alternative sources. Legumes such as beans and peas, nuts and seed are great substitutes. Also consider the lesser evil – dairy and eggs, before finally you give up on them. In addition you can try imitations of meat products, such as vegetable burgers and hot dogs, chicken patties, and meatless barbecue. Also you can try dairy alternatives soy yogurt and nondairy ice cream that are available in most food stores.
Always try and keep track of your weight and your energy levels since you started on the vegetarian diet for comparison.