Annual Festivals, Events and Campaigns
The day commemorates the original invasion of the continent by English colonisers, and the continued oppression of Aboriginal people since that time.
This day is the anniversary of the formal apology by the Australian Parliament to Australian Aboriginal people and Torres Strait Islander people, specifically the Stolen Generation, that took place on 13 February 2008.
National Close the Gap Day gives people the opportunity to show their support for closing the life expectancy gap between Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islanders and other Australians.
National Day of Action
March (dates can change each year)
Encourages young people to explore the facts about smoking and the tobacco industry.
Southern Hemisphere's biggest event for seniors. A wide variety of both small and large events organised by local clubs, community and sporting groups, Seniors Week celebrations.
April (dates can change each year)
National Youth Week is Australia’s biggest youth event with events taking place all over the country.
Annual LGBT pride parade and festival in Sydney.
Raise awareness in the community and get youth homelessness on the agenda!
An annual celebration to acknowledge the generous contribution of our nation’s volunteers.
16-27 May (dates can change each year)
UN Headquarters, New York
In 1967 over 90% of Australians voted in a Referendum to remove clauses from the Australian Constitution which discriminated against Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Australians. The Referendum also gave the Commonwealth Government the power to make laws on behalf of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people.
National Sorry Day commemorates and acknowledges the social and psychological impact of policies of forcible removable of Australian Aboriginal children from their loved ones.
The Ceremony commemorates the service and sacrifice of indigenous veterans who have fought for Australia in every major conflict since the Boer War.
27 May-3 June
Reconciliation Week is an opportunity for all Australians to focus on reconciliation and to learn about the history and culture of Australia's Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples. National Reconciliation Week is celebrated commencing on Sorry Day and concludes on Mabo Day each year.
Mabo Day is the anniversary of the High Court judgement in 1992 recognising Native Title. This judgement overturned the legal concept of Terra Nullius.
June (dates can change each year)
A national week of activities to raise awareness about AOD issues and to promote the achievements of those who work to reduce drug related harm.
July (dates can change each year)
NAIDOC (National Aboriginal and Islander Day Observance Committee) Week is dedicated to Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples to mark the communities’ achievements and uniqueness of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander traditions and cultures.
This day celebrates the importance of children to Indigenous communities.
Aims to make the voices of Indigenous peoples heard more clearly around the world and to protect the rights of Indigenous peoples and improve their situations with respect to their lands, their languages, their livelihoods, and their cultures.
Indigenous Literacy Day is held to raise literacy levels and improve the lives and opportunities of Indigenous Australians living in remote and isolated regions.
The week begins with International Tenants' Day (2 October). It is an opportunity to raise
awareness of tenancy issues and services available for people renting in the ACT.
1 - 23 October
One of the biggest Indigenous gatherings in Australia.
White Ribbon is Australia’s only national, male led Campaign to end men’s violence against women.