Prophet Ezekiel was privileged to receive the revelation of heaven; he described his experience thus, “Then he (God’s angel) went to the gateway which faced east; and he went up its stairs and measured the threshold of the gateway, which was one rod wide, and the other threshold was one rod wide. Each gate chamber was one rod long and one rod wide; between the gate chambers was a space of five cubits; and the threshold of the gateway by the vestibule of the inside gate was one rod. He also measured the vestibule of the inside gate, one rod. Then he measured the vestibule of the gateway, eight cubits; and the gateposts, two cubits. The vestibule of the gate was on the inside” (Ezekiel 40:6-9) … “He measured the width of the entrance to the gateway, ten cubits; and the length of the gate, thirteen cubits. There was a space in front of the gate chambers, one cubit on this side and one cubit on that side; the gate chambers were six cubits on this side and six cubits on that side. Then he measured the gateway from the roof of one gate chamber to the roof of the other; the width was twenty-five cubits, as door faces door” (Ezekiel:11-13) …“After that he brought me toward the south, and there a gateway was facing south; and he measured its gateposts and archways according to these same measurements. There were windows in it and in its archways all around like those windows; its length was fifty cubits and its width twenty-five cubits. Seven steps led up to it, and its archway was in front of them; and it had palm trees on its gateposts, one on this side and one on that side” (Ezekiel:24-26).
Heaven is an indescribable place of glory that God has prepared for his saints. Heaven – a place not designed by any human, but by God himself – consists of every bit of perfection. All made by God! He planned it, designed it, and constructed it! God crafted both the interior and exterior parts of heaven by himself. He made the architectural design and constructed it. He decorated both the interior and the exterior parts of heaven. He also crafted the landscapes and ensure they have his best creativity.
No human word is suitable enough to describe the beauty of heaven. Jehovah created it to showcase his glory and also to lavish it on his saints. Earthly people who have confessed Jesus Christ as their Lord and Savior will qualify for heaven. They are regarded as God’s saints, and they will inherit heaven – Which host God’s throne.
However, people who have failed to confess Jesus Christ as their Lord and personal Savior are unqualified for heaven. They will be disallowed to enter heaven. They are regarded as unbelievers, and they will have their part in the lake of fire called Hell Fire.
It is important that a person confess Jesus Christ as his/her personal Lord and Savior to qualify for heaven. Whoever makes this important decision will have his/her name written in the Book of Life. God will welcome the person to heaven on the last day to enjoy his eternal benefits.
Sing with me:
*“Jerusalem on high; my song and city is, my home whene’er I die, the center of my bliss. O happy place! When shall I be, my God, with thee, to see thy face?”*
Dear Heaven Father I believe that Jesus Christ is your only Son sent to save the world. I confess him as my personal Lord and Savior. I declare that I repent from my sins and I promise to faithfully serve you everyday of my life. Please write my name in your Book of Life, and ever keep me worthy of your eternal kingdom. For I have prayed and confessed in the name of my Lord Jesus Christ. Amen!
APRIL 15 BIBLE LIFE
The following two tabs change content below.