It seems that everywhere I turn this year, people are growing, eating, and raving about kale. The popularity of “super foods,” a list that includes raw, macrobiotic, and cancer-fighting foods, has propelled this soft-spoken cruciferous veggie to super-stardom.
A delicious kale salad from the Noorish Eatery inspired me to investigate this hyperbole-wrapped vegetable. I quickly discovered that, not only is the idea of kale as super-food nothing new, we’re actually quite late to the party!
Although kale’s cultivated history reaches back over 2,000 years, foraging tribes had been eating it long before the first cities appeared. Aside from smaller leaves, the kale you’re eating today is essentially the same food that kept our ancestors alive through Neolithic winters. Until the end of the Middle Ages, it was the most popular vegetable in Europe, especially in the British Isles, where it withstood the ravages of damp winters.
As the array of available vegetables expanded, humble kale fell out of fashion. It became a star again during the Second World War when Allied governments asked people to plant it in their gardens to supplement rations.
What’s in it?
In keeping with its historical role, kale is sometimes called the beef of the vegetable world because its robust nutrients are rare in other vegetables. Kale is rich in vitamins A, B6, C, and potassium. It’s also a dose of calcium, manganese, iron, folic acid, omega-3 acids, fibre and a host of other beneficial ingredients.
What scientists are just discovering is even more exciting than the known nutrients. Kale is loaded with phytochemicals, which are associated with the prevention of cancer, diabetes, and cardiovascular disease. It’s believed these chemicals prevent cell damage and stop cancer cells from replicating.
Kale also has an unusually high number of antioxidants, which help prevent the buildup of harmful metabolic byproducts. Scientists continue to investigate the link between antioxidants and the prevention of certain cancers, especially colon and ovarian. One note, though: it’s a good idea to avoid kale if you have a thyroid-based auto-immune disease.
Harvesting and eating
Kale’s cold tolerance makes it an ideal crop for Canadian autumns. A touch of frost actually intensifies the flavour.
One of the best things about kale is its versatility. The way you use kale depends on the maturity of the leaves. If they are still small and immature, they’re probably tender enough to use raw in salads. You’ll get the most health benefits by eating them this way and will be treated to a tantalizingly textured salad that tastes notably denser than a lettuce salad.
Consider using the middle leaves in an Asian stir-fry. Gai-Lan, or Chinese broccoli, is popular throughout Asia and is usually stir-fried with beef, but the sky is the limit. Unlike lettuce, Kale is robust enough to maintain its density through the stir-fry process.
The oldest, most mature leaves are the toughest and will probably be somewhat unpalatable if eaten raw. Consider steaming these or adding them to a stew or soup where a long cooking process tenderizes them. Avoid boiling it if you’re after the antioxidant benefits.
I have a self-confessed salt tooth. My favourite way of eating them is as kale chips, a healthier alternative to potato chips. Simply cut washed and dried leaves, mature or otherwise, into bite-sized chips. Mix them in a bowl with some olive oil and sea salt (or season to taste). Spread them on a baking sheet and cook at 350 F for 15 minutes or to desired crunchiness. They store well and are a saturated-fat-free alternative when you have a salt craving.
Rob Sproule is the author of Gardening with Colour, Creative Design Ideas for Canadian Gardens (Lone Pine Publishing) and the co-owner of Salisbury Greenhouse in Sherwood Park. For more information, go to salisburygreenhouse.com, email@example.com, twitter.com/@SalisburyGarden