Dental braces involve a system of wires, banding and brackets that are placed onto a person's teeth and left there for a period of time, up to a few years. The purpose of braces is to straighten the teeth and correct any dental problems such as overbites or underbites. While braces are generally very effective, there are both pros and cons to consider before making the investment.
Orthodontics.org states that one benefit of braces is that they are usually successful in straightening a person's teeth. This is especially true if they are put on when the patient is still young, say 9 to 12 years old. It also states that with proper use of products such as retainers, the straightened teeth usually stay in place for many years. Having straighter teeth makes a person more attractive, and it also gives them confidence that will last a lifetime.
The "Northwest Indiana Times" states that a drawback of having braces is the high cost. Braces usually cost between $4,000 and $7,000, according to the newspaper. If a first round of braces is not successful in correcting the alignment of the teeth, a patient may need to have braces put on a second time, which can cost several thousand dollars more.
Pain and Discomfort
Pain and discomfort are drawbacks to consider before getting braces. Orthodontics.org states that pain in the jaw is a very common occurrence for someone who has braces, especially after they are first put on or when the wires are tightened. Sometimes a person with braces may even experience clicking or popping noises coming from the jaw along with the pain.
Another con of having braces is the embarrassment that having dental wires on your teeth may cause. The embarrassment is especially tough for children to take. The "Northwest Indiana Times" explains that children are often harassed and teased at school for having braces. Adults with braces may feel out of place when in groups, since most adults do not have braces. A new type of braces made of clear plastic molds that fit to your teeth can help to decrease the embarrassment that traditional braces cause.
Possible Damage to Teeth
Though it is not very common, it is important to consider the possibility that orthodontic treatment might damage a tooth. According to Orthodontics.com, sometimes the roots of a tooth may be damaged during the process of putting on braces, which may cause the tooth to die. A root canal may be necessary if this occurs. Braces could also possibly damage the enamel of a tooth if placed incorrectly or if they shift and scratch the tooth's surface.