FC: The Man Things Of The World
2: Once there was a girl named Claudette. who lived in Paris ,France. She was very unlike other children her age becaus she was interested in what was happening in the world
3: Claudette was 13 at the time and the year would be 1768. Claudette loved to learn and would constantly ask her parents and teachers questions about her many interests
4: Claudette was a very smart girl and loved science, history, government and philosophy | phylosophy. Often she debated with her teacher about the enlightenment
5: and the ideas of the philosophesOnce in science class when learning of. | the geocentric theory and heliocentric theory she asked "what makes people
6: people think that the helio centric theory is right and the geocentric theory isn't | theory isn't?". So her teacher, Mr. Walters said ''See we have the evidence to prove it.
7: evidence to prove the theory right. A mathematician named Johannes Kepler | applied math to show the planets revolve in an elliptical orbit not in circles
8: like aristole thought. Also Copernicus studied the stars and planets for over 25 years before he made the theory and it's proved that he was right."
9: Just that day claudette learned something new. Claudette's father was apart of the philosophes and was very skilled in science. He taught her much about science and the scientific revolution
10: Once he told her "For every situation aspect of life there is always a reason." Claudette would travel alot .Once she went to prussia and went to the palace of Catherine the great
11: Great and her and her father talked and shared opinions. She always made sure she wrote down her experiences. She would also read the works of Voltaire in her spare time
12: On Saturdays her father would go to Versailles for salons and meetings with philosophes. Once she begged her father to take her because she had heard that
13: Rousseau would be talking of social contract and Montesquieu would be talking of the powers of government. He father would never take her because she was just a child.
14: Rousseau would be talking of social contract and Montesquieu would be talking of the powers of government. He father would never take her because she was just a child.
15: rosseau | Monteesquieu
16: So instead her mom took her to austria. Years later when Claudette was 21 she would do public speaking giving speeches of
17: freedom and government in Paris and Versailles and even Rome. She would speak of the American colonies and there fight for freedom. She loved their idea of
20: of no taxation without representation and found the declaration of independence incredible. This would help her lead to writing a book called "The Many Things Of The World.
21: The World" The End