Once upon a time, there was a beautiful young woman who lived on the Flathead-Kootenai Reservation. She found out she was pregnant and was so scared because, though she loved this baby, she knew she could not give him a good home.  

Far away, in Virginia, a couple wanted desperately to have a baby, but they couldn't. This beautiful native woman decided to give this couple the best gift in the world - her baby. So, the loving couple drove through a blizzard to come to the reservation to be there for his birth. Though they were not native, the tribe saw the couple's heart and allowed them to adopt. The moment they met the little boy, their heart knew he was theirs.

They studied the little boy's culture and traditions from the tribe's community elders and teachers. They wanted him to grow up with a deep understanding and appreciation of his native heritage. They took him to powwows, taught him traditional songs, took him to his reservation in the summers for classes, and showed him how to honor the earth the way his ancestors did.

This little boy was loved by his parents. He was the light of their lives. When he was 9, they got him a dog and a horse. They were breeds from the reservation of his ancestors. Their family and connection to his heritage were complete.

When he was old enough, he decided to go on a journey to learn even more about his roots. He traveled to many other First Peoples' Reservations to learn about their history and culture. He volunteered in native communities and fought to make their living conditions better. He became a tribal lawyer to make a difference for his people. Most importantly, he realized that even though he was adopted, he was still a part of a much larger family.

And so, my dear son, that's the story of how you came to be a part of our family and the impact that your life has on others. We may not share the same background, but we share the same love and respect for your culture. You are our light and a light for the world. We are so grateful to call you son and learn from you every day. You are a true gift to us and the world.
