The history of Minnesota tells the tale of the first
fur-traders arriving in Two
Harbors, Minnesota in 1660 who discovered that the
Native American tribes of the Chippewa and the Sioux had
inhabited the area for some time. Around this time fur
traders carrying hundreds of pounds of animal pelts discovered
what is now known as Voyageurs National Park. The entire
Lake Superior region was claimed in the name of France in 1679.
In Minnesota history, the land that was to the west
of the Mississippi River was handed over to Spain circa 1760. France continued with its successful fur trading
in the region where hunting was excellent. At the end
of the Indian and French war, circa 1765, Britain was in control of Minnesota's eastern region.
The well-known Fort Snelling in St Paul, adjacent to Minneapolis, was constructed in 1825 at the confluence of the Mississippi and Minnesota rivers. Fort Snelling was a big part of the development of the Northwest. Today it's surrounded by a metropolis but the history about Minnesota shows it was once staged alone in the wilderness.
Fort Snelling was a military outpost. In Minnesota history the outposts were there to ensure that non-citizens couldn't use the rivers for any commercial reasons. Later in Minnesota history treaties were created making foreigners less of a problem. Fort Snelling became a prosperous area that was eventually settled as the Twin Cities and Stillwater.
After ownership by many different territories, Minnesota officially became its own territory on March 3, 1849.
Visitors can learn many more details at the Minnesota
History Center. In the history of Minnesota the boundaries
that existed in the late 1800s are almost identical to
those that exist today. History about Minnesota explains
how the Native Americans that lived in the region traded
their land for food. The food was delivered to the isolated
reservations where they lived, and often suffered without
On May 11, 1858, highlighted in the history about Minnesota, the area was inaugurated as the 32nd state in the USA with St Paul as the capital. Two years later in Minnesota history the Civil War broke out. Due to the war consuming the Minnesotans, hostile and resentful Native Indians joined the war against the people of Minnesota due to their lack of food.
History about Minnesota shows that there was a wealth
of industrial development occurring in the later 1800s.
Minneapolis became a leader in flour milling. Railroads
were further developed making transportation more accessible
to the masses and for trading. Thousands of European immigrants
began arriving in droves looking for new land to settle
their families in. Newly discovered iron ore resources
were shipped to the Vermillion Range. Today this area
encompasses Lake Vermillion,
one of the most popular outdoor regions in Minnesota. Kayaking, canoeing,
excellent fishing and many water-based sports are all possible.
Around this time in the history of Minnesota the Mayo Clinic had begun development in Duluth. Today the clinic is one of the world leaders in medical research. After WW1 many industries which suffered from the Great Depression began expanding and included machinery, computers and electronic equipment.
Today visitors can learn about all aspects of state
history at the Minnesota History Center in St
Paul. Minnesota's past can be explored through
exhibits and interactive displays available. The Minnesota
History Center also features many historical events and
interesting presentations. Other great attractions in
the Twin Cities area include the Science
Museum of Minnesota, the Metrodome and the Minnehaha Falls.