Once the body does not have adequate water and fluids to perform normal bodily functions, the outcome can be serious. The loss of fluids and insufficient replenishment leads to dehydration. Certain illnesses and engaging in highly strenuous activities can cause dehydration. When engaging in strenuous activities, especially during warm weather, it is vital to rehydrate the body since a lot of fluids were lost during the activity.
There are some initial indications of dehydration that suggest the necessity for increased fluid intake in order to prevent any complications. Some of these symptoms are clearly linked to dehydration while others might be associated to other health conditions. It is important to note that dehydration can be triggered by various factors which include fever, diarrhea, excessive sweating, vomiting and prolonged exposure to heat.
If the individual experiences mild thirst, it can indicate dehydration. Always bear in mind that this sensation is the natural response of the body in an attempt to prevent any serious complications linked with insufficient fluid levels. A case of severe dehydration can lead to thirst that could not be quenched. The recommended fluids include clear and beverages free from sugar. Avoid carbonated beverages, caffeine and sugar-based drinks until the condition has improved.
Dryness of the mouth is often an early indication of dehydration. The mouth and tongue might feel tacky or gluey. In most cases, bad breath is due to the mouth dryness and can be considered as another early sign of dehydration.
Once the fluid levels in the body are reduced, the urinary output can be affected. Some individuals might initially notice urine that is darker in color than usual with a pungent odor. In the long run, dehydration can progress to a reduced amount of urine. Among infants and young children, this can indicate very few wet diapers.
Dry mucous membranes
The body will attempt to conserve any fluids that do not exist. It simply means withholding any unwanted secretions such as tears. When infants or children are dehydrated, they will no longer have any tears. In some cases, even the nose will dry out as well as chapped and dry lips.
An individual who is dehydrated can experience headaches or muscle weakness. Depending on the severity of dehydration, these can range from mild to moderate. Restoring the level of hydration in the body can help improve these symptoms, especially with the help of sodium-containing beverages such as clear broths. Lightheadedness or dizziness can also develop. In addition, lack reduced fluids in the body can lead to sleepiness or unusual tiredness, especially among children.
Once any of the early indications of dehydration are present, it is vital to perform the necessary measures to alleviate the symptoms. If the symptoms are ignored and eventually progress, dehydration can be life-threatening and would require immediate medical attention.