|Home Page | Links | Comments | Page 1 | Page 2 | Page 3 | Page 4 | Page 5 | Page 6 | Page 7 | Page 8 | Page 9 | Page 10 | Page 11 | Page 12 | Page 13 | Page 14 | Page 15|
Human Origin According To The Quranic Science (Part 2)
PICKTHAL: Then He made his seed from a draught of despised fluid;
SHAKIR: Then He made his progeny of an extract, of water held in light estimation.
How did the author of the quran come to know that offspring are produced as a result of fluid the animals produce? Well by the time the quran was written people were well used to breeding animals and birds and so they guessed that this fluid that males produce has something to do with producing their off-springs. They did not have the idea as regard the part the females play and the quran does not state it correctly either as we shall see.
YUSUFALI: But He fashioned him in due proportion, and breathed into him something of His spirit. And He gave you (the faculties of) hearing and sight and feeling (and understanding): little thanks do ye give!
What makes a human being become alive? When we look at sperms, they are alive, when we look at ova they too are alive. Sperms are reproductive cells produced by male animals in their testes and ova are reproductive cells produced by females in their ovaries. They both must unite to produce a new individual of the same species. A sperm has to get from male animal testes in to the female animal ovum that travels from either of the ovaries into the fallopian tube so that the fertilization process could take place. Ovaries are connected to the female uterus via fallopian tubes at the top end as if they are two raised arms of a person without the head and the fists could be imagined as ovaries. Bottom end of the female uterus is open for male entry to deliver sperms into the womb, which then may try to swim in the right direction ie towards fallopian tubes in search of the ovum/ova.
Only one sperm is needed to fertilize an ovum and as one sperm enters the ovum the changes are triggered in the ovum that prevent any further entry of another sperm into the same ovum. This is where male and female sexual activity plays the main role in reproduction ie it helps male to transfer its stock of sperms into female womb so that fertilization could occur. Both sperms and ova contain chromosomes which carry genes in them. As sperm gets into the ovum the changes are triggered which cause the chromosomes from both cells to pair up and as this happens the sex of new individual becomes decided. The fertilized ovum is called zygote. As fertilization occurs in the fallopian tube the fertilized ovum begins to divide eg 1 cell becomes 2, 2 cells become 4 and so on and so forth. These cells do not separate from each other as they divide but only grow in numbers while staying together as a ball and at the same time keep on moving towards the uterus . By the time this tiny ball of cells reaches the uterus, it becomes capable of attaching itself to the lining of the uterus and remains attached the while growing as an embryo till the time of birth. At times it is possible that female ovaries release more than one ovum=egg at a time, so that could results in multiple pregnancies at the same time hence the chance of twins and triplets etc etc. It is also possible that the single embryo may end up divided into two, in which case it could result in identical twins etc.
During all this process cells are alive ie zoosperm is alive, ovum is alive and so is embryo, so what is meant by breathing life into the body after it has been completed or perfected? Moreover, one can see that there are no separate individual stages or steps involved in development of embryo. As soon as an egg cell is fertilized by a zoosperm the embryo starts developing as an individual and carries on even after birth till its death. The only thing missing in the embryo is its brain which takes time to develop biologically and only when it is developed to a needed stage that it becomes aware of its existence. Still birth is result of something going wrong with the development of the embryo where after it dies and develops no further. So giving life to a living thing makes no sense whatsoever. The author of the quran seems to be unaware of these facts hence the mistake of giving life to the living. If embryos were not living right from their very beginning, they would not develop full stop. For example, a dead zoosperm would not fertilize an ovum nor a living zoosperm would be able to fertilize a dead ovum. Likewise after fertilization if an embryo dies for any known or unknown reason, it would not develop any more from that time onwards. One must keep in mind what is explained so far to realise, the problem I have with understanding of the quran.
How did Allah create us from dust and what is meant by dust? How did he create us from sperm? Is sperm itself not created from dust as well or whatever it means? If it is then how? Moreover how do sperms and ova become alive, do they not need spirits? Also why mention it as if these are two distinct ways of creating a human being? The implication of such verses is that that means Allah also created all other species of living things the very same way ie he created dogs as dogs and cats as cats or chickens as chickens and so evolution theory cannot be accommodated by the quranic idea of creation hence the problem between the evolutionists and the creationists. It also means that sperms are created as sperms, ova as ova and embryos as embryos etc etc etc. However there is no mention of ova at all in the quran just sperms, so author of the quran seems to be unaware of the ova. He thinks that women also produce sperms or something but he does not know what for, because the human progeny is attributed to man only and not to woman as if woman is just a womb to provide a place of stay for a man’s child. Perhaps that is the reason for the quran to give father the control of his children as opposed to mother.
According to hadith, people at the time did ask questions like, why a child is born male or female or why a child looks more like mother or father etc etc etc. The quran remains mostly silent to evade the issue but the hadith sheds the light on the subject here and there. People were told that it was because it depended on who ejaculated first ie man or woman or who produced more fluid etc etc. If that was the case, I wonder why gays and lesbians are condemned, for it may be that man and woman produced same amount of liquid and both ejaculated at the same time. On the other hand if sex is limited to male and female species only by Allah ie that male are born to be attracted to females only and vice versa then why people are born who have no such tendencies at all or have both or neither? Why some men do not find anyone attractive men or women or why some men find only men attractive as oppose to a women or why some find both the sexes attractive?
So the author of the quran again seems to be wrong in telling us that there are only two sexes that are attracted to each other only, which is contradicted by the quran itself by story of lot. Sexual attraction is not only about attraction and no attraction but also about repulsion and degree of attraction or repulsion. For no one finds his wife sexually attractive all the time nor by same degree. Some husbands may find their wives repulsive to varying degrees. It is just like feeling less hungry or more hungry etc etc. If there is nothing wrong in feeling hungry are satisfied or less or more hungry or satisfied because that is the way human bodies naturally are then why should people be condemned for what their bodies naturally are regarding sexuality when it mean no harm to anyone else?
The story of lot and his people is repeated in the quran and is condemned, why? Because the author of the quran thinks that people are deliberately doing the wrong thing. I wonder why people would deliberately do things to bring condemnation upon themselves and be target of all sorts of abuse and harm including death. Is this the understanding of the author of the quran about human psychology? I thought people would take easy rout out of trouble if they could and not deliberately run towards it. Moreover just as thought process can only occur when brain is developed to that stage likewise the brain cannot think beyond its biological development ie the less developed a brain is biologically the less capable it is of thinking and vice versa. This is the reason a baby does not and cannot think like a grown up but a physically grown up may be mentally retarded. If this fact is accepted then so should be the difference in existence, thought and action of heterosexuals, gays and lesbians or bisexuals etc etc etc. Another fact is that people are not always sexually active nor are all males attracted to all females. So there have to be physical as well as psychological factors that determine all this in individuals within similar environments.
One may ask, why homosexuality is forbidden in the quran? My view is that it is forbidden in the quran because the quran is a religious book and religions came to being from primitive tribal systems eg some of the things in the quran can be traced back to gospels and torah and avesta and Vedas etc etc. All these scriptures themselves contain tribal customs and laws. Now one has to go back in time and think how those people used to live. They used to fight with each other just like ourselves. Just as we think that we must be clever, strong and numerous to overcome our enemies so did they. Since the more back in time we go the more it was a number game ie the bigger the tribe was the better it was at its survival, for it could defend itself and its interests as well attack and overcome other smaller tribes. Moreover as there were not many human being around as we go back in time there was no population problem back then either as we face today.
Hence a man had to have many women, wives and slaves girls, to help its tribe to be as big in numbers as was possible. Since the whole system was geared towards growth in population hence they did not like men and women who did not contribute to this need of society ie population hence gays and lesbian were in a way outcastes. Manhood therefore was judged then by needs of those times ie physical strength to overcome the enemy. So to be a man one had to show how many children he has produced or how many combats one has won etc etc. However, now things have changed ie those very things which were necessary for our survival in times long ago have become liabilities. Today, we do not want any man to marry more than one woman and we do not want people to have dozens of kids either. All because we will have far too many mouths to feed than we can.
However, since our past was such that a man had to produce many kids his reproductive organs became developed that way generation after generation just like we breed animals for our purposes, so it is not going to be easy for men now to come to term with that change so suddenly, for time is needed for new equilibrium to come about hence it is not easy for many men to avoid other women beside their wives. It also explains why some women cannot look-after their men, because they had been mostly used for reproduction for generations so their sexuality developed that way ie due to oppression and suppression it did not get the equal chance to develop to match the sexuality of men. This in no way is the only reason for differences in sexual drives in people there are plenty others ie biological as well as psychological etc. Men and women evolved differently according to the circumstances and environments they found themselves in or they were born in. However, as religions became fixed in time as to when they were invented but world always moves on ie it keeps on changing so reconciling the world and religion is an impossible task.
Since homosexuality was seen as a bad thing in primitive tribal societies and religions came about then, so today it is impossible to reconcile religion and homosexuality for example. Likewise, since religion sanctioned many wives and slave girls and having a lot of children (ie no birth control was allowed) once upon a time but that is no longer tenable, again religion cannot be reconciled with reality of the real world. A human being is what his environment makes it wherein he finds himself, psychologically as well as biologically ie mentally and physically. It can slightly make changes in itself or cope with changes that may occur in its environment, but to expect it to go against its psychological and biological nature altogether is not possible. We can expect a human being to cope with a bit more hunger than normal or to eat a little bit extra but we cannot keep on feeding him nor keep him hungry for ever, for death is inevitable in either case. So religion at times takes a human along that path for no good reason at all.
When life threatening situation occurs muslims are allowed to eat pig and drink alcohol but if muslim must kill pigs in their land and have no alcohol therein, what is point of allowing such things? Moreover what kind of haphazard test it is that on one hand anything and everything is a test and on the other hand when life threatening situation occurs muslims can do whatever is necessary to survive. They can even hide their true beliefs in order to save their lives 5/4, 16/106 etc. Yet one has to ask, how do people become homosexual? Is it because of their genetic make up or is it because of the environment in which they are born and interact while growing? Or is it because of both the factors? Even by religion it can be proven that homosexuality is natural, for such people did exist who had such tendencies. Why people have such tendencies? How did the very first person become homosexual? Other animals also have such tendencies, why?
Moreover, since tendencies vary in degrees it would be unfair test to give all people exactly same rules and laws and set exactly same standards for all whereas they differ as regard their genetic make up and environmental factors and circumstances. For example, hunger is internal drive for bodily mechanism telling the person to start looking for food when it is running out of fuel but having nice food in front of you on the table is external stimulus as well. The same is true in case of sexual drive. Hormones internally tell body to go for sex the while looking at sexually stimulating beautiful people also has its affects. Moreover human brain prioritises all signals it receives from anywhere within the body as well as from external senses. Thus if you are hungry and thirsty as well as facing a danger also then reaching safety would be highest priority of yours. Thus things are not quite as straight forward as religions would have us believe. In fact religion is clearly trapped no matter how we look at it, as I see it.
YUSUFALI: That He did create in pairs,- male and female,
YUSUFALI: From a seed when lodged (in its place);
The quran seems to make this mistake again and again that human is created only and only from the male sperm. Female does not produce sperm nor it gushes forth as the quran puts it.
YUSUFALI: Now let man but think from what he is created!
YUSUFALI: He is created from a drop emitted-
YUSUFALI: Proceeding from between the backbone and the ribs:
The sperm is not produced as the quran suggest in 86/7 or the hadith already quoted, rather it is produced by male testis. The problem here is that some people assume that the quran is scientific in the sense that it predicts future scientific discoveries. If that was true, the quran ought to use a different language ie the language of precision, which made sense then as well as makes sense now. Even if it used descriptive language it ought to explain future discoveries such that they made exactly the same sense through out the time and place so that people did not get confused the while they tried to understand the quran. The differences in interpretations and translations of the quran clearly contradict all such claims ie the claims that the quran makes things perfectly clear. It is not right to suggest that people of old did not understand the quran the way they ought to because they did not know science as well as we do. Here we are not talking about people of old but god, who ought to know science better than us and so he could have explained it such that people of old, if they could not make any sense of anything they could have been told that those things will make sense to future generations when science becomes more developed and established etc etc. It is not possible even today to clearly predict anything for sure of scientific value that would be discovered in future. The way the quran talks about things clearly suggests its author is unaware of many things as have been pointed out here and elsewhere as well. Most people of old only explained things in sense of magic and mystery, for they could not see actual mechanisms involved at microscopic or atomic level. However, there were here and there odd minds that did contemplate that as there are mechanism involved at macroscopic level so there may be such mechanisms involved at a miniature level as well. When you knock two stones together, they break into smaller pieces, which you can carry on breaking into smaller and smaller pieces till you can do that no more. Thus to come to a conclusion that things could be even smaller than what they knew was not a far fetched idea at all for the people of the old. Even when many people thought that atom cannot be smashed any further yet some thought that it could hence they never stopped trying till they got it. So it is all a murder mystery and suspense kind of world in which we live therefore no wonder that religion is also something like that, for it too thus shows to be only a manmade thing. Many think religion is absolutely true but some think it is totally false and yet other are suspended in the midair despite the fact that we are now living in 21st century.
YUSUFALI: Does man think that he will be left uncontrolled, (without purpose)?
YUSUFALI: Was he not a drop of sperm emitted (in lowly form)?
YUSUFALI: Then did he become a leech-like clot; then did (Allah) make and fashion (him) in due proportion.
Notice, the deception is clear here ie instead of the quran telling us the proper reproduction process the way it happens, it tells us the process back to front. This method of telling things gives the impression that the informant is explaining the whole process but in actual fact it allows emissions by him with less chance of him being noticed or detected doing so. Man was a sperm true but every sperm does not end up into a human being. Next steps are omitted eg the man was an ovum as well but every ovum does not end up into a human being. The fact that a sperm fertilizes an ovum is also not mentioned anywhere in the quran, because the author of the quran was not aware of such things as mentioned in the hadith clearly. Thus the quran fails to describe a complete reproduction process, telling us only as much as it was known at the time or was assumed to be the case. We are told that sex of an individual is determined after the embryo turns into a clinging thing, which is wrong, for sex is determined right from the time of fertilization as soon as chromosomes become paired.
YUSUFALI: And of him He made two sexes, male and female.
YUSUFALI: When thy Lord drew forth from the Children of Adam - from their loins - their descendants, and made them testify concerning themselves, (saying): "Am I not your Lord (who cherishes and sustains you)?"- They said: "Yea! We do testify!" (This), lest ye should say on the Day of Judgment: "Of this we were never mindful":
YUSUFALI: Verily We created Man from a drop of mingled sperm, in order to try him: So We gave him (the gifts), of Hearing and Sight.
YUSUFALI: We showed him the Way: whether he be grateful or ungrateful (rests on his will).
YUSUFALI: It is He Who has created you from dust then from a sperm-drop, then from a leech-like clot; then does he get you out (into the light) as a child: then lets you (grow and) reach your age of full strength; then lets you become old,- though of you there are some who die before;- and lets you reach a Term appointed; in order that ye may learn wisdom.
YUSUFALI: O mankind! if ye have a doubt about the Resurrection, (consider) that We created you out of dust, then out of sperm, then out of a leech-like clot, then out of a morsel of flesh, partly formed and partly unformed, in order that We may manifest (our power) to you; and We cause whom We will to rest in the wombs for an appointed term, then do We bring you out as babes, then (foster you) that ye may reach your age of full strength; and some of you are called to die, and some are sent back to the feeblest old age, so that they know nothing after having known (much), and (further), thou seest the earth barren and lifeless, but when We pour down rain on it, it is stirred (to life), it swells, and it puts forth every kind of beautiful growth (in pairs).
YUSUFALI: Man We did create from a quintessence (of clay);
YUSUFALI: Then We placed him as (a drop of) sperm in a place of rest, firmly fixed;
YUSUFALI: He created you (all) from a single person: then created, of like nature, his mate; and he sent down for you eight head of cattle in pairs: He makes you, in the wombs of your mothers, in stages, one after another, in three veils of darkness. such is Allah, your Lord and Cherisher: to Him belongs (all) dominion. There is no god but He: then how are ye turned away (from your true Centre)?
This verse clearly tells us that god sent down or created eight pairs of cattle for us ie they did not evolve but were create as such. Some people as regard this verse assume that all people at the time of quranic writing did not know that a human baby is wrapped up into three covers in side its mother. This is simply silly because all human pregnancies do not necessarily end up in proper birth rather many are aborted or end up as miscarriages. Moreover people have been killing each other for generations including pregnant women, so it was not a difficult thing to know about. Furthermore people have been killing animals for food and it is unlikely that none of them realised how they were made and did not assume that humans were like other animals in many respects. All this shows that such ideas are absurd ie to think that the quran is telling us this as something that nobody knew at the time. Medicine has been in practice among people for a long time now, for they have been getting ill and must have tried to find what has gone wrong or what will help them get better. So anatomy of things did not pop out suddenly today, it is bound to have a long history behind it. Unfortunately religion promotes magical explanations and solutions to problems that never work in the real world because the world does not work like that.
YUSUFALI: Then We made the sperm into a clot of congealed blood; then of that clot We made a (foetus) lump; then we made out of that lump bones and clothed the bones with flesh; then we developed out of it another creature. So blessed be Allah, the best to create!
YUSUFALI: It is He Who brings out the living from the dead, and brings out the dead from the living, and Who gives life to the earth after it is dead: and thus shall ye be brought out (from the dead).
YUSUFALI: Among His Signs in this, that He created you from dust; and then,- behold, ye are men scattered (far and wide)!
What is the sign and in what sense? Nothing is explained. Things cannot be signs just because they exist or that they show certain natural order, for that is the way nature works. Calling such things as signs is nothing less than deception to deceive the simple minded people.
Moreover what is life and what is death and how can dead give life to the living? It is possible for a hen to lay eggs which are living not dead and therefore eggs can be incubated till they hatch into chicks. The quran makes serious mistake for taking living things as dead eg vegetation and eggs. Just as life is a biological process so is death the end of that process. Neither life nor death are any object in themselves. If we read the authentic hadith, we are told that the prophet forbid people from making pictures of living things but allowed pictures of nonliving things like plants etc. It means the prophet did not think that plants too were living things. Moreover muslims in Islamic states are not forced to have their pictures taken for this reason even though it is slowly changing now for security reasons, for people need to provide their pictures for identity cards or passports etc even in Islamic countries. Some people think that the quran clearly tells us that the plants are living things, for they reproduce sexually as well 36/36, 43/12, 51/49 etc. I think the quran does not use word zawaj in these verses for living thing only but but nonliving things as well eg heaven and earth are pair, day and night are pair, heaven and hell are pair, black and white are pair etc etc. Word pair simply means things that go together in the sense that they do and not in every respect. Just because things are said to be paired does not mean they are living nor that they reproduce sexually.
YUSUFALI: And among His Signs is this, that He created for you mates from among yourselves, that ye may dwell in tranquillity with them, and He has put love and mercy between your (hearts): verily in that are Signs for those who reflect.
YUSUFALI: And among His Signs is the creation of the heavens and the earth, and the variations in your languages and your colours: verily in that are Signs for those who know.
YUSUFALI: And among His Signs is the sleep that ye take by night and by day, and the quest that ye (make for livelihood) out of His Bounty: verily in that are signs for those who hearken.
YUSUFALI: And among His Signs, He shows you the lightning, by way both of fear and of hope, and He sends down rain from the sky and with it gives life to the earth after it is dead: verily in that are Signs for those who are wise.
YUSUFALI: And among His Signs is this, that heaven and earth stand by His Command: then when He calls you, by a single call, from the earth, behold, ye (straightway) come forth.
As I have explained by now, the idea that the quran is word of god is not true. It is not true for many different reasons. For example, the way the quran claims to be word of god is so forceful that only a false claimant would launch his claim this way. We know that is exactly what the quran does, for it fails to come up with any proof and proving as well as the way to do so. Instead it goes on and on about huge rewards and devastating punishments to make people believe in it. Since the indoctrination was originally forced upon muslims and has been around for so long, it is now difficult for them to get out of this cycle. Indoctrination became necessary when islam lost its appeal to those whose circumstances it suited originally. It was a booty based religion and since people have to struggle for their livelihood, islam made life easy for them hence in my opinion they turned to islam for living on loot.
Islam was originally religion of mostly poor people eg slaves etc who were messed up by their rich people. They therefore joined together from here and there everywhere as a small group of bandits and so turned rich by way of looting and that helped them grow in numbers. However, as they grew in numbers and looted more and more and became very very rich, they saw no reason for losing their lives for loot any more ie they became relaxed in this game. However, as muslims relaxed in this jihad, this gave other people the time they needed to organise themselves against muslim threat and so muslims were stopped in their tracks. Once you leave things, it is not easy to make a come back and so muslims lost their power never to regain. Now not being inventive and having no longer the strength to subdue others and loot them leaves you dead poor, perhaps, the same way as you started out in the beginning. No wonder then that muslims are poor for a very long time now and will remain so unless they find other ways of making a descent living for themselves like other civilised people.
This explanation might help to understand why muslims were encourage by their prophet to migrate to madina for example, even those who were not bothered by anyone at their homes. It also may explain why islam is relaunched as something scientific, for it is done once again by the same people ie Saudis to try and salvage whatever is left of islam to keep their grip on power over muslims around the world. They have spent some of that income which they get from muslims who visited their country for holy journeys and spent a lot of money there. Tourism is a big business that any country would love to have and they would spend some of their income from that for attracting the visitors. So Saudis have a huge advantage by promoting islam be it in new form ie scientific islam. As always is the case that when something is started by some one it takes time for others to catch up. Likewise when Saudis started out on this venture people did not notice it till very late and now we have a world full of so called scientific fanatics of the Quranic, thank to some educated people who took the opportunity to make a good living of Saudis on getting their word in about the scientific quran and thereby messing up their minds. The reaction was only triggered by sept 11. Perhaps, if sept 11 did not happen we would have seen world quietly taken over by scientific fanatics of islam who want everyone to live by Islamic sharia. It is not that I am against science or people making a good living for themselves but the method they used does concern me, for they did not think about the serious consequences for the wider world.
Going back to the start, I said that religion does not have any answers to our questions and from my posts so far one can see whether my this assumption was correct or not. My post is very long but without having a reasonable amount of related facts and their explanations we will end up arguing senselessly. I try my best to give as full a picture of things as I can. I have not used full Quranic text and left out many hadith due to post becoming even longer. I am also forced to leave out quranic verses and hadithes as regard medicine. I will see if I could discuss them at some other time. I have tried to avoid talking about sexuality as well in any greater detail for obvious reasons.
Please do note that I am explaining, why in my view the quran is not the word of god. I do not begin with the claim that the evolution theory is absolutely true therefore the quran is absolutely false. I am examining the quran regarding what it tells us to believe and what it tells us to do and whether that is self defeating or not. The nature of problems for example:
4)Now anyone can see from what I have stated that islam is no way a complete guidance for anything. The so called guide lines could be written by anyone. A road map is only good if it can clearly lead you to your destination. It is difficult enough to tread the road without worrying whether one is on the right road or not. My posts may seems random but they are about islam in an orderly manner. I am questioning Islamic ideology in general but about Islamic goals in this world in their proper priority order in particular.