of Teaching Nutrition to Your Kids
A IS FOR ACCESSIBILITY
NUTRITIPYou control the food that comes into the house. Make sure the good food you want your children to appreciate is child accessible.
The saying, not taught certainly applies to teaching nutrition to kids. More powerful than any amount of talking about nutrition is the example you set in your home. Give new meaning to foods. Make nutritious foods readily available for your children. Plan to have fresh foods within easy reach, so that when they hungry and foraging for something to eat, it easy for them to help themselves! If you want to control the serving size, consider pre packaging healthy snacks in plastic sandwich bags. Ideas for accessible snacks:
A raw vegetable tray kept in the refrigerator at children eye level
A tempting assortment of fresh fruits washed and ready to eat in a fruit bowl or cut up in bite size pieces in the refrigerator, ready to eat.
A special place in your cupboard or pantry for snack attacks. It may include popcorn, whole grain crackers, bread sticks, rice cakes or raisins.
A pre mixed snack that includes a variety of cereals, pretzels, and dried fruit. And, have fun keeping the best foods, not only available, but accessible!
Create a pleasant, supportive and unhurried environment in which your children can enjoy healthy foods. Meal and snack times should be happy times. If there is enjoyable, light conversation and relaxing background music playing, it is more likely that appetites and dispositions will be good. To lighten moods and facilitate pleasant conversation, ask each family member to share one positive thing that happened that day. is on. So, set the stage! Create the mood and set your kids up to enjoy their meal times. And by all means, enlist their help!
Pick kid friendly, ethnic meal themes, such as Mexican or Italian
Make special name tags or table decorations
Pick some flowers from the garden (or at the florist or grocery store) for the dinner table, and/or light candles.
Use special dishes paper plates for a picnic atmosphere, the best China for mom birthday. When you involve your children in the meal planning and give them choices, they are more likely to have a good attitude toward eating and eat the foods best for the Air Max m.
Bread and Jam for Frances, By Russell Hoban, 1993, HarperCollins
Bread is for Eating, By David Phillis Gershator, 1995, Henry Holt and Company
Green Eggs and Ham, By Dr. Seuss, 1960, Random House
Picky Nicky, By Cathy East Dubowski, 1996, Grosset Dunlap
The Berenstain Bears and Too Much Junk Food, By Stan Jan Berenstain, 1985, Random House
The Carrot Seed, By Ruth Krauss, 1945, Harper Row
The Very Hungry Caterpillar, By Eric Carle, 1969, Philomel Books
What Happens to your food?, By Alastair Smith, 1997, Usborne
A useful and fun workbook is: How to Teach Nutrition to Kids by Connie L. Evers, 24 Carrot Press, 1995.
Kids will copy your food habits. Do you eat nutritious foods? Set an example by being a good role model. If children see their parents enjoying nutritious food, they are more likely to do so, too, as children and as adults. Kids will pick up on your habits at an early age. If what you do does not mirror what you say, you will likely hear little voices asking, why are you eating that when you said I couldn have it? If a family member, such as grandma or uncle, is on a special diet for health reasons, talk with your children about why Air Max Air Max rong>this person eats certain foods and not others, and how the diet helps this special someone stay healthy. Model the positive value of good nutrition, and children will eventually begin to see that consistent daily choices translate into health and happiness.
Don expect your child to like a food just because you do. Use a small helping of peer pressure to get your child to eat. If your child is going through a food refusal stage, invite over peers with adventuresome palates, kids who like to eat new and wholesome foods. Monkey does what monkey sees.
D IS FOR DISCOVERY ON A FIELD TRIP
NUTRITIPMake learning nutrition fun by packing up the kids and discovering good food on a field trip!
There are many places to learn about good food right in your own community. Try one of these ideas when you need to get Air Max out of the house:
Visit a grocery store and have your child help pick out produce and other items on your grocery list. Talk about the nutritious and not so nutritious foods you see. (HINT: feed your child and yourself before you go!)
Lay ground rules so that your child knows what to expect, such as the need to stay in the cart, what snacks are acceptable, and no begging for toys or candy.
Take a behind the scenes tour of a grocery store. Many stores will arrange a tour for children of the different areas of the store, including delivery docks, meat counter, bakery, and produce.