Send the link below via email or IMCopy
Present to your audienceStart remote presentation
- Invited audience members will follow you as you navigate and present
- People invited to a presentation do not need a Prezi account
- This link expires 10 minutes after you close the presentation
- A maximum of 30 users can follow your presentation
- Learn more about this feature in our knowledge base article
Do you really want to delete this prezi?
Neither you, nor the coeditors you shared it with will be able to recover it again.
Make your likes visible on Facebook?
Connect your Facebook account to Prezi and let your likes appear on your timeline.
You can change this under Settings & Account at any time.
Southeast Asia Rain forest
Transcript of Southeast Asia Rain forest
Reports & Climate Southeast Asia Rainforest The tropical rainforests of Southeast Asia span across several Southeast Asian countries + 20,000 islands ranging from India and Burma in the west to Malaysia and the islands of Java and Borneo in the east With a range of more than 3,100 miles.
Southeast Asia is a 3,100 mile long chain of about 20,000 islands strung between Asia and Australia.
Abiotic Factors : The abiotic factors of this rainforest biome are the amount of water and sunlight,, climate, weather, and Temperature Abiotic Factors Sunlight: Since the tropical rainforest has different layers of the forest floor : Emergent , Canopy,Lower Canopy, Understory.
* its a limiting factor
~ The Canopy: Trees in the canopy can go more than 30 m tall; moreover, they form a dense layer of trees that absorbs up to 95 % of sunlight Climate: The climate in Southeast Asia stays hot and humid year-round due to its location near the equator.The climate of Southeast Asia is a tropical wet climate in the Köppen climate zone system. The climate is influenced by wind systems which start in the Indian Ocean and the South China Sea. Temperature :The daily temperature range is 10 C to 25 C. The humidity is very oppressive! PRECIPITATION : The average humidity is from 70-90% and the annual precipitation is heavy; 60 to over 100 inches during the months , October to February along the northeastern part of the region, while heavy rains occur along the southwestern part from April to August. TEMPERATURE :The climate is hot and humid all year round. It is dense, warm and wet beacuse its surrounded by oceans. The temperature in a rain forest rarely gets higher than 80 °F or drops below 68 °F What is the
Southeast Asia Rainforest ? The south-east Asian rainforest is the oldest, consistent rainforest on Earth, dating back to the ,Pleistocene Epoch 70 million years ago. giving it a very rich biological. diversity. Rainfall :The tropical rain forest is a forest of tall trees in a region of year-round warmth. An average of 50 to 260 inches (125 to 660 cm.) of rain falls yearly. Weather Report THINGS TO BING :Visiting a tropical rainforest promises to be a memorable experience; however, to fully enjoy your trip you must be prepared . Known for its Bio-Diversity
200 tree species in one single hectare: World Record Borneo, Malaysia Clothing: Cotton ,Long-sleeve shirts and pants are ideal. lightweight rain jacket, zip-off,light weight hiking trousers ,hat
Shoes: Pair of sturdy trainers to hike in, and at least one pair of flip flops , rain boots.
Gear: Backpack, Swiss Army Knife, rope ,anti-malarial gear, anti-malarial tablets,camera
Supplies : Emergency aid kit, sunscreen, Bug spray,Mosquito repellent lotion & Water bottle/canteen Although it hot & humid protect
yourself from thorns, insects, other plnats. Native Plants : Bengal Bamboo, Kapok tree, Tualang Biotic Factors: Southeast Asian Rainforests' biotic factors a very diverse Tualang Kapok Tree Bengal Bamboo :
1. Bengal Bamboo grows tall very fast so it can get more sun through the thick trees.
2. It has multiple vascular bundles that are smaller so it can absorb water faster.
3 .It requires a lot of water so the excessive rain of the rainforest is perfect.
4.The roots are large in order to collect more water. Kapok Tree:
1. It can grow to a height of 150 feet or more, so it can get sunlight.
2. It also has large spines that stick out from the truck that protect the trunk from getting harmed and from predators.
3. It has large butress root which help support the plant and anchor roots deep into the poor soils Tualang Tree :1. Towering above the canopy the tualang can reach 250 feet, or the 30 stories in height for sunlight
2. The trunks have a smooth, silvery bark. The slippery surface discourages sun bears (predator) from climbing up into the tree to reach the honey combs. Native Animals Jambu Fruit Dove ,Slender Loris,
Siamangs and fairy bluebirds Native Animals: fairy bluebirds Jambu Fruit Dove Slender Loris, Siamangs Jambu Fruit Dove:They have feathers that are spread apart so that they can fly faster and The feathers come out easily, which makes them hard to catch. Siamangs:They are very small and lightweight. Also they are long-armed so they are so dextrous while moving in the trees, almost no predators can catch them. Slender Loris: they have a second thumb that helps them grasp branches and twigs.
~ Move slowly, Night Vision: they are unable to rotate their eyes and must move their head to follow. Fairy BlueBirds: The height of the nest and camouflage provides protection for the nestlings.
They have a powerful, deep and notched bill used for crushing fruit. Attractions Activities: 1.Mountain climbing / tree climbing
2.Rainforest Exploration 5 day Safari
4. Chair Lifts over the Rainforest COOL FACTS: WARNINGS ! IMPORTANCE GLOBAL Biomes: Threats to Biomes:The region’s forests are endangered by conversion to agriculture or other land uses, such as oil palm plantations, logging (both legal and illegal) and climate change. Neotropical (Amazonia into Central America)
Indo-Malaysia Rainforest - west coast of India, Assam, Southeast Asia, New Guinea and Queensland, Australia.
* Southeast Asia, containing the world’s third largest
tropical forests, is experiencing deforestation rates higher than almost anywhere else on Earth.
*Known for its Bio-Diversity it has 200 tree species in one single hectare: World Record Endangered Species :There are also plenty of endangered plant and animal species in the Southeast Asian rainforests including the Bengal Tiger, the Dawn Bat, the Orangutan, the Proboscis Monkey, the Silvery Gibbon, the Slender Loris, and the Sumatran Rhinoceros. Impact Of Climate Change: Most economies are relying on agriculture and natural resources. South East Asia is annually affected by climate extremes, particularly floods, droughts and tropical cyclones, flooding that's influenced by monsoons.Moreover, large tidal variations,
tropical cyclones, coupled with the potential increase in regional rainfall.
Land-use change and degradation, overexploitation of water resources and biodiversity, and contamination of inland and coastal water already threaten many species. CLIMATE EFFECT :
logging It is projected that most of the primary rainforests of Southeast Asia will be destroyed in the next 10 years. Tropical rainforests are important because they provide oxygen, take in carbon dioxide, and are a huge source of biodiversity and cultural diversity. However, people also rely on tropical rainforests for food, medicine, timber, travel, and more.
ALSO Rainforests around the world provide people with food and spices, for example, allspice, vanilla, cacao, cassava, ginger, bananas, black pepper, sugar cane, nutmeg and more. Competition: Limited Factor OF Food, Space, Sunlight
* Also if One tree is taller than the other trees and therefore gets more sunlight whilst the trees below are in the shadow of the taller tree.
*For example, a toucan has a much larger beak than a Malachite Kingfisher. They both eat nuts but there is not enough to go around the rainforest! There are many causes of deforestation. People are logging for firewood, charcoal, building materials and other uses. Trees are being removed for commercial agriculture, which may cause permanent damage. Tropical Rainforests:
*help stabilize the world’s climate;
*provide a home to many plants and animals;
*maintain the water cycle
*protect against flood, drought, and erosion;
*support tribal people; and
are an interesting place to visit !
Come & Visit The Beautiful Biome * its the opposite of the Kapok Tree Siamangs The large naked throat sac of the siamang functions is communication. When it vocalizes, it can produce two different kinds of notes using this sac: a deep “boom” and a loud “wow” loud, deep, expressive chorus .