Spring Be prepared for a wide range of weather conditions. In spring, wet weather is not unusual, but warm, sunny weather is typical. Maximum temperatures rarely exceed 90°F/32°C; however, temperatures in the park can vary dramatically with changes in elevation and the time of day. Day and night temperatures can differ by over 30°F/17°C. Mornings and evenings can be cool. Consider dressing in layers to prepare for changes in temperature. Precipitation peaks in March. High water levels due to snowmelt often continue into late May. Abundant wildflowers bloom from April through June and peak in May.
Summer In summer, temperatures in Zion National Park often exceed 100°F/38°C. Higher elevations may have temperatures in excess of 90°F/32°C. Zion experiences monsoons from mid-July into September that results in an increased risk of flash floods. Always be aware of the threat of thunderstorms and lightning and be prepared for a wide range of weather conditions. Temperatures in the park can vary dramatically with changes in elevation and the time of day. Day and night temperatures can differ by over 30°F/17°C. Consider dressing in layers to prepare for changes in temperature.
Fall In fall, the heat of the summer gives way to cooler temperatures and drier weather, making it an ideal time to visit Zion National Park. Along the Virgin River, cottonwoods turn golden yellow and bigtooth maples add splashes of scarlet to the canyons and trails. Favorable conditions prevail for hiking and canyoneering, but be sure to check the weather forecast, flash flood potential ratings, and the temperature of the river before exploring the park. Day and night temperatures can differ by over 30°F/17°C. Consider dressing in layers to prepare for changes in temperature.
Winter Winters in Zion National Park are cold and often wet. Temperatures can range from highs of 50-60°F during the day to lows well below freezing at night. Nearly half of the annual precipitation in Zion Canyon falls between the months of December and March. Roads are plowed, but trails may be closed due to snow and ice. After winter storms, snow typically disappears within a matter of hours at lower elevations. At higher elevations, the snow accumulates. As temperatures rise in spring, melting snow causes high water levels in the Virgin River and its tributaries.