If time travel ever becomes practical (and affordable), there are times I would love to visit.
If time travel ever becomes practical (and affordable), there are times I would love to visit.Watching a herd of sauropods migrating across an ancient savannah in the Jurassic Period or viewing an epic battle between a Tyrannosaurus and a Triceratops in the Cretaceous would be awe-inspiring.
There are other times in Earthís history you couldnít pay me to visit.Two of them are the Carboniferous Period, 359 million to 299 million years ago (the time the forests that produced our coal were growing) and the subsequent Permian Period, 299 million to 252 million years ago.I donít mind snakes, rats or mice, but I donít like bugs. Those two periods had some monstrous bugs.
Among them were millipedes that were 6 feet long and dragonfly-like insects with 28-inch wingspans. Ugh!What permitted such big bugs was an abundance of oxygen in the atmosphere. Whereas we have a modest 21 percent oxygen today, the Carboniferous might have had as much as 32 percent. (As an aside, this would have made for far more forest fires, confirmed by the amount of soot in sediments of that period.)Insects donít have lungs, so they donít breathe in and out. They get oxygen by passive diffusion through a series of small tubes called tracheae that lead in from pores in their exoskeleton. The bigger the bug, the longer those tubes must be. That requires larger amounts of oxygen in the atmosphere to ďforceĒ enough into the interior of the bug.
We should note that the increased oxygen didnít cause the bugs to get bigger, it allowed them to get bigger.
This suggests that the size of bugs is constrained by the amount of oxygen in our atmosphere ó at least up to a point. New research, recently published in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, adds another factor.
Scientists examined more than 10,500 fossil insect specimens and measured the size of their wings as a proxy for body size. Then they compared the maximum insect size during each time period to the oxygen content of the atmosphere.
For the first 150 million years, maximum body size closely tracked oxygen levels, but only until about 130 million years ago, after the end of the Jurassic Period. After that, increases in oxygen did not lead to bigger bugs.
Scientists suspect that the appearance of birds, many of which feed on insects, caused the change. Bugs got even smaller about 60 million years ago, about the time when bats began to appear.
The research also found that, as it is today, the largest bugs lived in warmer climates close to the equator. During the Carboniferous Period, Ohio was near the equator.Carboniferous Ohio is not a place I want to visit.
Dale Gnidovec is curator of the Orton Geological Museum at Ohio State University.