Dunkeson History, Family Crest & Coats of Arms
- Origins Available:
The saga of the Dunkeson family name begins among the people of an ancient Scottish tribe called the Picts. The Dunkeson name is derived from son of Duncan which is derived from the Gaelic word or Clan Dhonnchaidh, which means brown warrior, accordingly the name literally means son of brown warrior.
Early Origins of the Dunkeson family
The surname Dunkeson was first found in Berwickshire an ancient county of Scotland, presently part of the Scottish Borders Council Area, located in the eastern part of the Borders Region of Scotland, where they held a family seat from very ancient times, some say well before the Norman Conquest and the arrival of Duke William at Hastings in 1066 A.D.
Important Dates for the Dunkeson family
This web page shows only a small excerpt of our Dunkeson research. Another 100 words (7 lines of text) covering the years 1376, 1367, 1582, 1530, 1601, 1574, 1576 and 1705 are included under the topic Early Dunkeson History in all our PDF Extended History products and printed products wherever possible.
Dunkeson Spelling Variations
Repeated and inaccurate translation of Scottish names from Gaelic to English and back resulted in a wide variety of spelling variations with single names. Dunkeson has appeared Duncanson, Duncason, Duncannon, Dunkeson and others.
Early Notables of the Dunkeson family (pre 1700)
Notable amongst the Clan at this time was Gilbert Duncanson of the Park; John Duncanson (ca. 1530-1601), Scottish minister, he willingly converted to the new Protestant doctrines at the Reformation, he was the King's Minister, tutor and chaplain to King James VI, and Moderator of the General...
Another 46 words (3 lines of text) are included under the topic Early Dunkeson Notables in all our PDF Extended History products and printed products wherever possible.
Migration of the Dunkeson family
Many Scottish families suffered enormous hardships and were compelled to leave their country of birth. They traveled to Ireland and Australia, but mostly to the colonies of North America, where many found the freedom and opportunity they sought. It was not without a fight, though, as many were forced to stand up and defend their freedom in the American War of Independence. The ancestors of these Scots abroad have rediscovered their heritage in the last century through the Clan societies and other organizations that have sprung up across North America. Immigration and passenger ship lists show some important early immigrants bearing the name Dunkeson: Robert Duncanson who settled in Georgia in 1730; Hugh Duncason settled in St. Vincent in 1774.