Expert CritiqueFROM THE ASCO Reading Room
Mammography remains the preferred screening technique for early detection of breast cancer. Digital mammography has been shown to offer advantages over film screen in contrast and acquisition speed and display, but the technique has not resulted in a significant improvement in the cancer detection rate over that with analog imaging. One reason for the lack of clear improvement in performance with digital mammography is that superimposition of normal tissue can obscure masses or malignancy when two-dimensional imaging is used on three-dimensional structures.
Digital technology has led to the development of digital breast tomosynthesis, also called 3-D mammography. Digital breast tomosynthesis was developed to overcome some of the limitations of mammography, and is now being implemented in breast clinics globally.
"Digital tomosynthesis is a new, better mammogram and has improved screening metrics," said Elizabeth Morris, MD, chief of the Breast Imaging Service at Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center in New York City, speaking at the Miami Breast Cancer Conference. "It allows a more efficient diagnostic workflow, leads to a more confident interpretation, and is rapidly replacing full-field digital mammography."
Tomosynthesis can be performed either in combination with standard 2-D mammography or synthetic reconstructions can be created from the projection images used to create tomosynthesis. In the former case, the radiation exposure to the patient is about 2- to 2.5-fold more than a regular mammogram, said Wendie Berg, MD, PhD, of the University of Pittsburg, in a presentation at the most recent ASCO annual meeting. In the latter case, the radiation exposure with tomosynthesis is almost the same as for a standard mammogram, she said.
In prospective trials comparing the addition of 3-D to 2-D versus 2-D alone, the improvement in cancer detection was 2.3 to 2.7 per 1,000 cases.
Cancers detected by digital breast tomosynthesis are invasive cancers: A study by Elizabeth Rafferty, MD, of Lawrence General Hospital in Massachusetts and colleagues showed that the increased sensitivity of tomosynthesis is greatest for invasive cancer, at about 15% to 22% greater than that of digital mammography, a finding that was then confirmed in the Oslo Screening Trial of a population-based screening program.
Unmasking of Cancers
Morris explained that dense breasts pose a problem because they not only mask cancer, but also confer an increased risk for developing breast cancer, an increase in the range of four to six times the risk of a woman without dense breasts. Breast density is the most prevalent risk factor for the development of breast cancer in both pre- and postmenopausal women, she noted, "so it is something we do need to pay attention to."
The rate of interval cancers increases with higher breast density -- for example, a 17.8-fold increase in the rate of interval cancers was found in women with the densest breasts compared with those with fatty breasts.
Digital breast tomosynthesis is able to unmask cancers that are masked by mammography as a result of overlapping tissue, Berg said. This ability has led to a reduction in the recall rate with the use of digital breast tomosynthesis. "We are better able to recognize false positives with tomosynthesis and avoid some unnecessary recalls."
In a series from Rhode Island Hospital in Providence, recall rates were decreased for almost all types of breast abnormalities examined (i.e., asymmetry, focal asymmetry, calcification, distortion, and mass) with digital breast tomosynthesis compared with digital mammography. In this study, the recall rate was 6.4% with digital breast tomosynthesis compared with 9.3% with digital mammography (P<0.0001).
A multicenter study conducted in the U.S. showed that cancer detection is superior with digital breast tomosynthesis compared with digital mammography (4.2 cancers detected per 1,000 screens with digital mammography versus 5.4 with digital mammography plus tomosynthesis, P<0.001). The greatest benefit to tomosynthesis was observed in women with scattered fibroglandular dense breasts, in whom there was an increase in cancer detection as well as a decrease in recalls, noted Berg. In women with extremely dense breasts, however, the cancer detection rates were similar between the two modalities.
After 4 years of screening of tomosynthesis, the cancer detection rate is still high and the recall rate remains decreased, indicating sustainability. "What we really need to see is the interval cancer rate. It seems to be trending down," said Morris. "We would like to see it trend down more, because if the interval cancer rate goes down, that means that we are picking up the cancers that we need to be picking up."
More Efficient Workflow
The efficiency of the workup is also increased with the use of tomosynthesis, she continued. "The diagnostic evaluation is much better, and the workflow is improved where we decrease additional mammographic use and may go straight to ultrasound, which the patient likes."
There is a reimbursement code for digital breast tomosynthesis, but reimbursement varies by state, Morris noted. As of February 2017, at least five states have introduced legislation requiring insurers to cover digital breast tomosynthesis. Medicare reimburses for digital breast tomosynthesis at a rate of $50 more than that for a standard mammogram.
Morris has no relevant financial conflicts to declare.
Berg has no relationships to disclose.