In order for wage levels to be effective and fair, you must establish a scale you use to rate jobs in your organization. The job evaluation is the tool employers use to measure each position's contribution level to the company. Perform a job evaluation in order to have a basis for the pay structure in your company.
Classify the Jobs in Your Company
Divide all jobs in your company into categories based on importance. This means the extent to which the company could not function without the position. Establish a scale with increasingly important jobs grouped at the high end of your pay scale and decreasingly important jobs approaching the low end of your pay scale. Rate importance on a scale of 1 to 100.
Rate Jobs by Responsibility
Determine how much responsibility is required for each position. Responsibility can be measured by the extent to which the position requires the employee to work without supervision or make decisions without conferring with others. Assign numbers on a scale of 0 to 100 to represent your appraisal of the responsibility level of each position.
Rate Jobs by Education Level Required
Determine how much education is necessary for each position. Assign points from 0 to 100 for elementary, high school diploma, bachelor's degree, master's degree, and Ph.D. You can give extra points for professional development courses and seminars.
Rate the Amount of Physical Labor Required
Decide how you rank physical labor. Many firms pay the least for jobs that require physical effort, and the most for jobs that rely more on thinking. Establish a scale that represents your thinking on this subject. Use the same 0 to 100 scale. If you do not want to pay higher for physical labor, lifting and carrying jobs will receive the lower numbers. The jobs requiring thinking would get the higher numbers in this case.
Add Up Numbers for Each Position
Use all your criteria: importance, responsibility, education level and physicality. Add the numbers you have assigned to each job in these four areas, and you will have a position ranking. This completes your job evaluation, and you can assign compensation ranges to each position. This is your pay structure.
- Stockbyte/Stockbyte/Getty Images