Effects of Global Warming:
It’s Sad but True!
Global warming is more severe and much faster in Alaska than in the rest of the world. It means that Alaska’s beautiful tundra could disappear completely if the temperatures continue to increase.
We are not promoting the below mentioned destinations, it’s hard core fact about these disappearing destinations within in this century. Our message is
“please take the steps in which ever way you could, to Save our only Planet”
#1 DEAD SEA
Renowned for its awesome beauty products that could make anyone look younger, the Dead Sea is one of the great places to visit before they disappear. In the next 50 years, you will not be able to find Dead Sea products. The thing is that the sea is shrinking at an alarming rate. When you visit the Dead Sea today, you see that all hotels and resorts that once were on the coast are a mile away from where the sea lies these days.
The Dead Sea beaches are well known throughout the globe. The high salt levels allow you to float on your back and enjoy the wonderful view surrounding the sea. The climate varies depending on the season. During the tourist season temperatures can become extremely warm, ranging from 30°C in the spring to 40°C in the summer. The shores of the Dead Sea have something to offer for every age and every taste.
#2 MALDIVES ISLANDS
The Maldives is the smallest Asian country in both land area and population. The islands of Maldives are also the lowest nation in the world. With 80% of the islands less than one meter above sea level, within 100 years the Maldives could be uninhabitable since they could be underwater.
In fact, there are many reasons to visit the Maldives today. The great number of atolls makes it a perfect place for snorkeling and scuba diving among the native marine life. Kayaking, canoeing, surfing and rock climbing are another amazing activities to enjoy while on holiday.
#3 MADAGASCAR ISLAND
Madagascar is world-famous for its lemurs. Over 20 different species of lemurs and the 80% of the wildlife and plants that are found in Madagascar are not found anywhere else in the world. If nothing is done to save the island, it will disappear in 35 years. The ecosystem is being destroyed by poaching, logging, and burning for subsistence farms.
Madagascar is just a perfect place to embrace a simpler way of life. The only noises you will hear are the birds and the waves. Diving is another reason why so many people visit Madagascar. Clear warm water, vibrant ocean life and unusual underwater rock formations make this island a true diver’s paradise!
Venice has sunk 9 inches in the last 100 years. Just imagine, 9 inches! Even though officials are trying to stop the sinking, there’s not much to be done. Scientists estimate that in 70 years, Venice will be underwater. Probably, that’s why tourism has jumped dramatically since 2007!
If you are an Italian-cuisine-loving gourmand, you should definitely consider visiting Venice. Its cuisine will please you with its simplicity of dishes and focus on fresh local seasonal ingredients. Go to one of the out-of-the-way restaurants, listen to what the locals order, and order the same thing, that’s a truly amazing experience!
#5 GREAT BARRIER REEF
The world’s largest coral reef, the Great Barrier Reef is another fabulous place to visit before it disappears. The continuing rising of ocean temperatures, cyclones, coral bleaching, and water pollution are destroying the reef every year. Experts estimate that about 60% of the reef may be lost by 2030. Sadly, those 8,000 years of natural creation could vanish within your lifetime. So make sure to see the Great Barrier Reef before it disappears.
The opportunity to visit the tropical city of Cairns is probably the best thing about taking a trip up to the Great Barrier Reef. Cairns is the city where the summer never ends, so you can enjoy your holiday any time of the year. And if you like whale watching, Cairns is an ideal for whale as well as dolphin watching, as there are 30 different species of whale and dolphin live in the reef.
#6 THE CONGO BASIN
The second largest rainforest in the world after the Amazon, the Congo Basin spans across six Central African countries. It is a collection of forests, rivers, swamps and savannas. It’s also responsible for 40% of the world’s oxygen. The United Nations has estimated that more than 2/3 of the forest and its plants and animals could disappear by 2040. Illegal logging, mining, ranching, farming, and guerrilla warfare are destroying the basin yearly.
#7 MOUNT APLS
One of the great mountain range systems of Europe, the Alps are well worth a visit. There are many resorts including Saalbach in Austria, Oberstdorf, in Bavaria, Chamonix in France, Cortina d’Ampezzo in Italy, and Davos in Switzerland recording over a million visitors every year.
In the past century, the Alps have lost about half their glacial ice because of increasing temperatures. Since the 1980s, the glaciers have lost 20% of their size. If the temperatures continue to increase, the Alps will disappear in the next 40 years!
#8 GLACIER NATIONAL PARK
A little more than 100 years ago, the Glacier National Park had more than a 150 glaciers strewn throughout it. Nowadays, there are only 27 glaciers, which could disappear by 2030. There are also more than 1,500 species of animals and plants that could be lost. That’s why I decided to take a road trip and do a little camping in the Glacier National Park to experience its beauty and wonders.
A massive and untouched land in South America, Patagonia could be greatly altered by global warming. Because of increasing temperatures and precipitation declines many of its glaciers are steadfastly retreating. Maybe this land won’t vanish entirely, but its landscape will soon be changed beyond recognition if climate change persists.
When you travel to Patagonia, make sure you visit the main tourist attractions like the Valdés Peninsula, the Perito Moreno glacier, Torres del Paine National Park, Ushuaia and Argentina’s Lake District. If you are interested in Patagonian cuisine, it’s greatly the same as the cuisine of Buenos Aires – pasta and grilled meats with different local ingredients. Lamb, grilled over an open fire, is considered the traditional meat of Patagonia.
#10 ALASKAN TUNDRA
According to experts at the University of Berkley, the Alaskan tundra is the coldest biome in the world. Permafrost, low temperatures, and little nutrients in the soil prevent many kinds of plants and trees from growing. Alaskan tundra is definitely one of the most beautiful places to visit before they vanish!
Yet for a long time, we humans have lived our lives on this planet as if we own the Earth.
To make way for societal developments, we have destroyed many natural habitats to many plant and animal species. We have been carrying out deforestation and clearing of natural grasslands at alarming rates, for reasons such as to extract resources (eg. paper, tin, etc) from the earth, or simply to get more land for developments (eg. farming, building of cities, landfills).
In the process, we have striped other creatures of their habitats and even lives. With the destruction of forests, we are also hindering the earth’s ability to clean itself of excessive pollutants and carbon dioxide (which contributes to global warming), resulting in a less ideal climate for both ourselves and other living organisms.
To feed our increasing population, we have been stretching the earth beyond its limits, through activities such as over-farming and over-fishing. Unrelenting, we continue to seek to challenge these limits, through inventing new ways of producing more for our greedy species. We introduced the use of man-made chemical fertilizers, artificial hormonal injection in farm animals, and genetic engineering.
In the process, we have introduced many man-made and harmful substances into other species, the environment and ourselves (unwittingly, we have also tainted the quality of our food supplies, and bring harm to our bodies). And many of these substances have impact still beyond our full comprehension.
The ecological balance we have with other living organisms has been greatly upset. Many plant and animal species have gone extinct as a result of man’s actions. And this is even before we have even discovered their existence!
The loss of the numerous plant species also mean goodbye to important sources of medicinal plants and herbs that could potentially be cures to deadly diseases plaguing mankind today.
GREEN SOLUTION. GET GREEN.
We need to be more responsible and proactive in protecting the earth’s ecological balance. This environmental consciousness should be present, whether we are dealing with government policies, or industrial and economic activities, or in our daily living.
It should not be a matter of convenience, or doing whatever we can within the limits of our societal or economic constraints. In fact, considerations for the environment should come first. For without a planet to live in, there would be no room for societal or economic life.
As an individual is you should not over-consume (not just food, but other goods and services as well). In addition, you should also encourage those around you to do the same. By consuming just what we need, we reduce the strain we place on the earth as a source of our resources.
Keep an organic garden, or even start an organic farm, and help reintroduce more life (beyond humans and our needs) on this planet. Use organic products instead of products that release harmful chemicals into the environment. Donate regularly to forest or wildlife conservation efforts. Or better still, protect a piece of forest land under your name. Respect the lives of other living creatures (plants and animals alike, not just pet dog or cat), and also educate your kids on the importance of doing so. In this way, you would have built the foundations for a more environmentally-conscious generation.
All these efforts will contribute now and in the long run to keeping this earth sustainable.
As with the earth’s resources, the sources of energy (in the form of oil, coal, natural gas, etc) on earth are currently finite.
While humans have started exploring other sources of “sustainable energy”, such as palm oil, there are inherent environmental problems with the cultivation of some of these energy sources. Until the day the human population is able to effectively make use of the infinite, sustainable, and green sources of energy available to us, it is important that we conserve our energy resources.
GREEN SOLUTION. GET GREEN.
There are many energy saving tips to be followed for the home, the office, when driving, and in fact, wherever we go. Adopt them now before it is too late.
Saving energy also means less pollution.
The extraction of energy producing materials such as oil and coal from the earth generates substantial pollution. In turn, the use of these energy materials in driving our power stations, factories and automobiles produces large amounts of pollution and contributes in large ways to global warming.
So the less energy we use, the less pollution we create!
In our day-to-day activities, we actually release substantial amount of toxic substances into the environment.
Have you ever think about the shampoo, soap and cleaning detergent that you use. Many of them contain chemicals that are washed down the sinks and pipes, into drains, rivers, reservoirs or even the sea.
Think about the fast-food lunch you had. In the process of producing the bread, meat patty and salad for the burger, chemicals in the form of pesticides, man-made fertilizers and even hormones are released into the lands, water and air. The wrappers used in packaging the meal is bound for the landfills and incinerators (because it is very hard to recycle them). In turn, harmful gases are released when the wrappers (as well as other waste) are buried or burnt.
Think about the car that you drive to work, or even the bus or cab that you take to your office. These vehicles emit greenhouse gases (contributing to global warming) and toxic substances like lead (harmful to living things, including the human body) into the atmosphere.
And we have yet to reach the part on the amount of chemicals and poisonous gases produced by factories and industries, in the process of manufacturing the various items we use (eg. electronics, clothes, paper and plastic products, furniture, packaged food etc), or extracting energy resources (eg. oil, coal, etc) from the earth.
In our modern day life, it may be hard to leave zero trace of toxic substances, or create zero pollution in our activities. So many of the things that we use on a daily basis contain some form of chemicals, or are produced through the use of some chemicals. Despite the pollution caused, we would still need to travel to work, whether by private or public transport. And we definitely need to consume food.
GREEN SOLUTION. GET GREEN.
Consider switching to more natural cleaners and personal products, such as natural detergents, or organic detergents, as well as organic shampoos and lotions. Made of natural substances instead of man-made chemicals, minimal harmful chemicals are used in the process of their production. At the same time, these natural products are ready bio-degradable and do little harm even when released into the environment, because they are found in the natural environment in the first place.
Switch to organically grown food if you can. Organically grown food is grown without the use of synthetic pesticides and fertilizers that would harm the environment, as well as hormones or genetic re-engineering. What’s more, organically grown food are so much healthier, because they are free of carcinogens and heavy metals (as a result of the synthetic chemicals), as well as more nutritious. And keep away from fast-food!
Also, what does going green mean in practice is to drive less, and use the public transport instead. You can even opt for carpool service in case the option is available. Automobiles are one of the single largest sources of air pollution on earth today, and the harmful gases released contribute to global warming and climate changes. By taking public transport (such as buses and trains), you are actually helping to reduce the number of automobiles on this earth, and hence the amount of air pollution produced by these vehicles.