Noun(1) a way of regarding situations or topics etc.(2) the visual percept of a region(3) the act of looking or seeing or observing(4) the range of the eye(5) a personal belief or judgment that is not founded on proof or certainty(6) a message expressing a belief about something; the expression of a belief that is held with confidence but not substantiated by positive knowledge or proof(7) purpose; the phrase `with a view to' means `with the intention of' or `for the purpose of'(8) graphic art consisting of the graphic or photographic representation of a visual percept(9) the range of interest or activity that can be anticipated(10) outward appearance
Verb(1) deem to be(2) look at carefully; study mentally(3) see or watch
(1) Just before touchdown he became aware of a pylon coming into view from behind a tree.(2) I'm trying to understand it from your point of view(3) So you suddenly had a few million farmers beginning to view themselves as consumers.(4) No sooner was Doherty back in the team than the mercurial ability of Graham Geraghty hoved into view .(5) From this perspective, the game is simply beautiful and it allows the player to view everything they need to.(6) I take the view that ...(7) few view the war as a success(8) The other woman sighed; Vicky's view of her was obstructed by a circle of three guards that surrounded her.(9) we take a positive view of the situation(10) a room with a sea view(11) a fine view of the castle(12) As it came into view , I noticed all the homes, restaurants and hotels that had been lost.(13) an aerial view of the military earthworks(14) the movie offers a dark view of life(15) I proceed today to reach a decision on the basis that no view of the scene by the jury could take place.(16) When we think about the Middle Ages, it is easy to view Europe in light of what it became rather than what it was.
(1) point of view :: ఆ కోణంలో
1. outlook ::
2. opinion ::
3. sight ::
4. scene ::
5. position ::
6. horizon ::
7. eyeshot ::
8. prospect ::
9. look at ::
10. consider ::
11. regard ::
12. catch ::
Different Formsview, viewed, viewer, viewers, viewing, viewings, views
English to Telugu Dictionary: view
Meaning and definitions of view, translation in Telugu language for view with similar and opposite words. Also find spoken pronunciation of view in Telugu and in English language.
Tags for the entry "view"
What view means in Telugu, view meaning in Telugu, view definition, examples and pronunciation of view in Telugu language.