About the content
This class is offered as CS7637 at Georgia Tech where it is a part of the [Online Masters Degree (OMS)](http://www.omscs.gatech.edu/). Taking this course here will not earn credit towards the OMS degree. This is a core course in artificial intelligence. It is designed to be a challenging course, involving significant independent work, readings, assignments, and projects. It covers structured knowledge representations, as well as knowledge-based methods of problem solving, planning, decision-making, and learning. The class is organized around three primary learning goals. First, this class teaches the concepts, methods, and prominent issues in knowledge-based artificial intelligence. Second, it teaches the specific skills and abilities needed to apply those concepts to the design of knowledge-based AI agents. Third, it teaches the relationship between knowledge-based artificial intelligence and the study of human cognition.
Unit 1: Introduction to KBAI and Cognitive Systems.- Where Knowledge-Based AI fits into AI as a whole - Cognitive systems: what are they? - AI and cognition: how are they connected?
Unit 2: Fundamentals- Semantic Networks - Generate & Test - Means-Ends Analysis - Problem Reduction - Production Systems
Unit 3: Common Sense Reasoning- Frames - Understanding - Common Sense Reasoning - Scripts
Unit 4: Planning- Logic - Planning
Unit 5: Learning- Learning by Recording Cases - Incremental Concept Learning - Classification - Version Spaces & Discrimination Trees
Unit 6: Analogical Reasoning- Case-Based Reasoning - Explanation-Based Learning - Analogical Reasoning
Unit 7: Visuospatial Reasoning- Constraint Propagation - Visuospatial Reasoning
Unit 8: Design & Creativity- Configuration - Diagnosis - Design - Creativity
Unit 9: Metacognition- Learning by Correcting Mistakes - Meta-Reasoning - AI Ethics
- Ashok Goel - Ashok Goel is a professor of Computer Science and Cognitive Science at Georgia Tech in the School of Interactive Computing. His lab, the Design & Intelligence Lab, is at the forefront of conducting research into computational design, discovery, and creativity. The goals of his research are to understand human creativity in conceptual design of complex systems as well as scientific problem solving, to develop interactive tools for aiding people in such creative tasks, and to invent computational systems that are themselves creative.
Udacity is a for-profit educational organization founded by Sebastian Thrun, David Stavens, and Mike Sokolsky offering massive open online courses (MOOCs). According to Thrun, the origin of the name Udacity comes from the company's desire to be "audacious for you, the student". While it originally focused on offering university-style courses, it now focuses more on vocational courses for professionals.