Who was more
insane ? The Zaddikim Zealots
- for mesa riding (long way to haul supplies);
or the Roman's - for building
the ramp (same for them)?
Zaddikite War on Human
BC King Solomon dies and the United Monarchy splits into two parts - the
northern Kingdom of Israel and the southern Kingdom of Judah.
morphs into a War on Nature
722 Hezekiah, according to the
Mishnah, was the son of Ahaz, the
13th King of Judah.
Hezekiah enacts sweeping religious reform after
witnessing the destruction of the northern kingdom
of Israel by Assyrians led by Sargon.
These include a strict mandate for the
sole worship of Yahweh and a prohibition on venerating other deities within
Hezekiah purifies and repairs Solomon's Temple in
Jerusalem, purges it of idols, reformes the
priesthood and centralizes the worship of Yahweh.
"The key phenomenon -
which cannot be explained solely against the background of economic prosperity
- was the sudden growth of the population of Jerusalem in particular, and of
Judah in general." - Archaeologist
Archaeologist Amihai Mazar explains, "Jerusalem was a
virtual city-state where the majority of the state's population was
The reign of Hezekiah saw a notable increase in the
power of the Judean state as there was a large influx of Israelites fleeing
from the Assyrian
destruction of the northern state of Israel.
King Hezekiah of Judah, backed by Nubian Empire, revolted against King
Sennacherib of Assyria.
Sennacherib sacked many Hebrew villages, but
failed in his attempt to take Jerusalem.
There is no description of how
the siege ended, but the annals record a list of booty sent from Jerusalem to
on his throne as a vassal
Hezekiah's capitualtion informed the
later suicide at Massada by his
last remaining psychopathic Zaddikim followers.
King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon captures Jersalem and installs
Zedekiah revolts against Babylon, and entered into an alliance
with Pharaoh Hophra, the king of Egypt.
King Nebuchadnezzar II of Babylonia lays siege to Jerusalem.
Jerusalem falls and Solomon's Temple is
Talented craftsmen and the educated are taken into
captivity to Babylon.
Jerusalem is razed to the ground.
BC The Second Temple is constructed by Jewish
exile groups returning to Jerusalem from Babylon under the Achaemenid
167 to 160 BC The Maccabean Revolt is led by
Simon Maccabeus against
the Seleucid Empire and the Hellenistic influence on Hebrew life.
The revolt was in response
to Antiochus IV, decree to 'rent in pieces' and burn Hebrew 'books of the law'
found in Jerusalem in 168 BC.
Simon Maccabeus was the leader of a
Hebrew rebel army, the Maccabees, that took control of Judah, which at the time
had been a province of the Seleucid Empire.
The Maccabees found the
dynasty asserts their version of the Hebrew religion, largely through forced
conversion with the help of a high priest sect, the
Sadducees, to expand
the boundaries of Judah by religious conquest in the vain attempt to reduce the
influence of the Therapeutae and
When the Romans replaced the
Seleucids as the great power in the region, they granted the Hasmonean king,
Hyrcanus II, limited authority under the Roman governor of Damascus.
Hasmoneans were hostile to the Romans, and the following years they witnessed
A last attempt to restore the former glory of
the Hasmonean dynasty was made by Mattathias Antigonus, whose defeat and death
brought Hasmonean rule to an end, and Judah became a province of the Roman
Herod, a son-in-law of Hyrcanus II,
is appointed King of Judah by the Romans.
Granted unlimited autonomy in
the country's internal affairs, he became one of the most powerful monarchs in
the eastern part of the Roman
A great admirer of Greco-Roman culture, Herod became
"Great" when he launched a massive infrastructure construction program, which
included the cities of Caesarea and Sebaste, the port at Caesarea Maritima, and
the fortresses at Herodium and Masada.
most ambitious project was the expansion of the Second Temple in Jerusalem
making it into one of the most magnificent buildings of its time.
Herod's rebuilding of the Second Temple in Jerusalem was done so that
he would "have a capital city worthy of his prestige and grandeur."
4 BC Near death Herod has a change of mind about
According to the final version of his will, Antipas'
elder brother Archelaus was now to become King of Judah, Idumea and Samaria,
while Antipas would rule Galilee and Perea with the lesser title of
After Herod's death Judah came under direct Roman
Archelaus is deemed incompetent by Augustus and replaced with a prefect.
Antipas goes on to govern Galilee and Perea for forty-two years.
These territories are separated by the region of the Decapolis, with
Galilee to the north and Perea to the south.
Threats to political
stability are ongoing when Antipas takes office.
While Antipas is making his case to Augustus in Rome,
dissidents led by Judas son of Hezekiah (Ezekias, in the
Septuagint) attacks the
Sepphoris in Galilee,
seizing weapons with which they terrorize locals.
In a counterattack
ordered by Quinctilius Varus, Roman governor of
Syria, Sepphoris was
destroyed by fire and its inhabitants sold off as slaves.
Herod Antipater or Antipas built
Tiberias, modeled on a Greek city, on the western shore of the Sea of Galilee
with baths, a stadium,
a royal palace and
a sanctuary for prayer.
Antipas also rebuilt and fortified Sepphoris, while adding a wall to
Betharamphtha in Perea.
An ancient route linking Sepphoris to Legio,
and further south to Samaria-Sebastia, was paved by the Romans at this time.
At the time of Jesus of Nazareth,
Sepphoris was a large settlement.
Reza Aslan describes the period of
time of Jesus's growing into maturity:
"Rich, cosmopolitan, deeply
influenced by Greek culture, and surrounded by a panoply of races and
religions, the Hebrews of
Sepphoris were the product of the Herodian social revolution - the nouveaux
riche who rose to prominence after Herod's massacre of the heirs of the
Hasmonean dynasty and their
Jesus, while living in Nazareth, worked as a craftsman at Sepphoris,
where, during his youth 'the largest restoration project' of his time took
BC During the Roman occupation of Jerusalem
the Pharisees of the Temple (Kohanim),
became increasingly corrupt and were seen by the Hebrew people as collaborators
with the Romans, whose mismanagement led to riots,
general resentment at
An inner circle of the
Sadducees, the surviving high priests of the Hasmonean dynasty, continued
to develop the Mystery of the Zaddikim while
fueling the resentment of the
Zealots, who become their shock
Growing anger against increased Roman
suppression of Hebrew life resulting in sporadic violence escalates into a
The Roman governor, Gessius Florus, respondes by
plundering the Temple, claiming the money is for the Emperor.
day he launches a raid on the city, arresting numerous senior Hebrew merchants.
This prompts a wider,
large-scale rebellion and the Roman military garrison of Judaea is quickly
overrun by the Zealots, while the pro-Roman king Agrippa II, together with
Roman officials, flee Jerusalem.
Confrontation between the
and the mainly Zealot factions of the Northern Revolt under the command of
Yohanan ben Levi and Simon bar Kokhba,
erupts into bloody violence.
Idumeans enter Jerusalem fighting on the side of the Zealots they kill the
former High Priest, Ananus ben Ananus - the man who ordered the execution by
stoning of James the
brother of Jesus.
Simon Bar Giora, commanding 15,000 troops, is
then invited into Jerusalem by the remaining
Sadducee leaders to stand
against the Zealots, and quickly takes control over much of the
69 Bitter infighting continues between the
factions of Simon Bar Giora and Yohanan ben Levi and Simon bar
Roman forces led by Titus besiege Jerusalem.
The first two walls of
Jerusalem are breached within three weeks, but
a stubborn rebel standoff
prevents the Roman Army from breaking the third and thickest wall.
Following a brutal seven-month siege, during which Zealot infighting
results in burning of the entire food supplies of the city, the Romans finally
succeed in breaching the defenses of the weakened Hebrew forces.
Second Temple is destroyed and
Jerusalem is razed to
a splinter group of
Zealots, act as assassins, saboteurs and commanders of the Zealot shock troops
for the Sadducees.
leader of the Sicarii, Menahem, is murdered by
rival factions during an altercation; but promises to return in physical form
to his people before the end of the 2nd fall of mankind right before his
passing from this life.
Saul of Tarsus is
born of wealthy Hebrew parents engaged in trade in the first decade of the
common era at Tarsus in Cilicia.
Tarsus - a junction point of land and
sea routes connecting the Cilician plain (today called Çukurova),
central Anatolia and the Mediterranean sea - has long been an important stop
for traders and a focal point of many civilizations for the past 6000 years,
much like Yemen.
There is no
indication in Saul's writings that he received rabbinical training.
Hellenistic literature, the Book of Wisdom (Sirach) and other Apocrypha
were the sources for his eschatological and theological system.
Saul of Tarsus chose the
Jesus the Tannaim as the
model to provide the fulfillment of the promise of return by the leader of the
Sicarii, Menahem, as his model for Chrestus.
The spiritual leader
of the Zaddikim, Menahem modeled on the scripture of Melchizedek, is the one
who raises Christ.
The Hebrew word Zaddikim, defined as
"the most perfect righteous Ones" (ZAD-dee-KEEM: etymology,
Hebrew word Tzaddik = "righteous"), were a
splinter cult of ultra-radical
Hebrews whose beliefs and practices are recorded in the
Dead Sea Scrolls.
remnants of the Sicarii and the Zaddikim were defeated at the last Hasmonean
dynasty outpost at Masada in 73 AD.
The inner circle of the Hasmonean
dynasty high priests were Zaddikim.
A manuscript with six chapters of
Sirach was found at Masada.
Survivors of the cult of the Zaddikim
following the destruction of Jerusalem in 70 AD fled to Masada,
the fortress hide
away built by Herod on a mountain plateau near the Dead Sea.
is 35 miles from Jerusalem.
73 AD As the Romans engineer and build a
ramp to invade the plateau the Zaddikim of
the Dead Sea become suicidal.
The Zaddikim, children of the Sadducee
high priesthood, make their last stand at Masada.
"Since we long ago
resolved never to be servants to the Romans, nor to any other than to God
Himself, Who alone is the true and just
Lord of Mankind, the time
is now come that obliges us to make that
resolution true in practice.
We were the very first that revolted, and we are the last that fight
against them; and I cannot but esteem it as a favor that God has granted us,
that it is still in our power to die bravely, and in a state of freedom." -
Elazar ben Yair, leader of the Zaddikim
After this oration, the last
remnants of the Hasmonean dynasty, the Zaddikim men, kill their wives, their
children, and then each other.
For over 1750 hundred years the tale of
Masada is a forgotten episode.
358 The Last Great
Sanhedrin, an assembly of seventy-one rabbis appointed to sit as tribunal the
ancient Land of Israel, is held.
The Nasi, functioned as head, while
the Av Beit Din was second to the Nasi along with sixty-nine general
The last universally binding decision of the Great Sanhedrin
was to abandon the Hebrew Calendar.
Lamdan pens "Masada," a poetic history of the anguished Jewish fight against a
world full of enemies.
According to Professor David Roskies, Lamdan's
poem, "more than any other text, inspired the uprising in the
of Exile was needed in order to construct a long-range memory in which an
exiled nation race was posited as the direct continuation of 'people of the
Bible' that preceded it." - Professor Shlomo Sand
1953 Chief of Staff of the Israel Defense Forces (IDF), Moshe
Dayan, initiates the practice of holding the swearing-in ceremony of Israeli
Armoured Corps soldiers who had completed their Tironut (IDF basic training),
on top of Masada.
The ceremony ended with the declaration: "Masada
shall not fall again."
The soldiers climb the Snake Path at night and
are sworn in with torches lite.
2007 A new museum
opens at Masada in which archeological findings are displayed in a theatrical
The Zaddikite impulse lives on
in the refounding of the Hasmonean dynasty as the state of Israel with a new
title for their reminiscent ideology, Zionism.
psychopathic beliefs of the
Zaddikim infect humanity globally with a suicidal mania demanding unattainable
perfection disguised as political-religious beliefs
and perverted into a War
"Whatever laws, customs, or ceremonies we observe -
whether we are Conservative, Reform or merely spasmodic sentimentalists -
we follow the Talmud. It is our common law." -
Herman Wouk Conscription exists in Israel for all
Israeli citizens over the age of 18 who are Jewish,
Palestinians are not conscripted.
Reexamining first Israeli_African American soldier
Black Hebrews slam IDF after soldier's death ruled
This web site is not a commercial web site and
is presented for educational purposes only.
This website defines a new
philosophical ideology to which its author adheres. The author feels that the
falsification of reality outside personal experience has forged a populace
unable to discern propaganda from reality and that this has been done
purposefully by an international corporate cartel through their agents who wish
to foist a corrupt version of reality on the human race. Religious intolerance
occurs when any group refuses to tolerate religious practices, religious
beliefs or persons due to their religious ideology. This web site marks the
founding of a mystery school aptly named The Truth of the Way of the
Lumière Infinie - a rational gnostic mystery religion based on reason
which requires no leap of faith, accepts no tithes, has no supreme leader, no
church buildings and in which each and every individual is encouraged to
develop a personal relation with the Creator and Sustainer through the pursuit
of the knowledge of reality in the hope of curing the spiritual corruption that
has enveloped the human spirit. The tenets of The Truth of the Way of the
Lumière Infinie are spelled out in detail on this web site by the
author. Violent acts against individuals due to their religious beliefs in
America is considered a "hate crime."
This web site in no way condones
violence. To the contrary the intent here is to reduce the violence that is
already occurring due to the international corporate cartels desire to control
the human race. The international corporate cartel already controls the world
banking system, corporate media worldwide, the global industrial military
entertainment complex and is responsible for the collapse of morals, the
elevation of self-centered behavior and the destruction of global ecosystems.
Civilization is based on coöperation. Coöperation does not occur at
the point of a gun.
American social mores and values have declined
precipitously over the last century as the corrupt international cartel has
garnered more and more power. This power rests in the ability to deceive the
populace in general through corporate media by pressing emotional buttons which
have been preprogrammed into the population through prior corporate media
psychological operations. The results have been the destruction of the family
and the destruction of social structures that do not adhere to the corrupt
international elites vision of a perfect world. Through distraction and
coercion the direction of thought of the bulk of the population has been
directed toward solutions proposed by the corrupt international elite that
further consolidates their power and which further their purposes.
views and opinions presented on this web site are the views and opinions of
individual human men and women that, through their writings, showed the
capacity for intelligent, reasonable, rational, insightful and unpopular
thought. All factual information presented on this web site is believed to be
true and accurate and is presented as originally presented in print media which
may or may not have originally presented the facts truthfully. Opinion and
thoughts have been adapted, edited, corrected, redacted, combined, added to,
re-edited and re-corrected as nearly all opinion and thought has been
throughout time but has been done so in the spirit of the original writer with
the intent of making his or her thoughts and opinions clearer and relevant to
the reader in the present time.
Fair Use Notice
This site may contain copyrighted material the use of which has
not always been specifically authorized by the copyright owner. We are making
such material available in our efforts to advance understanding of criminal
justice, human rights, political, economic, democratic, scientific, and social
justice issues, etc. We believe this constitutes a 'fair use' of any such
copyrighted material as provided for in section 107 of the US Copyright Law. In
accordance with Title 17 U.S.C. Section 107, the material on this site is
distributed without profit to those who have expressed a prior interest in
receiving the included information for research and educational purposes. For
more information see: www.law.cornell.edu/uscode/17/107.shtml. If you wish to
use copyrighted material from this site for purposes of your own that go beyond
'fair use', you must obtain permission from the copyright owner.
© Lawrence Turner
All Rights Reserved