If you play soccer you would know how much running is involved during a single game. So as you would expect, your feet, ankles and knees get placed under large amounts of stress for long periods of time. Therefore it is quite common to sustain both acute and chronic injuries to the lower limb, especially if you have flat or high arched feet.
Common Acute Foot and Ankle Injuries
Acute injuries to the feet, ankles and knees can be hard to avoid when playing soccer and commonly happen suddenly without much warming. In soccer it’s common to sustain an acute injury in the following scenarios
- When two players collide while challenging for the ball
- When joints twist the wrong way and beyond their normal range of motion
- When muscles tear as a result of being overstretched
These sorts of injuries are sudden and cause a large amount of pain and distress to the player and often require immediate treatment.
Ankle sprains are one of the most common injuries seen in many sports including soccer. If you have sustained a sprain ankle strapping is highly recommended immediately after the injury to prevent any further damage to the ligaments that support your ankle. Many players wait long after they’ve sustained their ankle injury before applying this important technique.
If you are unable to place weight on your foot or talk a few steps with the foot after you have sprained it this can be a sign of a fracture to part of the ankle. If the player is unable to put any weight on their foot, it’s important to come seek help from a health professional. They will likely refer you for x-ray examination to check for breaks in the bones that make up the ankle joint.
Chronic Foot and Ankle Injuries
These sorts of injuries tend to be more subtle. They occur after excessive wear and tear, fatigue and poor training technique. They may come on suddenly or gradually over time. The earlier these sorts of injuries are treated, the better the outcome for the player. Some common chronic injuries include plantar fasciitis (heel pain/spurs), Achilles tendinopathy, Sesamoiditis, Shin Splints and ITB syndrome.
What is Sever’s Disease?
This is a heel pain condition which commonly occurs in children aged 8-14. Although it can affect both boys and girls, it is a condition which is more commonly seen in boys. It can be extremely painful and can limit the child’s ability to participate in sport. Often the child will be seen to limp during or after a game.
This problem is commonly misdiagnosed as growing pains and often the condition is either ignored or the parents are told there is nothing that can be done to treat it. This is completely false and the condition is commonly treated successfully by podiatrists so your child can remain fit and active. If your son or daughter has the symptoms of Sever’s disease, make an appointment today by calling our Innaloo clinic on 0448242856. While Sever’s disease is the most common cause of pain in the active child’s foot, it is just one of many childhood foot conditions related to lower limb development, which is why your child should visit a podiatrist.
Treatment and Examination of Soccer Related Foot Problems
If you are suffering from any soccer related foot, leg or knee pain, the sooner your treat the problem, the better the long term outcome and faster you will be able to go back on the field pain free. At Cooper and Lourie, we offer many treatment services including low level laser therapy and custom foot orthoses.