international space station
2016 marked record-breaking progress in NASA’s exploration objectives. The agency advanced the capabilities needed to travel farther into the solar system while increasing observations of our home and the universe, learning more about how to continuously live and work in space and, of course, inspiring the next generation of leaders to take up our Journey to Mars and make their own discoveries.
During a televised presentation to NASA employees, on May 25 from NASA Headquarters, Deputy Administrator Dava Newman and retired NASA astronaut Scott Kelly reflected on Kelly’s historic one-year mission aboard the International Space Station, which he and Russian cosmonaut Mikhail Kornienko completed in March.
A SpaceX Dragon cargo spacecraft launched aboard a Falcon 9 rocket on April 8, from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida to resupply the International Space Station. Among the almost 7,000 pounds of science research, crew supplies and hardware being delivered is the Bigelow Expandable Activity Module, or BEAM.
Future astronauts will require highly reliable habitation systems to keep them healthy and productive during missions that take them farther from Earth than humans have ever gone before. Through public-private partnerships with U.S. industry, NASA is investigating habitation concepts that can support astronauts who are living and working in the harsh environment of deep space.
NASA Administrator Charlie Bolden was back on Capitol Hill during the week of March 13 for more Congressional hearings on the agency’s $19 billion dollar Fiscal Year 2017 budget proposal.
During a March 10 hearing of the U.S. Senate Appropriations Subcommittee on Commerce, Justice, Science and Related Agencies, NASA Administrator Charlie Bolden testified about the $19 billion dollar Fiscal Year 2017 budget proposed for the agency by President Obama.
Expedition 46 Commander Scott Kelly of NASA and cosmonauts Sergey Volkov and Mikhail Kornienko of Roscosmos landed safely in Kazakhstan on March 2. The landing wrapped up a 340 day mission aboard the International Space Station for Kelly and Kornienko, during which they gathered valuable biomedical data on the long duration effects of weightlessness on the human body that will be used to formulate a human mission to Mars.
On Jan. 16, 2016, Expedition 46 Commander Scott Kelly shared photographs of a blooming zinnia flower in the Veggie plant growth system aboard the International Space Station. Kelly wrote, "Yes, there are other life forms in space! #SpaceFlower #YearInSpace"
A Dec. 2 event with the House of Representatives Committee on Science, Space and Technology, featured a live chat with NASA’s Scott Kelly and Kjell Lindgren from onboard the International Space Station. Kelly and Lindgren answered questions from Texas Representative and Chairperson Lamar Smith and other committee members, about life on the station and the research on the orbital laboratory.
On Nov. 6, 2015, NASA astronauts Scott Kelly and Kjell Lindgren spent 7 hours and 48 minutes working outside the International Space Station on the 190th spacewalk in support of station assembly and maintenance.