Summary of "The Emerald Tablets of Thoth"
Tablet 1: The History of Thoth, the Atlantean
Scholars say that Hermes Trismegistus was the fictional hero of the Corpus Hermeticum, but in Arabic Hermetic literature, Apollonius (Balns) of Tyana is associated with Hermes. Apollonius is a historical figure, unlike the legendary Hermes Trismegistus. He was a physician, a magician and a spiritual person. Here is a fragment from The Letters of Apollonius of Tyana, translated by Robert J. Penella (Leiden 1979): "All men, so I believe, belong to the family of God and are of one nature; everyone experiences the same emotions, regardless of the place or condition of a person's birth, whether he is a barbarian or a Greek, so long as he is a human being."
The Emerald Tablets of Thoth are said to reveal secrets of creating the Philosophers Stone. The Emerald Tablets of Thoth (1–13 of which are part of the original collection and 14 and 15 supplemental) were translated by Dr. Doreal who, as the book claims had a connection with the pyramid priesthood and was instructed to recover and return the tablets to the pyramid, but before this, he was allowed to translate the work and keep a copy. The translation was done in 1925 and only now has permission been granted to publish parts of the work.
Despite its mysterious origin, many have imputed great significance to the text—its famous translators include Roger Bacon, Isaac Newton and even HP Blavatsky.
It seems that the reader is destined to read this ancient cryptic work and if he is spiritually aware, he will read between the lines.
Thoth is an Atlantean Priest-King who has rule ancient Egypt for 16,000 years. With the sinking of his land, he went to Egypt where he established his colony. It is Thoth who built the Great Pyramid of Giza, not Cheops, as a repository for Atlantean knowledge and a place for initiating great souls such as Solomon and Jesus Christ into the Mysteries. As Hermes in his third incarnation, the Thrice Born, he wrote the Emerald Tablets which became the basis for the ancient Mysteries. The tablets were left in the care of pyramid priests. From here they were taken to the Maya of South America.
In Tablet 1, Thoth refers to his kind as Mighty ones and those that he lives among in Egypt as little men.
Wise were we with the wisdom of the Children of the Light who dwell among us. Strong were we with the power drawn from the eternal fire. And of all these, greatest among the children of men was my father, Thotme, keeper of the great temple, link between the Children of Light who dwelt within the temple and the races of men who inhabited the ten islands.
Thoth speaks of the degeneration of the hearts of the Atlanteans that led to their downfall and the great cataclysm. Only the Temple of Light survived atop a mountain on Undal, and within it the fortunate few who were saved. But it sank too beneath the waves to emerge in some future time and those that were saved including Thoth left in the great ship of the Master, rising above the temple as though in a submarine.
When in Egypt the inhabitants tried to destroy them, Thoth paralysed them with a ray of vibration from his staff and only released them when they groveled at his feet.
Tablet 2: The Halls of Amenti
According to Thoth, there is a passage to Amenti (the Underworld beneath the sunken islands of Atlantis) from beneath the Great Pyramid. The pyramid he built using the power that overcomes Earth force (gravity).This passage to the halls of Amenti reaches almost to the summit of the pyramid. At the apex he placed a crystal that drew the force from out of the ether.
He who in courage would dare the dark realms, let him be purified first by long fasting. Lie in the sarcophagus of stone in my chamber. Then to reveal I to him the great mysteries.
The Children of Light sleep in Amenti, beneath the sunken islands of Atlantis. Once in a while, they incarnate to teach and guide, leading men from darkness to light. Here in the Halls of Amenti Death frees Thoth from his bondage to live as long as he wants and choose his own moment of death, so that he can be a guiding light for men.
Tablet 3: The Key to Wisdom
The Emerald Tablets of Thoth (or the Emerald Tablets of Hermes) is believed to have been discovered inside the Great pyramid. Said to be written by the Egyptian god Thoth or the Greek sage Hermes Trismegistus (Hermes the Thrice-Great'), at least 36,000 years ago, the work is the foundation for Hermetic philosophy and alchemy. Readers accompany Hermes on his journey from Atlantis to ancient Egypt and learn secrets to spiritual attainment and immortality on the way.
Tablet 4: The Space Born
When Thoth died he travelled through space and saw those who had conquered the ether, constructed a planet and created out of the ether cities of rose and gold. They created these from their thoughts. We are not of the Earth but children of the Infinite Cosmic Light. Only wisdom can free us from bondage. In the end, nothing but the progress of the soul matters.
In the following passage, Thoth seems to be telling us how to create:
Deep in the silence, first ye must linger until at last ye are free from desire. . . Conquer by silence, the bondage of words. Abstaining from eating until ye have conquered desire for food, that is bondage of soul. Centre thy soul in the place of thy consciousness, shaking it free from the bonds of the night. Place in thy mind-place the mage thou desireth. Picture the place thou desireth to see. Vibrate back and forth with thy power.
Once your soul is free from bondage, you can seek wisdom free from the fetters of the body.
What Does Thoth/ Hermes Trismegistus Teach Man?
- Wisdom is power. Don't be proud of your wisdom. Discourse with the ignorant as well as the wise. Listen to the knowledgeable as wisdom is everything.
- Speak up in the face of evil. For Truth like sunlight shines above all.
- Follow your heart.
- Do more than what is demanded of you.
- Use your riches in the right way. Share your resources with your friends.
- Seek out a spiritual guide. Those who are guided don't go astray, but those who are lost cannot find a straight path.
- Don't listen to gossip or gossip yourself. Silence is great.
- The senses are illusions. Turn thy thoughts inwards.
- Know O man that Light is thy heritage. Know that darkness is only a veil.
Tablet 5: The Dweller of Unal
In mighty Atlantis the Keeper of the Way Master of Unal Horlet dwelt in the temple built not by children of men. Horlet, not of the race of men, showed the path to attainment. He divided Atlantis into 10 kingdoms ruled by men and in another he built the Temple fromhis thoughts. It covered miles, deep in its heart the Essence of Light.
He filled its chambers with forms called forth from the Ether. Three of thse became his messengers to the kings of Atlantis. On the island of Undal he placed the teachers of light to men. Each trained for 15 years.
Thoth was summoned to the Temple by one of the three messengers. There Thoth trained and then found Amenti.
Atlantis fell because some too proud of their knowledge dared to enter Amenti in order to get greater knowledge. All the islands were destroyed except Unal and the part of the island where the sons of the Dweller teachers of the light lived. The gateway to Amenti was also destroyed.
Thoth was then instructed to take the sons of the Dweller (Sons of Atlantis) to Egypt in his spaceship which today lies buried beneath the Sphinx.
That is a most fascinating detail. A spaceship hidden inside the Sphinx?
- The Emerald Tablets of Thoth the Atlantean - translated by Dr. Doreal
Tablet 10: The Key of Time
Thoth further beseeches the children of Khem to turn away from the darkness to the light. He speaks of the great Void from which all existence was created with the power of thought.
When he asks the Dweller whether this thought was eternal, he is told that the Law of Time came into being so that eternal thought could exist. "Time does not move, rather we move through time. Time does not change, rather we change in time. Time separates events and gives them coherence. And even though in time ye are separate, yet still are One in all times existent."
Thoth gives us the powerful word which can open hidden planes to us and bring us power: Zin-Uru.
Tablet 11: The Key to Above and Below
This section is essentially about oneness. In Infinity there is no above or below. Only oneness. The consciousness of the masters of wisdom is within us
As the Lord of the Nine tells Thoth, in the end, nothing but the progress of the soul matters for the body is transient as are worldly achievements. Thoth reveals another startling secret:
Know ye that in the pyramid I built are the Keys that shall show ye the Way into life. Aye, draw ye a line from the great image I built, to the apex of the pyramid, built as a gateway. Draw ye another opposite in the same angle and direction. Dig ye and find that which I have hidden. There shall ye find the underground entrance to the secrets hidden before ye were men.
12: The Law of Cause and Effect and the Key of Prophecy
I was amazed and delighted to come across the subject of karma cause and effect. In fact, The Emerald Tablets of Thoth seem Buddhist in essence. Thoth tells us that we can know the future if we know the cause of the future. As The Buddha says, to know the future, know the present. According to Thoth (and The Buddha too), the future is not fixed, but varies according to the effects created by causes.
Thoth warns of wars which will halve the races of men. Then men shall again conquer the ocean and the air and once man has harnessed the lightning the great wars will shake the Earth. And then when the Sons of the Morning come to guide man, the ancient home of my people will rise from its place neath the dark ocean waves. Man will progress until he dissolves into the Light., becomes one with the SOURCE. Aye, in a time that is yet unborn, all shall be ONE and One shall be All.
In the end, Thoth urges us to call on him. Call his name three times in a row: Chequetet, Arelich, Vomalites
The Emerald Tablets of Thoth the Atlantean translated by Doreal