In a report published on the Health website, a University of Ior researcher explains the findings, Intestinal changes in bowel bacteria can be the reason for weight gain. Similar studies have shown that sleep disadvantages can also increase weight gain by up to 55 percent.
Indian dietician Neha Chadha said that a slight change in bowel bacteria can affect insulin resistance, increase hormones, reduce metabolism and even change the type of metabolism.
The Mumbai-based Nutritionist said, “Our body is refreshed and restructured while sleeping. At the same time, these bacteria do the best.
So before following the rules, you need to ensure the sleeping range.
Less than a week, you can wipe your body down to 7 kg weight. Thinking how can it be possible to lose 7 kg weight in seven days? This impossible can be done if you follow the General Motors (GM) diet plan. It is one of the world’s most popular diet programs. Those who are less interested in weight loss, keep them informed beforehand, Weight loss does not mean eating? It is rather harmful to your body. Because it is likely to increase the weight of a few more kilos next to it. In the right way, you can only lose weight by eating the right amount of food. Maybe thinking, how to lose weight by eating enough food?
So let’s see how we can lose weight in one week after eating the right foods?
According to the GM diet plan, the first day of the diet is very important. There will be nothing but fruit on your food list this day. Meaning, this day can be informed as a fruit day.
On the first day, you can put your favorite fruits on your food list. But remember that bananas cannot eat in any way this day. Keep food on the list, watermelon, apple, blueberries, and grapefruit. Eat this morning, afternoon, at night. You can also eat 8-10 glasses of water. However, no other food can be eaten.
This day can be celebrated as a Vegetable Day. You can eat vegetables that you like and eat raw. It is more beneficial to eat more than cooked vegetables and cook it better than eating. If you want to eat boiled potatoes, eat it in the morning. Because the potato carbohydrate can strengthen you all day. Keep in the food list, carrots, cucumbers, broccoli, cabbage and can eat vegetables. You can also eat 8-10 glasses of water.
On this day you can jointly observe fruits and vegetable day. However, on this day, potatoes and bananas will not be on the food list. Fruits in the morning, vegetables at noon, fruits in the afternoon and fruits and vegetables at night. You can also eat 8-10 glasses of water.
This day can eat milk and bananas all day. You can eat 8-10 bananas and 3 glasses of milk all day. Start with milk and bananas in the morning. Two bananas and one glass milk at noon. In the afternoon and at night you can finish the meal with bananas and milk.
You can eat a cup of rice at noon this afternoon. Besides, 6-8 tomatoes can eat all day and night. You can increase the amount of water 12-15 glasses on this day.
You can eat a cup of rice at noon this afternoon. You can also eat vegetables all day and night. You can increase the amount of water 12-15 glasses on this day.
Your weight loss mission arrives the last day. You can also eat a cup of rice on this day. You can eat fruit juice and vegetables throughout the day.
Nutritionists are asking for more fruit in the diet. But the fruit is healthy but there are some fruits that contain high levels of sugar. Therefore, the obstacles to the weight loss stand.
During the program, we are requesting not to eat the following fruits.
Dry Fruit: Dry Fruit is considered a healthy snack, but faster than the fresh fruit of the frying fry, blood sugar levels increase.
Papaya: As a result, the amount of sugar is high, so there is no fiber around. So, on one hand, the level of blood sugar increases, Because of lack of fiber, metabolism does not help papaya.
Pineapple: Very entertaining, delicious fruit pineapple. But due to this, the amount of sugar is very high, which is a big barrier to weight loss.
Mango: Everyone loves to eat mango in the summer. But if we want to lose weight, the lesser amount of food I eat, the better. The amount of sugar in me is very high. Which helps to increase weight.
After the above diet program, you will find that you have reduced the desired weight? You can not just lose weight in it rather, the skin of your face will be brighter than before. As a result of weight loss as well as the bright skin, you can now follow this one-week diet program.Follow Us