With the increasing number of mobile phones, tablets and other digital platforms, application developers are busy creating applications every day. The rising demand for application development services has been met through the creation of two types of apps; native apps and hybrid apps. It is not surprising to note that most people do not understand the difference between the apps.
If you look carefully at the apps in our phone, you will notice that there are apps which you never use. App developers should understand that the user experience for mobile apps is important. It is so easy to create a positive first impression by providing friendly user experience.
Native apps do an excellent job when it comes to user experience. The apps are characterized by smooth scrolling, advanced effects and animations, appealing UI elements, and gesture recognition that are specific to the platform. The characteristics help in creating an unforgettable user experience. Hybrid apps are different as they have to adapt to the platform in use simultaneously. In most cases, the apps seem odd in your device. Good web designers can create apps which resemble the native design.
Most native apps deliver high performance because the apps do not rely on internet speed to operate smoothly. The apps strike a connection with the hardware of the device so the content is downloaded as soon as the app is installed. The performance of the hybrid apps depend on the speed of the internet. This is because the apps have to pass through the hybrid platform then after that, execute the code then finally address to the hardware of the device. When resizing either from vertical to horizontal positions and vice versa, the app loads very slowly.
Time Taken to Develop
Life is moving quickly and so does businesses too. This means that business have little time to learn and adapt to changes so as to remain relevant in this era of digitalization. Technology in terms of applications is one of the areas where businesses are looking for solutions to simplify their activities and guarantee increased productivity and returns. Hybrid apps favor businesses in terms of development time. These apps are created in less time as a result of their single code base. Since the features in the app adapts to different platforms, they are easy to create. For native apps, you need to create designs for various configurations such as different androids, tablets and iPhones. It is therefore cheaper to create hybrid apps since you need one budget. Native apps means you need two budgets to represent the two platforms; Android and iOS.
As you look for an expert in application development services, you should decide the type of app you need depending on the use.