and Coffee Orchards in Kona
by George Yasuda
Ohia Tree & Blossom.
James Houk Setting Snare.
Damaged Hapu Fern by
Within 2 centuries a lot of koa and ohia forests have
either disappeared or have drastically been reduced
in Kona. Once where nice stands of koa and ohia flourished,
there now lie no koa or ohia trees.
There are several reasons for this decline including
agriculture and ranching. Over the years coffee farming
has to some degree contributed to this problem. However,
simple steps can be taken to coexist in a friendlier
manner with the rainforest. Some of these steps include:
1. Keeping all native trees intact without disturbing
them. The coffee trees can be formatted in the orchard
to coexist with the native trees.
2. Land clearing properly without injuring the tree
canopy, roots, soil or water drainage patterns.
3. Wherever the soil is disturbed a good program should
be initiated to stabilize the soil with a good, non-evasive
4. Preventing alien weeds to smother native plants.
5. Leaving dense forested areas untouched and maintaining
these areas as natural habitats.
6. Hunting and keeping feral pigs out of sensitive areas.
This introduced species has had a negative impact on
the native forests of Hawaii.
7. Conservative and careful use of pesticides.
8. Reforesting with native plants such as koa.
9. Practicing careful measures to prevent introduction
of soil and plant- born pests and diseases into pristine
10. Upkeeping and maintaining the orchard and native
plants with good nutrition and/or irrigation practices.
Coffee farming is a business and it also can be a pleasurable
life-style. This can be achieved by taking care of the
land so that it flourishes with a bountiful crop. Also,
by being respectful of the land and by taking some simple
steps, the natural landscape can be maintained as well
as radiate back to its original state.
may submit editorial comments to any of our stories
by sending an email to firstname.lastname@example.org.
We would be happy to attach your comments and feedback
to anything we publish online. Thank you for your interest."
appeared originally in Coffee Times print magazine and
appears online for archival purposes only. Any use or
reprinting of these stories without the expressed written
consent of the author is prohibited.