In the spring of 1940, Neville Chamberlain's cabinet hesitantly planned to mine neutral Norwegian coastal waters to interrupt German iron ore supplies being moved from Sweden via the port of Narvik. Troops were readied in Scottish ports for a preemptive invasion, should the Germans appear to be preparing one of their own.
They were indeed - and a terrible shambles ensued for the British from early April. The navy's attention was focused on protecting the transatlantic supply route; as reports flowed in of enemy forces moving north, the Admiralty ordered our warships to unload their troops and head north, which meant the Germans got ashore first, on April 9. The Anglo-French forces that eventually went ashore on April 13 were unable to dislodge them.
Back in London, the cabinet decided to withdraw the allied forces and concentrate on dislodging the enemy from Narvik, which was duly captured on May 28 - four days after Norway was abandoned to the Nazis because Hitler had overrun the low countries and France. The aircraft carrier HMS Glorious was sent to evacuate what was left of the small RAF fighter force supporting the troops at Narvik. These included the 10 surviving Hurricane fighters of 46 squadron, commanded by Kenneth Cross, whose own aircraft had earlier been badly damaged in a dogfight with German bombers.
On June 8, the Glorious and its two escorting destroyers were all sunk by the German battlecruisers Scharnhorst and Gneisenau. Cross jumped overboard, and spent nearly three days and nights on a float in the Arctic ocean before being rescued with frostbite by a Norwegian fishing boat. He was awarded the DFC.
Born in Portsmouth, Cross was forced to leave school at the age of 16 to help support his family. He managed to obtain a short-service commission in the RAF at 19, and was assigned to a fighter squadron in Kent in 1931. He proved himself a born pilot, took up aerobatics and eventually became an instructor, obtaining his permanent commission in 1936.
In the first weeks of the second world war, he was given command of 46 squadron. Grounded because of his injured feet, he missed the Battle of Britain but got himself posted to Egypt at the end of 1940, and commanded a fighter wing supporting Montgomery's Eighth Army in north Africa, Sicily and Italy. He won a DSO and was appointed group captain and CBE in 1945.
Transferred to Bomber Command, he led No 3 group of the nuclear-capable V-bombers from 1958. A year later, he became C-in-C of Bomber Command, a post he held for four years. He made sure that during the 1962 Cuban missile crisis the British deterrent was ready on shortest notice. His last appointment, as C-in-C of Transport Command, in 1963 was less stressful.
Cross retired in 1967 and worked for the Red Cross. He played golf, and also rugby for the RAF and Harlequins, and published his memoirs, Straight And Level, in 1993.
His wife, Brenda Powell, whom he married as a WAAF officer in 1945, was murdered at her London antique shop in 1991. They had two sons and a daughter.
· Kenneth Brian Boyd Cross, air commander, born October 4 1911; died June 18 2003.