In soccer, the objective is to move the ball from one end of the football pitch to the other and score a goal.
As players will be working in a team, passing, receiving and running with the ball are essential skills all new players should focus on.
Like any sport, progression and perfecting these skills takes practice, playing and developing. Here at Melbourne Soccer Academy we follow our specialised Practice-Play-Develop program. We understand the importance of a player actively practicing with a ball at training. It may seem obvious, but some programs focus on game situations or putting players into “positions” from an early age. We do not agree with this philosophy here at MSA as we believe players need to be “On-A-Ball” at each training session, getting as comfortable as possible while learning to control and manipulate the ball.
Getting Players ready for game positions comes at a later stage.
Some of the Key Skills for players are
Passing the ball
Passing the ball is a key skill that Players need to learn from the beginning. This will enable them and their team to keep possession of the ball.
The fundamental components to this skill comes in three parts and involves knowing what part of the foot to kick the ball with.
- Inside (instep) of the foot
- Outside of the foot
- Kicking the ball with the laces (this is what is known as Striking the Ball)
Each of these different techniques used while passing the ball will produce different results and the key trait in time will be to know what part of the foot to use in certain situations. If we can compare this to Golf, on the fairway a golfer has many different options of clubs from the tee-box to the green.
First Touch (Receiving and Controlling)
This is when a player needs to be able to Control the ball when he or she receives a pass from their teammate. Legs, Chest & Head can be used to receive and control the ball. The aim is to be able to use these body parts to receive the ball in a relaxed and controlled manner, keeping possession of the ball always. Passes can come to a player in a manner of different ways ie Air or Ground Passes. This will influence the players decision on how to control the ball.
Dribbling (Running with the Ball)
This involves players learning to run with the ball, kicking the ball with either inside or outside of their feet to move across the pitch.
This is the easiest skill a player can be thought if introduced properly.0yuiop;kjy6z0t9za
69057opulhjlm,.fadfvb,.l’[‘gh/fr/’98oikjmn zgv Players need to be able to familiarlise themselves with the ball and have fun. Here at MSA we strongly believe that loving the ball is a core ingredient for players to develop and excel and most importantly enjoying. This skill will help with mobility, agility and conditioning.
Many young players are apprehensive about heading because of the fear of getting hurt. As a coach, your challenge will be to teach your players to overcome the natural inclination to turn away from the ball in a heading situation. Develop heading skills in a sound, progressive manner, and teach player to head forward, sideways, and in the air with their foreheads.
As soccer games are won by scoring goals, learning the art of scoring with plenty of practise can be so important in their early development. This form of practise can be lots of fun to score goals like long shots, short tap-in, chip shots, and headers all hitting the back of the net and giving the player a sense of achievement. Practice with a goalkeeper and other defenders so players can experience a variety of situations that will present themselves in games.