Sheringham Point Lighthouse
Standing 20 metres high, above the rocky coastline of southwest Vancouver Island, the Sheringham Point Lighthouse has served as a beacon of hope and salvation for more than 100 years.
Built in 1912, Sheringham Point Lighthouse, like so many other lighthouses around our coastal waters, has saved countless lives throughout its history. Staffed for much of its life, the lighthouse was later automated and now has a single green beacon. It has provided navigational aid, weather information, solace and safety for mariners and the Coast Guard.
Its history is rich and touches many families in this area. It is a reminder of our deep connections to the land and the sea, and it has always been seen as a symbol of security for our community.
CELEBRATING 100 YEARS OF SERVICE TO THE WEST COAST
In 2012 Sheringham Point Lighthouse celebrated its 100th Anniversary.
“Eustace Travanion Arden lit the light for the first time on September 30, 1912. Sheringham Point with its dramatic view of the Olympic Mountain Range and close proximity to town had very little turnover. Keeper Arden remained at the station almost thirty-four years, retiring on February 18, 1946.”
A History of the Sheringham Point Lighthouse
Researched and authored by Rebecca Quinn and the volunteers of the Sheringham Point Lighthouse Preservation Society, “A History of the Sheringham Point Lighthouse” is a 20 page, full colour book covering the illustrious history of the lighthouse at Sheringham Point. It is available for purchase. For more details, please click here.
Excerpts from the Lightkeepers Journal
Tempests and Teapots
Some thoughts on the Sheringham Point Lighthouse by renowned B.C. author/poet Garry Geddes. Click here to view this article: Tempests .
VISIT THE SITE
Walk the Lighthouse View Trail – a short walk from the parking lot will take you to the Lighthouse, or you can walk the full trail (3.4 km) through the surrounding area. Please note that, at this time, access inside the lighthouse structure is not permitted. For more details on visiting the site, please click here.