- Web page
Gender equality is also a men's issue Gender (in)equality concerns both women and men and has a strong impact on their daily lives. Historically gender ...03 February 2015
Report that analyse issues concerning men and gender equality in Sweden. The report discuss men and gender equality in ...
- News article
... equality discussions often engage mainly women, but actually men have a crucial role to play. In order to achieve gender equality, we need ... suicide rates to lower levels of achievement in education and lower engagement in caring for children and other household duties. ...06 October 2016
... participants of several online discussion held in September and October 2013 via the EuroGender online platform. The reports were ... topics related to gender equality: Gender Equality Index, Men and Gender Equality, Female Genital Mutilation, Benefits of Gender ...24 September 2014
... to be as correct as possible in representation fo women and men. Subtype : Codes of conduct which safeguard gender equality ...01 January 2002
- ResourceEducation, Employment
The rationale for engaging men to positively transform gender relations is compelling. This paper outlines the arguments for male inclusion, both for gender equality and for men themselves, the principles that should underpin their involvement, ...01 January 2008
... examined women's access to decision-making in the media and politics in Latvia. The research is based on qualitative research methods - ... to an exhaustive description of the situation concerning men and women in decision-making. As the practical task of the research was to ...01 January 2004
Men for gender equality are a voluntary organisation that work for gender equlity and against mens' voilence of women. ...
- Career opportunity
... a reserve list for Seconded National Experts (SNE) – Men & Gender Equality. The registration of applications will begin on 7 May 2013 and will close on 6 June 2013 at 23:00 Eastern European Time (EET). The ...07 May 2013
The union collects gender statistics of governing body members, shop stewards etc. and these are discussed in regular meetings. Subtype : Other tools ...01 January 1990
A main legislative development that enhances gender equality in Malta that safeguards equal treatment in employment, education and vocational training, and financial services on the grounds of gender and ...01 January 2004
Gender policies contribute to employment and growth. In the renewed Lisbon strategy for growth and jobs, gender equality ... balance. It is necessary to step up efforts to help men and women reconcile work and their private responsibilities at all stages ...