Don’t Listen to Flu Shot Myths! Get Vaccinated This Year
Getting a flu shot is an important step to stay healthy through the winter and protect your loved ones. While it only takes a few minutes to get a flu vaccine, there are dozens of myths and misconceptions that prevent people from getting it.
These flu shot myths are dangerous.
Without the vaccine, you could be at risk of catching the flu and even getting hospitalized because of it. Don’t listen to these common flu shot myths. It’s time to bust these untruths to keep your friends and family healthy.
Myth: Flu Shots Don’t Work
Each year, people claim that the flu shot is “ineffective” and only covers certain strains. There are also stories about people who got a flu vaccine but got sick anyway. This leads to the myth that the flu shot is ineffective and a waste of time.
Studies show that getting vaccinated reduces your flu risk by 40-60%, that’s not an insignificant amount. Plus, if you do catch the flu even with your vaccine, your symptoms will likely be milder and last a shorter period of time than if you didn’t get a shot.
Myth: Flu Shots Cause the Flu
This is a flu shot myth where people claim that the side effects from the vaccine will be just as bad as the flu itself. While some people may experience fatigue, headache, or fever shortly after the injection, the side effects aren’t nearly as bad as getting the flu. In fact, the majority of people only experience mild soreness at the injection site for a few hours after.
Myth: You Don’t Need a Flu Shot if You’re Healthy
Many people believe that if they eat well and have a good immune system then they don’t need their flu shot. However, the flu affects many strong and healthy people each year. Not only that, but you could pass the flu on to those who are unable to get vaccinated, like the elderly, small children, and people with compromised immune systems. This could be deadly for them.
Getting a flu shot is part of herd immunity. You will stop the spread of disease to protect others who are vulnerable.
Myth: You Don’t Need a Flu Shot if You Got One Last Year
One of the most prevalent flu shot myths is the idea that your vaccine from last year will protect you this year. Flu strains are constantly evolving, and the vaccine that protected you last year might not be effective against this year’s strain. Make a point to get a flu shot each year to stay protected.
Ignore Flu Shot Myths and Schedule Your Vaccine Appointment
The CDC recommends getting your flu vaccine by the end of October.
However, getting vaccinated can be beneficial even if you get it in January or beyond. Flu season can last as late as May, so a quick shot can protect you for almost nine months.
At Florida Wellness, we offer flu vaccines as part of our Primary Care services. Schedule an appointment today to get your flu shot, along with a wellness checkup to make sure you are healthy and happy with your body.