Connecting the letters of the uppercase and lowercase alphabet
Name of Teacher: Mika Tejbo
Class/Grade/Language Level: Grade 4 ES
Textbook and specific lesson: Let’s Try 2 Unit 6 Alphabet, around the third lesson when the students already have gotten used to the lowercase alphabet.
Goal: To practice connecting the letters of the uppercase and lowercase alphabet, and also telling apart similar letters.
Preparation: The digital Let’s Try textbooks, big letter cards with magnets for the blackboard (uppercase and lowercase), smaller letter cards for the students (can be cut out from the back of Let’s Try 2)
Class time: 45 minutes
(5 min) Greetings and warmup; for example, the two alphabet songs from Let’s Try 1 and 2 – for the students to sing and look at first uppercase and then lowercase letters.
(15 min) Line up the letters in order on the blackboard with the students chanting them, first all of uppercase and then all of the lowercase alphabet. Then times is spent on comparing the two; which letters are really similar? Then, which letters are not at all like each other? Pick out the pairs d-D, e-E, g-G, q-Q, r-R etc. and ask the students to do the same in pairs. Let them play memory – choose two cards in turn, say them out loud, and if they are same you got a pair else you have to put them down face down again.
(5 min) Put up the cards for lowercase b, d, p, and q on the blackboard. These are very similar and can easily be mixed up. Talk about tricks to remember them – maybe a small story. I usually teach the students to put their fists so that they meet in front of the student. Then do thumbs up – you have b first to the left (like in the alphabet) and then d to the right. Then do thumbs down – you have p to the left before q to the right (again, same order as in the alphabet). But any trick can make the trick.
(15 min) Let the student do big memory games with all the letters in groups of 3-4. It’s important that they say the letters they are getting out loud, and help each other if they don’t remember.
(5 min) If there is any time left; do the alphabet chants again and finish the lesson with the usual greeting.