Why Psychological Testing?
Psychological testing can be an intimidating concept, but in reality, it is a powerful and highly useful tool designed to help the client. Therapists often refer their clients to psychologists for psychological testing and assessment. These assessments can help the client identify which problems to tackle in therapy (especially when a client has more than one presenting concern), as well as many other real-world problems, such as whether it may be beneficial to see a doctor about medication, engage in school child study, or simply continue therapy.
Psychological testing can also help differentiate specific disorders within a family of disorders in order to formulate appropriate goals for the client in consideration of a more specific diagnosis. For example, a person suffering form anxiety may choose psychological testing to narrow their disorder to Generalized Anxiety Disorder, Posttraumatic Stress Disorder, or a phobia. This can help optimize the benefits a client receives during therapy. Career testing is also an available assessment service.
If a child is struggling in school, psychological testing and assessment can help identify a specific disability, and allow the child to receive proper accommodations. Children can also be assessed when behavioral issues or issues with impulse-control are present in the home or school environment. Testing reports can be beneficial to allow schools or other professionals to be a partner in interventions.
Sometimes, in instances of legal cases, psychological testing can be used to determine whether a person is fit to stand trial, or if they are psychologically/emotionally competent. Psychological testing can sometimes be helpful in determining a person’s parental capacity.
The testing process can include both formal/normative tests and assessments, which are then interpreted by a licensed psychologist. Depending on the presenting concerns, a set of tests will be chosen, as well as a clinical assessment by the psychologist.
Testing provides a thorough documentation of the client’s history, symptom timeline, and impact on functioning. It provides a framework for addressing a client’s issues and a better understanding of how therapeutic intervention/counseling can be most helpful.
Testing is a three-part process. Three separate appointments are usually required to complete the testing process. The first appointment is a 45 minute “Testing Diagnostic Interview,” in which the psychologist will assess which areas in the client’s functioning need further examination. The second appointment is the actual “Test” session, in which any number of tests may be used. This appointment can range anywhere from two hours to six hours. Test sessions will typically be broken up into two or three-hour blocks. The final session is the “Testing Results Session,” in which case the psychologist will review their findings with the client, provide a written report, and provide suggestions for treatment.
Our psychologists serve the Williamsburg, Hampton, and Chesapeake areas, offering best practice testing for ADHD, Autism, and Memory/Dementia, including the ADOS-2. They perform psychological testing, neuropsychological testing, and educational testing. Call (757) 827-7707 for more information or to schedule an appointment with one of our psychologists.
Dr. Brenna Grant Squires is a Licensed Clinical Psychologist who works with children, adolescents, and adults. Dr. Squires has experience providing individual and group therapy, conducting psychological assessments, and consulting with educational personnel. She has worked in a variety of settings including community mental health, university clinics, and private practice.
Dr. Noelle Lowry is familiar with psychotherapeutic treatment of many personal difficulties. She will see any population, ages 7 and up, and specializes in psychological testing. While she is experienced with integrating faith in therapy sessions, she is respectful of individuals whom hold different views and of individuals whom do not wish to incorporate faith within their therapy time.
Dr. Cynthia Kokoris is a Licensed Clinical Psychologist. She holds a Master’s (M.A.) and Doctoral degree (Psy. D.) in Clinical Psychology from Regent University. She has a range of experience working with both inpatient and outpatient services. Dr. Kokoris works with children as well as adults and enjoys providing both individual and group therapy. Her approach to therapy is a combination of person-centered and cognitive behavioral techniques that address client needs holistically. Dr. Kokoris also provides assessment and evaluations, including forensic evaluations.
Dr. Candace Lassiter is a Licensed Clinical Psychologist in the state of Virginia. She completed her Master’s (M.A) and Doctorate in Clinical Psychology (Psy.D) from Regent University. Dr. Lassiter provides assessment and evaluations for a wide range of concerns including ADHD and LD evaluations. Dr. Lassiter’s professional interests also include a passion for training and supervising students. She is currently the Clinical Training Director at Genesis Counseling Center.
Dr. Trina Young Greer holds licensures in Virginia as a Licensed Clinical Psychologist, Licensed Marriage and Family Therapist, and Licensed Professional Counselor. She is recognized for her work in trauma recovery, grief, and assessment of all ages. Dr. Young Greer provides personality testing, psycho-educational testing for assessing learning issues, and best practice assessment for Autism and ADHD. Dr. Young Greer believes that all healing has a spiritual foundation and she is committed to assisting others to find meaning and true peace in their lives. Dr. Young Greer is the founder and executive director of Genesis Counseling Center.
Article by Sarah Warner, MS