Oklahoma, with the postal abbreviation OK is one among the 50 states in the United States, situated in the South Central part of the country. Oklahoma is bordered by Missouri and Arkansas in the east, New Mexico in the west, Kansas on the north, Colorado in the northwest and Texas in the south. The state is situated on a meeting point of three main American civilizing regions and served as a way for cattle drives in the past, a government-approved land for Native Americans and a destination for southern settlers. Though the state of Oklahoma is the chief producer of oil, natural gas and agricultural products, it counts on an economic base of energy, aviation, biotechnology and telecommunications. The state was one among the fastest developing economies in the country during 2007, ranking in the middle of the leading states in gross domestic product growth and per capita revenue growth. Tulsa and Oklahoma City serve as chief economic anchors of the state, with almost 2/3rd of Oklahomans existing within their city statistical regions. Oklahoma is the 20th most wide-ranging and the 28th most thickly populated state among the 50 states of the country.
Oklahoma was the 46th state admitted to the union on the 16th of November 1907. The total land area of Oklahoma is 69,899 square miles, which offers the state an area rank of 20 out of the available 50 states in the United States. In addition, water surface occupies 1,296 square miles of the total area of the state within its boundaries. There are 77 counties in Oklahoma among which the Cotton County was the most recent county formed in the state, in the year 1912.
Consistent with 2010 United States Census information, the population of Oklahoma was 3,450,654. Among the counties of the Oklahoma State, the most populous county is the Oklahoma County with the population of 718,633, and the Cimarron County is ranked as the least populous county with the population of 2,475.
As of 2010, there are seven State Electoral Votes in Oklahoma. The State Quarter issue Date of Oklahoma is January 28, 2008. The state motto of Oklahoma is “Labor conquers all things“.
Sooner State is the nickname of the state of Oklahoma. The name of the state bird of Oklahoma is the Scissor-tailed Flycatcher. Redbud is the state tree of Oklahoma, and the Mistletoe is the state flower. Oklahoma City is the state capital of Oklahoma. The Oklahoma City is the biggest of all cities in Oklahoma by population, and the same city ranks first in total land area, too. The Oklahoma City is the oldest city in Oklahoma. The Oklahoma State is served by three area codes, such as 405, 580 and 918.