The criminal justice field is as old as society itself. Unfortunately, there are people who prefer not abiding by rules in every country. The judicial system is a factor that deters them from violating other citizens’ welfare. Career building in this area is considered quite honorable and prestigious. Therefore, many young people decide to devote their lives to criminal justice and enter educational institutions that specialize in this field.
In order to become competent professionals, students have to pass many exams, do numerous assignments, and obtain knowledge that will be used in the future. If you are among them, choosing criminal justice topics for academic papers is a usual task for you.
The tips provided in this article will help you in overcoming difficulties that may occur while working on the paper. Read it carefully and pick up several options that seem the most interesting to you.
If you are not sure that your professor will like an original research direction, it is better to choose some standard topic. It can be widely discussed on TV, in newspapers, or on the Internet. And of course, you have to be really interested in this issue. It is much more enjoyable to study a phenomenon or a process that resonates with you. If you are indifferent to the topic chosen, your reader will feel it and get bored too.
You can explore the background of a problem, make some predictions, comparison, and discoveries that will supplement the world scientific heritage. Remember that all your arguments should be backed up with quotes or real-life examples. You may go to a library or surf the Internet to gather enough factual material to prove a thesis – the main idea of a paper. If there are not enough proofs, then it’s better to change a research direction.
The following list of criminal justice paper topics contains the most topical and interesting issues which your professor is guaranteed to appreciate:
The main problems of the prison system
The deterrence and rational choice theory
How school and workplace sexual offenders are punished by the law?
Why do men receive capital punishment more often than women?
Considering kidnapping and ransom cases, find common features, criminals’ motifs, and behavior style
Principles of crime prevention
How do professionals understand that a person fired off deliberately or accidentally?
A legal perspective of cybercrime
Mass media, crime, and justice
Review parental abduction laws
Wildlife crime and how it can be prevented
Discuss Miranda versus Arizona (1966) and its impact today
How is jury selection performed?
Organized crime and corruption relationship
Prison rape and violence
What is forensic science? Describe its role and functions
Theft and shoplifting
Witness Protection Program
Date rape, and what can be done to avoid it?
Crimes committed due to substance abuse
What changes your government can introduce to protect kids from online predators?
Difference between criminal and civil cases
What laws protect domestic abuse victims?
The strain theory
Ethics in criminal justice
What problems US law enforcement should solve currently?
Has information sharing technology been improved in the fight against terrorism?
Serial killers’ types
Relationship between youth arrests and drug use
Link between aggressive behavior and crime
How does sentencing take place?
What terms are established for different punishment types?
Is unwarranted arrest acceptable from the human rights perspective?
Drug Abuse Warning Network (DAWN) and Arrestee Drug Abuse Monitoring (ADAM)
Forensic evolving owing to technology use
Murder, manslaughter, and homicide: similarities and differences
Are female crimes different from male crimes?
What problems are caused by bad living conditions in prisons?
Causes of victimization
What are the rights of a rape victim?
What is mandatory sentencing and the three-strike rules?
History of criminal courts
What motivates people to commit hate crimes?
Youth gangs. Why are they dangerous? How can society influence their moral principles?
Fieldwork in criminology
The place of distributive justice in criminal justice
Capital punishment history
What rights do criminals and prisoners have?
Parts of a criminal trial process
How crimes committed on a religious or racial basis are punished?
Cases of fraud in the scientific field. How can researchers protect their discoveries using copyright?
Application and effectiveness of prosecution laws
Crime classification systems
How can parents save their children from cyberbullying and cyberstalking?
Consider forgery cases in offices, educational institutions and other organizations, explain what laws and organizations are designed to fight forgery
Controversial issues presuppose considering several opposite points of view. You can choose an opinion that seems the most logical to you or simply analyze all of the viewpoints impartially and let your reader decide which one is more trustworthy. If you support a certain party, your decision should be objective and backed up with evidence. Here are examples of controversial topics you can explore:
Punishment vs. reform. Which one brings more benefits?
Is restorative justice model the best criminal justice tool?
War on drugs. Does it help to solve the drug problem?
Is insanity a reason for exemption from liability?
Should the special juvenile justice system be eliminated?
Should high schools and colleges develop a school-based drug testing?
What should and should not be allowed for better gun control?
Is pornography a type of sexual violence?
Was the real Jack the Ripper caught?
Is there racism in the modern justice system?
How can a person protect oneself from a false accusation?
Attitude towards concealed weapons in criminal codes of various states
Is there a correlation between race and crime?
Should sex offenders be registered in public records?
Is there a relationship between bad parenting and juvenile delinquency?
Should all employers run a criminal background check on all new employees?
Are delinquency cases higher among immigrant children?
Can restrictive housing help decongest prisons?
Is community policing an effective program against homegrown crimes?
Prostitution legalization controversy
Does eyewitness testimony help to investigate crimes?
Boot camps for youthful offenders. Are they effective?
Is predictive policing effective?
Is selective incapacitation an effective policy for reducing crime?
Many young people dream of getting a degree in criminal justice. However, the final step on any educational path is always a thesis writing. As this science is much more profound than police training, choosing good criminal justice research topics may be rather challenging. There are many interesting issues which may help you impress your professor. The main thing is to find the most suitable direction which will reflect your knowledge on a major and show your analytical skills.
It’s worth remembering that the world of criminal justice undergoes constant changes. A topic should be relevant and interesting to the broad audience since not only professors but also other degree seekers will read your thesis. If you are still in doubt, this list will be of great use to you:
The main historical twists that affected the modern world of criminal justice
How accessible and effective the judicial system is? What reforms can improve legal proceedings?
What is the role of private companies in the public criminal justice system?
What would the criminal justice field look like today if all drugs were legalized?
Should sex offenders be registered in public records?
How can offender reentry be made seamless to society?
Should law enforcement representatives wear cameras? How can this affect the work of the judicial system and law enforcement agencies?
Why do most people who serve their sentences once become criminals again?
Are strategies used to deter or stop criminal behavior effective?
Consider instances of unlawful force used by law representatives. Do criminals deserve such cruelty? Conduct a comparative analysis of police treatment in different countries
How accurately do movies, television, and novels depict the criminal justice system?
Influence of people making public policy decisions on the criminal justice system
How many people were wrongly convicted in your country? What should be done to prevent this?
Relationship between the Mexican drug war and drug use in the United States. How can legalization change today’s violence and delinquency level?
We hope that the above information is useful, and you will find a worthy topic for your research paper. If there are any issues with the assignment preparation, you can always turn to research paper writing service for help and advice. We will share our knowledge or complete any tricky assignment for you.
Research paper writing
Your email address will not be published / Required
fields are marked *