Recycling is a process that allows us to conserve some of Earth’s finite sources and live a more sustainable lifestyle. While more and more people are getting more acquainted with the process of recycling, there is a lot people still don’t know about it. Here’s a broad overview of recycling and how much it does to help the environment.
What Is Recycling?
Let’s start with the basics! When most people think of the term “recycling” they think about taking certain materials to a facility so they can be broken down into a raw form and repurposed.
While this is a good way to think about what recycling is, it’s not the only form of recycling you can do. You can reuse things in and around your house to recycle as well. For example, if you get newspapers you can repurpose them to wrap your fragile items when you’re moving.
What Can I Recycle?
It’s important that if you’re planning to send your materials to a facility to be recycled, you make sure they are the right ones! Not all materials are recyclable, and the ones that are marked with a number ranging from 1-7, which shows how recyclable they are.1 is the most recyclable and 7 is the least. It’s also important to remember that your area determines what’s recyclable, so remember to check your local.
Why Is It Important?
It’s safe to assume that most of us know that on some level, recycling is important. However, some of us would have a rather difficult time coming up with specific reasons how. Recycling has been shown to have a positive impact on the environment. Because people who recycle are using the materials they already have in new ways, there’s not as much of a need for those materials to be gathered and waste is reduced.
For example, people who recycle help reduce the need for trees to be cut down. Recycling also helps on a more personal level. If you are reusing old things instead of buying new ones, you’ll be able to save a lot of money. It also helps create jobs! The people who work at recycling plants all depend on recycling to make a living. When you recycle, you not only help make environmental gains for the greater good but economic ones too.
WB Waste Solutions, LLC
WB Waste Solutions, LLC is a waste services holding company. Our focus is delivering environmentally focused waste solutions through our family of waste collection, recycling, processing, and transportation companies. Our clients come from all sectors, Government, Business, and Residential across all industries: hospitality, construction, education, transportation and many more.
Let us develop a comprehensive waste management solution for your business! Contact us today.