1575 – Desiderius Cornelis Rose, a young scholar, came aboard the brig “Ouwe Zon” for a small chart making mission on the Mediterranean Sea. It was nothing new for Rose as he sprung from a well-known Dutch family with a strong naval tradition. One night when he was on deck for a simple stroll he noticed a sloop approaching them rapidly. They didn’t have any lights nor colors. The first mate saw it too and panicked. Piracy was very common in the area and he knew for sure that it would be his last night amidst the living. The “Ouwe Zon” wasn’t armed apart from two swivel guns at the upper deck. Not enough for a confrontation like this. They had small arms, of course, but all the men were sound asleep. Their throats would be cut before they had any chance of knowing what happened. Rose knew this too. He had heard the stories his family told him when he was a child. Flee or fight it was. He didn’t hesitate and ordered the first mate to turn their bow towards the sloop at the very last moment and to not ring any bells until he instructed him to. A few moments later the sky filled with the smashing sound of shattering wood. The hull of the “Ouwe Zon”, sturdier than the one of the old sloop, appeared to be in the spot where the main deck of the pirate sloop used to be. Rose raised one of the swivel guns and aimed it at the person with the biggest hat, lit the fuse and by that shooting the head of the pirate captain right of his neck. Forcing the pirate crew into a shock that led to surrender.
1577 – Back in the Dutch Republic Desiderius Cornelis Rose was received a hero. Because of his years on the “Ouwe Zon” and his family tradition he joined the navy and immediately got promoted to the rank of Lieutenant. He had the privilege to choose the ship he would like to get assigned to. A few months later the “Ouwe Zon” received new sails, got armed to the teeth and was ready for more adventures. It didn’t take long for Lieutenant Rose to rise in ranks and the day came that he took over the captain’s chair. By now he was an experienced and respected sailor in the navy. He renamed the ship “Orange Rose”.
1595 – Being a scholar and a captain with his own ship created possibilities for Rose. He decided to focus more on exploration and undertook a mission towards the unknown east and ten years later he was the first Dutchmen to sail around the world (without being killed in the process). Laying the foundations for trade and progress.
1640 – Desiderius Cornelis Rose was now Sir Desiderius Cornelis Rose. He was now an old and wise man with a whole life behind him instead of in front of him. He was proud of it and so were his wife and child. Now an Admiral, he received an honorable discharge. But he was a pioneer in the field of exploration and couldn’t let it go. He was too old to set sail so he set up a small private company to aid future missions to new worlds. Orange Rose Corp was born.
2127 – By now Orange Rose Corp had aided many clients with their ever growing knowledge. The relations with grand organizations like NASA, ESA, CNSA and CCCP (later RFSA) were outstanding and though ORO was still relatively small it contributed to man’s greatest steps into the future. In that year Orange Rose Corp was led by a young woman called Johanna Rose. She became famous for her great work in aiding the teams of surveyors that charted Mars to find the best spots for atmospheric processors. But the Great Mars Tragedy that followed five years after the terraforming was the organizations worst nightmare. Because of the organizations part on Mars,ORO was now connected to the 4.876 lost lives. Things were going downhill for Orange Rose Corp. Clients suddenly turned their backs to ORO with immense financial losses a result. Johanna Rose took a bold step to deviate from the 487 years old ORO tradition to only aid and do nothing more. She sought other ways to make profit and found this in trading and transportation. She had found a way to keep Orange Rose Corp alive and her choices turned out to be a new milestone for the organization. Because of her they now had the extra financial boost to make Orange Rose Corp a standalone organization. Being able to survive without the continuous stream of, sometimes less honorable, clients. Orange Rose Corp was from now on a multi tasked organization with connections in almost every branch. It became bigger than ever anticipated.
2380 – 253 years later the United Nations of Earth (UNE, later UPE and UEE) was formed and Orange Rose Corp, now under the direction of the great grandson of Johanna Rose, Hermanus Rose, saw its chance to make good use of this. Before the creation of the biggest alliance in human history of that time there were too many small organizations and nations who rather made sure that the other nations couldn’t reach out in the universe than to make sure they succeeded in this themselves. It was a mess and ORO saw no other solution than to keep the focus on transportation and trading. But now things were changed. Humanity had a common goal again and Orange Rose Corp immediately regained its focus on their traditional role of aiding clients in exploration. But this time it was only one client, the UNE. Relationships were built and ORO was back in exploration business as expansion of the human race through the galaxy was on top of the UNE list.
2438 – The year of the First Contact with the Banu race. Hermanus Rose was still at the rudder of ORO and didn’t hesitate to immediately prepare an ORO peace convoy to make contact with the representatives of this formidable new race. By doing this he had a good part in creating the Interstellar Peace & Trade Accord that we all know today. Making sure that Orange Rose Corp was as respected as when it was founded so many years ago. Because of the knowledge of trade that was acquired in over 300 years it was not very strange that strong connections and later friendships were created between the Banu and Orange Rose Corp.
2530 – Sometimes history seems to repeat itself, this was one of those times. Just like our founder, Desiderius Cornelis Rose, did with his first chart-making mission, Orange Rose Corp was fully focusing its means into aiding the UPE with exploration missions. And just like the Dutch navy found it necessary to make that old brig “Ouwe Zon” ready for combat, so thought the UPE with the ORO fleet in 2530. Those were horrifying years. Humanity thought they could never run out of luck with new trade lanes added every day, more expansion of the human race and the Banu as its allies. Until they made contact with the Xi’An and immediately got into conflict with them. Suddenly humanity woke up from their dream and the first day in history arrived where they, as a unified human race, needed to arm themselves against a completely unknown alien race. For the first time in history the humans had a common enemy. On advice of the UPE much of ORO’s new credits (they were only introduced two years before) were invested in arming their ships and hiring marines and sometimes mercenaries for protection against boarding. This soon proved to be too expensive to maintain and Orange Rose Corp decided to introduce their own military training which was based on that of the UPE. This also made it necessary to include ranks and transform ORO from a Private Company (PC) into a Private Military Company (PMC) making Hermanus Rose the first Fleet Marshal.
2541 – Humanity was now not only in conflict with the Xi’An but also with the Tevarin. Big organizations were asked to provide ships and manpower to serve as a reservist’s role for the UPE. For the past ten years Orange Rose Corp had invested millions of credits into arming their ships and training its crew. It was no surprise that the UPE called upon ORO to take their share of the war. And it did. By that time Orange Rose Corp was led by Fleet Admiral Benjamin Rose. A young man and the only Rose at that time. Hermanus Rose, his father, had died a few years before and only had one son. Despite of the difficult time Benjamin was in, he still had big plans for ORO. In 2542, when a part of the LCOD division fleet was supporting a SAR mission in the Oberon system they got ambushed by the Tevarin. Until this day nobody knows what they did there on that day. All of the ships were lost including the ship of Benjamin. A massacre, they say. Making an end to the famous Rose bloodline who had been giving their lives to this organization for over 900 years. The organization was wrecked by this news. People didn’t know what to do but knew they had to do something to avenge the Rose family. Benjamin was initially to be wed with a woman called Anna Omnium. The daughter of one of the high ranking officers in Orange Rose Corp. The Omnium family servedORO for over eight generations and became very attached with the Rose family. In the chaos of Benjamin’s death, Anna rose up and took charge. With tears in her eyes she promised everyone the retribution that they were looking for.
2544 – In this year the time was there for Anna to fulfill her promise. They had been preparing for this moment for the last three years, arming the ORO fleet even more and spending most of their credits in offensive capabilities instead of the normal defensive roles that the ships used to have. It was in the Idris system where the complete Orange Rose Fleet joined the UPE in what would be the last battle to put an end to the First Tevarin War. That dayORO witnessed and fought in one of the biggest and most brutal battles in that war. The humans and the Tevarin had incredible high losses on either side. In this battle almost 80% of the ORO fleet was destroyed or declared a total loss afterwards with almost 50% of the ORO crew killed or MIA. But in the end it was worth it. Not only for Anna, Benjamin and Orange Rose Corp, but also for humanity. At least, they thought it was.
2603 – After almost sixty years of peace the Second Taverin War began. Nobody expected this and neither did Orange Rose Corp. After their losses in the Idris system it had been struggling to regain its former strength. The few credits that were left were invested in patching up the ships that survived the battle and paying of all of the huge loans needed for weapons and training. Credits to buy or build new ships were nowhere to be found. The offensive weaponry had to be sold and the ships held only a minimum of defensive countermeasures. Anna Omnium and the UPE knew that it was best to keep the ORO fleet out of combat. Alas the Taverin didn’t share this idea. They knew the role that Orange Rose Corp had in that infamous battle and they had revenge on their minds. In those seven years of war the Taverin were suddenly everywhere and the remaining ORO fleet took substantial losses. In the end there was almost nothing left than a handful of Avengers and Aurora’s and only their knowledge to trade with.
2750 – Finally things were looking good again for the organization. After the Second Taverin War when things eased down a bit, the Banu offered ORO as a sign of their good relationship a few brand new Merchantmans to aid its fleet. That resulted in booming business as the trading game could be picked up again. Instead of the small cargo holds of the Avengers (12 SCU’s) and Aurora’s (13 SCU’s), Orange Rose Corp could now ship thousands of freight units all at once. In this year the oldest son of Anna Omnium, Jack, was promoted to Fleet Admiral. Because Anna knew that now that the highly aggressive Vanduul were in the picture, the peaceful days where she grew up in were officially over. For this reason she sent Jack Omnium at the age of sixteen to the UEE navy so he could learn how to act during Vanduul encounters. Her decision proved worthy as this not only created better connections with the UEE, it also made sure that Orange Rose Corp implemented better strategies in combat and SAR situations.
2931 – Present day Orange Rose Corp is led by Fleet Marshal Swift Omnium, the grandson of Jack Omnium. The almost 1.300 years of experience in exploration, trade, transportation and combat have given him much to study and apply. He knows the importance of what the Rose family had achieved and wants to honor this by focusing on their once main goal; exploration. He also sees the importance of trade and transportation to back up the ORO missions and to make sure that the organization will exist for a thousand years to come.
Orange Rose Corp’s hoofdkwartier (ORO HQ), ligt in het Kilian stelsel, met meerdere kleinere buitenposten verspreidt over de ‘Verse, allen toegankelijk voor onze leden.
Als een gerespecteerd corporatie en vaak in delen van de ‘Verse ver buiten het bereik van de UEE, is aan Orange Rose Corp de vrijheden verleend om verdragen te onderhandelen, credits te crediteren, veroordeelden op te sluiten, nieuwe buitenposten te plaatsen en zichzelf en anderen te verdedigen met alle mogelijke middelen.
Het doel van Orange Rose Corp is om te blijven verkennen en nieuw licht te brengen in onze beschaving en anderen. Handel en transport zijn secundaire doelen, het creëren van middelen om nieuwe missies te ondernemen.
Orange Rose Corp biedt ook de mogelijkheid om schepen te huren en te verhuren aan zijn leden.
De organisatie bestaat uit 3 divisies:
- Expeditionary Division / [EXDI]
EXDI staat voor exploratie en is daarmee ook de oudste divisie. Deze divisie speelt de hoofdrol bij het verkennen en in kaart brengen van nieuwe gebieden. De eerste steen leggen voor commercie, handel en vriendschap op afgelegen plekken. Precies zoals men deed ruim 1.300 jaar geleden.
- Logistics and Commerce Division / [LCOD]
Orange Rose Corp drijft op LCOD. Zonder deze divisie zou het nooit de andere divisies kunnen ondersteunen. Het handelsgedeelte van deze divisie is gericht op goede handel in bekende regio’s en nieuwe gecharterde regio’s door EXDI. Het is de ruggengraat van de organisatie en vertrouwt onder andere op de goede banden met de Banu. Maar geen enkele operatie kan overleven zonder goede logistieke ondersteuning. Hier komt de ‘L’ in LCOD om de hoek kijken. LCOD is ook verantwoordelijk voor de distributie, het onderhoud en de vervanging van materieel en / of personeel. Het ondersteunt de activiteiten van de eigen divisie evenals die van EXDI en SID.
- Security and Intelligence Division / [SID]
De ‘Verse is alles behalve een veilige plek. Een organisatie als Orange Rose Corp heeft daarom een goede verdedigingsmacht nodig om de andere twee divisies te ondersteunen. De doorgewinterde gevechtspiloten van deze divisie zijn getraind om topprestaties te leveren. Het begeleiden van de ORO vloot, verkenning vooruit of het bestrijden van piraten en Vanduul. Het maakt niet uit hoe of wat, SID zal het voor elkaar krijgen.
Orange Rose Corp is een private organisatie, maar het houdt zich echter wel aan een militaristisch model. Het is bewezen dat het hiërarchische model het meest geschikt is voor langetermijnverkenning. Alle leden worden geacht deze structuur te handhaven. Dit maakt ons een ‘PMC’.
ORO verwelkomt alle Nederlandse en Belgische Citizens. Hoewel een volwaardig lid zijn voordelen heeft, is het geen exclusief lidmaatschap. Wanneer je lid wordt, word je automatisch gepromoveerd naar de rang van Ensign. Wanneer je als een ‘affiliate’ lid wordt, wordt de rang Affiliate en kan deze nooit hoger zijn.
Orange Rose Corp begrijpt dat vrienden, bondgenoten en verdragen in een vaak vijandig universum goede dingen zijn om te hebben. ORO verwelkomt elke organisatie, soort of natie die hetzelfde gedachtegoed deelt: