'You're not leaving the table until you've eaten your greens!' is a threat that's been uttered by most parents at some point. A recent survey found that over half of children now don't eat even a single portion of vegetables every day, and this age old problem seems to be getting worse. The number of overweight and obese youngsters in the UK has trebled in the last 25 years, with one in three now falling into this category. Given that force-feeding your children French beans is neither fair nor practical, there are sneakier, or should we say more subtle ways, of upping your children's vegetable intake.
Don't let the dinner table become a battleground.
Nutritionist and cognitive behavioural therapist Joanne Reid Rodrigues says:
"Mealtimes can often descend into a power struggle between parent and child and this is a situation you want to try to avoid. If you try to force your child to eat a particular food or vegetable, in adulthood they usually rebel and refuse to eat it ever again. Pushing against a situation actually fuels it and makes it more of a problem."
Fay Ripley, actress and author of two family cookbooks – Fay's Family Food and What's for Dinner? – agrees there is no point in pandering to fussy eaters.
"Don't make faces, trains or rockets out of food, it's confusing. I have a rule in my house – you don't have to eat it but you do have to try it. It works about 25% of the time," she says with refreshing honesty.
Stop cooking multiple meals
Ever feel like you're running a one-woman café from your own kitchen? It's time to put your foot down. "Cook one meal for the family and avoid making separate meals for fussy eaters," says Joanne. Set your boundaries: we teach people how to treat us, and if we yield to a child's demands for a different meal, we're teaching them how to play us. Fay stresses the importance of sitting down to eat together as a means of fostering healthy eating habits.
"Eat together whenever you can, laughing, smiling, passing on the love of each other and food. Joy of eating is infectious. Don't bother with bribing them to eat vegetables. It won't make them like them. Just cook stuff you love and they'll get the idea eventually," she says.
It's tempting to resort to bribes as a means of ensuring some vegetables find their way into stomachs rather than the floor. However, Joanne advises against it:
"By bribing with 'treats' we may inadvertently be introducing a psychological association with good and bad behaviour and food. A moral attachment to eating – I've been good versus I've been bad – can result in disordered thinking later in life which can result in an eating disorder," she says.
Hide the veg
While bribery may be a no-no, there's no harm in disguising vegetables or presenting them in a more palatable way. "Kids naturally prefer sweet things – we all do – you don't see anyone sitting in the cinema with a bag of broccoli," says nutritionist Ian Marber. Ian's top advice is:
- Children don't react well to bitter flavours in vegetables like broccoli and cabbage. It tastes far more bitter to them than adults because their taste buds aren't fully developed yet.
- Vegetables that grow beneath the ground like sweet potatoes and the sweeter root vegetables have a higher sugar content than those that grow above ground, so kids tend to prefer them. Ideally you want a good spread of both types of vegetable.
- Because children are naturally drawn towards sweeter things, mix these in with the more bitter ones to disguise the flavour.
- Avocado is also great for mushing with other, stronger flavours that kids might not like.
- Make ratatouille – chuck in as many vegetables as you can get away with. It's a great one for kids as the vegetables are soft and still full of nutrients.
- You can sweeten ratatouille further with a little balsamic vinegar, which will ameliorate the bitterness of the peppers.
- Make smoothies and juices. I have a friend who makes a different colour smoothie for each day of the week, including a green one! Although bear in mind they don't have the same fibre content as eating whole vegetables. The same goes for pureed pouches, so they shouldn't be seen as a substitute for whole vegetables.
- You can also pack lots of vegetables into soups. These can be a real hit with younger children who might be fussy about lumpy textures.
- Joanne also suggests making vegetable lasagne, as it's ideal for sneaking in 'slimy' vegetables like mushrooms, aubergine, and courgette, which kids normally don't like.
Fay's favourite vegetable dish is spaghetti Bolognese. "I can chop in half the veg tray from the bottom of the fridge into the sauce," she says.
Make the most out of what they WILL eat
Children will often eat sweet corn or peas – embrace this! "They're small and colourful and extremely nutritious. If your child will eat a spoonful of mixed peas and sweetcorn regularly, they'll be getting fibre as well as some minerals and vitamins," says Joanne. She also suggests swapping that ready-made oven chips for homemade wedges made from potatoes or sweet potatoes. Or try this:
"You can make an alternative healthier pizza-style meal using wholemeal pittas as a base. Put some thin slices of tomato and a few chopped bell peppers (red and yellow are both colourful and sweeter than green) into an ovenproof dish and drizzle over a little olive oil; and pop them under the grill on a medium heat until they're soft and warm. Open the pittas and pile the cooked vegetables on top and add a handful of grated cheese and pop them back under the grill until the cheese melts," add Joanne.
Involving children in shopping for veg and preparing meals from the age of about three onwards can be helpful in making them more open minded about vegetables, says Joanne. "If they've helped buy it and make it, they'll be more inclined to want to know what it tastes like. Try setting them little tasks such as finding specific types of vegetables in the supermarket or green grocers," she adds.
Cut yourself some slack
According to current advice from health visitors to parents who are weaning, babies will often refuse new foods up to 15 times before deciding they like them. In reality, the quest to up vegetable intake is likely to carry on way beyond babyhood.
"With my first child I pureed vegetables within an inch of my life. With my second I was more relaxed. I still pureed but he also ate what I ate. Guess which one is the foodie? Nevertheless I'm still always trying to add more vegetables on to the favourites list," says Fay, whose children are now 12 and eight.
Perhaps the most important message of all is to get some perspective on the problem.
"If they're not eating everything on their plate, don't force them and don't stress over it. Positive endorsement is much more effective in guiding your child than chastising them for things they don't do well. Accentuate the positive by giving them a high-five each time they do eat something nourishing, and ignore the rest," says Joanne."