Blueberry fruits are rich in nutritional ingredients. Blueberries are native to the Americas. Blueberry fruits are relatively rare in China. However, blueberries are of high value. They have the functions of protecting eyesight, preventing constipation, and preventing cancer. What is the way to eat blueberries? Next, let’s take a look at the efficacy and role of blueberries and what to eat!
What are the effects of blueberries?
1,Good for heart health. Blueberries contain ingredients that help to dilate blood vessels, which reduces the risk of blood clots and heart disease. Studies have found that eating more than five servings of blueberries a week can reduce the risk of heart disease.
2, Reduce blood sugar. Eating blueberries for diabetics helps regulate blood sugar levels. Eating 5 servings of low glycemic index fruits such as blueberries per week and sticking to it for two months can significantly improve blood glucose regulation.
3, Prevent cancer. Anthocyanins in blueberries can suppress the growth of tumor cells, and eating half a cup a day can achieve anti-cancer effects.
4, Prevention and treatment of constipation. One cup of fresh blueberries contains about 4 grams of dietary fiber, which is 14% of the daily intake of dietary fiber. Water-soluble dietary fiber in blueberries can promote intestinal peristalsis and prevent constipation.
5, Improve sleep. Anthocyanins in blueberries can enter cells, protect cell membranes from free radical oxidation, and have strong antioxidant and anti-allergic effects. The anthocyanins in blueberries can also penetrate the blood-brain barrier, so that the brain nerves are not oxidized, which can make the brain tissue function more stable, improve the body’s oxygen content, and improve sleep quality.
6, Enhance immunity
Studies have found that blueberries contain far more antioxidants than other fresh vegetables and fruits. Antioxidants can neutralize free radicals in the body and strengthen the immune system.
7, Reduce belly
Blueberries are rich in polyphenols that can break down abdominal fat and help control weight. In addition, blueberries are low in calories and do not cause weight gain.
8, Improve brainpower
Dried blueberries as a snack can improve brain vitality. A new study finds that flavonoids rich in blueberries can reduce senile memory decline.