This post may contain affiliate links. Please read my terms & conditions for more info.
The modern world appears to be a playground of time-saving gadgets, touch-screen computers and other technological wonders, and many parents are keen to give their child a head start by including these components in everyday play. Contemporary toys are ideal for children who enjoy playing alone as many involve self-contained games which require nothing but the interaction of the player, but although this may be convenient for busy adults, could your child be missing out on the benefits of traditional play?
Quality Time Together
Surprisingly, it doesn’t take much to make a positive difference in the development of your child and just an hour of meaningful play per day can help children bond with their parents as well as assist with their education. So switch off from technology and reach for books, arts and crafts kits and all the other excellent traditional toys that are available.
Fun for All
If you haven’t indulged in traditional play before you are in for a treat! This is your chance to be a kid again; get messy, play dress-up and remember all the fantastic things about being a child. The entire family will love getting involved in finger-painting and gathering around to listen to a bedtime story. Remember, if the little people are happy, you will be happy too.
Skills for Life
Traditional play can often be overlooked as some parents believe modern technology to be an all important part of contemporary child development, but nothing can compare to the simplistic joys of making homemade pizza, baking cakes, or even collecting leaves to make your own nature collage. All these activities gently introduce children to essential skills that will be with them throughout their lives, such as cooking, prioritising and organising. Getting creative keeps children interested whilst learning and Galt Toys has many ideas about what exciting games to play and how to slot them into your hectic schedule.
Time for a Table
It can be difficult to know where to begin when scheduling time for play and it may initially feel like a clinical, non-organic way to have fun with your child, but a timetable will help put everything into perspective. Slot in playtime before meals and substitute television time for those precious moments of play.
Crafts are ideal for all ages and using colourful paper along with materials of different shapes and textures can make for interesting collages and pictures. In days gone by parents would bring out a bag of pasta and while away the time with their child sticking pasta shapes onto paper to make pictures, but with the current need to discourage waste, why not use objects from nature to help your child make their very own masterpiece? Scour the local park or your garden for leaves and pine cones and make collecting them a game in itself. When you return home, select papers of different colours and enjoy creating truly unique pictures with your natural treasures.
Indoor gardening is always fun and your child can enjoy learning about the different stages of plant growth. Plant grass seeds in a pot and watch the delight on your child’s face when the seeds have grown into long shoots which can be cut in the style of their choice.
About the Author
This article was written on behalf of Galt Toys. Galt Toys have 175 years’ experience in toys and education. Galt know a thing or two about designing toys & craft activities to encourage children to learn through play…and also have fun!