For the next few weeks we are focusing on coding to make a shape that is going to be 3D printed. We have started off with the different ways to make a certain shape. I started off with a nonagon and I coded it to draw a nonagon. A nonagon has 9 sides. We are using an app called beetle blocks. Beetle blocks lets you look around the shape that you’ve made so it will look 3D.
Here is a photo and an explanation of the code.
This is the X axis. The X axis is flat going side to side not built up.
Something I found interesting was the green operator block. I thought you had to put in the code turns and forwards but you can just put in a rotate Z with a division operator block to make a nonagon.
The first block means to start drawing when the flag is clicked.
The second block means repeat the code below 5 times to make it a full shape the nonagon.
The third block means start drawing the lines.
The fourth line means move 5 steps forward to make each edge of the shape equal.
The last block means that 360 degrees equals a whole shape but 9 means a shape with 9 sides.
Then I made a flower like shape. Here is a photo and exlplanation of my code.
Then we went on with making the shape build up to Z position. Z position is the height of it. I have done it like this.
This goes up the Z axis. The Z axis goes up so if I am gong to print this (which I won’t) it will be built up.
It is very important when coding that you show the X Z or Y position because then it wont be built up if in z position
The second block means repeat the code below 111 times.
The third block means to start drawing the lines. There is other options like curves but I want it to be a line that isn’t curved.
The fourth block means to repeat the code below in the grey repeat area 12 times.
The fifth block means to make each edge three steps long.
The sixth block means to make the shape with 9 sides.
The seventh block means to stop drawing the lines.
The eighth block means to put the animal that draws the shape into Z position.
This is the operator block. It has a 360 because it means that it will be one whole shape. The 9 means to make a shape that has 9 sides which is a nonagon.
Now Mrs Watson has challenged us to make a cool pattern on turtle art. Turtle art is different o beetle blocks because it isn’t 3D but the coding is alike. I set the background colour to 100 which is black and then made the pattern. I put an arc block to make it curve around. I repeated it 50 times and it made this pattern.
Mrs Watson sent us a colour chart for turtle art. It tells you when you want to make a shape and what colour you want it to be.
As you can see if I wanted it to be green I would type in 29 so it will become green.
Then I made a squiggly pattern across my screen. I set the background colour to 100 again and set the colour and then set the pen size to 10.
After I made that purple squiggly lines I made a rainbow type. The changes I made was I put in after the set colour an add sign and added 10 which makes it change the colour by 10 so that it can be a rainbow.
The last 3 images of coding all were the same project except I just kept adding and adding different bits of code.
Now I am going to make a line with a circle on the end and repeat it 10 times. Here is a photo.
I have set the pen size to 15 and I filled the screen in with a blue. Then I set the shape colour to a lighter blue. Then I coded it to go forward 100, then right 90, then I put an arc block on to make a circle. I put the numbers as -360 because I wanted it to be on top of the line, then I put the 100 as the radius to make the circle smaller. Then I put a right turn 45 so it can turn to repeat again and made 9 more.
I have really enjoyed these weeks of design. I liked finding different ways to make the squiggly pattern I made and putting different colours in.
By Fidel Seignior.