Evolution Cannot Do Justice to Morality
June 8, 2019
Jargon-rich theories to explain altruism in Darwinian terms melt in the light.
Darwin Given Credit for Non-Darwinian Observations
November 5, 2018
Darwinian evolution is one of the most curious scientific theories ever. Even un-Darwinian data can be twisted to support it.
Oppose the Created Order, Suffer the Consequences
August 3, 2018
Blessed is the man who walks not in the counsel of the wicked... nor sits in the seat of scoffers; but his delight is in the law of the Lord, and on his law he meditates day and night.
Fake Evolution Is Not Evidence
June 16, 2017
The media have a bad habit of calling things 'evolution' that fail to support the notion that people have bacteria ancestors.
Abusing Science to Advance Wickedness
May 19, 2017
What the Bible calls wickedness, evolutionary 'science' calls normal: good, even. Have some secular scientists become the new priests of Baal?
Big Science Culture Condones Misconduct
May 2, 2017
Dishonest behavior by scientists is rampant, but nothing seems to change. Can evolutionary theory help?
Evolutionary Materialism Promotes Deadly Sins
February 12, 2017
Name a vice, and Darwinians will be there to rationalize it on evolutionary grounds. They claim proud ownership of the Seven Deadly Sins.
Scientists Not Prepared for Evil
October 9, 2016
What would scientists say if North Korea nuked their labs? Not much.
Evolutionists Boast of Storytelling
July 22, 2016
Some evolutionists not only own up to just-so storytelling; they parade it.
Does ISIS Evolve?
June 20, 2016
This may be the winning candidate for worst Darwinian just-so story of the decade.
Darwinism Produces Sociopathic Ideologies
January 24, 2016
Look at what some evolutionists are saying about the implications of their theory for human society.
Uncontested Consensus Is Bad for Science
December 21, 2015
Darwinian evolution is a prime example of how an unchallenged consensus leads to unbridled speculation and absurdity.
ISIS Atrocities: Does Outrage Evolve?
March 8, 2015
What will it take to turn outrage into action, if genocide won't? Destruction of antiquities? What would Darwin do?
Game Theory Undermined: Evolution of Altruism Not Demonstrated
January 18, 2015
Games that psychologists play with human lab rats don't show what evolutionists think they do.
Scientists Are Not Experts on Values
August 18, 2013
The "fact-value split" is a dubious distinction, illustrated by several recent articles. Scientists cannot act as if their findings are values-free.