Our editors will review what you’ve submitted and determine whether to revise the article.Join Britannica's Publishing Partner Program and our community of experts to gain a global audience for your work!
Unified Silla Dynasty
Unified Silla Dynasty, (668–935), dynasty that unified the three kingdoms of the Korean peninsula—Silla, Paekche, and Koguryŏ. The old Silla kingdom had forged an alliance with T’ang China (618–907) and had conquered the kingdom of Paekche to the southeast in 660 and the northern Korean kingdom of Koguryŏ—largest of the three—in 668.
This was the first occasion within historical times that the Korean peninsula had been unified under indigenous leadership. For nearly a decade after 668, fighting ensued in which Silla finally expelled T’ang forces. Thereafter the Korean nation was divided for only brief transitional periods. Under the Silla dynasty, Korea, which was one of the earliest of the nation-states to emerge, assumed many of the cultural, linguistic, and geographic features it maintains today.
After the unification, the country was reorganized in accord with the Chinese bureaucratic model. A complex system of ministries and bureaus was created; the peninsula was divided into nine provinces, which were in turn divided into prefectures and subprefectures; and military garrisons were established throughout the country. But a bureaucratic class based on merit, as in China, was never firmly established, and the old aristocracy remained firmly in control.
The visual arts of the Unified Silla period reflected the international style of T’ang realism, but without its eroticism. Silla art’s idealized naturalism emphasized flowing lines and soft contours. Rich ornamental tiles featured lotus blossoms and complex floral patterns.
After more than 100 years of peace, the kingdom was torn in the 9th century by conflicts among the aristocracy and by peasant uprisings. In 935 the Silla was overthrown, and the new Koryŏ dynasty was established.
Learn More in these related Britannica articles:
Korea: Unified SillaWith the support of China, Silla conquered and subjugated Paekche in 660 and Koguryŏ in 668. Not until 676 did Silla drive out the Chinese and gain complete control of the Korean peninsula. The surviving Koguryŏ people in northern Manchuria established Parhae (or…
Korean art: Unified, or Great, Silla period (668–935)In 660 and 668, respectively, the Paekche and Koguryŏ kingdoms fell to the allied armies of the Silla king and the Tang Chinese emperor, creating a new political and cultural era referred to as the Unified Silla period. This…
Korean architecture: Unified Silla, or Great Silla, period (668–935)In 660 and 668, respectively, the Paekche and Koguryŏ kingdoms fell to the allied armies of the Silla king and the Tang Chinese emperor, creating a new political and cultural era referred to as the Unified Silla period.…