Metastatic tumors in the lungs are cancers that developed at other places in the body (or other parts of the lungs) and spread through the bloodstream or lymphatic system to the lungs. It is different than lung cancer that starts in the lungs.
Surgery to take a sample of tissue from the lungs (surgical lung biopsy)
Chemotherapy is usually used to treat metastatic cancer to the lung. Surgery isn't always done, because usually the cancer is in other parts of the body not seen by imaging tests. Surgery to remove the tumors seen on an x-ray is not likely to be helpful. However, surgery may be an option when:
The first (primary) tumor has been removed
The cancer has spread to only limited areas of the lung
The lung tumors can be completely removed with surgery
However, the main tumor must be curable, and the patient must be strong enough to go through the surgery and recovery.
There are other experimental treatments. One of these treatments uses local heat probes to destroy the area. Another places chemotherapy medicines directly into the artery that supplies blood to the part of the lung containing the tumor.
You can ease the stress of illness by joining a support group where members share common experiences and problems. For this condition, see cancer support group.
A cure is unlikely in most cases. It is rare for someone to live more than 5 years with metastatic cancer to the lungs. However, the outlook depends on the specific type of primary cancer.
You and your family may want to start thinking about end-of-life planning, such as:
Ettinger DS. Lung cancer and other pulmonary neoplasms. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds. Cecil Medicine. 24th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Saunders Elsevier; 2011:chap 197.
David C. Dugdale, III, MD, Professor of Medicine, Division of General Medicine, Department of Medicine, University of Washington School of Medicine. Yi-Bin Chen, MD, Leukemia/Bone Marrow Transplant Program, Massachusetts General Hospital. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Medical Director, A.D.A.M. Health Solutions, Ebix, Inc.