Bananas are one of the fruits that easily found in all over the world, they are also mostly available throughout the year. In most tropical countries, they even have different types of bananas that they can enjoy from nice regular size yellow banana to green bananas that can reach to 12 inches in length, this is called banana tanduk.
They are very tasty and healthy for snack and they can also be cooked with other ingredient mostly for dessert or for your baking. Some even have produced banana flavored milk drink and kids seem to love it.
Recently, there have been controversies buzzing around about banana. This is due to some people claimed that banana is one the fruits that we need to avoid when we have constipation, even though fruit in general is such a good remedy for constipation. Yet, on the other hand, some other people testify that their constipation has been cured from eating banana.
This interesting issue will be discussed in this article and we will look at several factors why bananas are claimed to be the cause of constipation as well as why bananas on the other hand have been claimed to be the cure for constipation.
BANANAS, CAUSE OF CONSTIPATION
If we look at to the nutrition fact of banana, this fruit contains about 3 grams of fiber on each 100 grams of serving which is considerably high level of fiber in a fruit. But why does this fruit has been claimed to be the cause of constipation?
First is that it could be the high level of resistant starch that banana contains. Resistant starch is a complex carbohydrate that has fiber like ingredients. This type of carbohydrate can escape the small intestines and they go straight to the large intestines. Some studies have shown that high level of starch is found mostly in unripe green bananas which can cause constipation for some people. Hence, to avoid constipation, always choose ripe yellow banana with brown freckles when you buy bananas
The sweet taste in bananas easily displays to us that bananas have high level of sugar that can be considered as simple carbohydrate in form of fructose, glucose and maltose. This type of simple carbohydrate in sugar form has been studied to be the cause of delay in transit time of the waste in the large intestines. This in the end can be the cause of constipation.
Banana also contains one substance that is called pectin. It is a polysaccharide that is commonly known gel transforming factor in a fruit, this compound can make a fruit thickens. This component we often find in jam ingredient can solidify the jam. Some people who are more sensitive to pectin can be affected more when eating banana. They can suffer from constipation even though pectin its self also carry great amount of fiber that is good for curing constipation. This is highly relies on the person’s body.
An ancient beliefs have been spread that banana is a mucus forming fruit. In older Asian culture bananas are considered to be damp food and should be avoided when someone is feeling under the weather or any other sickness that already cause a person’s body to produce excessive mucus as consuming bananas can make their body produce even more mucus and eventually can cause constipation.
BANANAS, CURE FOR CONSTIPATION
After we look at several reasons why bananas are considered as fruit that can cause constipation, now we would like to take a look at some facts that might support the opinion of those who say bananas can cure them from constipation.
As we touched above that banana is high source of fiber. A medium sized banana can give us about 10% of our daily fiber needs. This is a good reason why we can say that banana is a good remedy for constipation. However, drink plenty of water is also necessary if you want your digestive system is healthy. As water will give moisture and soften the stool and can make it easier to pass.
Banana as all of us might have been aware of is very high in mineral called potassium. This potassium is an electrolyte and electrolyte is a very important factor that our body will need to balance its fluid in the cells. Balance fluid in our body including in our cells is very important for a healthy bowel movement. Hence, eating the right amount of banana can be considered as a way to keep ourselves hydrated and in the end will make our stool easier to pass.
If consumed moderately bananas have this important effect in our body that is probiotic effect. This probiotic will feed the friendly bacteria found in our digestive system. The friendly bacteria can also help our body to digest food properly without having constipation but nor diarrhea. This compound not only can help constipation but it also can help bloated stomach and other uncomfortable feeling in our stomach.
As a result in this argument, it is always good to be aware of the condition of our body. Whether we are very sensitive to bananas and all its compounds or we can still tolerate them? If our body’s respond to bananas are not so nice as in it can cause us discomfort feeling including bloating stomach and constipation, we might want to consume less bananas and try some other fruits that can help our digestive system.
However, if our body shows no problem when consuming banana, we can keep enjoying this sweet healthy fruit as snack or in our dessert. However, it is always best to eat them in a moderate way still and of course balance your banana consumption with plenty of water and other healthy foods.