Winston’s Guidance Counselor conducts individual, group, and family counseling pertaining to issues related to school success and classroom guidance lessons. The Guidance Counselor also works with teachers to complete and organize behavior observation/rating scales.
Winston’s Guidance Counselor is available to meet with students and parents upon request. Please contact Mrs. Denise Williams by email at email@example.com or call (210) 615-6544 to make an appointment.
Purpose of Guidance
The Guidance program is a developmental educational program designed to help students acquire skills through planned educational experiences and activities.
Services of Counseling
The purpose of the Responsive Service component is to intervene with, or on behalf of, those students in pre-kindergarten through 12th grade whose personal circumstance, concerns or problems are threatening to interfere with, or are interfering with, their healthy personal, social, career and /or educational development.
The System Support component describes management activities which assure the delivery of a high-quality guidance program and service which indirectly benefits students by supporting other programs.
The Guidance Curriculum component includes skill-based lessons and units designed to help all students in kindergarten through 12th grade develop competence in essential life skills.
The Individual Planning component is where students are guided in planning, monitoring and managing their own educational, career, personal and social development. Each student is provided with necessary steps toward his/her established goal
Goals for All Students to Achieve
Self-Esteem Development: Students will learn to manage their feelings, have an accurate self-concept, and value their uniqueness.
Motivation to Achieve: Students will take advantage of educational opportunities, develop their academic potential, take responsibility for their educational planning and understand how career choices affect lifestyles.
Decision-Making & Problem—Solving: Students will solve problems, make good decisions, set goals and make plans, accept consequences of decisions, and accept and manage change.
Interpersonal Effectiveness: Students will make and keep friends, understand others’ feelings, respect others’ feelings and participate effectively in groups.
Communication Skills: Students will understand communication skills, listen to others and express themselves appropriately.
Cross-Cultural Effectiveness: Students will respect family units, respect traditions of communities, respect their own culture and heritage, and relate effectively with others based on appreciation for differences.
Responsible Behavior: Students will accept responsibility for their behavior, manage their time efficiently, be self-disciplined, and respect laws and rules.