Developmental crisis is a turning point marked by sharp improvement or sharp deterioration which is developing, meaning thereby, growing large; fuller; more mature; or worse. Turning point is the point in place, time, development etc. Which is critical.It may be a decision or event of great psychological significance for the individual or group. When things are coming to or drawing to a crisis, it does mean that do something to reach the state when a definite decision must be taken. Sharp improvement paves the way for more mature, well organized or quite better condition. The critical juncture in crisis is a time of difficulty, danger, or anxiety about the future. The term crisis is used to refer to times, in that, the stress situation approaches or exceeds the adaptive capacities of an individual or group.Crisis is a turning point in an illness, life, or history. Crises are, especially, stressful because coping techniques, usually, do not work. A crisis may center on a traumatic condition or an episode of depression, in which, the individual may seriously consider suicide or due to a serious injury or disease may find difficulty in readjustments in one’s opinion and way of life. How, often, such crises occur in the life of an average person is unknown but it is certain that if a person is engulfed in the desert of crises once towards sharp deterioration, it becomes almost impossible for one to come out because of the production of the human intelligence. The outcome of these crises has profound significance if an effective new method of coping is not developed or the inability to deal adequately, may, invariably, entangle a person in unfavorable circumstances, preoccupation with the crises, and expectation of failure or lack of confidence. Involuntary or unconscious processes of negative as well as positive responses occur in a human brain as per one’s volition, attitude, or behaviour in regard to the developmental crisis. If only the negative responses rule over the facts as these exist in nature it is a matter of concern or utmost importance. One is to find the modes and means or ways to resolve the problem. If, nothing works, in that situation, developmental crisis is the answer, analyze it again or interpret in different angles, besides, rendering one’s mind neutral. Crisis intervention. Crisis intervention has emerged as a supportive response to a wide spread need for help. The modes of therapeutic intervention are ( a ) short term crisis therapy, and ( b ) the telephone “hot line”. 1. In short-term crisis therapy emphasis is laid on the current problem with which the individual or group is having difficulty. Problems of an emotional nature may also require emergency treatment or therapeutic intervention, in that, a therapist is usually very active, helping clarify the problem, suggesting plans of action, providing reassurance, needed information and support and all these to be accepted. In psychological disturbance, mobilizing the support of significant others, often enables the person to avoid hospitalization and disruptive activities. If need is felt, bring mental health or medical personnel into the treatment picture. 2. The ” hot line” services provided by government departments in various countries opened up a whole new approach to dealing with people undergoing crisis. It depends upon skills of the person handling hot-line calls as how to persuade the caller to prevent from taking a drastic step or give one’s details. The urgency of crisis intervention and the frequent inability to provide any therapeutic closure or follow up are probably key factors. Free clinics and crisis intervention centers may provide ” hot line” services to young people.