Have you lived with swollen or infected gums? The experience isn’t fun. Infected gums can swell, bleed, and cause pain. During advanced stages of gum disease, gums can also excrete pus while fighting bacterial infection. When these problems develop, your oral health obviously needs attention. You might wonder what is happening in your mouth and how to correct the problem. In this article, Lake Forest dentist, Dr. James Fondriest, explains why gums swell and how to treat them.
Why Do Gums Swell?
Although they protect teeth roots, gums are sensitive and made of delicate tissues. A number of things can irritate and inflame gums. Brushing and flossing too aggressively can damage and weaken gum tissue. Gum recession can start with incorrect brushing techniques, and gums may bleed when forcing floss between teeth. Most poor gum health issues stem from gum disease, or periodontal disease. More than 75% of adults in the U.S. have gingivitis, the earliest stage of gum disease. Plaque buildup that breeds bacteria initiates gum disease. In most cases with gingivitis, gums can swell and bleed easily. If left untreated, gingivitis evolves into periodontitis, during which damage to connective tissues between teeth and gums can take place. Ignoring swollen or infected gums can eventually lead to receding gums and root exposure. Finally the teeth will be lost. In fact, gum disease is the primary cause of adult tooth loss in the U.S.
Treating Infected gums
Practicing better oral care when you notice signs of gingivitis can prevent periodontitis and reverse damage from bacteria. Eating a balanced diet provides nutrients like calcium or vitamin C for healthy gums. Avoiding sugary foods prevents bacteria from feasting on sugars and producing acid that erodes tooth enamel. Drinking water regularly will help cleanse the mouth of food particles and plaque. Brushing and flossing regularly, but gently, can cleanses the mouth of excessive bacteria, but if your infection has advanced, you may need to take extra steps to treat swollen gums. See Dr. Fondriest for a treatment plan that can save your teeth from periodontitis.
Schedule an Appointment to confirm infected gums
Is self-treatment not enough for your swollen and infected gums? Visit Dr. Fondriest at our office for a periodontal evaluation. Scaling and deep cleaning may bring your gums back from the grips of periodontitis. Call (847) 234-0517 to schedule an appointment today.
Our practice serves the Chicago metropolitan area including the North Shore and Northwest suburbs