Does RO Waste Water?
- Posted by
Does a reverse osmosis (RO) water filtration system WASTE water?
The dictionary defines waste as 'To consume, spend, or employ uselessly'.
If you have dirt on your hands and use water to rinse off the dirt, are you wasting water? Most would say, no but using water to wash the hands. If you use 20 gallons of water to hand wash your dishes after a meal, is that wasting water?
Simply put: water is utilized to "wash" impurities out of your water, too. Yes, water itself is what is needed to produce clean water in the reverse osmosis process.
How Does Reverse Osmosis Work?
In simple terms, the process utilizes household water pressure to push water through a series of water filters including a semi-permeable membrane. Because the pressure is higher on the outside of the membrane, the small water molecules pass through to the lower pressure side, and the larger molecules of contaminants are rejected and cannot push through. These trapped impurities are then washed away by—you guessed it—water!
The small water molecules that were able to push through the RO membrane, are collected in a storage tank and you have pristine water ready for consumption.
This process generally requires about 4 gallons of water to produce one gallon of clean, filtered water. The amount of water used in the filtration process can vary depending on water temperature, contaminants present, and amount of dissolved solids in the water.
What About 'Zero Waste' Systems?
Some water filtration systems try to reduce water usage by circulating the water back into the system repeatedly. But that approach quickly wears down the filter components and water filtration system.
Other RO systems attempt to reduce water usage by sending the contaminate-concentrated water to the hot water line. But that doesn't make since most of us don't want to wash our hands or dishes with contaminated water.
Reverse Osmosis Proven Method for Clean Water
Our company has been in the water filtration business since 1991, and we've found that reverse osmosis consistently proves to be one of the most effective way to filter water.
RO systems can remove pollutants from water including nitrates, pesticides, sulfates, fluoride, bacteria, pharmaceuticals, arsenic and much more. And with a carbon filter, an RO system can also remove chlorine and chloramines.
Best of all, RO filtration improves the taste, odor and appearance of your water. The process is fully automated, effective and simple to maintain.
Learn more at https://www.espwaterproducts.com/understanding-ro...