Ahmedabad by 1960 had become a popular metropolitan city boasting of having a population about half million people. The buildings that lined the city’s thoroughfares were both classical and of European style. After independence, this city went on to become Bombay state provincial town and the state capital on 1st May 1960. This was due to the bifurcation of Bombay state into two states, namely Gujarat and Maharashtra after the Mahagujarat Movement.
An emerging economy
Several research and educational institutions were established in the city during this time, thus making it a popular center to avail higher education, technology and science. Its economic base became much more diverse with chemical and heavy industry being established during this period. The city, at that point of time was being witnessed as a global economic role model. There were many countries that that tried to emulate the economic planning strategy of India and South Korea was one among them, copying the 2nd Five Year Plan of the city. Seoul’s World Financial Centre has been modelled and designed after Ahmedabad. You can find all types of hotels at Ahmedabad from budgeted to 5-star and luxury resorts to welcome their guests with open arms.
During 1960s, this city had a municipal corporation as well as divisional council that developed roads, colleges, schools, parks and municipal gardens. Working committees were present at the divisional council for roads, residential planning and development and for education.
However, during the late 1970s, the well planned Gandhinagar city became the new capital of the state. This actually started the decline of the great city of Ahmedabad and it witnessed lack of development in the coming years. It occupied prime importance in February 1974 in national politics, with the Nav Nirman agitation begin launched. This began as an argument of 20%+ hike in the bills of hostel food in LD Engineering College. But an agitation got ignited and snowballed into Nav Nirman movement. The then Gujarat Chief Minister, Mr. Chimanbhai Patel was compelled by the movement to resign and it also gave the then Prime Minister Indira Gandhi an excuse to declare emergency on 25 June, 1975.
In the country, a reservation policy had been introduced during the 1980s. This led to strong anti-reservation agitations between 1981 and 1985. Violent clashes had been witnessed with this protest belonging to different castes.
A devastating earthquake had struck on 26th January 2001 centring near Bhuj. It measured about 6.9 on Richter scale and havoc was caused in the city of Ahmedabad. Around fifty multi-storied buildings had collapsed during thus unfortunate calamity, with the death toll rising to about 752 people. The next year saw violence emerge for a 3 day period between the Muslims and the Hindus in the state that become infamous as the Gujarat Violence of 2002. This violence later spread to the different cities of Gujarat including Ahmedabad. Economy was severely affected and the government had to set up refugee camps across the city. In 2004 was initiated the Sabarmati Riverfront, and the Ahmedabad Metro project was initiated in 2015. The first Bullet train project has been initiated by the present central government to ply between Gujarat and Mumbai.
The hotels in Gujarat are well prepared to welcome all types of guests throughout the year.