Having a good anti-virus program can be the difference between the life and death of your computer. With so many computer viruses in existence, protecting your computer's security should be one of your top priorities. Aside from just stopping viruses, most anti-virus programs have other features, such as firewalls, that will ensure the well-rounded safety and security of your valued computer.
Protection from Viruses
The greatest and most obvious advantage to installing anti-virus software on your computer is that it will prevent you from getting viruses such as trojans, malware and spyware. Viruses range in severity from the harmless to the downright system crippling. Not only can a virus destroy all of the valued data on your computer, it can make the computer utterly worthless by infecting and destroying processes vital to your computer's performance.
Protecting Personal Information
Hackers and viruses go hand in hand. A good anti-virus program will protect you while you surf the Internet, preventing hackers from gaining access to personal things such as credit card information and bank account access. The firewall feature included with most anti-virus software will block any unauthorized incoming connections to your network or computer, preventing hackers from digging their hooks into your life and your computer.
Video of the Day
Though some anti-virus programs are quite pricey, there are some very good options for those wanting something relatively cheap or even free. Many free anti-virus programs are available that will protect your system just as well as a subscription-based anti-virus program. Even if you choose to go with a program you have to pay for, the cost of the program and subscription to their service will almost certainly extend the life of your computer, meaning you'll have to purchase new computers less frequently than those who choose not to use anti-virus software.
Though you may find it inconvenient to have to run virus scans and worry about the security of your computer, you'd have more to worry about without proper anti-virus protection. A computer left open for viruses and hackers will often start to show premature signs of wear and a significant slow down will be noticeable, making normal computing tasks take much longer and causing much more hassle. Let's assume your system does get infected with a virus. Without protection you'd be at the mercy of the virus and you'd have to waste time trying to find it, delete it and restore any damage it has caused and it will still probably be there, even after deletion. Yet with proper real-time anti-virus software working you will simply get a notification that a virus has been detected and be asked if you would like to delete it. These notifications usually come as soon as the virus is detected, leaving it without enough time to do its damage.