About Power Line Communications
In recent years, a lot has been written about Power Line Communications (PLC).
PLC refers to a variety of broadband services provided over the electricity grid, such as High Speed Internet, telephony, AMR and home networking. These new services over the existing electricity infrastructure can be offered by power utilities themselves or in partnership with telecom operators.
PLC is a new technology that is interesting for power utilities in several aspects:
PLC enables power utilities telecom operators to offer their customers solid business services such as High Speed Internet, telephony and additional services.
PLC enables power utilities to build their market position by enhancing their corporate image as an innovator and trendsetter in the latest broadband communication services.
PLC provides alternative “last miles” access that supports the entire process of the deregulation of the telecom market.
Recent trends in deregulation are forcing power utilities to face severe competition and margin pressures. In order to increase their revenues, power utilities are looking at new market opportunities.
The market for broadband telecommunication services offers power utilities the opportunity to diversify their product and services portfolio without huge additional investments.
Power utilities already possess key strategic assets, such as:
Strong existing customer base
Existing infrastructure for billing and customer support
Existing infrastructure for maintenance
Extensive fiber optic backbone network
By using Main.net’s PLUS system solution, power utilities can generate additional revenues and larger margins.
PLC Benefits for the power utilities
1. Growing market for Broadband communications is rapidly growing
2. Utilizing existing infrastructure (power grid)
3. Utilizing existing customer base (distribution strategy)
4. Utilizing existing business models
5. Utilizing existing telecom capabilities
6. Versifying existing products and services
7. Adding additional Broadband PLC services
8. Generating a higher return on investment (ROI)
9. Creating a corporate image of an innovator (trend setter) in the market
10. Building shareholders’ confidence with a clear corporate vision
11. Building closer connections with the customers
12. Incorporating strategic municipality issues
13. Optimizing existing fiber optic infrastructures