He waited in the bushes, slowly counting to 100. This was how the car thief always operated. After he checked the perimeter and made sure there were no cameras and no witnesses, he would always count to 100 to make sure he was truly safe before stealing his prize. Now, he had finished his countdown and he quickly approached the car. He held his kit to the keylock and it emitted a tone, unlocking the car. He entered the car and once again used the kit to start the keyless ignition. Less than 15 seconds from the time he had exited the bushes, the thief had broken into the car and driven it out of the private lot.

As he drove the sedan down various backstreets, the thief noticed noises from the trunk of the car. This was a problem. Although the trunk looked secure, if there was any type of rattle that caused it to even partially open, that might give any nearby policeman an excuse to pull the car over. The thief decided to investigate. He pulled into an alley to investigate. Making sure no one was around, he moved to the back of the car and once again used his kit to open the trunk. Inside, his eyes met the eyes of a man he knew too well. It was his former boss, the mafia captain Sam Gambinelli. 

Shocked, the thief removed the tape from Gambinelli's mouth. "Sam, what is this? How did you end up here?" Gambinelli didn't answer. "Never mind that! Untie me!" The thief used his utility knife to cut the mafioso loose. Gambinelli looked panicked as he approached the passenger side of the vehicle and commanded the thief to drive them out of there. The thief did as he was told, although he was no longer in Gambinelli's employ. He didn't know what else to do. 

After a few minutes, during which he continually looked to see if they were being followed, Gambinelli finally spoke again. "Look, kid, we have a problem", he said as he removed a pack of cigarettes from his pocket. "The man who put me in that trunk is gonna be after us now." The thief was bewildered. "Who would dare do this to you, Sam?" Gambinelli hesitated, then sighed and revealed the culprit. "My boss...the Don."
