Teton County Declared Species
(1) Mosquito Culicidae spp.
Wyoming Designated Pests W.S. 11-5-102 (a)(xii)
(2) Mormon crickets
(3) Prairie dogs
(4) Ground squirrels
(5) Mountain pine beetle
(6) Beet leafhopper
Mosquito/West Nile Virus
West Nile virus (WNV) is an arbovirus which is passed to humans by infected mosquitoes and which can cause potentially serious illness and death. The most serious manifestation of WNV infection is fatal encephalitis (inflammation of the brain) in humans, as well as mortality in certain domestic & wild animals. West Nile virus was first reported in the United States in 1999 and has been a significant cause of human illness in Wyoming since 2003. Nationally, there have been 37,088 total human cases of WNV illness reported and confirmed, including 1549 fatalities as of January 2013.
Control: West Nile virus requires an extensive Integrated Mosquito Management Plan including active bird/mosquito surveillance, community education, and vigorous larviciding & adulticiding to reduce mosquito populations.
Prevention: Just one mosquito bite can transmit West Nile virus or other diseases. To prevent illness from WNV and other mosquito-borne diseases, remember to use mosquito repellent, eliminate mosquito breeding sites, install or repair window and door screens, and support community-based mosquito control programs. WNV can cause serious, life-altering and even fatal disease, so it’s worth it to take the time to prevent mosquito bites.
For more information on WNV and mosquitoes, please visit the following links:
For more information on rodents and other pests, please explore these links:
Bats and Rabies – The District is not equipped to offer services to assist with rabies testing, exclusion, or bat capture.
University of California IPM Project – An excellent site which talks about many home, landscape and agriculture pests.
BugGuide.net – Probably one of the best if not the best site for the identification of insects that are pests and/or beneficial bugs that pique your curiosity. Hosted by Iowa State University’s Entomology Department.
Entomologist’s resource guide – Located at the bottom of the page is a convenient springboard for all things related to entomology, as well as some associated integrated pest management articles.
The Outdoor Enthusiast’s Guide to Bugs – This site provides links to a variety of informative articles related to “bugs” – both beneficial bugs and those considered pests.
Spider Facts – This site provides interesting facts about spiders in general and the ones you are most likely to encounter.