As we know that wireless technology becomes very famous among all the aspects of different technologies of computer networking of present era. Wireless networks really provide the convenient and easy approach to communications between different areas. In this technological World, there are many networking technologies present in the field of computer networking for the sake of benefit of humanity such as internet, Ethernet, DSL and many more. Among these wired technologies, some wireless technologies are also present for example broadband wireless networking, WiFi etc. Wireless technologies basically designed to reduce the time and different type of obstacles created by the cables.
Therefore, wireless networks have more convenient working as compared to other type of wired networking. Wireless network is the type of the computer networking in which computer is connected with the different telecommunication devices wirelessly. It is used for the sake of different purposes such as communication or data transmission etc. these all types of transmission that is related to the wireless networks are carried out with help of different types of waves which have micro wavelength in nature.
Types of Wireless networks
Wireless networks are categorized into three basic types that are almost used in every configuration of the networks wirelessly. These types are as follows
- Wide Area Network (WAN)
- Local Area Network (LAN)
- Personal Area Network (PAN).
Wireless Network Security:
As there are different technologies that are very sensitive to small viruses as well as the viruses of dangerous types. For securing these kind of threats wireless networking designed a special setup that is called as wireless network security. It is defined as the protection of the security provided to different types of networking technologies and also to the networking media from the unspecified and unauthenticated access to the network and avoid the destruction of the network is referred to as wireless network security. As we know that there are different types of threats and spam come from different types of browsers and corrupt the whole networking media and slows down the working of the computer and the network. But the wireless networking technology suggests different types of hardware and the software ways to get rid of such kind o security problems.
Different Ways to Secure the Wireless Network:
As wireless technology develop[s different ways to get rid of the critical problems created by the wireless network security. Some important ways to securing your wireless networks from different types viruses Trojans and also some kind of dangerous spam are as follows
- Wireless Encryption Privacy (WEP)
- Limitations of Access Points
Wireless Encryption Privacy (WEP):
First method to secure the wireless network security is the encryption of the data that has to be transmitted on the wireless network for the transferring the information from one place to another. Different types of encryption processes are used to secure the data and the whole network form different types of destruction from security problems such as hardware solutions, software solutions, in some other solutions the whole mechanism of the access points would be change etc. but to the complications in setting the encryption it fails in walk of securing the wireless network.
Another important way to secure the network is the authentication. It is the process in which the default password of the wireless networking device is changed and assigns the new and the secret password and the username again. If we cannot change the default password any one can use your private data and information on the network.
Limitation of Access Points:
Limitation of access points is the fast and the safer way to secure the whole network from different types of threats. In this process different types of securities take part specially MAC security plays a vital role in securing the complete wireless networking system.