What are braces and how do they work?
Braces use constant, gentle pressure, which over time, move teeth into their proper positions. Your braces are at work every moment of your orthodontic treatment. The two main components of your braces are: the brackets that are placed on your teeth and the main archwire that connects them. The bracket is a piece of shaped metal or ceramic that we affix to each tooth. The archwire is bent to reflect your “ideal” bite. In other words, it reflects the way we want you to look after treatment. To discuss getting braces for you or your child,please feel free to contact us to schedule an appointment.
Oral Hygiene Overview
For a brief overview of oral hygiene tips, please click on the image below. It will launch our educational module in a separate window that may answer some of your questions about oral hygiene.
The wire threads through the brackets and, as the wire tries to return to its original shape, it applies pressure to move your teeth. Picture your tooth resting in your jaw bone. With pressure on one side from the archwire, the bone on the other side gives way. The tooth moves. New bone grows in behind.
Sometimes during treatment, elastics (rubber bands) are attached to your braces. Elastics exert the proper force that creates the right amount of pressure to move teeth. In order for this force to remain constant, elastics must be worn as prescribed by Dr. Wolsky.They should be changed every day.
Different Types of Braces
Metal braces are the most popular with kids and teenagers.Kids and adults alike love picking out different color ties at each visit. “Ties” are tiny circular elastics that hold the wire into each brace. The ties get changed at each visit, so if you want to match a certain holiday or sports team, just let us know!
Check out the “Color Picker” on the website to help decide what colors you want at your next appointment. If you do not want any color to show, we will suggest silver ties to match the braces. We also have “tooth” color that help to hide the bracket slightly.
Clear ceramic braces are popular with adults. You have to be very close to someone to be able to see them. Yet, because they are a ceramic material, they are more fragile. Feel free to discuss your options with Dr. Wolsky.