Are you Seeing Red?
When you urinate, the last thing you expect is to see red. To notice visible blood in your urine can feel frightening, and may send you into a tailspin of investigative work. What could be the reason for blood in the urine? What might it mean for your health? Why are there no other symptoms to speak of? These are all normal questions, and they can be answered by your Chattanooga urologist.
Without causing unnecessary alarm, our first recommendation if you have observed blood in your urine is that you schedule an examination and consultation with us. The team at UT Urology has extensive training in conditions affecting the urinary tract, including the kidneys, bladder, and other structures. We are here to help you make sense of the mystery of hematuria and to provide treatment focused on the resolution of this problem.
When there is blood in the urine, what we want to determine is its source. There are three common areas from which blood cells may be released: the bladder, the ureters, or the urethra. You know the bladder as the container for urine. The ureters are the small tubes that attach to the kidneys and the bladder. The urethra is the tube through which urine is excreted.
Causes of Blood in Urine
There are several potential reasons for the release of blood cells into the urine. For this reason, it is important to see us for a thorough evaluation, whether or not hematuria is accompanied by other symptoms, such as discomfort or a strong and frequent urge to urinate. Some of the common reasons why one may see blood in their urine include:
- Bladder infection, or urinary tract infection. Typically, burning upon urination will also occur, but not always, so don’t rule out this possibility.
- Kidney infection. This condition may also cause fever and chills, or pan in the low back.
- Kidney stones. Most people are aware that kidney stones are likely to cause intense abdominal or pelvic pain as they pass.
Lesser known reasons for hematuria include enlarged prostate, tumors (benign or malignant), and strenuous exercise. A comprehensive examination that includes urinalysis, bloodwork, and other screenings as needed will help us determine the underlying cause of blood in the urine, as well as the most appropriate approach to treatment.
At UT Urology, our primary concern is your comfort and health. Contact us at (423) 778-8765 to schedule your visit.