Monthly Archives: September 2017
Music (from the Greek. Musike, literally – the art of music), an art form that reflects reality and affects a person through meaningful and specially organized sound sequences, consisting mainly of tones. Music is a specific kind of human sound activity. With other varieties (speech, instrumental and audible alarms, etc.), it combines the ability to express the thoughts, emotions, and volitional processes of a person in audible form and serve as a means of communicating people and controlling their behavior. At the same time, it differs significantly from all other varieties of human sound activity. Continue reading
Cinema art, a kind of art, whose works are created by filming real, specially staged or recreated by means of animated events of reality.
The cinema art synthesizes the aesthetic properties of literature, theatrical and visual arts, music on the basis of inherent only expressive means, of which the main is the photographic nature of the image, which allows to recreate any pictures of reality with utmost certainty, and editing. The mobility of the camera and the variety of optics used in the filming make it possible to present in the frame huge spaces and large masses of people (general plan), small groups of people in their interrelations (medium plan), human portrait or individual detail (close-up). Continue reading
Painting, a form of fine art, works of art, which are created with the help of paints applied to any hard surface. Like other forms of art, painting performs ideological and cognitive tasks, and also serves as a sphere for creating subject aesthetic values, being one of the highly developed forms of human labor.
Painting reflects and in the light of certain concepts evaluates the spiritual content of the era, its social development. Powerfully acting on the feelings and thoughts of the audience, forcing the latter to experience the reality depicted by the artist, it serves as an effective means of social education. Many paintings have documentary-informational value. Continue reading