January 24, 2018
A .CSV file is a common, relatively simple file format that is widely supported by consumer, business, and scientific applications. Among its most common uses is moving data between programs that operate on incompatible formats. This works because so many programs support some variation of .CSV. A .CSV file consists of any number of records, separated by line breaks; each record consists of fields, separated by a character or string, most commonly a comma. Many of our clients request a .CSV file as the output format for their data once captured. However, we are happy to support any format required.
Administration refers to the supporting tasks associated with keeping an organisation running behind the scenes. Administration activities are often considered to be part of the back office function and can be a drain on internal resources. Many organisations are turning to outsourced service providers to provide cost effective administration support services.
See also: Back Office.
Artificial intelligence (AI) is a technology that emphasises the creation of intelligent machines that work and react like humans.
See also: RPA
An archive relates to the collection of historical records, or the physical place those records are contained. An archive contains documents that have been gathered over the course of an organisation's lifetime, often to prove the function of the organisation or business unit. An archive can be physical or electronic, which requires the documents to be digitised and indexed to allow the electronic archive to be searched.
See also: Electronic Archive, Document Management System.
Business-to-Business (B2B) describes commercial transactions between businesses, such as between a manufacturer and a wholesaler, or between a wholesaler and a retailer. B2B marketing refers to the promotion of products or services that would appeal to a business audience.
See also: B2C.
Business to Consumer (B2C) refers to the sale of goods and services from businesses to the end-user. B2C marketing refers to the promotion of products or services that would appeal to different sectors in the consumer base.
See also: B2B.
The back office relates to the section of an organisation where tasks dedicated to running the company itself take place. Back office functions are rarely customer facing and are often associated with the administration of running the company.
See also: Administration.
Best practice is a method or technique that has consistently shown superior results to those achieved with other means, and is used as a benchmark for quality and service.
Big data is a collection of data sets so large and complex that it is difficult to process using on-hand database management tools or traditional data processing applications. The challenges include capture, interpretation, storage, search, sharing, analysis and visualisation.
Book scanning refers to the digitisation of physical books for either re-printing purposes or for online electronic use. Books can be scanned using flatbed or planetary scanning methods depending upon their value, history and scale.
See also: Rare Book Scanning, Digitisation, Planetary Scanning, Flatbed Scanning.
BPaaS (Business Process as a Service)
Business Process as a Service (BPaaS) is the delivery of business process outsourcing (BPO) services via the cloud, typically leveraging a utility-based, on-demand or consumption-based pricing model, and is accessible as a cloud, web-based service, not requiring the client to own or manage its own infrastructure.
See also: BPO, DPO, KPO, LPO, Near-shoring, Off-shoring, On-shoring, Outsourcing, Re-shoring, Right-shoring.
BPO (Business Process Outsourcing)
Business process outsourcing (BPO) is a subset of outsourcing that involves contracting the operation and responsibility of specific business functions (or processes) to a third-party service provider.
See also: BPaaS, DPO, KPO, LPO, Near-shoring, Off-shoring, On-shoring, Outsourcing, Re-shoring, Right-shoring.
A Content Management System (CMS) is a web based tool that allows webmasters to publish and manage content such as graphics, text and video to their website and provides a user friendly interface to allow content to be updates without the need for HTML coding knowledge.
Customer Relationship Management (CRM) refers to the management and communication that an organisation has with its customers and the nurture of those customer relationships. A CRM system can help an organisation to track customer relations to better assist sales, marketing and customer services teams.
A database is a structured collection of data and can be articulated in wide ranging formats.
Data capture is the process whereby data is captured from either physical or electronic documents and processed either manually or using OCR, OMR or ICR technology into a consistent, interpretable format, usually a database. Data formats can be wide ranging and relate to typed or handwritten data. It can be numeric, alphanumeric or coded and can be expansive or short in format. Data capture can also refer to the population of missing data and can involve some administrative tasks in order to populate the missing data. Specific parameters are often put in place to ensure that data is captured according to the needs of the organisation.
See also: Data Entry System, Data Entry, Data Input.
Data Entry System
At Adetiq, we use our secure data entry system to process much of our client’s data. This is to ensure the highest levels of security and also the enable us to process the data as efficiently as possible, due to the functionality and programming available within the system. Our data entry system is bespoke to us and our data entry team are highly experienced at processing large volumes of data.
See also: Data Entry.
Data entry is the process whereby data is captured from either physical or electronic documents and processed either manually or using OCR, OMR or ICR technology into a consistent, interpretable format, usually a database. Data formats can be wide ranging and relate to typed or handwritten data. It can be numeric, alphanumeric or coded and can be expansive or short in format. To ensure efficient manual data entry, experienced data entry personnel are required and a specialist data entry system further improves accuracy and efficiency.
See also: Data Entry System, Data Capture, Data Input.
Data input is the manual process whereby data is inputted into a data entry system for processing into a consistent, interpretable format, usually a database. Data formats can be wide ranging and relate to typed or handwritten data. It can be numeric, alphanumeric or coded and can be expansive or short in format. To ensure efficient manual data input, experienced data input personnel are required and a specialist data entry system further improves accuracy and efficiency.
See also: Data Entry System, Data Capture, Data Entry
The term data projects relates to any data challenge, whether short or long term faced by an organisation, a specialist organisation is often required to assist with determining the best course of action relating to the data project.
Data verification is the process where captured data is verified to ensure extremely high levels of accuracy. This is conducted within our secure data entry system, and involves multiple data capture methods and technological checks to ensure that the data is as accurate as possible.
Digitisation is the process where physical documents are scanned to create an electronic image of the physical document, which can then be passed through OCR and indexed accordingly to create a searchable digital document. Digitisation can reduce storage costs and reduce time searching for unordered physical documents.
See also: Scanning, Document Scanning, Book Scanning, Archive, Document Management System, The Cloud.
Document Management System
A document management system (DMS) is a computer system (or set of computer programs) installed for the purposes of making documents widely available electronically and to track and store electronic documents.
See also: The Cloud, Archive, Electronic Archive, Digitisation.
Document Processing Cycle
The document processing cycle refers to the stages that any given document goes through during its life, from initial creation through to final destruction and the processes required for it to fulfil its task. Document processing more frequency refers to high volume documents rather than a single document specifically.
See also: Data Entry, Document Management, Big Data, Data Projects.
Document scanning and document digitisation enables organisations to digitise and store large volumes of documents for archive purposes and for access across multiple sites. Document digitisation has huge benefits for organisations in terms of improving productivity and saving money on storage costs. Many organisations are digitising vast archives in preparation to migrate to Cloud based document storage.
See also: Document Management Systems, Digitisation, The Cloud.
DPO (Document Process Outsourcing)
Document and Data Process Outsourcing is a specialised area of Business Process Outsourcing involving the outsourcing of document and data processing, to a third-party service provider that is a specialist in that area. Document processing involves the conversion of typed and handwritten text on paper-based & electronic documents into electronic information utilising one of, or a combination of, Intelligent Character Recognition (ICR), Optical Character Recognition (OCR) and experienced data entry personnel. Data processing involves the data capture of wide ranging data forms from either physical or electronic documents and processing the data into a consistent, interpretable format usually into a database and is handled by experienced data entry personnel.
See also: BPaaS, BPO, KPO, LPO, Near-shoring, Off-shoring, On-shoring, Outsourcing, Re-shoring, Right-shoring.
Electronic commerce, commonly known as e-commerce, relates to the buying and selling of product or service over electronic systems such as the Internet and other computer networks.
An electronic archive is the storage of documents gathered over the course of an organisations lifetime, within a virtual storage solution, which can bring cost savings in terms of storage space and improve efficiency in terms of personnel productivity.
See also: Archive, Document Management System.
Encryption is the process of encoding or information in such a way that hackers or unintended recipients cannot read it, but that authorized parties can.
A flatbed scanner is usually composed of a glass pane under which there is a bright light which illuminates the pane, and a moving optical array in CCD scanning. Flatbed scanning allows for quick scanning of flat sheets in either duplex or simplex formats.
See also: Planetary Scanning, Scanning, Document Scanning, Book Scanning.
A focus group is a form of qualitative research in which a group of people are asked about their perceptions, opinions, beliefs, and attitudes. Questions are asked in an interactive group setting where participants are free to talk with other group members.
The Global Sourcing Association (GSA) is the industry association and professional body for the global sourcing industry. They are the home of the Global Sourcing Standard, a world first for the provision of a portfolio of best practice methodologies and accreditation programmes supported by both buyers and suppliers of sourcing.
High Resolution Scanning
High resolution refers to the detail that a scanned image holds. The higher the resolution the more detail is contained within the image. Image resolution can be measured in a variety of ways, however frequently PPI (Pixels Per Inch) and DPI (Dots Per Inch) are the more frequent measurements. The higher the resolution the more detail is contained within the image. Photographic scanning often requires high resolution, whereas volume document scanning can be digitised cost effectively using a lower resolution.
See also: Document Scanning, Photograph Scanning, Scanning, Book Scanning.
In technology, horizontal industries relate to the function of the business unit and consist of customers that share a common need which crosses many, if not, all vertical industries. For example: Marketing, Operations, HR.
See also: Vertical Industry.
Hybrid Processing technique is using a combination of Robotic Process Automation (RPA), Artificial Intelligence (AI) and knowledge based human interaction.
ICR (Intelligent Character Recognition)
Intelligent Character Recognition (ICR) is an advanced version of optical character recognition (OCR) and allows better capture of handwritten data. The system learns handwriting styles during the processing to improve accuracy and recognition over the course of a project.
See also: OMR, OCR, Data Entry, Data Capture, Data Input.
Indexing is the processing of classifying a document by stipulated index terms in order to indicate what the document is about, to summarize its content or to increase its findability.
ISO/IEC 27001, part of the growing ISO/IEC 27000 family of standards, is an information security management system (ISMS) standard published in October 2005 by the International Organization for Standardization (ISO) and the International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC).
The ISO 9000 family of quality management systems standards is designed to help organizations ensure that they meet the needs of customers and other stakeholders while meeting statutory and regulatory requirements related to a product or program.
KPO (Knowledge Process Outsourcing)
Knowledge process outsourcing (KPO) describes the outsourcing of core business activities, which often are an integral part of the company and its differentiators. KPO requires advanced analytical and technical skills as well as a high degree of proprietary domain expertise.
See also: BPaaS, BPO, DPO, LPO, Near-shoring, Off-shoring, On-shoring, Outsourcing, Re-shoring, Right-shoring.
Letter opening is an administrative task that can be labour intensive when there are high volumes of letters which need to be processed. At Adetiq, we operate a virtual mail room for our clients, processing both physical and electronic mail. Additionally, we provide a mail room for marketing campaigns where responses levels are high, the responses are then passed to the relevant teams for processing.
See also: Mail Room, Virtual Mail Room, Administration.
Legal Process Outsourcing (LPO) refers to the practice of a law firm or corporation obtaining legal support services from an outside law firm or legal support services company (LPO provider). We support many LPO providers with processing large volumes of documents and data.
See also: BPaaS, BPO, DPO, KPO, Near-shoring, Off-shoring, On-shoring, Outsourcing, Re-shoring, Right-shoring.
Data captured from planning and land surveys can be labour intensive to plot onto land maps. Our team are experienced at plotting map data associated with land and planning surveys and can provide a cost effective outsourced solution.
See also: Map Scanning.
Using Planetary scanning technology, large maps can be scanned and digitised for re-printing or electronic use. The Planetary technology allows historic maps to be scanned without damage and post-scanning techniques enable the maps to be re-touched to ensure a high quality output.
See also: Scanning, High Resolution Scanning, Planetary Scanning, Map Plotting.
Market research is any organized effort to gather information about markets or customers.
Near-shoring relates to the outsourcing of business processes to companies in a nearby country, often sharing a border with your own country.
See also: BPaaS, BPO, DPO, KPO, LPO, Off-shoring, On-shoring, Outsourcing, Re-shoring, Re-shoring, Right-shoring.
OCR (Optical Character Recognition)
Optical Character Recognition (OCR) is the electronic conversion of scanned images of handwritten, typewritten or printed text into machine-encoded text. It is widely used as a form of data entry from paper data sources, whether documents, sales receipts, mail, or any number of printed records. It is a common method of digitising printed texts so that they can be electronically searched and stored.
See also: OMR, ICR, Data Entry, Data Capture, Data Input.
Offshoring describes the process of outsourcing a business function or process to a third party, located outside of your own country, and often far from the home country of the organisation.
See also: BPaaS, BPO, DPO, KPO, LPO, Near-shoring, On-shoring, Outsourcing, Re-shoring, Right-shoring.
On-shoring describes the process of outsourcing a business function or process to a third party, based within your own country.
See also: BPaaS, BPO, DPO, KPO, LPO, Near-shoring, Off-shoring, Outsourcing, Re-shoring, Right-shoring.
OMR (Optical Mark Recognition)
Optical Mark Recognition (OMR) is the process of capturing human-marked data from document forms such as surveys and tests. The technology is able to read simple checked or marked boxes within stipulated parameters quickly, in order to process structured data in a time efficient manner.
See also: OCR, ICR, Data Entry, Data Capture, Data Input.
See Planetary Scanning.
Outsourcing refers to the contracting out of a business process to an independent organisation who will either act as a third party or as a virtual extension of the organisation’s in house team.
See also: BPaaS, BPO, DPO, KPO, LPO, Near-shoring, Off-shoring, On-shoring, Re-shoring, Right-shoring.
PAF® is a database of all UK addresses and postcodes. PAF® is used widely for the efficient delivery of mail and, increasingly, for online use particularly for address look-up, address verification, and in mapping software.
PCI DSS stands for Payment Card Industry Data Security Standard and was created by the PCI Security Standards Council. It provides a robust and comprehensive framework of standards and supporting material to enhance data security and to ensure the safe handling of sensitive data at every step. The PCI DSS framework includes specific checks and measures associated with the prevention, detection and appropriate reaction to security incidents, which Adetiq has in place.
The process of scanning existing photographs for re-printing purposes or digital use.
See also: Slide Scanning, Scanning, High Resolution Scanning.
Planetary scanning technology also known as Orbital scanning, uses overhead technology allowing rare or fragile books to be handled sensitively minimising damage to covers, pages, spins and bindings, which are often be damaged using other scanning technology. The technology allows high resolution capture of otherwise, un-scannable books for use online or for re-printing purposes.
See also: Flatbed Scanning, Book Scanning, Rare Book Scanning, High Resolution Scanning, Scanning.
Within our price comparison services, we are able compare prices for specific products and articulate the information in an easy to interpret manner. In this context it is useful for business who need to compare prices but don’t have the resources in house to conduct such activities effectively.
Process outsourcing relates to the practice where an organisation elects to outsource any given business process to a third party service provider, for the benefits of cost saving and efficiency.
See also: BPaaS, BPO, DPO, KPO, LPO, Near-shoring, Off-shoring, On-shoring, Outsourcing, Re-shoring Right-shoring.
Rare Book Scanning
Rare, valuable or historic books require specialist handling to preserve the original condition of the book. At Adetiq, we use planetary technology to ensure that the condition of each rare book is preserved throughout the scanning process.
See also: Digitisation, Planetary Scanning, Book Scanning.
Re-shoring relates to the process of bringing off-shore processes back onshore.
See also: BPaaS, BPO, DPO, KPO, LPO, Near-shoring, Off-shoring, On-shoring, Outsourcing, Right-shoring.
is the process of identifying the best location to move business processes for a company. The decision is to be based on quantifiable criteria which are intended to take subjective and political input out of the decision cycle.
See also: BPaaS, BPO, DPO, KPO, LPO, Near-shoring, Off-shoring, On-shoring, Outsourcing, Re-shoring.
Robotic process automation (RPA) is the use of software with artificial intelligence (AI) and machine learning capabilities to handle high-volume, repeatable tasks that previously required a human to perform.
See also: AI.
Image scanning, which is often abbreviated to just scanning is the process where physical documents including images, text, plans or handwritten documents are optically scanned and converted to a digital image.
See also: Book Scanning, Document Scanning, Flatbed Scanning, Planetary Scanning, Digitisation.
Slide scanning is the process where photographic film is scanned, and the images digitised for re-printing purposes or for electronic use. Film and slide scanning requires specialist scanning technology.
See also: Scanning, Photographic Scanning, High Resolution Scanning.
Smartphone Data Capture
Data collection method that lets you fill out forms offline on smartphones. It’s a flexible way to collect data as it helps you gather more information like images, photos, videos etc and work faster, without having to worry about a wifi signal.
See also: Tablet data capture.
Survey Scoring / Sentiment Analysis
Survey coding is the process of scoring open comment responses captured during a survey or interview according to a framework of possible scores. Typically, the scoring framework is based upon sentiment or mentions of particular items within the criteria.
See also: Survey Classification.
Survey classification is the process of classifying open comment responses captured during a survey or interview according to a framework of possible classifications. Typically, the classification framework is based upon sentiment or mentions of particular items within the criteria. Thereafter, whole surveys can be processed into specific classification criteria if required.
See also: Survey Scoring.
Tablet Data Capture
Data collection method that lets you fill out forms offline on tablets. It’s a flexible way to collect data as it helps you gather more information like images, photos, videos etc and work faster, without having to worry about a wifi signal.
See also: Smartphone data capture.
Also known as software as a service, users are provided with virtual access to application software and databases. Access to the applications is generally on a subscription basis and The Cloud provider is responsible for the infrastructure associated with running the software and databases, often from large data warehouses.
See also: Document Management, Digitisation.
A vertical industry is a group of similar businesses operating in a similar space, which have specific industry related needs. For example: Public Sector, Retail, Manufacturing.
Virtual Mail Room
A virtual mail room is a mail and sorting office managed by a third party service provider on behalf of an organisation, and on the premises of the third party supplier. The mail room can handle physical and/or electronic mail.
A virtual team is a group of individuals who work across time, space and organisational boundaries as one unit.
Web scraping (also called as screen scraping, web harvesting or web data extraction) is data scraping used for extracting data from websites. whereby the data is extracted and saved to a database in table (spreadsheet) format.