A Critically Endangered species of Madagascan frog has bred successfully for the first time at North Queensferry’s Deep Sea World.
More than 30 tiny golden mantella tadpoles, measuring less than 10mm in length have been born at the aquarium.
Zoologists at the centre are now waiting anxiously to see how many of the tadpoles will transform into froglets.
The golden mantella frog is only found in the high forests of Eastern Madagascar – where the frogs are confined to a fragment of forest, surrounded by farmland and human settlements and is threatened by logging.
Deep Sea World’s Zoological Manager Chris Smith, said: “We have been looking after a group of seven adult frogs here for the past four years and this is the first time they have bred.
“It’s a fantastic achievement and we are now talking to other captive breeding programmes around the world to try and ensure as many of the tadpoles as possible reach maturity.
“If all goes well these tadpoles should start to change into froglets in the next two months.”
As its name suggests, the frog is a bright golden colour and, although not toxic, it is thought the frog may mimic the vivid colouration of poison frogs to fool would-be predators.
The adult frogs are totally land-based and don’t have webbed feet.
In the wild the eggs are laid on the forest floor and the tadpoles have to find their own way to the water.
Unlike some species of frog the golden mantella is not a great parent and once the eggs have been laid they are ignored by the adults.
They live in small groups, known as ‘armies’ which usually contain twice as many males than females.
Critically Endangered is the highest risk category assigned by the International Union for Conservation of Nature Red List for wild species and means that a species' numbers have decreased, or will decrease, by 80% within three generations.
This is great news for North Queensferry! Will you be visiting the froglets? Remember to post your pictures and comments here at s1northqueensferry.