Significance of developing the wood-plastic composite decking
In modern life, people are becoming more and more dependent on plastics. From daily necessities to various instruments, the existence of plastics is clearly shown everywhere. Then colleagues who are enjoying a convenient life are plagued by white pollution.
Disposal of plastic waste is not only a problem of the plastic industry but also a public hazard that is widely concerned by the international community. In terms of urban plastic solid waste treatment, three methods are mainly used: landfill, incineration, and recycling.
1. With landfill treatment, plastic products are bulky and low in weight, and they are not easy to rot, which will cause the landfill to become a soft foundation, which will be difficult to use in the future.
2. Use incineration. Due to a large amount of heat generated by the plastic, the furnace is easily damaged. In addition, a large number of greenhouse gases will be generated after incineration, which will aggravate the greenhouse effect of the earth. Some plastics will release harmful gases and cause atmospheric pollution when they are burned.
3. Use recycling methods. It requires a lot of manpower, the recycling cost is high, and there is no corresponding recycling channel, so this method is not suitable.
Because the world’s petroleum resources are limited, from the perspective of saving the earth’s resources and protecting the global environment, the recycling of plastics is of great significance. For this reason, countries around the world have invested a lot of manpower and resources to develop new technologies for the recycling of various waste plastics. In addition, due to the current depletion of global forest resources, the awareness of environmental protection in various countries has continuously increased, and laws on the restriction and prohibition of forest logging have been promulgated, which has set higher requirements for the use of wood. On the one hand, the amount of wood harvested should be minimized, and on the other hand, the utilization rate of wood should be improved. In the use of traditional wood, 25% -35% are waste materials. How to use these leftovers to improve the utilization of wood has attracted much attention.
In this situation, WPC products just provide a good way for the recycling of waste plastics, and its logging function has played an important role in saving wood resources. Wood-plastic composite decking fully reflects the effective use of renewable resources and the recycling of petroleum products. Its rise is of great significance to alleviate the shortage of wood and petroleum resources and the difficulty of recycling waste plastics.