What does the house mouse look like?
The house mouse ranges in size from 5 ½ to 7 inches in length including the tail. Their round body is covered in fur that is gray, brown, or black with a cream or tan underbelly; its ears and tail are covered in a light layer of fur. House mice have very tiny dark colored eyes.
How do mice get inside?
Mice can enter homes and businesses through small spaces found in exterior walls. They only need a space that is about ¼ of an inch in diameter (about the width of a pencil) to enter through. House mice often squeeze through cracks and crevices in the foundation, spaces found around exterior windows and doors, spaces around utilities entering your home, and through vents or spaces found around heating and air conditioning units.
Why do mice infest homes and businesses?
Mice will infest homes and businesses any time of the year while searching for food and water. Mice can become a particular nuisance in the fall and winter when they actively search for warm, safe shelter to stay in over the winter months.
Are house mice dangerous?
Yes, house mice are dangerous; they can spread serious diseases including: salmonellosis, leptospirosis, dysentery, and lymphocytic choriomeningitis. They are also known for introducing other parasites like ticks and fleas that carry their own set of diseases that can be spread to people. Because they need to constantly chew, mice will also cause significant structural damage to properties and belongings.
Signs of a mouse infestation:
Damage caused by mice
Damages caused by the house mouse
House mice can cause significant damages to properties, personal items, and inventory. House mice chew constantly and will chew through and damage wires, pipes, insulation, drywall, and flooring; along with pictures, books, boxes, clothing, and furniture. Mouse droppings and urine will contaminate insulation, other building materials and possessions.
House mouse control
House mice are difficult to find and eliminate because they often nest in hard to reach areas of your home or business; therefore, the best way to ensure that all mice are found and removed is with professional help. DIY mouse control is more often than not ineffective and does nothing to get to the root of the infestation - how the house mice are entering your property in the first place.
Pine State Pest Solutions offers comprehensive rodent control services that target mice and other rodents common to Maine. Our team of highly trained pest control technicians work with customers to identify the source of the infestation, the conditions that are attracting these critters and develop a management plan to get rid of mice in your home. We also provide exclusion services and will recommend behavior and landscape modifications to prevent a hospitable living space for rodents near your home or business.
If you’ve found mouse poop in a drawer, have discovered mice nesting in the attic or found evidence of a problem, please contact Pine State Pest Solutions today.
House mouse prevention tips
Don’t want a mouse problem in or around your home? We don’t blame you, they’re nasty creatures. To help prevent a mouse problem, our Maine pest control pros have recommended the following tips:
Seal cracks in the foundation.
Place a tight fitting cap on all chimneys. You should also inspect the chimney and fix any loose or missing roof shingles.
Caulk gaps found around exterior windows and doors.
Trim back trees and shrubs from the exterior of your home. Mice will use their branches to gain easy access to your home.
Keep tight fitting lids on outdoor trash cans and place them a distance away from the exterior of your home.
Store food in sealed containers and do not leave open containers or food out on the counters for easy access.
Make sure that spills and crumbs are cleaned up quickly and wash dirty dishes regularly.
Reduce areas of clutter and routinely remove garbage from your home.
Pine State Pest Solutions serves the following counties, Kennebec, Androscoggin, Sagadahoc, Oxford, Cumberland and York. We are the best pest control service provider in Maine.