PCOS, also known as Polycystic Ovarian Syndrome, is a health disorder that affects women and their reproductive organs. It is a very common disorder, and affects up to 5 million women in the USA alone. It is estimated that 1 in 20 women and possibly even more have PCOS. It can affect women of any age, beginning as young as 11 years old, and has many different symptoms. PCOS affects the hormones, the heart, the blood vessels, the menstrual cycle, the appearance, and more. The cause is unknown, although it is thought that genetics plays some sort of a role. So, what are the symptoms of PCOS, and how do you know if you have it? Read on for some more information on symptoms and what to look for. Claim Your 20 Free Pregnancy Tests – Click Here
Infertility, or the inability to get pregnant, is a very common symptom of PCOS. In fact, PCOS is the most common cause of female infertility.
PCOS can very commonly cause problems with the menstrual cycle. If you have irregular, infrequent or absent periods, PCOS could possibly be a cause.
One of the most common symptoms of PCOS is excessive hair growth, also known as Hirsutism. This excessive hair is most often found on the face, chest, stomach, back, thumbs and toes.
Ovarian cysts are very common and can be caused by many different female issues. They are also a symptom of PCOS, so make sure to ask your doctor about PCOS if he or she tells you that you have cysts on your ovaries.
One of the most common symptoms of PCOS is strange skin issues. These issues can include excessively oily skin and acne. Dandruff can also be a skin issue associated with PCOS.
PCOS is often associated with weight gain and obesity. This weight gain is usually, but not always centered around the middle of the body, in the stomach area.
Another common symptom of PCOS is patches of skin on the body that are dark brown or even black. These skin patches are usually located on the neck, arms, breasts, and thighs.
Anxiety is also a common symptom of PCOS, along with mild to moderate depression. Sleep apnea can also sometimes be attributed to PCOS.
Aside from dandruff, there are also some other hair issues that can be associated with PCOS. Some of these include thinning hair and even, in some cases, male pattern baldness.
As you can see, there are so many different symptoms associated with PCOS. If you think it might be affecting you, make sure to contact your doctor or health care provider.