A team of scientists at Tel Aviv has made an astonishing claim that could reaffirm the age-old scientific fact that ‘plants are living things’.
The team discovered that some plants emit a high-frequency distress sound when they are in pain or under any environmental stress. In simple terms, these plants make sounds when their stems are cut.
The test involved depriving tomato and tobacco plants of water by cutting their stems and then recording their responses on a microphone. Both the plants emitted ultrasonic sounds between 200 and 100 kilohertz. The researchers believe the sounds could convey their distress to other plants and organisms in the immediate surrounding.
The tomato plant emitted 25 ultrasonic distress sounds when its stem was cut and the tobacco plant sent out 15 distress sounds. But when the tomato plant was deprived of water, it emitted around 35 distress sounds in one hour.
Interestingly, the plants also responded to different intensities of sound and stress. However, plants that had no environmental threat released less than one ultrasonic sound per hour.
“These findings can alter the way we think about the plant kingdom, which has been considered to be almost silent until now,” the researchers wrote in a paper.
The team said their findings can help farmers to identify potential problems with crops.
The ultrasonic sounds emitted by the plants cannot be heard by humans but can be picked up by bats, dogs, and mice, according to sound experts.
Not so long ago, a study found that certain plants registered 'pain' when their leaves were plucked off or even touched.
When the plants were threatened physically, they released a foul-tasting chemical on their leaves to ward off insects, the research claimed.
U.P ADG Prashant Kumar on charge against Meerut top cop who was seen asking protesters to 'go to Pakistan' in a viral video.
Row over Meerut top cop's viral video, BSP chief Mayawati demands probe into the matter.
TIMES NOW’s Prashant with details. Watch!