known as the bulb onion or common onion, is used as a vegetable and is the most widely cultivated. This genus also contains several other species variously referred to as onions and cultivated for food, such as the Japanese bunching onion
, the Egyptian onion
, and the Canada onion
The onion plant has a fan of hollow, bluish-green leaves and the bulb at the base of the plant begins to swell when a certain day-length is reached. In the autumn the foliage dies down and the outer layers of the bulb become dry and brittle. The crop is harvested and dried and the onions are ready for use or storage.
Onions are cultivated and used around the world. As a foodstuff they are usually served cooked, as a vegetable or part of a prepared savoury dish, but can also be eaten raw
or used to make pickles
. They are pungent when chopped and contain certain chemical substances which irritate the eyes. Onions contain phenolics and flavonoids that have potential anti-inflammatory, anti-cholesterol, anticancer and antioxidant properties.
Onion contains 89% water
, 4% sugar
, 1% protein
, 2% fibre and 0.1% fat
They contain vitamin C
, vitamin B6, folic acid and numerous other nutrients in small amounts. They are low in fats and in sodium
, and with an energy value of 166kJ per 100 g serving, they can contribute their flavour to savoury dishes without raising caloric content appreciably.Health benefits of onion:
The phytochemicals in onions improve the working of Vitamin C in the body
, thus gifting you with improved immunity.
Onions contain chromium, which assists in regulating blood sugar
For centuries, onions have been used to reduce inflammation and heal infections
Raw onion encourages the production of good cholesterol (HDL), thus keeping your heart healthy
A powerful compound called quercetin in onions is known to play a significant role in preventing cancer
Got bitten by a honeybee? Apply onion juice on the area for immediate relief from the pain and burning sensation
Onions scavenge free radicals, thereby reducing your risk of developing gastric ulcers
.Those bright green tops of green onions are rich in Vitamin A
, so do use them often.
Read More at Wikipedia.
Recipe Using Onion Click Here Here and Here.
Also see Onion Goggles, Onion Saver.