No problem! Here are some characters you could use for your costume party: 

Male characters: 
1. Captain Gale - The captain of the ship. Captain Gale is a suspect because he served in the war, lost countless friends, and resented the victim's war profiteering. He wears a traditional captain's uniform in navy blue with a double-breasted jacket and cap. 
2. Doctor Cole Coffman - The ship's physician. The doctor is a suspect because he should have been able to save the victim's life but failed to do so. He wears a black suit under a white doctor's jacket and carries a medical bag.  
3. Dewey Cheatem, Esquire - A lawyer. Dewey is a suspect because he was hired to represent the victim in a lawsuit that he was likely to lose, which would have done irreparable damage to his law career. Dewey wears a pin-striped 3-piece suit with glasses and carries a leather briefcase. 
4. Jarvis Jeeves - A butler. Jarvis is a suspect because he was formerly employed by the victim but abruptly let go, with no option but to accept a lower-paid position in another household. He wears a black suit, glasses, and white gloves.  

Female characters: 
1. Martha McBride - A wealthy widow in mourning. Martha is a suspect because she was previously married to the victim's father. She wears black from head to toe, including gloves and a lace veil, with a simple string of pearls around her neck.
2. Dottie Mae Lister - Dottie was employed as the victim's personal secretary up until the event of his death. She is a suspect because she knew all of his secrets, many of which conflicted with her personal ethics. She wears a simple tweed dress suit with glasses and mary jane shoes. 
3. Vivian Valentino - A burgeoning Hollywood starlet. Vivian is a suspect because she was formerly romantically involved with the victim and their affair ended badly. She wears a satin gown with gaudy diamond jewelry and a fur coat. 
4. Pamela Pennyworth - A telephone operator. Pamela is a suspect because she was engaged to the victim at the time of his death, it was plain that their relationship was a financial arrangement rather than true love, and the victim suspected her of carrying on an affair with her high school sweetheart. She wears a polka-dot dress, red lipstick, and a fur-lined coat.
