Final Fantasy is a long-running series of video games in the RPG (role-playing game) genre. It spawned an entire generation of games that were inspired by it, and there is an entire sub-genre of RPG that was directly influenced by Final Fantasy. This sub-genre is called Japanese role-playing games, shortened to JRPG.

The first Final Fantasy came out in 1987 in Japan on the Famicom, short for family computer. It had a 1990 release in North America, on the Nintendo Entertainment System, also known as NES. Although simplistic by today's standards, it was very innovative in its time and known for its cleverly laid-out dungeons, creative monster designs, and fun gameplay.

The story revolves around four Warriors of Light, who find themselves banding together to save the world. They each carry an elemental crystal from their worlds, which were darkened by the four Elemental Fiends. They realize they must restore light to the crystals by defeating the fiends, while also growing stronger in the process. At the end of the game, the warriors travel through a portal to fight the final boss, Chao. Once he's defeated, they can restore peace to the world.

Final Fantasy IV is another entry in the series, that came out for the Super Famicom in Japan and Super Nintendo in North America (in the US the title was Final Fantasy II), both in the year 1991. The Four Fiends make their return but the graphics and story have been greatly improved. The story revolves around the dark knight Cecil Harvey who is the captain of the Red Wings and takes orders from the King of Baron. He realizes in the story that he is taking orders from an evil king and strives to become a better person, transforming from a dark knight into a paladin while coming to terms with his past. The main antagonist throughout most of the story is Golbez, who is after the crystals that the Four Fiends are guarding. After numerous fights Cecil and Golbez realize that they are brothers, and they team up to defeat Zeromus, who lives on the moon and plans to destroy the Earth. Cecil defeats Zeromus with the help of his companions and peace is restored on Earth.
