(SAN DIEGO, CA) February 1, 2018 — Wowzers Learning, an engaging K-8 math curriculum provider is breaking the stereotype that math is difficult and is focused on transforming the way students view math and how teachers personalize instruction.
Launched in 2012, Wowzers created a standards-based curriculum with “real-world” applications to help students of all ages and abilities learn and process math through a multi-modal approach. The newly launched Wowzers Learning, provides schools and districts with a holistic and comprehensive, digital math curriculum which includes lessons, practices, games, instructional videos, assessments, blended learning activities, and performance tasks, all of which help students answer the question, “Why do I need to learn this?” The adaptive features built into Wowzers automatically creates a personalized learning path for each student and gives educators the power to customize sequences to match the needs of their students.
In August 2017, Wowzers partnered with the Northwest Evaluation Association (NWEA) to help educators personalize math instruction and track growth for every student through an automated process. “Our integration with NWEA allows us to generate an automatic learning path with a click of a button by connecting NWEA MAP Growth RIT scores with Wowzers. We are proud to be the first (and right now, the only) company to offer this capability,” said Reed Howard, the CEO of Wowzers Learning. “For the past few years, I have watched personalized learning intensify, and for educators to best understand what that means, it is imperative to connect the needs of students to the desired outcomes in a way that saves time for teachers and delivers positive results.”
The comprehensive curriculum based on the Science of Learning is aligned to state and national standards, personalized for each student, and includes enhanced assessments to track and monitor students’ mastery of mathematical foundations.
Wowzers allows students and teachers unlimited access to the comprehensive curriculum on computers and tablets 24/7. Animated, virtual tools get students excited to learn new math skills, and the activities in Wowzers build declarative knowledge and underlying cognitive skills, like memory, thinking, and sequencing. Wowzers supports the learning system of the brain by including emotional, social, and reflective thinking in a variety of ways.
At the TCEA conference on February 7 and 8, Wowzers Learning will discuss its partnership with NWEA, showcase research and identify clients’ success stories at the PR with Panache! Storytelling Suite. To make an appointment, please contact Susan Hanson.
About Wowzers Learning
The vision of Wowzers Learning is to breakdown the barriers to math success by personalizing math programs for grades K-8. Wowzers combines a standards-based curriculum to facilitate learning math for students of all ages and abilities and is appropriate for blended learning, RTI, small-group instruction, before- and after-school programs, and more. The program gives students, teachers, and administrators the ability to track engagement, mastery of math concepts, and growth. The Wowzers curriculum is based on the Science of Learning, which integrates modalities that appeal to tactile, auditory, and visual learners with important elements to address the needs of every student. To learn more, please visit Wowzers.com.
PR with Panache!