Water: What You Can Do
What You Can Do
Provides information on how you can get involved including ways to protect human health and the environment by raising awareness about potential threats to your drinking water, local rivers, lakes, streams, wetlands, the fish and shellfish you eat, and aquatic ecosystems.
Adopt Your Watershed – This program challenges you to serve your community by taking part in activities to protect and restore your local watershed.
After the Storm – Weather emergencies such as flooding can introduce pollutants to your water supply. Learn how to protect your source of water and find out what to do in the event that your drinking water is compromised.
Bring Back the Water Fountain - Learn about how EPA is partnering with Mayors across the country through the U.S. Conference of Mayors to reinvigorate our nation's supply of public drinking fountains.
Clean Water Act 40th Anniversary - 2012 marked the 40th anniversary of the Clean Water Act, the nation's law for protecting our most irreplaceable resource
Emergency Preparedness – identify some of the issues you may face preparing for, during and after an event that can directly threaten your health and the health of your family.
Energy/Water - To help move toward a more sustainable energy and water future, EPA has drafted Principles for an Energy Water Future.
Good Samaritan – An Agency-wide initiative to accelerate restoration of watersheds and fisheries threatened by abandoned hard rock mine runoff. The Good Samaritan initiative encourages voluntary cleanups by parties that are not responsible for the property in question.
Importance of Water to the United States Economy - EPA is conducting a study of the importance of water in the U.S. economy. Learn more about this effort.
Nonpoint Source Toolbox - Contains a variety of resources for the development of an effective outreach campaign to educate the public on nonpoint source pollution or storm water runoff.
Pollution Prevention – Water pollution and control measures are critical to improving water quality and lessening the need for costly wastewater and drinking water treatment. Find information on a variety of water pollution prevention and control measures.
Protect Your Health – Offers information on how to protect yourself from water-related health risks such as microbes in tap water and in water bodies used for swimming, and contaminants in fish and shellfish.
Protecting Drinking Water - People who travel abroad know the familiar problem with unsafe drinking water. At home, we scarcely give it a thought. Usually, we are right. But the sources of our drinking water are constantly under siege from naturally occurring events and human activities that can pollute our sources of drinking water.
Volunteer Monitoring - EPA encourages all citizens to learn about their water resources and supports volunteer monitoring because of its many benefits.
Water Efficiency - Efficient use of water helps reduce the demands on our water supplies, as well as on both drinking water and wastewater infrastructure, as using less water means moving and treating less water.