International Day for Biological Diversity : Here’s why the future of our food depends on biodiversity
International Day for Biological Diversity,Also known as World Biodiversity Day.This year’s celebrations focus on biodiversity as the foundation for our food and a key catalyst in transforming food system.
Amritsar,11 June: The Department of Botanical & Environmental Sciences, Guru Nanak Dev University Amritsar in collaboration with Punjab Biodiversity Board celebrated the International Biodiversity Day . The program included ‘Poster making’ and ‘Best out of Waste’ competitions on the theme “Our Biodiversity, Our Food, Our Health”. The event was sponsored by National Biodiversity Authority, Government of India. Prof. Adarsh Pal Vig, Co-ordinator of program highlighted the need of conservation of biodiversity and its effects on food and health. He also discussed the role of student’s participation in such programmes. The students from various departments of the university participated and were given cash prizes, trophies and certificates of participation. Ms. Manharjot Kaur (M.Sc. Bot Sem-IV) won the first prize in poster making whereas Ms. Tamanna Bhardwaj (M.Sc. Bot Sem-IV) and Mr. Hridoy Ranjan Saikia (research fellow) bagged the second positions.
In Best out of Waste competition, Mr. Jahangeer Quadar, Ms. Tamanna Bhardwaj and Khushneet Kaur secured first, second and third positions respectively. Dr. A.S. Soodan of the department shared his ideas on biodiversity which is his field of research. He also threw light on role of Plants in Culture and Literature. He commented that it has been forewarned in our religious scriptures that human activities can damage the ecosystem. He argued that man’s dependence and association on biodiversity is as old as his own existence but in the pursuit of material development we have caused damage to the nature balance development. He drew the attention of audience to the religious scriptures which not only talk of the importance of plants to mankind but also the need to conserve them.
Prof. Avinash Kaur Nagpal discussed the damage which has already been done to the ecosystem and emphasized on ecologically safe development. Dr. Jatinder Kaur, Faculty Advisor of Society of Botanical and Environmental Sciences, addressed the audience with the importance of biodiversity. Dr. A.S Soodan and Dr. J.S. Bilga judged the entries for poster making competition whereas Prof. Saroj Arora and Dr. Rajinder Kaur judged the entries for Best out of waste competition. International biodiversity day was celebrated with full enthusiasm and students took part with great spirit. Prof. Adarsh Pal Vig conducted the whole program and gave vote of thanks to the guests & participants. The Head of the Department Dr. M.S. Bhatti and other faculty members including Prof. A.K. Thukral, Prof. Renu Bhardwaj, Prof. Saroj Arora, Prof. Satwinderjeet Kaur, Dr. Jatinder Kaur, Dr. Rajinder Kaur, Dr. Kirandeep Dhami, and Dr. J.S. Bilga attended the function. The names of other winners are Ms. Palak Sharma, Mr. Ankush, Mr. Pargat, Ms. Meenakshi, Ms. Sehajpreet Kaur, Ms. Areet Kaur, Mr. Dilpreet Singh and Ms. Simratpreet Kaur.