4 Types of Dental Implants
Lacking a single tooth or teeth can have a significant impact in deteriorating your health, confidence, and nutrition. Some of the causes of missing teeth may include tooth decay, injuries, gum problems and genetic elements such as congenitally missing teeth. However, missing teeth can be replaced with distinct dental implants available. Dental implants exist in various sizes and height hence offering different types of implants.
Types of Dental Implants
- Endosteal Dental Implant
The endosteal procedure entails an implant that is introduced directly into the jaw and is the most familiar method used by patients. However, the method also includes two main categories of either using a cylinder or a blade in the procedure. The implants have a given period of healing, and the prosthetic teeth are fastened to the jawbone considering the various methods suggested by the dentist.
The endosteal implant consists of various components depending on the two subdivisions of the procedure. Cylinder form accompanies a screw, small titanium cylinder, ceramic and a buttress. On the other hand, a blade constitutes more abutments compared to the other method. However, both categories of endosteal are made to fit the supported position of the implant.
- Subperiosteal Dental Implant
Unlike the endosteal method, subperiosteal implants lie over the jawbone immediately under the thin layer in between the gum and the bone. The process is suitable for patients with dental problems and requires implants but suffer from bone loss on jaws. Despite being rarely used, subperiosteal implants are essential for boneless jaws on both the maxilla and the mandible hence offer an option to acquire prosthetic teeth.
Bone loss may result from aging, calcium and potassium deficiency and thyroid complications which may affect the jaws which anchor teeth. The subperiosteal method is not limited to the size or shape of the jawbone available and prevents grafting of the bone. More so, the procedure has an immediate improvement of the teeth which also get to work in a short period after the implant. Dissimilar to other methods, the subperiosteal implant provides a sooner healing process as it does not require the jawbone and implanted teeth attachments.
- Single-Stage Dental Implant
A single-stage dental implant is a procedure that involves surgery of placing a prolonged replacement base through the gum to the jawbone but not into the bone. The protruding region is then left level with the gum to heal without any attachment at the top. A while after healing, the dentist then implants a prosthetic tooth or teeth or conducts a restoration procedure without performing another surgery. The method is usually done by a specialist who initially approves the process after a complete examination of the patient.
- Two- Stage Dental implants
The procedure is much similar to endosteal as it comprises drilling the jaw bone, but it’s a surgical process. It also involves the gums being stitched together similar to single-stage implant and later the prosthetic teeth are attached. The procedure offers both permanent and temporary implants and less expensive compared to other methods of implants. The main difference between single-stage and two-stage is that two-stage requires a second minor surgery where a tooth is attached while single-stage only comprises of a single surgical procedure even on the attachment of the prosthetic tooth.
In some cases, some patients have jawbones which would not support any implant procedure hence may require some techniques to realign to provide a steady jawbone. Some methods used to restore the jawbone include bone augmentation, sinus lift, and ridge expansion. These techniques range from the regeneration of the bone, sinus elevation, and bone grafting. Its advisable to consult your dentist before selecting a given dental implant procedure to undergo for a successful implant process