Jelly Towers is a 2D puzzle game that requires players to stack blobs of jelly together to form towers. The towers must grow high enough to reach the “Jydra,” a monster resting above. Once the tower is high enough to reach the monster, players then stack the gelatinous objects so that Jydra can eat them, making sure the monster gets the right shapes it wants. This game features no violence, blood, or any other inappropriate content, and has no reading or math requirements, but features a moderate level of difficulty, so it is recommended for players ages 7 and up.
Jelly Towers is good for kids who need help practicing Planning skills because it uses concepts like gravity and physics to make objects in the game react with their environment in realistic ways. This means a poorly built tower will topple over if it doesn’t have a well-built base, and that certain objects will stack together better than others. In order to make a tower tall enough to feed the monster above, players must first plan how to build a base, then stack their blobs of jelly in a way that allows them to remain stable long enough to feed the monster.
Managing our actions, feelings and behaviors.
Moving the blobs of jelly is a tricky process as their movement can be unpredictable, and they are very sensitive to touch. A gentle tap can send a blob flying across the screen. Especially on the levels where it's easy to quickly see how the jellies need to be stacked, players must resist the temptation to move too fast or they will likely make careless mistakes. Repeatedly building a tower that keeps falling can become very frustrating as well, but keeping control of their temper will allow them to take the caution necessary to construct sound structures, making the game easier and more enjoyable to play. Also, players will be driven to complete the level as fast as possible considering it's timed, which makes Self-Control skills even more critical to avoid rushing and making mistakes.
Being efficient and aware of our use of time and effort.
Due to the timed nature of the levels, players must act efficiently, prioritizing their actions to strike a balance between speed and precision. If players rush, they will likely make mistakes that cost them the level. lf they move too slowly, they won't be able to stack the tower up high enough to reach the Jydra before the timer runs out. The stability of the tower hinges on the placement of the jellies and therefore stresses the importance of a solid foundation. By using good Time Management skills, players can take the time to build a solid base before speeding things up as they stack the objects higher.
All membership plans come with full access to our entire suite of tools learning guides, and resources. Here are a few of the ones we think you’ll like the most: