Monday 13th – Friday 17th January
After reading Traction Man in English over the last two weeks we have started writing our own superhero stories this week. After planning them on Tuesday we have written our beginning and build-up of the story and we will finish them next week.
In maths, both year one and two have been continuing to learn about time with year ones telling and drawing times at o’clock and half past while year twos have learnt about quarter to, quarter past and times at 5 minute intervals.
With Miss Clark the Owls have learnt who Florence Nightingale was and why she is such an important person. We learnt about the differences between nursing now and when she was alive and we created a timeline about her life.
In computing we learnt what an algorithm is and using what we learnt we followed an algorithm with the help of our partner.
6th – 10th January
Happy new year!
Welcome back to the Owls blog. During the first week back at school after the holidays we have started to learn about our new topic this term which is Superheroes. As a class we made two school children by gluing tissue paper to human body cut outs so we can label them for our display board in the classroom. Have a look next time you are in our class.
In maths, the year ones have been learning about time and year twos have been learning about the inverse and how it can help us to check our answers.
Enjoy your weekend!
Monday 18th - Friday 29th November
Over the last two weeks the owls have been working hard in all subjects whilst having lots of fun as well. We have covered lots of different things in our English, maths and topic.
Last week in English, the Owls finished off their poems about the sea that they had planned the week before and during this week they have been learning about how to write a non-chronological report. They have researched the animal that they are going to write about and next week they will write up the report on their chosen animal.
In maths, both the year 1’s and year 2’s have been working on addition and subtraction. The year 1’s have been finding and writing numbers that go up past 100 and down through 100 as well. The year 2’s have been finding out how subtraction isn’t commutative and how to subtract ones from two-digit numbers.
For our topic, we have been learning about different habitats. The habitats that we have learnt about are the desert habitat and forest habitat. We have thoroughly learning our new actions to remember the habitats and on Thursday we had the chance to make a forest habitat.
Tuesday 5th November – Friday 15th November
Over the last two weeks the Owls have been working incredibly hard after coming back after half term.
For maths, both the year 1’s and year 2’s have moved onto addition and subtraction. The year 1’s have worked hard on identifying numbers that are one more or less than a given number and they have been working hard on learning number bonds within 10 and 20. They have also been working on taking away numbers from 10 and 20 too.
The year 2’s have been working hard to use their addition and subtraction facts to find addition and subtraction facts within 100. They have also learnt to add ones and tens to two-digit numbers.
In English, we have been reading some poems about the sea and water and we have created a rhyming bank of words for the seaside.
For topic, all the Owls were out into pairs or threes and they chose a design for a bird feeder and on Friday they were able to make and put up their bird feeders in the playground.
Monday 21st – Friday 25th October
This week in the Owls we have been very busy as always. In maths, we have continued to learn about 3D shapes. The year twos have been learning about different faces on 3D shapes and the amount of vertices and edges 3D shapes have. The year ones have been recapping how to represent numbers in different ways such as pictures and objects.
In English we completed writing our letters. The letters we wrote were to ourselves, we pretended to be the Ipads and pens in the class and we complained about the way they have been treated. Everyone did a fantastic job.
For the last two days of the week, we have spent our time learning about bullying and the different types of bullying there are. We also looked at how to stay safe when we go online and what we need to do if we are being bullied or we come across something online that we shouldn’t be on. All children were put into groups and they have made a short video on one of things that we learnt over the two days.
Monday 7th – Friday 18th October
Over the last two weeks we have been very busy. In English, we have started to look at letters and how we can write a letter. We have been reading ‘The day the crayons quit’ to help us. Before we started learning about how to write a letter, we wrote a set of instructions on how to pot a plant. We have put the plants we potted just outside our classroom to see how much they grow.
In maths, both year one and year two have been learning about 2D and 3D shapes. We have enjoyed creating some actions to help us remember what 3D shapes have. The shapes we have been learning about are spheres, cubes, cuboids and pyramids.
For our topic, we have learnt about which animals live in tundra and grassland habitats. We started to learn about the effects of climate change and we started an experiment using ice to help us understand the effects.
Monday 23rd September – Friday 4th October
Owls have had a very busy two weeks in class. In English, we had the chance to finish off our amazing alien stories and this week we have started to learn about instructions. We have been using our bossy verbs and exclamation marks to write some instructions. On Thursday, we used some instructions to help us make some pirate hats.
In maths the year ones have been counting in 2’s and 5’s. They have also started to recognise 2D and 3D shapes. They have become especially good at recognising rectangles and squares. The year twos have also been counting on in 2’s, 5’s and 10’s, they have been counting on and backwards with those numbers.
For Art, we have been looking at the jungle painting by Henri Rosseau. Last week we water washed our backgrounds and this week we have added our trees, bushes and branches and next week we can’t wait to draw the tiger hiding in the jungle.
Over the last two weeks we have been learning to say different animals in French. We have learnt how to say dog, cat, snake, horse, pig and duck. We have begun to start learning ‘Old Macdonald had a farm too’. We have enjoyed learning these animals and have started saying hello and goodbye too.
Monday 16th – Friday 20th September
This week in Owls it has been an amazing and we’ve had so much fun. Everyone has worked so hard and Mr Moorcroft and Mrs Knight are proud of all of them.
After finishing our Art last week, we had the chance to peel our animals off our Art work and see the animal silhouettes we created. Lots of different animal silhouettes were created.
For English, we have been reading Beegu all week long and have been learning to put the story in order. Everyone has created their own alien and we have just finished planning our own alien story so we are ready to start writing our story next week.
In maths, the year 1’s have been learning to write numbers to 100 in numerals and use pictures to show numbers. The year 2’s have been learning to plot numbers on a number line and to understand if numbers are greater than, less than or equal to each other.
We finished reading ‘The Giraffe the Pelly and Me’, we really enjoyed this book so we have decided to read another Roald Dahl book called ‘Minpins’. We have started it and can’t wait to carry on reading it next week.
In topic, we learnt about the different types of animals and how we group them. We also learnt what food animals eat and what they called when they eat that type of food.
Because we worked so hard this week we had an amazing time in Golden time. We had a class disco in the nest with everyone and even Mr Moorcroft had a boogie with us. We were using lego to make models, making models out of different materials, colouring, using a football board game and many more exciting things.
We can’t wait for another brilliant week next week!
Monday 9th – Friday 13th
We have had another exciting week in Owls. We continued learning more about out topic and in particular we started to learn about food chains and animals that are vertebrate and invertebrate. Following on with the theme of animals in Art we created some silhouette painting of animals of our choice. We cut out the animal then stuck it down and painted around the animal to create a background that matches the animal’s habitat.
In English, we were writing a recount about the things that we did over the summer holidays.
In Maths, the year 2’s have learning about place value, the value of each digit in a two-digit number and reading and writing numbers to 100. While the year 1’s have learning about how to read and write numbers to 20 in numerals and words.
With Mrs Knight in PE, we had a great time in the playground playing different types of games.
We measured our heads, feet, hands and height this week too and we have stored away our sheets in a time capsule and at the end of the year we will open this up and measure ourselves again to see how much we have grown!
Wednesday 4th – 6th September
Welcome to the first blog of the school year! We have had a brilliant first week back. The year ones have loved meeting their new classmates and over the course of the week we have been finding out about what they have been up to over the holidays.
On the first day back, we decided our class rules that we are going to follow throughout the year and we signed these with our finger or thumb prints. It has been displayed up in the class above the school’s golden rules. In the afternoon, we learnt what a good friend is and how we should treat each other. We met Oscar the Owl as well, who will be taken home each week with someone from the class and they show everyone on Monday what they have been up to with Oscar the Owl.
On Thursday, we found out what our Topic is going to be for this term (Animal Conservation – Creating an Animal Sanctuary) and we then made the animals that are going to be displayed in and around our classroom. Later that day, we learnt about how to use the internet safely when we are at home or at school.
On Friday, we played some classroom bingo about our classmates and learnt more about Mr Moorcroft and Mrs Knight.
Throughout the week we have been enjoying our new class book – The Giraffe and the Pelly and Me.
Week Beginning 3rd June
What a fun first week back! On Thursday we all went to Cotswold Wildlife Park to look at African animals. It was lovely to be able to talk about the animals and their habitats whilst actually looking at them. The children made lots of really interesting observations and had lots of questions to ask.
After our arrival and time to do some exploring of savannah based animals, all of Owls split into two groups and had a talk with a park keeper in the walled garden. We learned a lot about how different animals have adapted and changed to suit the different environments that they live in. Our favourite fact of the day was that a sloth's hair grows down so that rain will run off of it. This means that if you turned one upside down its hair would stick straight up! Lunchtime was a real success as the children had a chance to play in the adventure playground. Some even plucked up the courage to go down a very, very steep slide!
The rest of the afternoon was spent looking at desert and forest animals before we all came back, tired but happy!
Week Beginning 13th May 2019
Linking to our topic on Kenya we have been looking at percussion instruments used in Africa. The children are now excellent at keeping a steady beat, using the phrase, 'let's all play our drum.'
We have been looking at different habitats across Africa and can talk about the features of the Savannah, deserts and forests. We have particularly enjoyed listening to rain forest sounds and have been inspired to create our own rain sticks.
Week Beginning 6th May 2019
When the sun is shining what better thing to do than explore shape outside! Making shapes is a lot more challenging when you have to ensure that the length of the sides is the same to make a regular shape. This lead to some fantastic discussions about regular and irregular shapes and really helped us think about the properties of 2D shape.
Week Beginning 22nd April 2018
We are all very excited to be back at school for Term 5. This term we will be learning all about Kenya. To start our topic off we will be reading books about a lady called Wangari Maathai. She worked hard in Kenya to protect forests and helped the women of Africa plant over 35 million trees! We will also be learning about different geographical features of Kenya and different habitats. We are planning to arrange a trip to a place where we could see some of these animals, so watch this space!
Week Beginning 18th March 2019
This week we went to visit Folly Acres. After a very long walk up a very steep hill on a very cold and windy day we were delighted to be greeted with cups of hot chocolate and biscuits!
This gave us the energy to split into two groups. Group One had the important role of looking after the chickens. This involved feeding the chickens, collecting eggs, petting the chickens and adding extra straw to their house.
Group Two had to plant sunflower and bean seeds in their hot chocolate cups and plant a row of potatoes. We are hoping to visit Folly Acres later in the year to dig up our potatoes and bring them home to cook and eat. The groups then swapped and completed the opposite task.
Finally we all walked back down the hill and into school. We would like to say a huge thanks to Lizzie and Dan for making us so welcome and for planning such an exciting morning for us.
Week Beginning 28th January 2019
We have been exploring collage in art and have created some lovely pictures of animals from the different continents that we have been exploring. We used tissue paper and looked carefully at the colours and patterns of the animals we were re-creating.
Week Beginning 21st January 2019
We are continuing to learn about the world's oceans and continents. We have used maps to track the journey of the snail and the whale (from our literacy text The Snail and the Whale) and believe that they traveled from England to Antarctica, Hawaii, The Shetland Isles and then back to England. We have decided to write diaries about the snail's adventures and will write newspaper reports next week instead. Our focus has been using adjectives and expanded noun phrases to describe the different places that the characters visit.
This week has been a very musical week. We are obsessed with the Five Oceans Song ( look it up on YouTube!) as it is unbearably catchy but also brilliant in teaching us about the different oceans of the world. We have also been playing the ocarina and are working hard to play Happy Birthday.
Week Beginning 14th January 2019
This week we have used salt dough to create our favourite food. We have used different modelling and painting techniques in order to make them look as realistic as possible. In geography we have been finding out about the different continents and oceans in our world and have used maps to find them. Our literacy text is The Snail and the Whale which is a lovely story about a snail who hitches a ride on the tail of a whale all over the world. We will be linking this story to our own discoveries about the continents and oceans. We plan to write a newspaper report about the snail's adventures next week.
In PE the children have started country dancing. They are doing a magnificent job and Mrs Knight is already very impressed with how quickly they are learning the different dances.
Week Beginning 7th January
We are all very excited to be starting our new topic, 'From Plant to Plate'. To help us get thinking about where our food comes from we have been looking at the packaging on our food and finding the different countries that food is produced on, on maps. We have also enjoyed looking at these countries on Google Earth.
In English this week we have been watching a video explaining how marmalade is made. We have discovered that oranges are grown in hot countries such as Spain and are brought to England to be made into marmalade in factories. We have used this information to write our own reports. Our favourite marmalade story is that marmalade was invented in 1700 in Dundee when a ship carrying oranges from Spain had to stop due to a storm. A lady called Mrs Keiller made 'orange jam' from the rotting fruit by adding sugar to it.
Week Beginning 10th December
Our Christmas adverts are finally being completed! Here are a few more for you to watch.
Week Beginning 3rd December
This week we have been watching different Christmas adverts and planning our own versions. We have spotted that most of the adverts include a journey that results in the solving of a problem. Our absolute favourite was one called The Longest Journey which features a snowman going shopping for the lady snowman who he loves!
We have started by choosing different Christmas characters and planning where their journeys will be. We hope to film these next week and add them to the blog.
Week Beginning 26th November 2018
This week we have been writing our own versions of a story based on the lovely animation Mon Ami Le Robot. The children have used a range of adjectives to describe their underwater world and have ensured that they have a clear beginning, middle and end to their stories. We are all working hard to ensure that our sentences are properly punctuated and some of us are beginning to use exclamation marks and speech marks.
We have also made some beautiful Christmas tree decorations which are currently displayed on our tree in St Laurence Church, Stroud as part of the Christmas Tree Festival. The tree will remain there until Sunday 9th December, so please visit the church and take a look.
Week beginning 19.11.18
This week we have been investigating how light travels. We have discovered that some material blocks light. These materials are called opaque. Materials that let light travel through a bit are translucent and things that light can easily pass through are called transparent. We can see easily through transparent things like windows and glasses.Later this week we plan to sort different materials according to whether they are transparent, translucent or opaque.
Week Beginning 12.11.18
On Wednesday this week Owls Class went to Stratford Park with Merlins Class. At the park we took part in different activities to do with autumn. We each had a colour chart that we had to match with the different plants in the park. We were amazed at the many different coloured leaves that we were able to find! After our snack we collected leaves and tried to make beautiful patterns with them in the style of Andy Goldsworthy. Owls class will be writing autumn poems at the end of this week so we also brought back a huge selection of leaves for inspiration.
Week Beginning 29th October
We had a very exciting start back to school with a visit from Ian McGuire from Wild Owl. He has two pet owls (a barn owl and a tawny owl) and had lots of information to share with us about owls. We can now name the five main species of owl found in the United Kingdom and understand how owls are able to fly silently!
Monday 1st October - Friday 5th October
For the past two weeks the children have been working in teams to create Tudor style buildings. On Monday we set up our own version of Pudding Lane and then used red paint to represent the flames leaping from building to building. In a matter of minutes our houses were all destroyed and we talked about how this made us feel.
Although we were sad to see our hard work go up 'in flames' we now have looks of amazing words to describe our feelings. These will be used in the diaries that we are also writing this week.
Tuesday 4th September- Friday 21st September 2018
Well, what a fantastic start to the school year we have had in Owls Class! In order to start our topic on The Great Fire of London with a bang we lit a small fire in our garden. This gave us a wonderful opportunity to really explore what fire is like and to collect describing words that will support our writing later in the term.
Taking part in lots of drama activities and using our imaginations has enabled us to really understand what it felt like to be alive during the Great Fire of London. We have also sequenced the events of the Great Fire and have learned about Samuel Pepys and his diary.
This is what Sir Kenelme wrote in his book, which is called "The Closet of Sir Kenelme Digby Opened".
"Take one pound of very fine flower, and put to it half a pound of sugar. Add one pound of currants well washed. When your flower is well mixed with the sugar and currants, you must put in it a half a pound of melted butter, three spoonfuls of milk, with the yolks of three new-laid eggs beat with it, some nutmeg; and if you please, three spoonfuls of Sack.
"When you have mixed your paste well, you must put it in a dish by the fire, till it be warm.
"Then make them up in little cakes, and prick them full of holes. Bake them in a quick oven unclosed. Afterwards sprinkle them with sugar.
"The Cakes should be about the bigness of a hand-breadth and thin; of the cise of the Sugar Cakes sold at Barnet."
As well as making the cakes, we have enjoyed working out what the original recipe says. 'Sack' is actually Maderia wine, so we didn't include that in our cakes!
We started work on finding out about Uplands - both local history and geography too. We completed a traffic survey at the front of school, using our data handling skills to collect data in a tally chart. The children enjoyed choosing their own categories of vehicle and spotting the traffic going past on Thompson Road.
Finally, we had a fantastic walk around Uplands on Friday morning looking at all the different houses. We spotted the different types of housing we had talked about in class and were able to talk about how they were different to each other. The children enjoyed pointing out their own houses and we even saw some parents out in the garden! We also noticed the differences between the older and newer houses in Uplands, which is something we will look further into during our history lessons. Thank you so much to everyone who has sent in photographs and information about their own houses - this will be used in school next week and will really bring the subject alive for the children.
As a bonus, we also had chance to walk through the co-housing and we were given a brief guided tour by a resident. It was incredibly peaceful because they were no cars and we learnt that all the houses were made from wood and designed to be eco-friendly, which the children found fascinating.
Mon 4th - Friday 8th July
This week the children have really got in to our weather topic. They finished off their wind socks which we then took outside to measure the wind speed and direction - they decided that there was a light North Easterly breeze! They also finished their weather vanes which you probably saw outside this week and which the children have designed and made themselves. They are fully working although I'm not sure they would last very long outside in all weathers! We have now bought our own weather vane, thermometer and wind sock for the class so that we can continue measuring the weather each day over the summer term.
We have also been using the ipads in school this week to program our own animations about the seasons. The children used an app called Scratch Jr which allows them to input commands to make different characters move around the screen. They can also add text and sound. They did a fantastic job and were really good at just trying things out and learning from their mistakes which is often the best way to learn when using new technology.
Please take a look at the 'Wonderful Writing Wall' blog where I have added some of the Owls stories about 'The Bog Baby'. Please leave the children a comment too if you have chance! Thank you.
Mon 13th - Fri 25th May
We have been really busy over the last couple of weeks. We have continued learning about the weather during our topic work where we have researched weather vanes and designed our own based on what we found out. We learnt that they needed to be strong and waterproof to be left out in all weathers! We are going to each be making a weather station to use across the term for measuring weather on a daily basis. It will consist of a rain gauge, wind sock and weather vane and we will also use the class thermometer each day to compare the temperature. This week we started to put together some of the pieces and they are going to make the classroom look very colourful!
In English, the Year 1 children worked on their sentence writing by creating a treasure hunt out in the playground for the year 2 children to complete. They decided where to hide the clues, thought about prepositions and adjectives and then wrote questions for each clue so that they could practise adding a question mark at the end of a sentence. The year 2 children had a great time running around the playground looking for the treasure.
In PSHE we have continued our work on managing emotions and the children wrote and performed short plays about how best to manage anger and frustration, thinking about the reasons why they might feel that way and how best to deal with the situation. They all did a fantastic job and we performed out on the stage in the outdoor area.
Have a fantastic half term and we will see you back in June!
Mon 7th - Friday 11th May
This week we learnt about the weather for our topic 'Uplands News and Journal'. We kicked off by going outside one of the beautiful sunny afternoon and sitting down to enjoy the feel of the sunshine. We talked about how we could use our 5 senses to explore different kinds of weather and also thought about what we associate with different weathers e.g. sunshine and beaches, snow and Christmas. The children came up with some fantastic ideas and I'm sure they are going to really enjoy finding out even more during our science this term.
I have attached a copy of this term's year 2 homework which started this week. The children should have come home on Friday with a new homework book and the list of homework's stuck inside the front cover. As always they can choose which order to do the homework's in as long as one is handed in each week and the first one will be due this coming Friday.
Mon 30th April - Friday 4th May
This week the children have started their art for the term, they began by drawing pieces of fruit in the classroom to learn about colour, lines and shading then they went out in to the playground to take pictures of different man-made and natural objects which they then carefully sketched inside. We are building up to a picture of the countryside which will be part of our topic all about Stroud.
The children have been busy sharpening up their calculation skills in maths; adding, subtracting, multiplying and dividing. They are starting to become really fluent now.
Finally, we have been thinking about managing emotions in PSHE and how we can spot how other people are feeling. We started by naming different emotions and discussing how they show on people's faces and in their body language. Can you tell which emotions the children are portraying in the photos below?
Have a fantastic bank holiday weekend and enjoy the sunshine - see you on Tuesday!
I can't believe we are in the summer term already! The children seem to have had a great rest over Easter and are raring to go back in school. We have had an exciting start to the term with swimming lessons beginning straight away and the wonderful Country Dance Festival at Stratford Park last Thursday. We have been so impressed with how the children have approached swimming lessons so far. It is a long walk down to the leisure centre and they have to be incredibly independent with getting themselves changed and staying organised in the changing rooms and so far they have really surpassed our expectations. They have all been keen to get in the pool and I'm sure they will make excellent progress over the term.
Thank you so much to all of you who came to the Country Dance Festival, we really appreciate your support and it meant so much to the children. The best moments of the night were seeing the massive smiles as they galloped past with their adult in tow! I cannot stress enough how proud we were of them on the night, they have put in a huge amount of work alongside Mrs Knight in PE lessons last term and it is a lot for them to remember and some of the dances are really complicated! I even had a teacher come over from another school to compliment them on their energy and skill! They really were fantastic - well done everyone!
Cotswold Wildlife Park
Apologies for the delay, but I wanted to share some photos from our trip to Cotswold Wildlife Park at the end of last term. It was a fantastic day and we got to see a whole range of animals. The best thing about this particular park is how up close and personal you can get to some really fantastic beasts! The giraffes and the wolves were a real highlight and it is also very special to see a lion so close up - hopefully it is something the children will always remember.
Mon 12th - Friday 16th March
In maths this week the children have all tackled fractions - looking at how to find 1/2 1/4 1/3 and much more! They did a whole range of activities and have done a great job with this tricky subject! In English we began our stories based around 'Giraffes Can't Dance'. They came up with Bunnies who can't hop, puppies who can't play the drums and even a crocodile who can't eat meat! As always, please feel free to come in and see any of their writing after school whenever you are free - the children love to share their stories with you!
In topic the children have listened to the orchestral music for 'Peter and the Wolf' with Mrs Wride and will be composing their own animal based music next week. They have also created their very own animal sculptures in art with Mrs Wride based on the work of artist Alberto Giacometti.
Mon 5th - Fri 9th March
In maths this week the children in both Year 1 and 2 have really nailed multiplication! They have drawn arrays to help them find the answers and also used their times tables knowledge as well. The Year 2 children have started 'Magic Maths' where they do a daily 4 minute session of both multiplying and dividing - if you have chance to ask them about it please do and any time you get to test them on their 2, 5 and 10 times table will really make a difference.
In English we wrote a recount of our wonderful Harry Potter day including all the snow excitement! We then read the book 'Giraffes Can't Dance' and the year 1 children acted out some of the story which you can see in the photos below. This coming week we will begin writing our own version of this story with an animal of our choosing!
Mon 19th - Fri 23rd February
We have been very lucky this week to welcome into class Mr Moorcroft, a student teacher from the University of Bath who is completing his placement in Owls for the next 8 weeks - no doubt you will have heard about him already from the children but please do come and say hello if you get the chance.
In English the children have written their stories based on 'The Bog Baby' which we had read together. They have done such an incredible job and some of the creatures they created were so imaginative, I thoroughly enjoyed reading them all.
In maths, as you can see from the photos below, we have started to tackle multiplication! The year 2 children will be starting rainbow maths this week to help them practise their 2, 5 and 10 times tables - ask them to share with you what they know and practise any chance you get as this is a really important skill as the children get older.
In our 'Jaws, Paws and Claws' topic we have moved on to finding out about the 5 senses. The children completed a scavenger hunt where they had to use their senses to identify different objects around the school - inside and out! They had a lot of fun and will now use this knowledge to write an information text on the subject.
Mon 5th - Friday 9th February
Please see the whole school blog this week for photographs and news from our 'When I Grow Up' week.
Monday 22nd - Friday 26th
This week we have continued to find out about the human body with a particular focus on faces. We thought about how faces can be different to each other and made a collage of different facial features. We then did some research on body parts which we will continue next week in order to write an information text about the human body. Thank you to all the children who have bought in books from home too - they are very useful!
In maths the Year 1 children have continued learning about subtracting and counting backwards. If you have chance at home to count backwards from 100, maybe in the car or at tea time, then the children will really benefit - it is as important a skill as counting forwards! In year 2 the children have been tackling missing number problems - a really tricky task which they have been working hard on. I have been really impressed with their perseverance and positive learning attitudes!
In English we have had great fun reading 'The Bog Baby' by Jeanne Willis. The children first described The Bog Baby and then created their own woodland creatures - you may have seen their first draft pictures which I sent home. They have now written a description of their creature and will use this to develop a story next week. Do ask them about their creature as they are really enthusiastic and I'm sure their writing will be fantastic as a result. I will share some of the creatures with you next week.
I have also included some photos below of the children enjoying a fun game in phonics as I thought you might like to see the smiles on their faces as they learn their sounds!
Monday 15th - Friday 19th
This week the children have continued their work on body parts. We sang along with and danced to 'The Body Parts Song' and played Simon Says to help us identify different, more unusual parts of the human body. We then thought about what we use each body part for and the children were particularly good at thinking about the number of body parts involved in simple everyday tasks such as writing your name or riding a bike. They had to justify their choices and came up with some ideas that even I hadn't thought of.
In maths Year 1 finished off their work on addition and Year 2 have become really fluent with subtracting 2 digit numbers. In English, the children completed their writing about sharks and lions - some of which will be on display in the classroom soon.
In PE, the children have started learning some dances in preparation for the country dance festival in April. They have done so well so far, working together and having to remember a huge amount of moves. They have to keep it up for a 3 minute song too so lots of energy burnt off! As you can see from their smiling faces, they are having a lot of fun!
Don't forget - Jungle Agility started this week - your first challenge card was attached to Friday's newsletter and our focus this week is on BALANCE. If you have lost your card, you can find them all on our new Jungle Agility blog page.
Monday 8th - Friday 12th January
The Owls class have come back to school raring to go and have already been working incredibly hard this term. We have started our new topic 'Jaws, Claws, Paws!' by beginning to find out about the human body and it's different parts. We went out in to the playground to draw around each other and label our body parts - ask the children if they can remember where their forehead, heel or torso are?!
In English, the children researched lions and sharks and then used the information they gathered to write reports and descriptions of these fierce animals. Did you know lions sleep for up to 21 hours a day!? or that sharks don't blink?!
In maths, we have been working particularly hard. The year 1 children have spent a long time on adding and getting this important skill right and the year 2 children have become really confident with both adding and subtracting 2 digit numbers.
Monday 27th - Friday 1st
In the last week before Christmas arrives at Uplands, we have been busy in Owls with a lot of learning! In English, the children followed up their visit by Mr Jardine and his ambulance by writing a recount. In maths, we continued our work on adding - speeding up our mental addition by spotting near doubles and number bonds in year 2. In art, the children are working on a painting with Mrs Walker which will be finished next week ready for Christmas! As you can see, they had great fun getting messy and created some beautiful backgrounds. Finally, we followed up our work on creating maps by learning how to use a compass and finding out where North, East, South and West are. What a busy week!
Please can I remind everyone about our snack policy in Owls, ready for the new term. The children are allowed to bring in any type of fruit or vegetable, cheese or yogurt (in a squeezy container of some kind to prevent mess!) and also dry rice crackers with no added extras! They are also allowed fruit snacks e.g. YoYo bars, as long as the ingredients are 100% fruit. If you are not sure about anything, please do ask any of us.
The children are really excited about starting the Christmas play and practising our 'festive' dance! Thank you in advance for your help with costumes, as always, any questions please do ask. I think I can hear jingle bells in the distance...
Monday 20th - Friday 24th November
This week we had a go at map-making as part of the geography element of our topic. Super Cat had set us a challenge to hide some treasure from his enemy - Big Dog! We talked about how modern maps are created using satellite navigation and then walked around the playground imagining what it would look like from space so that we could make our own maps of the school to help out Super Cat. The children did a really good job thinking about the different shapes they needed to include on their plan and also labeling the different areas carefully.
Following our science experiment, where we found out which material would make the best waterproof cape for Super Cat, this week the children designed a logo and had chance to make a cape! They enjoyed going outside and trying them out in the playground! A lovely end to our science investigation.
Monday 13th - Friday 17th November
This week in maths we have started to practice our addition skills. The year 1 children have focused on learning their number bonds to 10 off by heart - if you test them at home they should be able to respond quickly now! The year 2 children have been practicing different strategies for adding quickly in their heads. For example by spotting number bonds, using near doubles or by jumping to the next ten - this has really helped them to speed up their mental addition.
On Thursday, we were very lucky to be visited by Nick Jardine with his ambulance! The children were able to climb inside, look at all the equipment and even hear the siren working! They were particularly impressed by the magic step on the side and the sheer number of sick bowls on board! Next week, they will be writing a text based on their experience and seeing it first-hand will really set them up for some fantastic writing I'm sure.
Monday 6th Nov - Friday 10th Nov
Last week the children took part in anti-bullying week alongside the rest of the school. Thank you so much to all the parents who came along on Wednesday afternoon to see what we had been finding out about. We talked about bullying and being kind to each other in school and also found out how we can keep ourselves safe when we are playing or working on the computer. As you can see from the photos, the children particularly enjoyed acting out a story about bullying called 'Chrysanthemum' by Kevin Henkes.
On Wednesday, we braved the cold and went to the park with Merlins class. It was the Merlin children's very first outing from school and the Year 2s were fantastic - holding their hands and showing them how to behave whilst we were walking on the pavement, we were very proud of them. When we got back to school, we looked at all the interesting leaves and other Autumn items we had gathered, sorting them by colour and shape and then using them to create some lovely art for display in the classroom.
Monday 30th Oct - Friday 3rd Nov
We have had another lovely week in the Owls and the children returned to school after half term raring to go! We have been joined in class by Miss Sampson who is helping out on Mon - Wed in Owls until Christmas. However, Miss Francis and Mrs Knight will still be there everyday across the week.
This week in maths we have been working on counting in different ways - some of us counted to 100, some counted in 2s, 5s,10s and 3s and some of us found out about the pattern of odd and even numbers.
In art, we worked with Mrs Walker on our cutting and sticking skills in order to create a collage. The children had to really concentrate to make sure their cutting was accurate and they are improving all the time with practice. If you have chance at home, using scissors is a great way to strengthen their fingers and work on their fine-motor skills.
Monday 9th - Friday 13th
This week we welcomed a visitor into Owls class. PCSO Underwood came to talk to us about crossing the road safely. We went outside in small groups and put our knowledge to the test! She taught us the importance of making sure we stop, look and listen every time we cross the road. It was great to see some of the children applying this knowledge on the way to the field for football club on Wednesday. Next week we will be making our own books to share with Merlins to help them cross the road safely too.
In art, the children have been looking at pop art with Mrs Walker. They created their own designs in polystyrene and then printed with them - creating some fantastic results.
Monday 2nd - Friday 6th October
Another wonderful week in the Owls - we are really settling in now and getting used to all the new routines and expectations. In English, we have read the 'Supertato' series of books. The children have really loved the stories and we were inspired to write a set of instructions for 'How to trap the Evil Pea...' We made evil peas out of plasticine and then trapped them in jelly - just like the end of the story! As you can see the children had a lot of fun watching the jelly change from a solid to a liquid.
In PE we were learning different ways to travel across the floor, including galloping, side-stepping and hopping! We also worked on our balance by trying to keep beanbags on our heads whilst completing different tasks - very difficult indeed but lots of fun!
Finally, in maths we have been using the 'numicon' pieces to help us find out about all sorts of new concepts, including more than and less than. The children were also challenged to create a superhero city scape using this fantastic resource. They had to count the windows and make sure it all added up to the total they were given. They worked well together and grew in confidence as the task progressed.
Mon 11th - Fri 22nd Sept
Mrs Wride has had a fantastic two weeks in Owls and the children have been really busy. They found out all about the superhero 'Big Brave Bill' created by folk singer Kate Rusby. He comes from Barnsley and likes Yorkshire tea! The children went outside and made their own 'Big Brave Bill' drawings out on the playground in chalk and then they all enjoyed some tea and biscuits to finish off the week!
Welcome Back Owls!
Calling all superheroes! We have had a super first week back in Owls class. We have practiced our hero handwriting, who knew there was a superhero for every letter of the alphabet! Marvelous maths challenged our brains, especially when the evil teacher came along and muddled up our numbers, we worked as a team to put them back in order. Our art work was spectacular and we had a brilliant time getting to know each other during golden time.
Miss W-S and Mrs Knight are really impressed and can't wait to see how our super learning powers grow over the term.
Week beginning 16th July 2017
We have had a fantastic final week! We had lots of fun playing at the park. We played rounders and some of the children scored a rounder first time! After that, we had a fantastic water fight and everybody got soaked. All the children loved it and so did the grown ups. Mr Lucas very much enjoyed squirting everybody with the super soaker. On Wednesday, we made pizzas. It was really great learning how to make the dough from scratch using Miss Dempster's recipe. At the end of the week, we brought in our own toys and games to share with each other. We also got to go and play with the Merlins.
It has been a fantastic year and all the children have achieved so much. It is all made possible by the support we get from all of you so thank you. We hope you all have a fantastic summer holiday.
Miss Dermody and Miss Dempster
Week beginning 9th July 2017
On Monday, a dance lady came in to teach us dances and we made big Kenyan animals using different materials. It was really fun!
On Tuesday, Miss Dermody did beading and someone came in and did felting.
On Wednesday, we went to the CINEMA to see Despicable me 3!
On Thursday, we met our new teachers.
On Friday, we did some drama and finishes our photography collages.
Have a nice weekend.
A message from Miss Dermody and Miss Dempster.
Next week, we will be doing lots of fun activities to celebrate the end of term. On Tuesday, we will walk up to the park and spend the morning there. Please could you ensure your child has got a snack and water bottle that they can take with them. If necessary, please apply sun cream before school.
On Thursday, the children are allowed to bring in one of their toys from home!
Thank you for all your support.
Week beginning 2nd June 2017
This week we have done lots of DT. We used a range of materials to design and make printing blocks which we then used to print on to paper and fabric. We took our inspiration from a Kenyan artist and used the colours of the Kenyan flag to make our prints. On Wednesday, we had sports day. We all had a great time and the Leopards in the class were very pleased to have won. We finished off the week with a fashion show to display all of our fabulous work. All in all it has been a great week!
Just a reminder about our trip to the cinema on Wednesday. If you have not yet signed the permission slip then please could you do so by Monday.
Thanks for all your support.
Miss Dermody and Miss Dempster.
Week beginning 26th June 2017
At the beginning of the week, we planned and carried out a science investigation about habitats. We made choice chambers out of a cardboard box and went to look for woodlice to see if they would choose either the dark/dry, dark/wet, light/dry or light/wet corner. We wrote down our predictions and then we looked in our boxes to see where the woodlice chose to go. After, we wrote up our conclusion.
We used a program called Scratch on the iPads to learn about coding. We had to create a safari scene using different animals. We had to create a code to make the different characters move.
At the end of the week we dug up our potatoes and did some cooking. We made a Kenyan dish called Irio. It took ages. Afterwards we ate the food. Some people didn't want to try it but when they did, they loved it. Only two people didn't like it.
Hope we you have a great weekend.
Some children attended a writing workshop with Miss Dempster this week. Here are some of their amazing poems:
I Saw a Monster
I saw a friendly monster as cheerful as can be
He was laughing with glee
I saw a brave monster as strong as can be
He wanted to save the princess so she could be free
I saw monster as sad as could be
He was lost all alone and he wanted his mummy
I saw a monster he said for goodness sake
Bake me a cake!
I saw a monster she was the best of them all
She didn’t break a monster law
She didn’t crawl, she didn’t fall, she didn’t play ball
She was the best of them all!
I am a sea monster, a waving, snaking sea monster as blue as the foaming waves.
Thrashing, crashing, flying, smashing. Leaping through watery caves.
I am a sea monster, a swirling, curling sea monster loving the autumn breeze.
Swooping into the distance. Moving, wriggling, being careful not to freeze.
I am a sea monster, a whirling, twirling sea monster flicking up water.
Diving, creeping, snaking for I am the Sea King’s daughter
In sunset sinking away.
Under the shimmering, turquoise sea
Under the sea there could be:
An old wooden shipwreck sitting at the bottom on the sea.
A turtle’s dangerous tooth and a ripped message hidden in a bottle.
A treasure chest’s lock sparkling like silver.
A bobbing clown fish as orange as the sun and a smooth shiny seahorse weaving through seaweed.
A string of bright green seaweed swaying in the water and a shiny, light blue fish left in a coral reef.
What else could be under the sea?
I saw a monster, a sunny, yellow monster, gliding in the water like me,
And it said, “ello little monster are you good or bad?”
“Right now,” I replied, “I’m incredibly sad!”
But then it kept on gliding, it kept on slither sliding and it called,
“When you’re in the ocean you do need suntan lotion!”
“But I do not have any. I don’t even have a plan!”
So it faded away for the rest of the day and I kept on going for my five metre badge!
Week beginning 18th June 2017
This week we had a brilliant trip to Bristol Zoo. At Bristol Zoo, we saw some meerkats, lions, flamingos, dinosaurs and ducks. The dinosaurs weren't real although they did roar! When we had our lunch a duck ate half of my sandwich! At lunchtime, Miss Dempster and her son George turned up. He is really cute! We got all wet when we went in the water park. It was really fun because it was a really hot day.
In our English lessons we wrote recounts about out trip. Some of them are up in the classroom on display.
In genius hour we explored how things fly and made awesome paper aeroplanes.
Week beginning 12th June 2017
This week we cracked a code for finding Miss Dempster's Lego cards. Mrs Moore was the thief. How fun it was!
On Thursday, the Year 2s got into partners and made posters about Kenya.
We made some special cards. Everybody made different cards.
On Friday we did lots of repeated patterns. We made them out of Lego, boxes and we even drew them.
Message from Miss Dermody and Miss Dempster
On Monday, we will be going on our trip to Bristol Zoo. Please apply sun cream before school. Children will need a hat, lots of water and a snack. It's forecast to be a scorcher! They will also need a rucksack to carry their lunch in.
Thanks for all your support.
Week beginning 5th May 2017
On Monday, we had a visit from a tortoise. It was very funny.
On Tuesday, we wrote instructions about how to care for a tortoise. It was quite fun.
On Wednesday, we did doubling and halving. It was hard.
On Thursday, we researched lots of things about Kenya. It was fun!
A message from Miss Dermody and Miss Dempster
If children have not brought back their slips for the Bristol Zoo trip, please could they remember to bring them on Monday.
Week beginning 22nd May 2017
This week we were doing our 'We love maths' books. They are fun, awesome and brilliant for new learners. On Tuesday, we went swimming. How hot it was! We also did lots of work on shape.
On Friday, we did golden time. Lots of people did IPads and some did colouring. What fun we had!
I hope everybody has a brilliant half term filled with loveliness and enjoyment.
Week beginning 15th May 2017
On Monday we had a reading day where we dressed up as are favourite book characters. Miss Dempster dressed up as Gerald the giraffe and Miss Dermody dressed up as Big the kangoroo. We had breakfast with the parents and we made potatoes look like book characters out of school for everyone to see.
On Tuesday we wrote a book review for Giraffes Can’t Dance and went swimming in the afternoon.
Today we played fun, exiting and extremely cool games including rob the nest and we typed up are animal riddles.
Have a lovely weekend, Eleanor.
Week beginning 8th May 2017
This week we've been doing some riddles about animals. We've also been learning about habitats and doing some gardening. It has been very fun. Surprisingly, we all finished our animal models. It was the best week yet. What wonderful models we made!
We made African masks with Mrs Walker and we've been doing some hard maths and English. On Friday in maths, we worked on telling the time.
Have a good weekend.
Week beginning 1st May 2017
Hello everybody. Hope you have a good week.
We have been writing stories about animals using the story of ‘How the tortoise got his shell’. Read on to find out what sort of things we used to write our stories. We used conjunctions, character descriptions, setting descriptions and some of us used commas to separate our clauses. What fun we had!
On Thursday afternoon Mrs Walker came in for our art lesson. We looked up Kenyan masks on Ipads to give us ideas and then designed them. Were you wondering what the milk bottles were for? They were for making the masks.
In maths we were writing shape riddles and then we told them to the class to see if they could guess them. What an excitement it was when we guessed the shapes right!
Finally we built houses during genius hour. We tested to see if we could blow them down with a hair dryer.
Have a great weekend.
As part of our DT week near the end of term 6, we will be printing onto t-shirts. All children will need a white or light coloured t-shirt.
If you have one of these going spare or want to provide one for your child then that is brilliant. Otherwise, we are happy to take a £2 payment to buy one for your child.
A letter has been given out which will need to be returned by Monday 15th May.
Thanks for all your support.
Miss Dermody and Miss Dempster
Week beginning 24th April
Hope you had a great Easter Holidays!
This week we learnt the story of how tortoise got his shell. Do you know the story? We also painted this wonderful story.
We used modroc to make safari animals. How messy we got! We used some balloons to put the modroc onto and these became the animal’s bodies. We started our new topic on Kenya. So far we are full of excitement!
We will be starting our swimming lessons on Tuesday. Please could your child remember to bring their swimming kit.
Thank you for your support.
Miss Dermody and Miss Dempster
Here is a topic overview for this term so that you know all about the exciting activities that are coming up!
Week beginning 3rd April
This week it was the Country Dance Festival. We loved showing our families all of the dances we have been learning. We were really brilliant and it was a lot of fun.
At the beginning of the week, we were set a really exciting challenge. We were told that each group would be given a budget of £5 to buy ingredients to make a healthy food item. We had to work together to design our item and then we went to Tesco to buy the ingredients. We decided to make fruit jellies, cakes, wraps, smoothies, soup and fruit kebabs.
We then had a shop in our classroom to sell everything we made. Lots of people came and it was really brilliant! The carrot cakes won the competition of making the most money in total.
We also made bird nest cakes.
Have a great Easter!
Week beginning 27th March 2017
On Tuesday we went to Cotswold Farm Park for an awesome school trip.
When we got there we took our belongings to the lunch room so we could eat our snacks and then we went to the toilet.
We went to the demonstration barn to see the sheep with the lambs. We then went on a tractor ride. What a bumpy ride it was!
Next we went back to the lunch room to have our lunch.
We went to the touch barn and held a rabbit, chick and guinea pig.
Would you like to go on this school trip?
Eleanor and Isabelle.
Message from Miss Dempster and Miss Dermody
This week we will be working on a DT project to end our brilliant topic From Plant to Plate. The children will be set the challenge of designing a food item that includes fruit or vegetables that they can produce and sell to make a profit. They will work in teams and be given a budget of £5 per team. We will be opening our class pop up shop to sell our products to you on Wednesday 5th April at 3pm - please come along to support us and buy lots of our goodies. We look forward to seeing you there!
Week beginning 20th March 2017
Hello everybody. Welcome to our weekly blog!
This week we watched a video from food glorious food. We listened to the rhythm and we listened to the beat.
In maths we looked at position and direction using the b-bots. What fun we had!
In English we designed our own animal and we wrote information about our animals. The Year 1s wrote information about the life cycle of a seed.
Nancy and Jemima.
Our trip to the farm is coming up on Tuesday 28th March! Please make sure you have given in your child's permission slip. We will be carrying our lunch throughout the morning so rucksacks would be very useful. It will be muddy so it would be great if your child could bring their wellies.
Week commencing 13th March 2017
Hello everybody! We hope you’ve had a good week.
This week we planted potatoes in our vegetable planters. We had a lot of fun because it was exciting to imagine our own potatoes growing.
We wrote explanation texts in English. The year twos wrote about the life cycle of a seed and the year ones wrote about a heffalump.
On Friday we created mini bridges that we tested to see what materials are the best.
By Isabelle and Maya
Week commencing 6th March 2017
Hi everybody. Welcome to our weekly blog!
This week we were writing instructions of how to make spam fritters. We made them and they tasted delicious, yummy and scrummy in your tummy.
We also started measuring capacity and we liked that.
The past few days have been fun.
Jemima and Nancy
27th February 2017
This week we wrote instructions of how to make a sandwich for a giant and in some of the sandwiches there were gooey snozzcumbers and blue slime.
In maths we did very tricky number problems. We got stuck on some of them but then we persevered and solved them in the end.
We also had a visit from a very jolly gardener. We planted cress, sunflowers and mustard and we all enjoyed it. We get to take home the sunflowers when they’re 10cm tall!
We hope you all had a good week.
Maisie and Eleanor
20th February 2017
Hello everybody. Welcome to our first weekly blog!
This week we were writing instructions of how to make a sandwich. We learnt that the main features of how to write instructions are the title, a what you need list and a method. We got to make our own tasty peanut butter and jam sandwiches.
Next we interviewed some older relatives including Henry’s great aunt and uncle. Then we had a visit from Caterlink. They are the nice people who make our yummy school dinners. They talked to us about fruit and vegetables and what is healthy.
Have a great weekend.
Izzy and Jemima.
6th February 2017
Welcome back after half term!
During Genius Week the children had loads of fun trying out new skills and taking part in lots of different workshops. Take a look at the photos of our busy week!