What is Pupil Premium?
This is additional funding provided by the DFE to enable the school to focus its attention on those children within school who are either on Free School Meals or are deemed by the school to be in need of additional support.
Funding is utilised by employing additional hours of support from teachers and teaching assistants. They work with specific children in small groups or in a one to one situation. These sessions are planned by the teaching staff and implemented with very positive results. The children who benefited from the additional support have made more progress than expected. This progress is not only academically but also in terms of confidence and perseverance in completing their learning and extending themselves. We also used the funding to allow pupils to attend the Year 6 residential visit and subsidise other trips and visits. It is also used to support Pupil Premium pupils access music lessons and after school fee paying clubs.
How is Pupil Premium spent at Gilingstool Primary School?
At Gillingstool, we continuously monitor the progress of all our pupils to ensure that they are achieving their full potential. When deciding how to best use the Pupil Premium, we have used the Educational Endowment Foundation’s Teaching and Learning Toolkit which provides evidence on how schools can spend money more effectively to improve the teaching and learning of children from low-income families.
Our main strategy to support children in receipt of the Pupil Premium is through providing the highest standard of Quality First Teaching. We ensure that the funding is used to support all disadvantaged pupils, regardless of ability, to achieve the highest levels of attainment. Families may not necessarily be in receipt of Pupil Premium but many of our children are affected by the barriers of child poverty evidenced in the South Gloucestershire Child Poverty Needs Assessment
The table below gives examples of how the school uses the Child Poverty Report findings and highlights how the school is using its pupil premium to address these:
|‘Given the evidence that educational attainment is the key determinant of life chances, tackling the gap in attainment between children from low-income families and other pupils whilst aiming to raise attainment across the board, particularly at key stage 4, should be a priority for South Gloucestershire.’ Page 36||The school spends a large % of its PP funding on academic support targeting English and mathematics. The school uses the Education Endowment Foundations research to inform it’s planning of interventions and catch up programmes.|
|‘Social disadvantages, such a negative prior educational experience, low confidence, poor health, and limited information, advice and guidance which lock negative attitudes and practices in place from an early age.’ Page 48||The school spends another large portion of its PP funding on a PP Teaching Assistant The PPTA supports teachers in providing 1:1 support to PP pupils and supports smaller group work.|
|‘Fuel poverty can impact negatively on children’s health and long-term life prospects. Children living in cold homes are twice as likely to suffer from a variety of respiratory problems as children living in warm homes’. Page 57||The school uses some of its PP funding to employ an ELSA TA who works with families to address issues resulting in poor attendance at school and other related problems|
|The national Child Poverty Strategy found that ‘if every child does well at school and finds a job, they would earn more for themselves and boost economic growth’. Page 21||The school uses some of its PP funding on enrichment, engagement and extra-curricular activities. We ensure that all PP children attend educational visits by supporting them with the cost. The school aims that all pupils hold the highest aspirations and understand that passion and hard work lead to high achievement.|