Struggling Readers Can Suffer In all Academic Subjects but Reading Programs Can Help
Reading isn't just about opening a book and being able to read the story. It is a complex process that requires students to interpret new concepts, make connections between previously read texts, evaluate their own understanding, make inferences and predictions, and draw conclusions based on previous knowledge. When a child is struggling with reading skills it affects much more than the ability to read and comprehend a book. Reading permeates every facet of life, impacts all subject areas, and can have a major effect on a student's academic confidence.
Multiple academic disciplines are affected when a student is struggling in reading. Areas of concern may include:
The reading programs for struggling readers at Huntington Learning Centers are designed with the individual child in mind. Our professional tutors begin with an academic evaluation that covers all areas of reading to determine a student's weak skills and areas for potential growth. The results of this evaluation are then used to develop a personalized reading program that builds on a student's strengths to address areas of need. Since no two students are alike, no two reading programs are alike either. You can trust that your child's individual needs are being met and our tutors are committed to your child's unique set of strengths and challenges.
Huntington Learning Center tutors are trained to address a variety of reading skills with their students based on readiness and developmental ability. Elementary reading skills range from basic letter and sound recognition to reading comprehension concepts such as drawing conclusions, following directions, and identifying main idea and details. Middle school reading skills include increasing a student's reading rate, making inferences, and integrating critical thinking skills. Struggling high school students often receive instruction in applying reading skills to other subject areas, making connections between genres and individual texts, and discovering the plot, theme, and conflict of a narrative piece of work. Regardless of a child's age or ability, Huntington Learning Centers can help.