Saturday is the 50th anniversary of humans first stepping foot on the Moon. Should humanity be returning to our closest celestial neighbour? Physics and astronomy Prof. Paul Delaney of York University argues yes, while aerospace engineer Robert Zubrin argues no, we should be going to Mars instead.
Should we return to the moon?
Putting aside the notion that we should never have abandoned the moon after the Apollo program, yes, it is time to go back and perhaps more importantly, to stay.
Humanity currently lives in the most technologically developed era. Tomorrow will be even more reliant upon the technology that surrounds and empowers us. Whether or not we embrace this technology in every corner of our lives, it is here to stay and it requires a technologically flexible and responsive workforce. That workforce is fuelled and nourished, in part, by the challenge of space flight, the mastering of the high frontier.
Many nations have realized this: Russia, China, Japan, India, Germany, France and others are developing their space expertise to maintain their share of the space market and to keep their own talent close to home for domestic needs. National satellites for weather prediction, search and rescue, environmental management, security, GPS, television, etc., are fundamental space endeavours for all developing countries.
In a way, it is simple economics. To challenge that workforce, to go beyond what is easy, means setting the bar higher and for me that equates to going initially to the moon, and then beyond.
As compelling as the economic argument is, going to the moon is fundamentally a voyage of exploration, a desire for humanity to see what is over the horizon. It is in our genetic code to explore, to look beyond the mountain, to see what lies across the ocean. We are curious and always will be. Hold something behind your back and everyone wants to know what you are hiding.
Astronomers and space scientists are seeking to understand the characteristics of other worlds, how they formed and whether they may possess life. While life is highly unlikely to be found on the moon, reaching this nearby celestial body and staying there will pave the way for more distant visitations. Answering the call of the unknown is an essential human endeavour. The moon is an excellent starting point.
Do not think for a moment that inhabiting the moon and plumbing its science riches cannot also be profitable. There are many groups, including the European Space Agency, already investigating the moon and other targets — asteroids — for mining purposes. You will not find fossil fuels on the moon but the wealth of other precious rare Earth metals (REMs), not to mention helium-3, may make the moon a huge asset to humanity.
In May, 1960, American engineer and physicist Theodore Maiman built and successfully executed the first laser using a synthetic ruby crystal. There was no expected benefit from this research-driven experiment, let alone envisaged profit. One of the leading theoreticians, Charles Townes, working on lasers at that time, was quoted in 2003 as saying that the ruby laser was “a solution looking for a problem.” When the ruby laser worked it was a triumph of scientific research and technology but little more than that.
Today, from that meagre beginning, lasers are a part of everyone’s daily lives, from scanning your grocery labels to playing compact discs (an almost obsolete technology!) to levelling floors and aligning building structures.
The Big Debate:
Research for the sake of research has led to enormous practical benefits. In much the same way as President Kennedy committed the United States to landing a man on the moon by the end of the decade, so too in that May 25, 1961 speech did he state “ … no one can predict with certainty what the ultimate meaning will be of mastery of space.”
Returning to the moon and staying will once again be a triumph of human ingenuity. It will advance science, engineering and technology, it will inspire the next generation of scientists, engineers and entrepreneurs, and pave the way to other destinations in our solar system.
The moon is relatively close by astronomical standards and such proximity offers significant advantages in travel time and logistical support. Using the blueprint that established the International Space Station, the return to the moon can be a symbol of international co-operation where humanity can pit its energy and determination against the hazards of the space environment rather than expending destructive energies against itself.
The potential benefits in a return to the moon are numerous but perhaps the most rewarding will be watching and nurturing a new settlement of humans, taking those first steps beyond the cradle of Earth, setting sail for the stars.
The Trump administration has announced it intends to send astronauts to the moon by 2024. The question is why?
There is nothing profound that we could hope to discover on the moon. In contrast, the Red Planet is challenging us to dare to go there to solve the greatest mystery of all time — the question of the real nature of life.
We know from fossil evidence dating back at least 3.5 billion years that life appeared on Earth virtually as soon as it could. This means that either life evolves quickly and spontaneously from chemistry, or that life is being spread in microbial form across interstellar space and readily takes hold as soon as it finds a habitable environment.
Either way, the conclusion is that life must be plentiful throughout the universe. In particular, since the thickly CO2-enshrouded early warm and wet Mars was very similar to the early Earth, it means the Red Planet almost certainly once had life. Methane emissions detected by the Curiosity rover strongly supports the suspicion that it still does, protected underground in hydrothermal reservoirs. We need to go to Mars, drill, bring up samples of subsurface water, and see what is there.
The key question is not whether there is life on Mars, but what is its nature? At the biochemical level, all life on Earth is the same. Whether bacteria, mushrooms, grasshoppers, or people, we all use the same DNA/RNA genetic alphabet. That’s because we all share a common ancestor. But what about the Martians? If we both came from a common source, our alphabets will resemble each other, as the English alphabet does that of French. But if each biosphere originated locally, they could be as different as English and Chinese.
The necessary program of drilling, sample taking, culturing, biochemical analysis and related observations is far beyond the ability of robotic rovers. It will require human explorers on the surface of Mars to carry out such a quest. But it will be worth the cost and risk involved, because it will provide answers to fundamental questions about the prevalence and potential diversity of life in the universe that thinking men and women have wondered about for thousands of years.
THE BIG DEBATE: For more opposing view columns from Toronto Star contributors, click here.
We don’t need fantastical spaceships based at a lunar orbiting space station to enable human Mars exploration. What we do need is a heavy lander, with a payload capacity in the 10 to 20 ton range. With a proper upper stage, SpaceX’s currently operational Falcon Heavy launch vehicle could send a lander with 10 tons cargo to Mars, while NASA’s Space Launch System and SpaceX’s Starship booster currently under development could deliver a 20 ton payload.
The human Mars exploration program could then begin by exercising such systems to deliver platoons of rovers, armed with diverse instruments and tools to thoroughly explore regions of interest, demonstrate systems for making methane/oxygen rocket propellant on Mars out of local CO2 and water, and ultimately prepare a base.
The rover platoon could also photograph their region in high definition, enabling the creation of a virtual reality simulacrum to allow thousands of people on Earth to explore alongside the rovers, (“Hey rover, this rock looks interesting. I think it could be a fossil. Come here and brush off the dust so we can have a better look.”) testing out methods of Earth-Mars combined operations in advance of their use in support of astronauts. Such missions would produce an immense scientific return, while taking down the key tall pole blocking the way to human Mars exploration.
Once the heavy lander has been proven on such highly productive robotic missions, it could be employed to deliver an ascent vehicle that could be fuelled on Mars using local resources, which would then be used to send a geologist’s bonanza, including hundreds of samples of rocks and potentially fossils, collected by the rover expedition. With this system successfully demonstrated, human Mars exploration could then begin.
NASA’s human space flight program needs a goal worthy of the costs and risks of human space flight. The search for life on Mars provides such a goal. If we embrace it, our astronauts can contribute to an epic advance in human knowledge — namely the discovery of the truth about the nature of life and its place in the cosmos.
As the approach of 50th anniversary of the Apollo 11 moon landing reminds us of what we as a people can accomplish when we choose to rise to the challenge, we should demand no less.