View a selection of implementation strategies from educators who are successfully using ALEKS to achieve dramatic learning outcomes.
Vineyard Elementary School, Alpine School District
Grade(s): K - 6
Scenario: Computer Lab, Computers in Classroom
Purpose: Intervention, ESL Students, Supplement
ALEKS Portion of Curriculum: 0%
Time Spent in ALEKS: 2 hours per week, 24 hours per term
ALEKS Course: Mathematics - LV 3 (with QuickTables), Mathematics - LV 4 (with QuickTables), Mathematics - LV 5 (with QuickTables)
Tirzah Smith, Paraprofessional Aide
ALEKS is a great program! Students that consistently log in and stay on task learn math topics at their own pace with detailed explanation. The QuickTables section of ALEKS is great for learning and practicing basic math facts with an excellent incentive - MATH GAMES!
What challenges did the class or school face in math prior to using ALEKS?
We had low test scores and students were behind in class. We also have students who are English Language Learners.
How many days per week is class time dedicated to ALEKS?
4 days per week.
What is the average length of a class period when ALEKS is used?
How do you implement ALEKS?
ALEKS is used for double dosing and supplemental instruction before school.
Do you cover ALEKS concepts in a particular order?
I don't cover topics in particular order. The students each go at their own pace and learn the topics that they are ready for, which are the areas that they can understand from their previous learning in math. The topics are directed by the teacher.
How do you structure your class period with ALEKS?
Students use QuickTables for the first 15 minutes, three days a week. The other 15 minutes are used to progress in the pie chart.
How did you modify your regular teaching approach as a result of ALEKS?
All the instruction for the supplemental time is just the ALEKS program.
How often are students required or encouraged to work on ALEKS at home?
Students are encouraged to work in ALEKS at home, but for no particular time length.
How do you cultivate parental involvement and support for ALEKS?
A letter is sent home to inform the parents that ALEKS is being used during the before-school, supplemental instruction that their child is involved in. Two students also reported to me that they have been using the program at home.
Is ALEKS assigned to your students as all or part of their homework responsibilities? If so, what part of the total homework load is it?
It is not homework.
How do you incorporate ALEKS into your grading system?
It is not incorporated.
Do you require students to make regular amounts of progress in ALEKS?
The students that need the extra instruction are allowed to progress at their own speed and progress as much as they possibly can.
Since using ALEKS, please describe the learning outcomes or progress you have seen.
We have only tested the third and fourth grades for the end of the year Northwest Evaluation Association tests (NWEA), but the results we have seen so far have been very promising. The points increase per student ranges from 11-30. Students feel wonderful! When they complete a section of QuickTables, they are so excited and feel really great about their progress. Also, four out of the 11 students that have been tested so far went out of their way to tell me that ALEKS helped them with math in their class and the year end testing in NWEA.
Are there any best practices you would like to share with other teachers implementing ALEKS?
Make sure the students are consistently logging in and working hard; that is where they will receive the most growth and the greatest chance for improvement.