Identifying a child's needs - before a problem even exists. It is also being a detective and identifying the unmet need behind the negative emotion or behavior - then as an alternative to punishment - meeting that need or teaching the child to more positively communicate or meet the need themselves. Helping our children to understand their own emotions and needs encourages compassion and connection and grows happy, secure and self-regulating children. When you are raising a very unique child, whether they be gifted, highly sensitive, highly creative, or something else, proactive parenting and identifying special needs - becomes even more important.
What A Coach Is: Having a life coach is like having a wise and supportive friend along for the ride of life! Your coach is there to support you in identifying and moving forward toward achieving your goals and dreams. A Proactive Parenting Coach is someone who is there to help you identify, understand and support your children's unique social, emotional, and educational needs, and help you move forward toward improved communication, learning, self regulation, self esteem, cooperation and family relationships. Every client is unique, but this may include one on one sessions with just you and your coach, those with both you, your coach and your child, and at your discretion, coaching and mentoring sessions may be set up between just your coach and your child. Your personal coach is there to first listen,next to support you in identifying strengths, as well as areas for change, finding resolution or setting and moving forward toward achieving your goals, and always to put you and your child's progress and best interests first. They will share relative personal experiences, offer useful tools, and provide educational and enlightening information and resources that will help you move forward toward becoming the best possible parent and person you can be!
"Accept the past, change today, hope for tomorrow..." ~ Unknown ~
What A Coach Is Not: A coach is not a therapist or counselor, they do not give personal advise, they do not judge you, your child or your life, or diagnose your problems. They do not tell you what you should or shouldn't do, but will offer useful tools, share relative personal experiences and educational and enlightening information and resources to help you move forward toward achieving your goals. It is always your choice as to whether you see what is presented to you as applicable to you or your child's life, and if you choose to take what is presented and use it. They do not solve your problems, but rather support you in identifying new ways to improve communication and relationships, identify your strengths, passions and dreams as well as areas for change, set achievable goals and help you move forward toward becoming the best possible parent and person you can be!
Identify you and your child's communication style and how it affects your relationships and learning
Learn emotional intelligence - How to teach it - How to be your child's emotional coach
Communicate in a way that encourages mutual respect, accountability, self regulation, analyzing & problem solving skills, family peace and more...
Read on below to learn a little more about me personally, my experience and life's passion supporting the social/emotional needs of gifted, highly sensitive, highly creative, and other unique children, and just what I personally have to offer as a Life, Relationship & Proactive Parenting Coach. Hugs, Julie
"There are no bad children - Only those with unmet needs or unresolved pain"
The above quote is something I personally believe in...wholeheartedly. As a parent raising a gifted, highly sensitive & highly creative child, sharing what I have learned along this journey has turned into a passion for me. These unique children and their ever present and oftentimes concerned parents, have become very important to me, they hold a special place in my heart and in my life.
They say a passion grows out of an emotional experience or connection, for me both of these are true. My passion for supporting the social, emotional, and educational needs of gifted, highly sensitive, highly creative and other unique children, I suppose in a way started with the birth of my daughter, but more pointedly, after she started having problems in school in 4th grade. There is much more to Our Personal Story, of my daughter's bullying experience in the public school system, but for the purpose of explaining how my passion or this proactive parenting journey started: In 4th grade, due to the effects of severe emotional bullying, and unbeknownst to me at the time my daughter's highly sensitive and unique makeup, my previously always happy, highly social, lover of life and all things learning - my 9 year old daughter - had a complete emotional breakdown. Subsequently, we were forced to leave public school and started homeschooling. At least we were suppose to be homeschooling, but the reality was that my daughter could tolerate no schoolwork at that time. But...she could draw, and that's what she did day and night for months she drew. As I watched her draw, I could tell it brought her great peace, and it was through her newfound love for drawing and creating characters that she was able to work through much of the emotional pain.
It was 2010 when my daughter had her breakdown and we left public school. I have spent every year since dedicated to helping my daughter recover and educating myself on this new gifted, highly sensitive & highly creative world - my daughter's unique makeup and needs. Many sleepless nights spent searching on the internet, up all night driven only by my love for my daughter and a desperation for answers, something, anything, that would help. It took about two years of research before I really started to put together all the pieces of the puzzle, but finally I began to understand and be able to better support my daughter's unique needs. It was in 2012, after finding no local support, that we decided to start our own Gifted Children Meetups & Parent Support group, to find true-peers for my daughter and others who would understand and support both of us. Our support group has given us everything we every dreamed of, it still amazes me every time I see it, how these unique kids so often "just get each other," how my daughter has found true friendships, those she relates to, intellectual-peers or those with similar interests, others who understand and accept her. Through our group, sharing and reaching out to other parents going through some of the same things we have, I too have found supportive friends, finding others who truly understand and accept us has been an invaluable asset.
I love running my support group and being able to offer the same resources that helped my daughter and I so much, sharing those resources and support with others who are searching is truly fulfilling. In 2015 I started my proactive parenting blog: Proactive Parenting Gifted, Sensitive & Creative Children. My blog is my creative outlet - I love creating websites and pages, designing inspirational posts with graphic art and writing and sharing proactive parenting resources in this new forum. Today, with the newfound knowledge and understanding of my daughter's special social, emotional and educational needs, through the process of creating our Meetup support system and the benefits we have received from it, by prioritizing getting my daughter every bit of support she needed to heal and recover from her breakdown - I am happy to tell you that she is now doing awesome - and happily pursuing her own passions and creative dreams! Cartoon Dreamer
"The truly creative mind in any field is... a human creature born abnormally, inhumanly sensitive... the overpowering necessity to create, create, create—so that without creating... his very breath is cut off from him... he is not really alive unless he is creating." ~Pulitzer Prize and the Nobel Prize, Pearl S. Buck~
Out of our personal experience has grown a passion - a desire to help other parents with unique-needs children or those with experiences similar to our own. To help them know that they are not alone in all this, that there are others who understand, who have been there, those who have found valuable, applicable, and concrete information - tools to use in supporting their children's special social, emotional, and educational needs. I can't tell you what a relief it is for both my daughter and I to get to the point where we feel like we can finally breathe... to feel a sense of peace and control over our lives, to stop looking back and start looking forward with confidence and excitement to the future and what it holds! All of this made possible by proactive parenting; identifying, understanding, and supporting inherent strengths as well as areas of struggle, emotions and needs.
As a Proactive Parenting Coach my goal is to share the tools I have acquired through three years of Life & Relationship Coach training, along with lessons and valuable tools learned along this journey of raising an awesomely-unique daughter, and to share my support with others, to help them identify and support their own children's needs, so that they are fully equipped to raise happy children ready to go out into the world to pursue their own passions & dreams.
If you think you might benefit from having a personal coach to support you along your own journey to better understand and support your child's unique needs, to become the best parent....person, spouse, family... the best YOU, you can be, I would love the chance to meet you and support you in pursuing what ever your goals, passions, and dreams are. If you aren't yet sure what those things are for you, I would love to have the opportunity to help you identify them, and to see how you can move forward toward achieving a happier and more fulfilling family and personal life.