What does it mean to be Cajun or Creole in Louisiana? This documentary tries to find out
It was another hot, humid August day in Eunice. A 12-year-old Nathan Rabalais sat across from his Mawmaw at the restaurant, waiting for their to-go order to make it home before her soap opera started.
Then Mawmaw, without trying, said something profound as they sat inside the local Crispy Cajun.
“Everything is Cajun now. We never called ourselves that," she said.
This was a surprise to Rabalais. To him, his Mawmaw was the most Cajun person in the world, and on that day she declared she wasn’t really at all.
"Well, what are you?" he asked her.
And without hesitating, she answered: "We are French, because that’s what we spoke. We are just French."
That memory helped to shape Rabalais’ view of his Mawmaw, his family and his identity. And it helps to inform a new documentary he created with his brother, David Rabalais.
“Finding Cajun” explores what it means to be Cajun, poking at questions about culture, race and identity in south Louisiana and what the label has come to mean to many inside and outside of Acadiana.
Although not yet available for public viewing, the documentary closed Lafayette’s annual Cinema on the Bayou in January with a sold-out crowd attending its world premiere. The Rabalais brothers hope to offer their documentary to wider audiences come December when film festival season has wrapped up.
And when they do, it is sure to provoke strong reaction over sharp views expressed by nearly two dozen historians, scholars and authors of a long history of Louisiana’s French heritage. It's a history, they say, that has been trampled on by white, Anglo, protestant, and sometimes racist, opportunists threatened by those thousands of immigrants who settled what is now too casually referred to as Cajun Country.
“I think it’s time to be a bit more critical — not necessarily negative, but to re-examine: 'What does that mean now to be Cajun?'" Nathan Rabalais said. "So what the film does, it kind of traces the use of that word up until today."
A touchy subject
Few people have seen “Finding Cajun.” The little bit of the documentary that is out there now is a brief trailer publicizing it on Facebook. And already the project is receiving some harsh criticism from some who have strong feelings on the subject.
"Cajuns ARE NOT racists as stated in this preview!" one user said. "You should be ashamed of yourselves for promoting that falsehood."
"It's always the same people coming here to tell us who we are," another person commented. "The original French who were 'imported' (dare I use that word) were not Creole. We have a mixture of both. But not all of us are Cajun, and not all of us are Creole."
The identity of south Louisiana is not an easy subject to tackle for the Rabalais brothers. And anyone who has spent a lifetime discussing their French heritage will understand these are tricky waters to navigate when debating what is truly French, Creole or Cajun.
In their documentary, the brothers discuss the label "Creole," and its parallel history to "Cajun." Although the Canadian French migration to Louisiana is a pivotal part of the Cajun identity, the film touches on lesser-known migrations, such as the earlier European French settlements in south and central Louisiana, and 9,000 French-speaking Haitians that moved to New Orleans in the early 1800s.
This Haitian migration led to the term Creole being introduced in south Louisiana, and a fascinating evolution of that label from native-born Louisianan to racially tinged reference.
"The term Creole is definitely one of those terms that can engender fiercely combative discussions amongst different types of people," Loyola professor Angel Parham said in her “Finding Cajun” interview. "Different people have different understandings of it."
"Today when we think about Creole or when a lot of people think about Creole, they're often assuming mixed race. They're assuming that Creole means to be maybe a combination of African decent and European. That is possible. However, the earliest understandings of Creole were regardless of race."
Her most basic definition of Creole is the distinction between being of the old world and of the new world. Someone born in Louisiana with French parents is of the new Louisiana world. The same title was given to an individual with French parents who was born in Haiti. She said slave owners used to distinguish between African-born slaves and Creole slaves, pointing out there wasn't as much of a racialist sense as there was of being born in the new world.
It wasn’t until later in south Louisiana’s history, after the Civil War, that the term Creole began being used in a more racial context, as if to separate the white French from the black French.
The documentary discusses the common usage of Creole and takes stabs at other iconic symbols that have come to define Louisiana’s French culture to the world. For example, the fictional character Evangeline that came to represent the poor, rural, French, Catholic south Louisiana experience was created in the poem by a writer who had a very different experience — Henry Wadsworth Longfellow, a descendant of white, Anglo-Saxon, protestant privilege dating back to the Mayflower.
The film also explores how the monetized, consumable identity of Cajun culture started to form as it became more popularized, with a brief clip of the comedian Justin Wilson, born and raised outside of Acadiana, known for his over-the-top Cajun accent selling potato chips in a TV commercial.
The popularization and commercialization of the Cajun label had its own impact on what it means to be French in Louisiana.
"Cajun ultimately comes from an ethnic group," south Louisiana historian and author Shane Bernard said. "Outsiders know it as a flavor or sound."
He explains the expansion of items called Cajun in the 1980s and how Creole was overshadowed by that interest. The demand for new, exotic things created fake Cajun products that were neither Cajun nor Creole, which a lot of locals saw as disingenuous, according to Bernard.
The film then tackles the stark difference between Acadian in Canada and Acadiana in south Louisiana. Canadians focused on the French language whereas Louisiana has emphasized lineage and genealogy. There are many factors affecting these decisions, such as how Louisiana leaders prohibited French children from speaking their language in schools and how generations of French-speakers stopped passing the language on to their children.
These ideas are among others in the film that have provoked discussion.
"I don't believe that people ‘threw away’ the Cajun culture & language," a comment said regarding a quote from the trailer on the film’s Facebook page. "But I believe it was suppressed and discouraged. Also, ‘these people from non-Anglophone Protestant families,’ I always thought the French speaking were primarily Catholic. Anyway, it is all fascinating to me. I want to learn more. Would love to see the finished project."
"I agree!" Nathan Rabalais responded to the Facebook comment. "To give context, Clint Bruce is from an English background in Shreveport. He fell in love with Louisiana French and he was expressing his feeling from hanging out with his Cajun friends who had so many speakers in their family but didn’t seem concerned about learning."
Bruce, a Université Sainte-Anne professor, said he sees “Finding Cajun” as Nathan Rabalais' way of trying to understand growing up with the cookie-cutter, even commercialized Cajun identity.
“I think he wanted to get at the roots of what that means," he said. "He wanted to understand the process that got it that way.
"Some people are at stake in defending a certain image, but he’s not stabbing at it."
Local film producer Pat Mire said Nathan was nervous to premier “Finding Cajun” to other producers and scholars because identity and culture is a sensitive subject for any film.
“Your worst critiques come from your backyard," Mire said. "I think (Nathan) did say 'Keep the film in a safe zone' because it really talks about complex, delicate issues, which is like peeling back an artichoke. There’s a lot of layers there that aren’t understood that are being looked at closer.”
Passing the cultural baton
“Finding Cajun” is the brothers' first film. Prior to the documentary they had never worked together. In 2016, Nathan approached David with the idea of making a short film about Cajun culture and before they knew it, the film was turning into a full documentary.
"It kind of developed as we shot," David Rabalais said. "He didn’t come to me with this huge idea. He was just asking me to shoot something. It started small, snowballed out of that idea and got more exciting as it went on.”
In 2018, they had to take a break after Nathan received a book fellowship. This allowed David time to "edit and reflect when no one is speaking French."
Nathan and David were born six years apart in Eunice and raised in Lafayette. They both graduated from University of Louisiana at Lafayette before following different career paths.
Nathan is a researcher and professor of Francophone studies at the College of William & Mary in Virginia, while publishing academic journals, poetry, creative writing, Quebec literature and film, and Louisiana literature and pop culture in Acadian.
David, a film producer based out of Austin, Texas, runs his own video company called Rowdy Bovines. He travels between Texas and Louisiana working weddings and producing commercials.
"We wanted to go on a three-week trip to Canada to film," David Rabalais said. "It was more of an adventure at that point. But after that there was no turning back."
The brothers traveled to Louisiana, New Brunswick and Nova Scotia for the documentary. The original plan was to put the film on YouTube, but they soon set their sights on Louisiana Public Broadcasting.
Mire sees the documentary making its way into academia. He is proud to put his stamp of approval on it and feels like he's passing on the "cultural film" baton.
“This film is going to end up, I believe, in foreign language departments at universities," he said. "It will have a big impact.”
“It’ll have a long life and not just a shelf life. It's going to end up in places where it should end up, schools, universities, and used as a cultural learning tool.”
So how does the man trying to find what Cajun means define himself? Well, he doesn't.
"It seems insane to work on this and not care about labels," Nathan Rabalais said. "But I guess in a weird way that’s sort of the point. Those labels are only beneficial to a point before they start dividing people up."
Mire agreed that though the documentary does not have a hard stance on the definition of Cajun, it attempts to give enough information to allow the audience to find the answers themselves.
"It’s the unseen thread," he said. "Don’t try, you can look all you want, but he’s keeping it open.”
- What is a Creole? This book offers answers
- Toussaint Legacy Act would outlaw use of deceased celebrities' name, image without consent
- Festival International: Taste testers vote on favorite bread bowls
- French traiteurs: 8 traditions to know about Louisiana's faith healers