In Our View: Roads
Roads have long served humankind as a means to more easily facilitate travel.
From the earliest known road — a 7 1/2 mile stretch of limestone and sandstone slabs over which the ancient Egyptians carried rock from their quarries to the site upon which the Great Pyramids were constructed 5,000 years ago — to the paved concrete and cobblestone roads of ancient Rome, to the Interstate Highway system constructed here in the United States beginning in the 1950s, humanity has come to depend on roads to move goods, people and military equipment from place to place.
For as long as roads have been around, however, there has also been the need to maintain them.
Rain, snow, ice, erosion and the rest of the forces that Mother Nature has in her arsenal are constantly at war with the highways we build.
Sometimes roads come to need repair in catastrophic ways, as state Route 14 did in 2011 when a landslide in Cedar Canyon buried one-third of a mile stretch of the highway, or as Valley View Drive and several other Southern Utah roads did when bridges were washed away in the floods of 2005.
But more often than not, the repairs and maintenance our roads need are subtle and nearly invisible.
Old bridges in need of repair often don’t look like they need a fix to drivers speeding over them, and unless we see a gaping pothole open up on our way to work, we often are oblivious to the other dangers aging roads can present.
Standing water and pooling in depressions on the roadway can provide an ideal surface on which cars can hydroplane and spin out of control. Wheel ruts in roads that need resurfacing and deteriorating road shoulders can cause steering and control issues for drivers. And potholes and rough roads can cause vibrations and jarring that exasperate car problems – not to mention spilling the beverage in your cup holder.
With regular maintenance these issues are usually rare, but when we try to save money and put off regular repaving and maintenance work to save a few dollars, that’s when the larger issues arise. And when they do arise, the quicker the Utah Department of Transportation can respond to them, the cheaper they are to repair.
Yet, a recent study by the Utah Foundation found that 82 percent of city and 95 percent of county respondents believe current transportation funding is insufficient.
“The overwhelming majority of these roads are not being adequately maintained due to insufficient funding,” Foundation Research Analyst Mallory Bateman said. “This is particularly troubling since the research shows that every $1 invested in proper maintenance now will save taxpayers $10 in costly rehabilitation work later.”
This legislative session, lawmakers are contemplating raising the gas tax to increase the level of funding available for Utah’s roads.
While we are loathe to see more taxes levied upon Utah taxpayers, clearly a small increase in taxes now will prevent a much larger tax increase in the future.
It is to be hoped that the Legislature will either find a way to make a hike in the gas tax as painless as possible, or find some other more creative way to facilitate increasing funding levels for Utah’s roadways.
But if we do nothing, our roads will continue to deteriorate. The time to act is now.