The Association strives to advance the day when HYDROGEN ENERGY
will become the principal means by which the world will achieve
its long-sought goal of Abundant Clean Energy for Mankind. Toward
this end, the Association stimulates the exchange of information
in Hydrogen Energy field through its publications and sponsorship
of international workshops, short courses and conferences. In addition,
the Association endeavors to inform the general public of the important
role of Hydrogen Energy in the planning of an inexhaustible and
clean energy system.
The Association has an official scientific journal, International
Journal of Hydrogen Energy,
organizes biennial World Hydrogen Energy Conferences - including
exhibitions - around the world (the last World Hydrogen Energy Conference
took place in Rio de Janerio, Brazil, June 2018; the next one, WHEC 23,
will take place in Istanbul, Turkey, July 2020); publishes the proceedings of these conferences as the Hydrogen
Progress volumes; and maintains and updates this Internet site. International
Journal of Hydrogen Energy is published by Elsevier on behalf of the
International Association for Hydrogen Energy, find out more about the
journal on the journal homepage www.elsevier.com/locate/he.
Hydrogen is considered to be an ideal energy carrier in the foreseeable future. It can be produced from water by using a variety of energy sources, such as solar, nuclear and fossils, and it can be converted into useful energy forms efficiently and without detrimental environmental effects. The only by-product is water or water vapor (if air is used for flame combustion of hydrogen, small amounts of NOx are produced). When solar energy - in its direct and/or indirect forms - is used to produce hydrogen from water, both the primary and secondary forms of energy become renewable and environmentally compatible, resulting with an ideal, clean and permanent energy system - the Solar Hydrogen Energy System. Hydrogen can be used in any application in which fossil fuels are being used today, with sole exception of cases in which carbon is specifically needed. Hydrogen can be used as a fuel in furnaces, internal combustion engines, turbines and jet engines, even more efficiently than fossil fuels, i.e., coal, petroleum and natural gas. Automobiles, buses, trains, ships, submarines, airplanes and rockets can run on hydrogen. Hydrogen can also be converted directly to electricity by the fuel cells, with a variety of applications in transportation and stationary power generation. Metal hydride technologies offer a variety of applications in refrigeration, air conditioning, hydrogen storage and purification. Combustion of hydrogen with oxygen results in pure steam, which has many applications in industrial processes and space heating. Moreover, hydrogen is an important industrial gas and raw material in numerous industries, such as computer, metallurgical, chemical, pharmaceutical, fertilizer and food industries.
Team Water (Food) for thought wins Eemsdelta vision competition The industry cluster Eemsdelta in Groningen has an ambitious goal: sustainable and CO2-neutral production in 2050. The scenario competition Northern Back from the Future has offered several young professionals the opportunity to share their vision. The jury was most impressed by team '(Water)stof tot nadenken' (wordplay on Hydrogen/Food for thought) and they have won a study tour to Japan.
18.10.2019 23rd World Hydrogen Energy Conference - WHEC 2020 It is our great pleasure to invite you to the 23rd World Hydrogen Energy Conference (WHEC2020) scheduled for July 5-9, 2020 in Istanbul, Turkey. 12.10.2019 Introduction to IAHE Codes and Standards Division (IAHE-CSD) International Association for Hydrogen Energy Codes and Standards Division(IAHE Codes and Standards Division, IAHE-CSD)is a division of the International Association for Hydrogen Energy established in 2016. The IAHE-CSD has been created thanks to the efforts of Prof. Jinyang Zheng and his research team from Zhejiang University. It is focused on enabling commercialization of hydrogen energy technologies by facilitating the global research community input to the harmonization of hydrogen codes and standards.
4.07.2019 New Book on Biofuel Production Debabrata Das and Jhansi L. Varanasi published their new book, "Fundamentals of Biofuel Production Processes" by CRC Press recently. 25.04.2019 Renewable Transformation Challenge
The Renewable Transformation Challenge is awarded every two years to recognize
accomplishments by organizations such as private enterprises, NGO’s, and research
institutions for undertaking projects and programs that help move the world toward an
energy system supplied entirely by renewable energy sources, or for conducting the
critical analyses that provide meaningful roadmaps for the transformation.
3.02.2019 New e-Journal: H2-International H2-international is an English-language information service on hydrogen and fuel cells. Via blog, e-journal, and newsletter, the service reports on current developments, especially from across the German-speaking region. The articles written by independent journalists and science professionals are primarily contributions which also appear in the German-language trade publicationHZwei. 7.07.2018 IAHE Board Meeting at WHEC2018
IAHE Board of Directors Meeting took place in Brazil. Brazilian Secretary of Technological and Innovation Development was also present at WHEC 2018.