Elijah becomes corrupted by the war which leads to his ultimate demise.
The essay is not perfect; you may notice some grammar errors. However, more importantly, it is clear and organized and it is also obvious that Viviana had put her heart into the essay.
Viviana is definitely engaged with her topic, the book itself, and the Criminal Justice system. For more detailed information about the essay contest and the Common Book, Common Ground Program which culminated in the essay contest, please go to the Faculty of Applied and Professional Studies or follow this link: Though at face-value this seems to have little relation to the study of the Criminal Justice system, the two narratives tackle important issues.
It also enforces the fact that Canada is a diverse nation with people from different walks of life, all of whose needs must be met by the system.
At the beginning of the novel, he has just returned from serving in the First World War and has become addicted to morphine.
Through his eyes, the novel points out the brutality of justice on the battlefield. In more than one case, it is mentioned that soldiers not following military rules will be shot.
This is a very different approach from the fulfillment of justice as we know it in present-day Canada, and even different from how Canadian law was during the War. Military law as presented in this novel focuses on group before individual and discipline before solid proof of innocence or guilt.
It is important for people involved in the justice system to realize what different forms of law exist, even in contemporary democracies. Military law is still present in the Canadian Armed Forces, and though members of the armed forces are Canadian citizens, they face different standards of conduct than the average Canadian.
Though most people in Canada have been taught the inalienable right to life and respect for the lives of others, soldiers who once killed for necessity alone can become caught up in the glory of the battlefield. He even goes to the extent of collecting trophies in the form of scalps.
Through that ability to kill without thought, people like Elijah have been able to establish a place for themselves in the military, earning medals and honours, but they suffer greatly when the war ends and they return home.
According to Lawrenceafter World War One Britain experienced a period of turmoil in which former soldiers played a large role.
The country was gripped by violence as people with revolutionary intent motivated the working class to overthrow the upper-class once and for all, and ex-servicemen caused disorder among civilians Lawrence, Many citizens feared that peace would never return because the men of the country had been so brutalized by the war, and that they would never be able to settle into life as it used to be Lawrence, Though the state of affairs in Britain quieted down, the aftermath of war is always a factor for those involved.
Countries involved with war must be able to meet the needs of returning soldiers. For example, many soldiers suffer from post-traumatic stress disorder PTSD.Three Day Road Essay - Similarly, Xavier and Elijah from Three Day Road go through a path of losing love and friends eventually turning to enemies.
To begin, Xavier and Elijah war quickly noticed by other comrades because of their hunting skills. Three Day Road Essay - Similarly, Xavier and Elijah from Three Day Road go through a path of losing love and friends eventually turning to enemies.
To begin, Xavier and Elijah war quickly noticed by other comrades because of their hunting skills. Three Day Road: Character Development Essay Words May 8th, 8 Pages The two main characters in the novel “Three Day Road” by Joseph Boyden; Xavier Bird and Elijah Weesageechack, have many key differences that are illustrated throughout the novel.
Three day road essays تتشرف أكاديمية ” أوسدي “ للتدريب والتنمية ـ التابعة للإتحاد العربى للتنمية المستدامة والبيئة ـ أن تعلن عن بدء برامجها التدريبية لتنمية القدرات للطلبة والخريجين من طلاب الجامعات المصرية والعربية.
Three Day Road: Character Development Essay Words May 8th, 8 Pages The two main characters in the novel “Three Day Road” by Joseph Boyden; Xavier Bird and Elijah Weesageechack, have many key differences that .
Essays; Three Day Road; Three Day Road. 8 August Novel; The first theme I noticed in the second half of the novel was being powerless. Xavier is ultimately powerless in the sense that he cannot stop Elijah from heading down his path of self-destruction. No matter what he does Elijah will continue to evolve as the monster he has become.