Here are the stories of men and women who build things, walk across continents, play video games, study ice and fire, build trans-continental highways, engineer software and bridges; stories of insects, plants, biophysics, dinosaurs, time, reality, artificial intelligence, energy. Dig in.
The essential Popular Mechanics book—science, measuring, James Clerk Maxwell and Michael Faraday, the Silver Ghost, tales of amazing achievement, bewildered failure, and an unflagging search for precision. And, as to why the kilogram is no longer set by Le Grand K in Paris—the afterword explains how the standardized units of measure came to be based on constants of nature.
A close and thoroughly entertaining analysis of a classic physics problem that explains (if one can) quantum mechanics: the double-slit experiment.
“And so our imagination is stretched to the utmost—not, as in fiction, to imagine things which aren’t really there. But our imagination is stretched to the utmost just to comprehend those things which are there.”
You could drive on one road from Prudhoe Bay in Alaska to Patagonia in South America. Almost. The crazy story of building a highway through all the Americas, some difficulties encountered, and the people who struggled with nature, technology, governments, politics, and other forces to attempt it.
How we have sought, produced, and used energy, from wood to coal to oil to renewables. Richard Rhodes, who received the Pulitzer Prize for The Making of the Atomic Bomb, says in the introduction that "the current debate has hardly told the rich human history behind today's energy challenges."
The trees for the huge masts of a ship of the line in Elizabethan England took "80 to 120 years to grow to sufficient diameter."
With developments in gene sequencing and DNA studies, scientists in the late 1900s found that horizontal gene transfer—the transferral of genes across species—was not only possible but has been occurring. The story of radical changes to our view of the tree of life, the structure of our own human DNA, and the story of Carl Woese and other researchers who made these discoveries.
A beautifully written and mind-intensifying set of essays on what we believe the world is, how we establish such knowledge and justify getting it, and the metaphysics of what we know or believe about some of the fundamental ideas in physics and mathematics.
Kurt Godel “had a tendency toward paranoia. He believed in ghosts; he had a morbid dread of being poisoned by refrigerator gases.”
A great tale of what dinosaurs are, how they came to dominate, how they transformed gradually into beasts such as the ferocious Tyrannosaurus or the delicate Zhenyuanlong, a feathered precursor of birds, and why their story is important to us now. An enthusiastic trip around the globe hunting fossils with a friendly expert.
Stefano Mancuso clearly respects and loves plants. In the preface he notes that in 2015 alone 2,034 plant species were discovered—we have barely begun to learn about these beings that are crucial to human survival: "[P]lants have evolved in unique and unusual ways, developing solutions so different from those of animals that they have become the very epitome of diversity (indeed, plant species are so diverse that they might as well be aliens)."
A look at what big data can do and what it can’t and admonitory but fun real-life stories on why human intelligence needs to be part of the AI mix. Told by economics expert Gary Smith, whose research has been used by The New York Times, The Wall Street Journal, and others.
Boots on the ground: Software engineer Ken Kocienda describes his fifteen-plus years at Apple. When he started there in 2001, computers and laptops were the main products. “I’ll introduce you to the world programmers inhabit, how software gets made from scratch, and how we tried to imbue this software with spirit.”
Any book that starts off the introduction with a quote from the Narrator in Dear Esther (the Half-Life 2 mod from The Chinese Room) and talks about “postphenomenological aspects of video games on mobile devices” and how players become “attuned” to video games is going to be pure catnip for anyone interested in video games. Clearly written by and maybe for people with PhDs in game theory but of interest to all who wonder what "real" is.
The writings of peripatetic scientist, writer, and naturalist Alexander von Humboldt influenced many who today are more well known, but who all claim influence from Humboldt—Thoreau, Goethe, Darwin. Traveling to Latin America (then Spanish colonies), to volcanoes in the Andes, to colonial America (and in his sixties, to Siberia) in the late 1700s to the early 1800s, he collected notes on everything he found. Andrea Wulf has selected a wonderful collection of Humboldt's massive writing.
Social-media moderators are necessary—and many people want them. But the moderating they do is not overseen much, and it should be. Tarleton Gillespie lays out why and explains, with real-life stories from the trenches, why it is a difficult task indeed to say what statements and images should be allowed to live in our social media, what speech if any should be silenced, and how these decisions are being made. Engrossing, worrisome, and hopeful.
A drop of water stays in the earth’s atmosphere for nine days, a carbon-dioxide molecule for hundreds of years. Marcia Bjornerud lays out why it is critical for us to understand time in different ways, to better gauge our effects on the universe.
A guy breaks into a British natural history museum in Tring, England, and steals a bunch of bird skins (Red-ruffed fruitcrows, Resplendent Quetzal, Spangled Cotinga), many collected at great cost and danger long ago from species now extinct or endangered. Why, and what happens, and fly-tying.
Why go back and look at this collision, the worst in aviation history? Apart from the gripping account of the many points at which happenstance and seemingly inconsequential decisions could have avoided the death of more than 500 people, this crash was the start of serious study of people’s behavior in emergencies. Many changes improving airline safety resulted from this disaster.
“[T]hose Pan Am passengers who had taken a minute…to understand the safety instructions given in the cabin had a significantly higher chance of survival than those who paid no attention.”
From Galileo’s law of fall to Newton’s first theory of dynamics to Feynman’s quantum particles taking all paths at once, this is not only a history of dynamics but of modern thought. The text itself seems to take flight across the universe, taking you with it.
Marvelous tales of magic. "The chief juggler began by promising to produce any tree in an instant. ... In front of their bewildered audience, they produced other trees in the same manner—mango, apple, cypress, fig, almond, walnut, and so on."
John Zubrzycki researches historical accounts and the "contemporary magic scene" in India and enchants us, too, with the story of how magic "came down from the gods" and became a staple of many different cultures in India and spread throughout the world.
This fun and informative memoir of a life in coding explains what makes coding deeply fascinating, and is tamped full, like a scientist's experiment in sphere-packing, of history, fact, and anecdote from former Google and Microsoft software engineer David Auerbach. Geeks for Geeks: "Bitwise operators are used to perform manipulation of individual bits of a number."
British poet Nancy Campbell’s memoir of a seven-year adventure studying Earth’s disappearing ice. From Upernavik in Greenland to Johannes Kepler’s discourse about trying to capture snowflakes on his jacket to the sites of lost polar expeditions, Campbell looks at the fragile interconnections between humans and their planet through the medium of ice.
Carlo Rovelli describes the crumbling of our concept of time, the quantum gravity physics that now define this “world without time,” and in the final third of the book circles back to examining what time means for us now.
Many of the chapters open with verses from Horace, an oddly apt choice, as Horace’s poems often deal with the concrete rather than the speculative—wine, dancing, friends, women, and “thieving time.”
Michael S. Engel, a professor of ecology and evolutionary biology and senior curator of entomology at the University of Kansas, Lawrence, took a dive into the collections of the American Museum of Natural History and gathers these beautiful depictions of insects. Worth it just for the drawings—but the accompanying text is full of anecdote, teaching, history, and interesting or peculiar people and bugs.
Alex Hutchinson examines the latest science on pushing oneself to and past limits. It turns out it is the mind as much as any physical prowess that gives the ability to go beyond.
John Wesley Powell navigated the length of the Colorado River in 1869. John F. Ross retells the tale of this journey and restates issues raised by Powell then that are critical now, on how development should be shaped and on the role of government and industry in developing resources.
A fascinating study of the history, practical efforts, politics, and ethics of the effort to wipe out polio in the world. As Thomas Abraham’s colleague (the late Carl Taylor, a professor of public health at Johns Hopkins University) asks, “Should poor countries, with many health problems that could be controlled, divert their limited resources for a global goal that has low priority for their own children?” A simple goal has many layers.
Structural engineer Roma Agrawal looks at the history of structures, from huts to the world's tallest buildings. She explains the mechanics and forces that act upon structures and the materials that make modern architectural feats possible, and she analyzes tragic engineering and building disasters and what is being done to prevent their recurrence. This entrancing history, analysis, part memoir, part guide, is inspiring and fun.
Even theoretical physicists have a hard time understanding black holes. They are what remains when a massive star dies, they exist at the center of galaxies—although for years we had no proof that they existed at all. Chris Impey explains the science of black holes and what researchers are learning about them now, as they watch star swarms at the centers of galaxies and the somber dance of stars circling black holes.
“We tend to forget that fire is also a force of nature.” Andrew C. Scott has spent his life studying fire. He digs into the 400-million-year history of this force. A helpful glossary is given. Satellite photos show how much of the globe is affected by fire and how critical it is to understand this element.
Henry Worsley, a modern-day Renaissance man, attempts to cross the Antarctic, alone and on foot. At the age of 55. Dragging a loaded sled behind. David Grann, who wrote Lost City of Z and Killers of the Flower Moon (and more), tells us how and why.
Apollo 11 is the journey that took men to the surface of the moon, and it gets the lion's share of the press even today. But Apollo 8, in which NASA decided to send men to orbit the moon with only months to make the journey happen, is a remarkable story of scientists, astronauts, managers, politicians, and a president working together. Robert Kurson talked in depth to the men and women who made this successful venture into space work.