In Term 3 Prep students will be exploring pitch. Using body movement, voice and tuned percussion instruments, preps will be looking at the role that pitch plays in music. The students will be engaging in a number of games and activities that will help students achieve a deeper understanding of how pitch works.
What’s The Story? Hip Hop and Rhyme:
Grade 1&2 students will be digging deeper into the concepts of rhythm and rhyme. Drawing on their prior knowledge of rhythm and beat from last semester, grade 1&2 students will be exploring rhyme and meter through the musical genre Rap and Hip Hop. The students will then be creating their own Raps and Hip Hop backing track. These creative opportunities will link in with the artists as illustrators focus in art looking at Dr Seuss.
Atmospheric Music Using Technology
Drawing from their prior knowledge of film music the grade 3/4 students will be adopting the role of composers to create pieces of music that help portray a certain atmosphere of a particular scene and characterisation. Using music creation software and other technologies students will be working collaboratively to compose a series of short compositions. These compositions will link in with the ‘Artists’ as illustrators work that they will be undertaking in art. Student finished artefacts will be published on the Arts@Bell Blog.
Inquiry Into the relationship between materials, sound and aesthetic to create a performance.
This is an exciting term for the Year 5s and 6s and their specialist lessons. Music and Visual Art will be fused to create an in-depth Sound Art Inquiry Project that will span the entirety of Term Three. The students will create sound sculptures and through exploration will develop an understanding of the relationship between sound and sculpture. Through collaboration, individual work, digital-portfolios and culminating in a performance at the end of the term, the students will explore the way in which the line between music and art can be blurred to create a hybrid work of art.