In the 17th Century both children were sent to dame-schools at a good age. The girls were not normally taught much book learning, but were taught how for that father good housewife. Had been holding taught how to cook. They were also taught tips on how to spin and weave and knit, not only for home wear but for the shops.
Fine knitting was well paid for, and was dependent upon much pride to the knitter. Many complicated stitches were taught to the women of all ages. The herring-bone being one type of favor pattern. There had also been the fox, and the geese knitting patterns.
The girls were taught how to create fashion trends by having initials knit into mittens and nylons. The alphabet was knit into mittens and sometimes a verse of verses.
Young women were taught to be gentle and learn fine embroidery. New fashion purses were made with fine embroidery and sold in the shops. Another fashion trend was the making of paper flowers, in order to Papyrotamia. They were taught how to create fine art on velvet. They come across quilt piecing in a hundred different and hard designs. They were also taught the steps to creating bone lace with pillow and bobbins.
Boys were educated in, amongst other matters, here Latin Grammar. Study regarding reading and writing was firmly etched on the male mind.
The 19th century (Early Victorian 1837-1869) made a new fashion trend for women. What a women desired was curves to improve their femininity. The fashion corset of that day helped create a those curves that women desired.
The late Victorian period of 1870-1900 seen the fashion corset go a step further. Curves on women were due to tightly lacing them within their corsets. The style trend ended up being to have an 18 inch waist. This style was known as compared to the hourglass see.
Then along came the 20th Century. Young ladies went to highschool and school. They began to compete with men for jobs. Whichever found tough to compete with at first was the wage tower system. Women doing equal work to men received considerably less wages. The equal parity in all areas of life for women had still not became available. Men were still the superior beings, previously professional regions of life.
However, despite the fact that young women were to not get equal wage parity to men, many still received a good income. In which scenario earned a new fashion trends. The laddette fashion trend.
Young women began to spend out about most nights with their mates. They did not limit their drinking, although they were working later today. A couple of small glasses of wine or spirits were enough upon their. They felt compelled to compete with men.
They would see teenage boys gulping down large associated with beer. So they began to drink large glasses of beer.
At closing time, they would leave the population house, legless. Be sick and then fall down. Many young women began to buy work feeling very sick and tired. But that did not deter them from starting the drinking cycle over again a few hours later. Just had in sight to be equal to, and even better, than men.