Distillation Lab: Purifying Water Full Lesson
1. Teacher Instructions
2. Starter Activity
3. Distillation Practical Guide
4. Follow Up Questions
5. Results and Discussion Questions
6. Finisher Puzzle Activity
This full hour laboratory lesson is well structured to engage mixed ability chemistry classes between grades 8-11. The actual lab based practical requires only basic school lab glassware and access to a water faucet. The laboratory method and equipment is all comprehensively explained in both the teacher instructions section and student practical guide.
The hour lab is split into five progressive activities. All main activities include tiered questions (bronze, silver and gold) to make the content accessible to all learners and gives each activity an element of choice and challenge. The first starter activity includes questions based around naming and describing the functions of laboratory equipment. This tests the prior practical knowledge of students.
The practical document encompasses a method which is easy to follow and an equipment list. Accompanying tiered questions follow the practical activity. Whilst the practical equipment is cooling down, students can answer the follow up questions which reflect on the practical and their understanding of distillation in terms of evaporation and condensation. Before the results and discussion activity, the students have the opportunity to observe the teacher carry out a boiling point analysis on the distilled water sample (simply explained in the teacher instructions). Upon completion of the results and discussion tiered questions, students can complete the lesson with a cool down puzzle based on distillation keywords.
Answers to all activities are included in the resource. I have included each activity as a separate word doc and pdf file (completely editable if desired). I have also combined each activity into a student workbook (again editable word doc and pdf available). Please be aware there is a few British English spellings as I also use this lab with my British study group.
This is a hassle free, tried and tested lab which engages students and caters to a range of abilities.
Please feel free to ask any questions before purchasing. Many Thanks! - Science House