Planning for geography field work
A head of curriculum meets with two class teachers to support them as they plan their Year 8 Geography unit of study and prepare for an excursion to the local area. The teachers describe how they intend to take into account the individual learning needs of their students and discuss how they have personalised the teaching and learning program so that it is meaningful and relevant. The curriculum leader refers to the General Capability of Literacy to generate discussion about specific communication goals for individual students. The teachers discuss the different ways students can develop these goals in the context of geography. The head teacher demonstrates verbal and non-verbal communication strategies to support students’ understanding, engagement and achievement specifically in relation to the geography excursion.
Support for teachers who aim to develop their students’ sense of wonder and curiosity about familiar places and the local environment, in addition to developing an understanding of the connection Aboriginal Peoples have to the land.
Plan from age-equivalent learning area content:
Year 8 Geography content is used to develop a teaching and learning program on Landforms and Landscapes, building on the concept of environment and connecting it to place.
• Draw from learning area content at different levels along the Foundation to Year 10 sequence to personalise the learning:
Geographical Inquiry and Skills content at Foundation level provides a meaningful way for students to access the Year 8 content around landscapes and landforms
• Use the General Capabilities and/or cross-curriculum priorities to adjust the learning focus and to personalise the learning:
A focus on the Literacy and Personal and social capabilities allows for the development of targeted communication and self-management skills within the geography teaching and learning program.
• Align individual learning goals with age-equivalent content to personalise the learning:
Individual communication goals are aligned with the geography content. The communication skills enable the students to develop their geographical knowledge and skills and the geography content gives an age-equivalent and authentic context for the students to apply their communication skills.
1. How would you develop an age-appropriate unit of work for students of different ages in the one class?
2. How do you, or could you use the flexible design of the Australian Curriculum to cater for individual student needs?
3. How can the collaborative planning process be used in your school context to support access for all students to the Australian Curriculum content?
Know students and how they learn
Focus area 1.6
Strategies to support full participation of students with disability
Know the content and how to teach it
Focus area 2.1
Content and teaching strategies of the teaching area
Plan for and implement effective teaching and learning
Focus area 3.5
Use effective classroom communication
Clifford Park Special School (Rob Street Campus)
Toowoomba QLD Australia
Clifford Park Special School in Toowoomba, Queensland, delivers educational programs to over 100 students aged from 12 to 18 years. Students at the school have individual learning needs.
These illustrations of personalised learning are not licensed under the creative commons license used for other material on the Australian Curriculum website. Instead, you may view, download, display, reproduce, and distribute these materials in unaltered form only for your personal, non-commercial educational purposes or for the non-commercial educational purposes of your organisation, provided that you retain this copyright notice. This means you cannot edit, modify or adapt any of these materials and you cannot sub-license any of these materials to others. Apart from any uses permitted under the Copyright Act 1968 (Cth), and those explicitly granted above, all other rights are reserved by ACARA.