By Alessandra Malito, MarketWatch
The U.S. is ranked No. 1 out of 20 countries for its artificial intelligence skills, but it’s got another persistent workplace more problem that it was unable to fix.
The gender gap in this field is still huge.
Only 23% of U.S. professionals with AI skills are women, according to a World Economic Forum report released this week. The U.S. isn’t the worst country in this regard, however: Only 14% of Brazil’s AI professionals are women, followed by Mexico with 15%. Poland and Germany are tied with 16%. Italy, Singapore and South Africa have the smallest gender gaps in comparison.
Globally, only 22% of AI professionals around the world are women , compared to 78% of men.
Men and women have both invested in their AI skills at an equal clip for the last four years, but fewer women indicate they have these skills on LinkedIn, according to the WEF, which partnered with the LinkedIn Economic Graph Team for the report. Even though the number of both women and men with AI skills have increased over the last four years, the gender disparity has remained stubbornly unchanged.
Part of the problem lies within the industries that fuel artificial intelligence innovation, like software and IT services. Only 7.4% of the employees in those sectors are women. And the sectors with the smallest gender gaps, like nonprofits and health care, are only a tiny sliver of the AI world, accounting for 4% and 2% of the AI talent pool respectively.
Increasingly, jobs will require skills obtained in higher education institutions, which women typically attend at higher rates than men.
One of the biggest issues within artificial intelligence and gender diversity: Not many women are involved in the process of creating this technology. That could lead to women being shut out of this booming field. “The diversity — including gender diversity — of views among innovators is vital to ensuring the economic opportunities created by AI do not increase existing gender inequalities,” the researchers said.
But there’s hope for women in these fields. Artificial intelligence may give women a boost in these tech careers. Increasingly, jobs will require skills obtained in higher education institutions, which women typically attend at higher rates than men, and also require team-building and communication. Artificial intelligence and robotics will also allow women to participate in physically taxing jobs that were typically dominated by men.
Still, the U.S. has a long way to go. The number of PhDs in STEM (science, technology, engineering and math) rose from 18,000 in 2006 to 27,000 in 2016, but the share of women who received STEM doctorates remained at 40%, according to a study recently published in the journal Nature .
The gender gap appears to appear in the ninth grade. Girls comprise just 30% of the top 5,000 ninth graders in the American Mathematics Competitions.
The gender gap appears to appear in the ninth grade. Girls comprise just 30% of the top 5,000 ninth graders in the American Mathematics Competitions, just 18% of the top 500 ninth graders, and only 8% of the top 50, according to research released earlier this year and distributed by the National Bureau of Economic Research. The gender gap in math achievement worsens over time. By the time these girls get to their senior year of high school, they comprise only 22% of the top 5,000 students, and just 12% of the top 500.
One theory: Teachers may give girls less attention and, consciously or not, make them feel unwelcome in the class. One 2012 study published in the journal Gender & Society found “consistent bias against white females” among teachers who believed math was just easier for boys than girls. It concluded that “disparities in teachers’ perceptions of ability that favored white males over minority students of both genders are explained away by student achievement in the form of test scores and grades.”
Women don’t always see their post-graduate degrees in STEM through, another study published by Ohio State University researchers concluded. Women tended to drop out because they didn’t receive enough in research funding, compared to their male counterparts, and they had slightly lower grades than men in the same classes.
Sexism and unequal pay or access to resources also contributed to fewer women in these industries, according to Harvard Business Review.