WE ARE ENERGETIC BEINGS
To supplement chiropractic treatments, consider that the body is an environment composed of both chemical and electrical fields and at any one time we are only as healthy as our cells can be in that environment. Our cells are like an electric battery; subject to states of charge or depletion. Electricity trumps chemistry. Our cells conduct the electrical charges created by our central nervous system. Each cell functions as a receiver as well as transmitter, conducting the flow of electricity as well as chemicals. A compromised electrical system results in faulty communications; no messages are sent and no healing chemicals can be manufactured. French scientist George Lakhovsky, whose work was inspired by the work of Nicola Tesla, viewed disease as a battle of vibrations between the body’s cells and pathogenic viruses and bacteria. If the cell was energetically weak, the invading organism could win this “vibration contest,” thus infecting the cell. So, if the cell was energetically weak, the invading organism could win this “vibration contest”.
Today we have entered an era where we can, via machines and chiropractic treatments, broadcast a therapeutic electromagnetic field; bring our own cells into a state of RESONANCE; strengthen the energy-field of each cell and thereby fortify and protect ourselves from the attack of disease causing organisms.
MRS – THE MAGNETIZING WAY TO STAY HEALTHY
MRS 2000+ restores lost energy and crippled cellular resonance to a normal, healthy state of vibration. As a result, the entire cell metabolism is stimulated, blood cells are regenerated, blood supply moves more freely and with more oxygen, immune system in strengthened, vitamins and minerals are better absorbed, the respiratory system becomes more efficient, the nervous system is relaxed, bone structure becomes more dense and organs such as liver, kidneys, and spleen are able to detoxify, ridding themselves of impurities and regaining their designated bodily functions.
The effect of one application using the MRS 2000+ lasts up to 4-6 hours in healthy people. Most people do not feel any noticeable sensation when starting therapy. “Sensing” nothing only means that the magnetic field is having its effect without any outward signs. If people are very tense, nervous, or under stress, they generally need low field intensities (settings) to obtain relaxation. If the person is exhausted and tired the brain becomes receptive to the low frequency magnetic stimuli. The frequencies encapsulated in the double-sawtooth signal trigger beneficial responses in that part of the brain responsible for the symptoms of stress and depression, leading to more complete rest, relaxation, deep sleep and regeneration. The aim is to reduce the level of stress/depression through better rest and deeper sleep. For inducing deep sleep, the most appropriate time to use the mat applicator is the hour before going to bed. Try to remain sensitive to the “experience and results” of particular settings at particular times of day. Settings depend on body mass, blood pressure/pulse, level of stress, age and health challenges.
MODERN THERAPEUTIC ELECTROMAGNETIC FIELD
“Magnetic Resonance Stimulation” is not a static magnet, but a Resonating Magnetic Field (RMS). MRS 2000+ (Magnetic Resonance Stimulation) contains NO MAGNETS.
Electromagnetic therapy applies magnetic fields–either static or pulsed. Low Pulsing Electromagnetic Fields (PEMF) are used instead because a constant magnetic field is unable to penetrate the whole body and also the body’s cells soon become used to a constant magnetic field. The pulsating field can be optimized to the correct frequency of vibration to effects the whole system and its long term use has many benefits. With low pulsating electromagnetic fields the cells cannot be damaged.
Today, magnetic therapy is well established worldwide. Japan has given official approval for the use of pulsed magnetic devices for healing. Over 1000 clinical studies world-wide document the effectiveness of Magnetic- Resonance- Stimulation. The German-made MRS 2000+ design is the “next step” as well as the new benchmark in the field of pulsating magnetic therapy for home, medical or clinical use.
Contact us/call us today to discuss what the MRS 2000+ and chiropractic can do for your health!