Found in rocks and soils in all parts of the world, naturally occurring groups of heat-resistant, fibrous minerals called asbestos are toxic to humans, potentially causing a form of lung cancer that affects mesothelial cells lining the lungs. Before it was discovered in the 1970s that asbestos caused lung cancer, these cheap, durable fibers were widely used in the construction of industrial and commercial facilities and products.
According to the American Cancer Society, the U.S. sees 3000 new cases of mesothelioma each year. Veterans who served in the military between 1940 and 1980 are members of a demographic commonly diagnosed with pleural mesothelioma, or lung cancer caused by inhaling asbestos fibers. Included in naval ship construction and other military equipment, asbestos was later banned in the early 1980s. However, you can still find asbestos used as insulation in homes constructed between 1930 and 1950.
Exposure to asbestos has been found to cause three different types of mesothelioma: pleural (lung) mesothelioma, peritoneal (abdominal) mesothelioma, and pericardial (heart) mesothelioma. Symptoms of pleural mesothelioma, the most common type of mesothelioma, may not emerge for ten or 15 years after exposure to asbestos. Classic symptoms of pleural mesothelioma include difficulty breathing, a chronic cough that does not respond to medication, chest pain that may be mistaken for heart problems, weight loss and extreme fatigue.
Since most people do not present symptoms of mesothelioma for a decade or more, they are often misdiagnosed as having pneumonia or some other respiratory illness. Consequently, by the time they receive the appropriate treatment, they are suffering advanced, incurable mesothelioma. Treatment for mesothelioma at any stage consists of radiation therapy, chemotherapy or surgery. For more advanced cases, surgery combined with chemotherapy may be necessary to delay progression of the condition.
Why You Need an Asbestos Mesothelioma Lawyer
Specializing in litigating cases for individuals who were exposed to asbestos and later developed mesothelioma, an asbestos mesothelioma attorney offers expertise in pursuing lawsuits against companies that used asbestos even though they were aware of its cancer causing properties. Additionally, filing a lawsuit to get compensation for suffering unnecessarily from mesothelioma is a complicated process and requires the assistance of a specialty law firm who has successfully handled numerous cases of this nature.
Contact an Attorney Immediately to File Your Mesothelioma Lawsuit
Deadlines for filing asbestos-related mesothelioma claims depend on a number of factors. For example, lawsuits filed while the individual is alive but suffering from mesothelioma have filing expiration dates several months after the initial diagnosis. For someone who has died from complications of mesothelioma, filing date expirations are even more limited.
Asbestos mesothelioma attorneys are skilled at gathering information about companies that deliberately exposed employees to asbestos. This information is vital to winning a lawsuit and obtaining substantial compensation for medical bills as well as for pain and suffering.
Call Our Law Firm Today to Discuss Your Case
Mesothelioma attorneys have helped thousands of individuals receive rightful compensation for a life-threatening illness that could have been avoided. Treatment for mesothelioma is expensive and lengthy, generally involving chemotherapy, radiation therapy and sometimes surgery. Lawyers specializing in asbestos and mesothelioma know what kind of evidence, documents and witnesses are needed to successfully argue a lawsuit. Moreover, most mesothelioma lawsuits rarely reach the trial stage, since they are settled out of court when aggressive mesothelioma attorneys present clear evidence to the guilty party.
If you or someone you know has been diagnosed with mesothelioma, contact our attorneys to find out if you are eligible to receive compensation to pay for past, present and future medical bills. Knopf Bigger’s outstanding track record of litigating asbestos and mesothelioma lawsuits speaks for itself.