Sure! I would be happy to go into detail about three famous concepts in statistics, mathematics, and physics!

1. The Invention of Calculus - Isaac Newton invented the concept of calculus in 1665. Although calculus has uses in physics, biology, economics, engineering, chemistry, and more, its most common association is with mathematics. Calculus is about studying the rate of change over time. Differential calculus can be compared to algebra. Calculus is used to define the slope of the curve, while algebra is more focused on straight lines. Integral calculus is used when the area under a graph needs to be calculated. It can break a sloped line into smaller segments to solve a problem that algebra can't.

Isaac Newton found that when trying to describe the speed of a falling object, the speed increased every second, although no mathematical solution explained why at the time. He found the explanation through calculus and used the same formula to explain the orbits of the sun, moon, and other planets. There are many uses for calculus today: it is heavily tied into all aspects of engineering, it can be used when data is being collected and analyzed, and, of course, it is still taught in various forms at the high school and, more typically, college level. Its invention also allowed for other scientific theories to come after it, such as the theory of relativity.

2. The Theory of Relativity - Widely known as the most famous theory in all of physics, the theory was invented by Albert Einstein. He had published a paper ten years earlier than his more famous theory about "special relativity," which explained space and time, but the theory did not address gravity. Einstein's theory expanded upon Newton's by determining the laws of physics are the same for all non-accelerating observers. He also showed the speed of light on its own is the same no matter what speed the observer is traveling. Equations for this theory also prove that massive objects distort spacetime. Light bends around massive objects like black holes, allowing it to act as a lens for things that are behind it; this is used by scientists to observe stars. Another aspect of the theory of relativity that is widely known is its direct impact on allowing the invention of the atomic bomb. Einstein was around during its creation but did not directly work on it himself, instead warning about the potential of its possible impact.

3. Normal Distribution - One of the most common concepts in statistics, also known as the Bell Curve, normal distribution affects many parts of our everyday lives. It explains various distributions such as the heights of the general public, errors in measurement, blood pressure, marks on a test, and intelligence of the populace, just to name a few examples. Related to the normal distribution is the standard deviation; the highest number of examples occur right in the middle of the graph, while standard deviations to the left and right are much less common. Typically two standard deviations away from the mean are rare, while three or more are exceedingly rare. This explains things like why there are so few extremely intelligent people. The probability of distribution means the odds of it happening are very unlikely, all factors considered.
