Learning of your child’s autism diagnosis can be a scary and overwhelming time. You may have been:
- Struggling with tantrums or simply getting through the day for some time without knowing why.
- Maybe you’ve been aware of your child’s diagnosis, but haven’t known what to do.
- Or, maybe your child has been receiving services, but you still don’t feel confident in how to best help your child.
THE NEED FOR PARENT EDUCATION
There is a reason your child does the things he or she does, which is central to learning how to alleviate those challenging behaviors. Many children with autism also have skills deficits, which are likely contributing to those maladaptive behaviors. For instance, if I couldn’t communicate my needs, I’d probably scream to get what I wanted, too. As such, it’s vital to teach skills in addition to applying strategies to decrease challenging behavior.
As a parent or caregiver, you are in the best position to help your child succeed, but you need the tools and resources to do that. Learning to apply these behavior principles to change your child’s behavior is like learning a whole new language. It takes time and, more importantly, education and training.
If you are looking for more ways to help your child or loved one, our courses are a great place to start. Our online courses provide you with easily digestible explanations behind the theory, and actionable strategies, which we walk you through implementing.
These course were created with busy parents in mind. Complete them at your own pace and in your own time.
Our content includes easy to follow, real-life examples to simplify complex topics.
The modules are broken into short segments, so that you can still progress, even if you only have 10 minutes.
We provide realistic approaches for managing behavior and walk you through how to implement them.
Foundations & Strategies
Research shows that early, intensive intervention through Applied Behavior Analysis (ABA) is the most effective form of treatment for children with autism. In order to effectively apply ABA strategies, it is important to understand the principles behind them.
Our first course focuses on the foundations of ABA. At the end of this course, you will be able to better communicate with your supervisor, have a thorough understanding of how ABA works, and an action plan to better manage your child’s challenging behaviors.