     When Jim came home from work, he noticed something strange. His wife's car wasn't in the driveway, but he could hear noises coming from the kitchen. "Kate, is that you?" Jim reluctantly asked. The noise stopped. Jim approached the kitchen. The only thing nearby was a broom, so Jim equipped himself with it. He rounded the corner, prepared to strike! But to his surprise, he saw a masked bandit holding a bag of chips. 

	 Jim exclaimed, "Oh gosh, it's a raccoon! How did you get in here? Get out now!" Jim started shooing at the raccoon with the end of the broom, but that was a mistake. He was a very angry raccoon, and he wanted those chips. The raccoon let out a hiss and spit at Jim. "Crap, crap, crap. What do I do?" shouted Jim as he tried to keep the raccoon at bay with his broom. Suddenly, the raccoon bolted up the length of the broom toward Jim's face. "AHHHH!!!!" shouted Jim as he panicked and ran through his house. The raccoon, sensing Jim's fear, chased after him. There was a horrible sound as pots and pans crashed to the ground.

	"What in tarnation is all that racket?" Kate asked as she approached the front door. She opened the door just in time to see Jim leaping over the couch, followed by a flying raccoon. Instinctually, Kate stretched out her hand and caught the raccoon by the scruff of its neck. The angry raccoon was hissing and spitting at her. Jim stared at his wife Kate with utter disbelief as she turned the angry raccoon's face towards her, stared it in the eyes, pointed one finger at it, and firmly stated, "No." The raccoon's anger melted away, and it let out a little whimper.  

	Kate held the now docile raccoon by its scruff while Jim explained the situation. Kate told Jim to "Grab the chips, and let's go." She took both Jim and the raccoon to a tree with a hole in it on their property. Out popped three little raccoon heads looking confused as to why Kate had their momma scruffed. "See, this is that family of raccoons I have been telling you about. Ain't they sweet." Jim stood in admiration of his wife, and he declared with a smile, "You are amazing."
