The benefits of celery have been known from ancient times. Celery nutrition and medicinal values have been described by the Greeks as the best cure for many ailments.
Celery leaves have high content of vitamin A, while the stems are an excellent source of vitamins B1, B2, B6 and C with rich supplies of potassium, folic acid, calcium, magnesium, iron, phosphorus, sodium and plenty essential amino acids.
During ancient times, celery was considered to be a medicinal herb and used to treat a variety of ailments. This juice is a very powerful way to improve your health, and regular consumption will surely do wonders.
Nutrients in the fiber are released during juicing, aiding bowel movements. The natural organic sodium (salt) in celery is very safe for consumption, in fact is essential for the body. Even individuals who are salt-sensitive can safely take the sodium in celery, unlike table salt (iodised sodium) which is harmful for those with high blood pressure.
While many foods lose nutrients during cooking, most of the compounds in celery hold up well during cooking.
Celery is also known to contain at least eight different types of anti-cancer compounds. Among these are coumarins which have been shown to prevent free radicals from damaging cells, have anti-coagulant effects, enhance the activity of certain white blood cells that help to fight cancer, and help to prevent cancers of the skin, tongue, esophagus, liver, and colon.
Celery also contains acetylenics which have been shown to stop the growth of tumor cells. Others such as Phenolic acids block the action of prostaglandins that encourage the growth of tumor cells.
The health benefits of celery juice also include help to reduce blood pressure. Phthalides a group of active compounds found in celery juice help to reduce blood pressure by relaxing the muscles in and around the walls of the arteries.
This causes the vessels to dilate which creates more space for the blood to flow at a lower level of pressure. Phthalides also lower levels of stress hormones, which in turn can have a positive effect on your blood pressure as well as many other areas of health.
Apigenin, Coumarins and Potassium also play a role in helping to reduce lower blood pressure. Apigenin in celery is known to lower blood pressure by dilating blood vessels. In studies it has been shown to have a relaxing effect minus any feeling of sedation.
Coumarins which have many other health benefits also can help to lower blood pressure by reducing stress levels and toning the vascular system. Potassium is an essential mineral for regulating your blood system and celery has approximately 310 mg of this mineral per cup.
Pick one stalk of celery with straight, firm stalks and rigid ribs. For best results, use it immediately.
- Wash the celery in order to remove soil deposits between the ridges or the inside of the stalk.
- Chop celery into smaller sections.
- Run through juicer.
- Serve celery juice fresh or chilled.
- Try a variation by adding a vegetable or fruit of your choice. E.g. apple or carrot.
Traditionally, celery juice is recommended for menstrual problems in women, asthma sufferers, those who have constipation problems, for mild fever, in order to retain fluid in the body, for gout attacks, to relieve headache, treat inflammation, insomnia, kidney, liver, lung disorders, nervous problems and for weight reduction. Further, celery juice is recommended for people with high acidity due to calcification and degenerative bones and joints. Regular intake of celery juice can help eliminate calcium deposits even before accumulation in the body.
Cream of celery soup recipe
4-5 sticks of celery, 1 medium-sized onion, 4 spring onions, 2 potatoes, 1 tbsp plain butter, 200 gms fresh cream
Wash celery, spring onions and potatoes.
Cut celery and spring onions.
Slice potatoes and keep aside.
Melt butter in a wide-bottomed pan.
Add spring onions and celery.
Fry for 3-4 minutes.
Add potatoes and saute for 2-3 minutes.
Add 5 cups of water and cook.
Blend the mixuture in a liquidizer.
Strain the mixutre. Let it boil for 2 minutes.
Add beaten cream to the mixture.
Cream of celery soup is ready.
Add pepper, salt and serve hot.
The herb, especially wild celery can cause serious anaphylactic reactions in some sensitive individuals. It should not be eaten by pregnant women. People on diuretic medications and anticoagulant medications should use this herb sparingly.
Its stalks also has very high quantities of soluble as well as insoluble fiber contents. Eating recipes with too much of fiber content may cause stomach-pain, indigestion, bloating, and oftentimes complicates existing constipation condition.