Global warming, wars, famines, economic gloom, melting ice caps ... What is the world coming to? Understanding what is going on around you in a world that is always changing has never been as important as it is today. GCSE Geography gives students the opportunity to make sense of their surroundings.
Students will study the impact on the earth’s resources and the environmental consequences that lie ahead, as well as Physical and Human Geography of Natural Hazards. They will explore natural landscapes such as rivers, coasts and glaciers, as well as the living ecosystems of the world. Students will also develop adept skills in problem solving and evaluating issues, thereby acquiring essential skills for many successful careers.
In Year 9, students will undertake a piece of coursework to Box Hill, study a tsunami disaster with a particular focus on how humans manage the situation. They will also study ecosystem use and abuses across the planet, with an in-depth study of the Matis tribe in the Amazon Rainforest (looking specifically at our role in threatening their existence). Closer to home, we explore various physical and human aspects of the UK environment, and human issues of population and migration, all of which provide a foundation of knowledge, as well as develop the necessary skills required to be successful at GCSE.
Three written papers:
Paper 1 - 1 hour 30 minutes on Global Geographical Issues
Paper 2 - 1 hour 30 minutes on UK Geographical Issues
Paper 3 - 1 hour 30 minutes on People and Environmental Issues
Students will receive a grade 1 – 9 after sitting all three exams.
Demands of the course
To succeed in this course, students need to have an enquiring mind and be both willing and able to complete a reasonable amount of independent study. Those who will benefit most from the course will be those who have achieved Grade 4 in Key Stage 3 Geography. Students will be expected to complete both human and physical fieldwork.
Why study Geography?
A good grade in GCSE Geography is welcomed by employers, colleges and universities. The course develops powers of analysis and helps students to make better sense of the world in which they live. Geography is also a good ‘bridge’ between the Arts and the Sciences and encourages students to appreciate complex relationships. Those who study GCSE Geography could find themselves employed as architects, advertising executives, teachers, transport planners, housing officers, members of the armed forces, journalists, police officers or working in the leisure and tourist industries to name but a few!