NROC Developmental Math is designed to be used with students striving to meet college entrance requirements. Available in both “standard” and “pre-assessment” versions, the program is designed to direct students to the study needed to close their proficiency gaps. Video, audio, adaptive practice sets, interactive simulations, an integrated textbook, and other instructional approaches engage a variety of learning styles and attitudes.
Topically organized, this program offers flexible modules that address concepts and skills taught in the traditional developmental math sequence of Arithmetic, Beginning and Intermediate Algebra. In keeping with AMATYC’s proposal for a new developmental mathematics, this program includes topics that provide a high-level, basic introduction to Statistics, Geometry, and Trigonometry.
This program includes nineteen units comprised of 59 lessons and 130 topics. Flexible modules address concepts and skills for Arithmetic, Beginning Algebra, and Intermediate Algebra, including basic Geometry, Statistics and Trigonometry topics.
- Arithmetic with Geometry and Statistics Topics
- Beginning Algebra
- Intermediate Algebra with Trigonometry Topics
I. Whole Numbers
II. Fractions and Mixed Numbers
IV. Ratios, Rates, and Proportions
IX. Real Numbers
X. Solving Equations and Inequalities
XI. Exponents and Polynomials
XIV. Systems of Equations and Inequalities
XV. Rational Expressions
XVI. Radical Expressions and Quadratic Equations
XVIII. Exponential and Logarithmic Functions
Design and Pedagogy
Media-rich and diverse components help students gain mastery.
- Warm-up: a series of problems to assess prior knowledge, resulting in customized recommendations for review.
- Presentation: a rich media presentation introducing the topic concept with illustrated examples and optional closed caption [CC] script.
- Worked Examples: narrated, step-by-step presentation of problems being solved.
- Practice Problems: symbolic and word problems designed in adaptive sets, offering students practice and feedback.
- Topic Text: integrated textbook provides comprehensive coverage of topics with additional explanations and examples.
- Review: self-test understanding prior to moving to the next topic.
- Project: collaborative assignments in the project-based learning tradition based on real-world problems.
- Tutor Simulation: provides students directed guidance in solving a multifaceted problem.
- Puzzles: simple activities offer learners an opportunity to practice what they have learned in a fun, no-fault environment.
- Topic/Unit Assessments: formative and summative assessments are designed to guide a learner’s progress.
- Case Studies
We extend our thanks to the students, instructors, and administrators from the institutions who have participated in focus groups and early pilots, or who contributed subject matter expertise in the development of this project.
Members may access NROC Developmental Math – Pre-Assessment content in two ways:
- The complete course may be installed in a member’s LMS.
- NROC Developmental Math content is available through your institution’s customized EdReady website.
If you are interested in using NROC Developmental Math in your LMS, you must contact the NROC Project Manager at your institution to arrange for LMS installation (per instructions below).
To link to content through your Institution’s HippoCampus website, ask your NROC Project Manager for the custom URL.
To utilize EdReady to access the NROC Developmental Math material, contact your NROC EdReady Administrator for the URL.
If you are not sure who your NROC Project Manager or EdReady Administrator is, you may email email@example.com.
Visit the Instructor Resources Tab for more information on resources to support this content.
The NROC Developmental Math – Pre-Assessment course must be installed in your LMS by an LMS Administrator with sufficient privileges to set up the course. If you are the LMS Administrator, you will need to have a login to this website to gain access to the installation files. Check with your NROC Project Manager if you need secure access to the NROC Network.
Please go to the Installation Tab to access the installation file for your LMS and follow the detailed directions provided.
Check out our webinars.
See our publicity resources to get the word out at your institution.
We extend our thanks to the students, instructors, and administrators from the institutions who have participated in focus groups or early pilots, or who contributed subject matter expertise in the development of this project.
NROC Developmental Math – Pre-Assessment is available for installation in your LMS as an IMS Common Cartridge v1.1 compliant package. A list of Learning Management System (LMS) vendors that support IMS Common Cartridge format can be found at http://www.imsglobal.org/cc/statuschart.cfm.
The IMSCC course files include unit, midterm and final assessments, and select course-level content – large media objects are not contained in these course files.
The media files are referenced via URL, and displayed within your LMS environment from a remote (NROC) host location.
Once you have downloaded the file, log in to your LMS environment and follow the LMS’ standard steps to install an IMSCC course. If you need assistance with this process, please consult your LMS system administrator or LMS support site.
If you have any difficulty or need additional assistance, please visit the Help Center from the top menu and login with your NROCnetwork.org credentials.
Course Installation Files
LMS Administrators and Technical Staff with appropriate access are able to access the required installation resources on this page. If you already have an Administrative/Technical account, please log in and then return to this page.
If you need an access code, please contact the NROC Project Manager on your campus. If you do not know who your Project Manager is, contact us.
Supplemental Installation Resources
Essential Instructor Resources
A variety of resources are available for instructors to support their use of Developmental Math. These include instructor guides, a student video, and correlations to the Common Core.
Supplemental Instructor Resources
While not necessary to use the course, these additional materials are available to supplement the course or provide more context.
Find out how NROC members are using NROC Developmental Math in their programs.