Get Private Tuition in Biology from one of our specialists
Biology has its own way of being taught and good Biology Tutors are hard to find. Biology is a subject based around learning lots of content. This means that students will need to have excellent study skills in order to take in and digest large amounts of information. As Biology is a key requirement on STEM courses such as Medicine and Pharmacy, student will benefit from the guidance of a skilled Tutor.
Our Tutors are highly experienced, with some having worked as clinical researchers and other working in Industry in general. They are well prepared to tutor students in A Level and GCSE Biology, as well as giving them advice on University applications. We also have a smaller core of specialist tutors who prepare students for entrance exams such as the BMAT and UKCAT.
A student’s lack of success in GCSE/IGCSE Biology is a good indicator of whether they have good study skills. Often, students report that there is nothing hard within Biology, rather they are overwhelmed by the amount of information they need to process. Exam technique is also a major factor, as most questions contain information in the form of words, pictures or graphs. Our specialist Biology Tutors are able to break down the subject and allow students to properly develop learning skills. This ensures the best possible outcome and has a high carry over into other content based subjects such as English and history.
Our tutors are equipped to handle any syllabus, either for the GCSEs or IGCSEs. They keep themselves up to date with any major changes in the curriculum. The key aim in tutorials is to develop a students knowledge so that they can analyse and interpret material with out being out off. Tutors will also go thought past papers with students in the run up to exams.
A Level Biology is the detialed study of living organisms, plants and animals included. This may at first sight seem an easy study area, but school result statistics show that compared to Physics and Chemistry, Biology results are often worse, on average. This may be due to exam technique or that unlike physics and maths that go hand in hand biology is stand alone and requires a lot more memorising and concept understanding. Our tutors have years of experience in dealing with A Level students, they are familiar with the techniques that students need to use in order to succeed.
Our tutors are equipped to handle any qualification, any syllabus, for both domestic and foreign qualifications. We have several subject specialists who keep themselves up to date with all major changes to the Biology curriculum. They are fully prepared to tutor for the new A Level syllabus. Developing a students knowledge is the primary aim of most tutorials, as Biology is a content based subject. Tutors will focus on exam papers closer to exam time.
Our services for University are highly specialised. We treat each case individually, so to find out what we are able to do, please get in touch. We have several experienced tutors on staff, many with decades of experience working as researchers in Industry. Some of our tutors are University lecturers and PhD holders, having specific specialisations towards Medicine and Pharmacy.