1823W.W. BirdState of Cape of G.H. 73Slaves at the Cape may be divided into three classes: the Negro, the Malay, and the Africander...The last and most valuable class of slaves is the African-born slave, — the produce of an European, or of a Cape Dutchman, and of a slave girl.
1823W.W. BirdState of Cape of G.H. 74The Africander slave girl would consider herself disgraced by a connection with the Negro.
1847‘A Bengali’Notes on Cape of G.H. 71The ‘Africanders’, or Half-castes, make good servants, but the men are all more or less pilfering thieves.
1861Lady Duff-GordonLett. from Cape (1925) 24My landlady is Dutch; the waiter is an Afrikander, half Dutch, half Malay, very handsome, and exactly like a French gentleman, and as civil.
1900A.H. KeaneBoer States: Land & People 86The term ‘Afrikander,’ which is now extended to all ‘country-born’ whites, was originally coined to designate this very class of Boers, who were known or supposed to be touched with this (yellow) tar-brush.
1917S.T. PlaatjeNative Life 279The Natives and the Cape coloured Afrikanders were not alone in tendering loyal offers of service to the Government.
1968E.A. WalkerHist. of Sn Afr. 84Half-castes or Afrikaners, a growing class, who were household slaves and often the confidantes of their masters and mistresses.
1986M. Picardie inS. GrayMarket Plays 93Imagine that this is the voice of the coloured people who were once themselves called Afrikaners.
3.One born in South Africa of European descent; a white inhabitant of South Africa. Also attributive.
1834Cape of G.H. Lit. Gaz. July 103The number of matches that have taken place between the fair Africanders (the general term for natives of European descent..) and ‘Indians,’ proves that their attractions are appreciated.
1895Star 31 Dec. 1Afrikanders! A meeting of all men born in South Africa of European descent will be held at Standard Restaurant.
1897F.R. StathamS. Afr. as It Is 139In the adoption of the expression ‘Afrikander’ a somewhat bold departure was made...The word..has come to signify, all those Europeans, no matter what their original nationality or birthplace, who regard South Africa as their home.
1900H.C. HillegasOom Paul’s People 1The Afrikander class comprises those persons who were born in the country but of European descent, while the Uitlanders are the foreigners who are, for the most part, only temporary residents.
1904Argus Christmas Annual (Cape Colony Sect.) 38The physique of the native-born Afrikander — by that no distinction is made, and Dutch, Scotch, English, Irish, etc., are included — is admirably suitable for the rugged athleticism of the football arena.
1912The Jrnl 31 Oct. 4If a Dutch Afrikander spoke so, it would be decried as treacherous, but it comes safely from an English born Afrikander.
1940F.B. YoungCity of Gold 385The Walker joke came, at last, to the quick ears of a shrewd, scrubby man named Joe Robinson, a bankrupt Afrikander shop-keeper from the Cape.
1943I. FrackS. Afr. Doctor 115It is not pleasant for the English-speaking Afrikaner to be reminded, day after day, that he is unwanted and that his future is very uncertain.
1948A. PatonCry, Beloved Country 265Afrikaner, The name now used for the descendants of the Boers. Some large-minded Afrikaners claim that it has a wider connotation, and means white South Africans, but many Afrikaans-speaking and English-speaking South Africans would object to this extension of meaning.
1950J.B.M. Hertzog inH. GibbsTwilight in S. Afr. 210His membership of this anti-English movement of necessity compelled him to depart from the policy of national unity, which included the English-speaking Afrikaner.
1966T.R.H. DavenportAfrikaner Bond 326The word Afrikaner and its variants could be used more naturally in the late nineteenth century to describe any white South African than is the case in the mid-twentieth.
1852Durban Observer 9 Jan. (Pettman)The Africander is a very tall, ponderous, large-horned breed of cattle.
c1911C.A. Pope inS. PlayneCape Col. 424To those accustomed to the improved breeds the Afrikander appears full of faults, being narrow, uneven, and flat-sided, with a decided lack of fleshy covering to fill up the angularities.
1921E. Prov. Herald 9 Mar. 11Afrikanders..exhibited excellent show condition and form.
1937H. SauerEx Afr. 195Of the genus trek ox, the red Afrikander is a long way ahead of all other breeds...He is a fine upstanding bullock, with long, wide, spreading horns, and stands higher than any European ox.
1950H. GibbsTwilight in S. Afr. 154Afrikander cattle have yet to gain the quality of cattle in Northern countries.
1967E.M. SlatterMy Leaves Are Green 14The oxen were not easy to acquire, but in the end we got together a team of twenty powerful red Afrikander beasts with humped backs and spreading horns.
1971S. Afr. Panorama July 5Africander cattle, the only breed indigenous to South Africa, have always been the foundation of the country’s beef industry.
1977Family Radio & TV 11 May 32Africanders, Bos indicus, originated in Central Asia and crossed to this continent as long as 2000 years ago with various nomadic tribes.
1982M. MzamaneChildren of Soweto 183His neck was as thick as an Afrikander bull’s, with jugular veins jutting out.
1990R. StengelJanuary Sun 13Sailors who landed at the Cape six years before Columbus discovered America reported seeing such cattle with Khoisan tribesmen. The Africander has a large, floppy dewlap and a coffin-shaped head..its distinctive horns..twist downward, giving them the appearance somehow of being upside down.
1990Weekend Post 6 Oct. (Leisure) 7A local variant of the breed known in this country as Nguni or Africander.
[1882C.L. Norris-NewmanWith Boers in Tvl 2Before..the close of the last century the different languages and dialects had become less used and spoken, and a kind of Dutch patois, now termed Afrikander Dutch, was and is now in the O. F. State and Transvaal,..spoken by the inhabitants.]
7. Either of two indigenous breeds of sheep, originally derived from the same breed but subsequently adapted to different feeding conditions: the Namaqua Afrikander (see Namaquanoun sense 2), and the Ronderib. Also attributive.
1887A.A. Anderson25 Yrs in WaggonI. 271When outspanned, it was taken down to the water..to obtain milk and purchase the large Africander sheep.
1897‘F. Macnab’On Veldt & Farm 55The Count laid great stress on the importance of feeding the veldt in rotation; first with goats..then with Afrikander sheep..then with Kaffir cattle; lastly with Afrikander or Friesland.
1911D.B. Hook’Tis but Yesterday 158Jan kept the woolled sheep on his property, while Charles had the Africander sheep, and they were not allowed to mix.
1936Cambridge Hist. of Brit. EmpireVIII. 17Native cattle and sheep, obtained by barter from the Hottentots, formed the basis for the stock of the early colonists. The breeds that were developed were in both cases indicated as ‘Afrikaanders’, to distinguish them from imported European types.
1946S. CloeteAfr. Portraits 26At the age of nine he left home with his grandfather, father, his uncles Gert and Theunis, their families, a flock of nearly thirty thousand Afrikaaner sheep and a few hundred horses and cattle.
Unfortunately you are using a browser that is either outdated or not supported.
To view the content of dsae.co.za with full functionality, please use the latest version of one of the browsers hyperlinked below.