Ambassador Maulian Dana of the Penobscot Nation spoke at the bill-signing ceremony.
“...we are happy that our
ancestral ties and contributions are validated and celebrated instead of silenced and ignored by the previous holiday that
glorified the attempted genocide of our Nations.”
Attempted genocide, eh? OK "ambassador" -- let's talk about some of the "genocide"
that was actually going on in the Americas long before Columbus and the other big bad white men arrived and introduced
the sainted and oh-so-gentle "indigenous peoples" to the benefits of civilization and Christian ethics. Shall we?
1. The early voyages of Columbus
and other European explorers actually mark the start of the liberation and uplifting of many "indigenous peoples."
// 2."Ambassador" Maulian Dana looks more white than she does "indigenous."
NORTH AMERICA (Various tribes)
In his well researched book, Cannibalism, Headhunting and Human Sacrifice in North America,
historian George Franklin Feldman -- while obligatorily acknowledging some of the rough stuff that the big bad White Man did,
summarizes the archaeological evidence for the brutal massacres, scalpings and cannibalism which "many of the Native
American peoples" inflicted upon their defeated rivals --- and without regard for women and children. A typically horrific
before the white European knew a North American continent existed, Indians of the Northern Plains were massacring entire villages,... at least five
hundred men, women and children were killed—and not just killed, but mutilated. Hands and feet were cut off, each
body's head was scalped, the remains were left scattered around the village, which was burned... Other excavations...also
indicate that warfare in the plains was a way of life in the pre-history era of Middle America."
CENTRAL AMERICA (Aztecs)
Headline: The Daily Mail (UK) / June
Full Horror of the Aztec 'Skull Tower' Revealed
Archaeologists Say THOUSANDS of human sacrifices had their
still-beating hearts cut out before their heads were severed and added to a monument the size of a basketball court
of the gory rituals have also been revealed, which include turning skulls into masks.
According to the new research detailed in Science, captives wer first taken to the city's Templo Mayor, or great temple,
where priests removed their still-beating hearts. The bodies were then decapitated and priests removed the
skin and muscle from the corpses' heads.
Large holes were carved into the sides of the skulls, allowing them to be placed onto a
large wooden pole.... Some Spanish conquistadors wrote about the towers, estimating that the rack alone contained 130,000 skulls."
CENTRAL AMERICA (Mayans)
From liberal-leaning Wikipedia:
the pre-Columbian era, human sacrifice in Maya culture was the ritual offering of nourishment to the gods. ... By extension,
the sacrifice of a human life was the ultimate offering of blood to the gods, and the most important Maya rituals culminated
in human sacrifice."
Scalping, raiding, warring and sacrificial murder rituals were all commonplace throughout the Americas BEFORE
SOUTH AMERICA (Incans)
Again, from liberal Wikipedia:
"Qhapaq hucha was the
Inca practice of human sacrifice, mainly using children. The Incas performed child sacrifices during or after important events,
such as the death of the Sapa Inca (emperor) or during a famine. Children were selected as sacrificial victims as they were
considered to be the purest of beings."Even
the most libtarded academic eggheads do not deny the brutality and human sacrificing that was going on throughout pre-Columbian
times. They just downplay or ignore it. But it was this brutality which enabled the Spaniards, with such ridiculously small
numbers, to overthrow these vicious tyrants. That's because so many oppressed natives were eager to join their ranks
of the Spaniards and throw off the murderous yoke of their Aztec, Mayan and Incan tormentors.
The fact is, were it not for the arrival of Whitey and the Christian doctrine, these demonic mass-torture-murders
would likely still being going on today. And that is why we, Whites and descendants of natives alike, should continue to honor
the voyage of Columbus and those who came after him.
Americanus 1: I
read in the New York Times today that the state of Maine just changed Columbus Day to Indiginous Peoples' Day.
Americanus 2: It's time. Afterall, we Whites inflicted a lot of harm on their great civilizations.
St. Sugar: Boobuss,
you cretinouss clown! If it wassn't for the arrival of the Europeanss, those frickin' monssters would sstill be sscalping
and ripping out heartss!
We used to understand that as a people Now it's all been forgotten.