Last modified: 2002-07-05 by dov gutterman
Keywords: nicaragua | mosquito coast |
Links: FOTW homepage | search | disclaimer and copyright | write us | mirrors
See also :
Zeljko asked: In the zone there existed another two British colonies, the Protected Kingdom of the Mosquitos (today Miskitos), and the colony of Bay Islands (today a Honduran province). Did there exist flags for the two territories?.
Both were given up before the 1864 Order-in-Council that
permitted colonies to have ensigns with flag badges - Mosquito
Coast in 1860 to Nicaragua and the Bay Islands in 1859 to
Honduras. I wasn't aware that the Mosquito Coast was constituted
as a kingdom within the British protectorate though, so it may
well have had a flag.
Roy Stilling, 26 July 1996
Here are the flags.
The first version was adopted 1834. The second was adopted in 1860 when the Nicaraguan flag replaced the Union Jack in the canton.
The 1986 Constitution provides for the autonomy of the two Moskito Coast provinces. Source: William Crampton's "The World of Flags".
Mark Sensen, 28 July 1996
This is one of a number of inconsistent British ensigns with
an 1801 Union canton that are shown in 19th century flag
Blue and white stripes.
3b-3w : Mosquito Coast - Unidentified source 1824
5b-5w : ditto 1852 - Unidentified source
6b-6w : ditto 1853-81 - ditto
Mosquito Coast covered parts of modern Nicaragua and Honduras. Possibly had some connection with Bay Islands a dependency of Jamaica ceded to Republic of Honduras in 1859.
David Prothero, 30 January 2001
Below there are a couple of historical flags of the Mosquito
Coast, used in the 19th century. "Nations Without
States" describes a similar flag in use at present as the
national flag of the Moskitu people. It has 8 horizontal
stripes, alternately blue and white (I assume blue uppermost, but
it is not specified). The flags here appear to be based on 10
stripes. Also, the present one described in NWS has no charges or
other features beyond the 8 stripes.
Ned Smith, 24 March 2001
some time ago I searched in the miskitos flags. I read a
ponency in a national spanish Congress devoted to this topic.
Currently there's no flag for Miskitos, Sumos or Ramas, but
several parties that claim to represent this peoples has flags.
Neither RAAN neither RAAS (Autonomous regions of North and South
Atlantic) have official flags yet. Ex combatants for autonomy for
the Atlantic Coast readopted the 1824 flag that has 6 stripes and
union jack in canton. The Indigenous Movement Seven Tender Leaves
has a complicate flag which is very hard to describe: half
vertical blue (two shaddes) with several devices (a shil, a
lance, a sun, two birds)
Miskitos Asla Takanka Nicaragua has a flag of green, white and yellow horizontal (1:2:1)
Indigenous Movement Rescue has a white flag with name of the party in black, in spanish (upper) and miskito(?) (lower) separate for the word MIRE also in black; at hoist is a blue palm Autonomous party of the South region is blue over green with a yellow sun in center near hoist
Multiethnic indigenous party has a flag of green, white and green (1:2:1). Coastal Unity Movement (RAAN) is vertical green, white and blue, and in center is a white bordered black bird above the bird a semicircle of white bordered black stars (7 stars, two in the green, two in the black and three in the white).
Yapty Tasba Masraka NanihTakanka: green with red circle lined white and below white letters YATAMA. Whitin circle is lined white a device: a boat above waves and crossed indigenous sword and lance
The historic flag seems that was used in several patterns in the years of the war against Sandinist. Flags with ten stripes (5 blue and 5 white) as the flag of 1860-1993, with or without canton (in the canton the nicaraguan natonal flag) was used, and also with six stripes (in exchange the flag with 12 stripes reported by Sternberg is not quoted any more)
About this flag (1860-1893) I'm unable to discover if the 1854-? nicaraguan flag was used in this flag. I assume that, because the flag with nicaraguayan flag in canton was created in 1860, the 1854 nicaraguayan flag was push into the flag, but I found only versions in use later, when nicaraguayan de facto flag is already the B-W-B.
Jaume Olle', 26 March 2001
Mosquitia was self named Togosgalpa or Tologalpa during
spanish times. No spanish administrative body was present in
Mosquitia. The spanish ruler Philip V decree in 1707 on the
extermination of the Miskitos but this was never completed. The
local paramount chief put territory under british rule. The
British transfered the zone to Nicaragua 1894. In 1894 in
Bluefields era, the flag of Mosquitia was desecrated by
Nicaragua, and he was fired. Even if it was recognized in the
treaty where United Kingdom transfered the protectorate to
Nicaragua, really it was never used anymore.
The flag of Mosquitia was recognized de facto by Violeta Chamorra when it was restored by the oldmen council on 17 Octuber 1996 (the oldmen claim to be the representative body of the Communitary Miskito Nation) and was hoisted for 7 monthes but it was forbidden by the rightist Arnaldo Aleman after he won the elections. In 10 January Aleman anounced that the flag is forbidden as separatist. Later he traveled to Mosquitia. The flag was last hoisted on 4 May 1997, the day of the arrival of Aleman, that ordered of its lowering from the Central Park of Puerto Cabezas, the most representative place where it was hoisted. During its short reaparence the flag was hoisted in Bilwi, Waspám, Sisín, Kum, Francia Sirpi and la Esperanza. The flag bear the british flag in canton, but, in front of the attacks of Nicaraguayan, the oldmen council explained that this is their historical flag and not a pro-british flag as assumed by european originated people.
On 10 March 2002, under preasure of the miskito local leaders, the oldmen council hoisted another time the Mosquito national flag, exactly two month after Aleman finished his presidency (Aleman was later presecuted as corrupter). On 20 June 2002, the Moskito leaders anounced the full independence of the Communitary Miskito Nation (I believe that they want a confederation with Nicaragua or status of free asociated state)
Jaume Olle', 23 June 2002
Jaume wrote that the local paramount chief put territory under
british rule. British transfered the zone to Nicaragua 1894.....
This would appear to have been a local agreement which was not officially recognised. The only British colony in the area, other than British Honduras (Belize) was Bay Islands off the coast of Honduras. They were occupied by Britain in 1839, annexed as a dependency of Jamaica in 1852 and ceded to the Republic of Honduras in 1859.
I presume that the territory said to have been transferred to Nicaragua was associated with Greytown (now known as San Juan del Norte) where Britain maintained a consul ?
David Prothero, 23 June 2002
by Mark Sensen, 28 July 1996
by Mark Sensen, 28 July 1996
by Jaume Olle', 17 June 2002
The flag above for 1834 is not quite correct. The last
quarter, bottom right, should be plain white with a crown in the
centre as in the image.
The source is "Mosquito, Nicaragua and Costa Rica". Second Edition. Effingham Wilson, Royal Exchange, London, 1849. The standard appears in colour on the title page. Unfortunately the author is anonymous.
Christopher Buyers, 16 June 2002
What is the source for this image? And it would be more
convincing if it didn't have the common error of joining up the
two red crosses of the UJ.
André Coutanche, 17 June 2002
This standard was designed by the British consul Patrick
Walker to be used in the coronation of the king George in 1845.
Sources: Mc Meekin, Flags of Mosquitia, Poyais and Araucania FB XVIII:2 (image page 53, text related pages 52 to 65) that quote the source for this flag: "Mosquito, Nicaragua and Costa Rica" (image in the cover) and undated and anonymous book a copy of which is in the British Library, published in London about 1850.
Jaume Olle', 17 June 2002
Jaume's message has sources, but it remains, IMHO, dubious for
the reason I cited in response to the first message: the UJ has
its red crosses meeting. I simply do not believe that (in this
form, at least) it "was designed by the British
André Coutanche, 17 June 2002
It is strange undeed, but all the construction is strange.
British consul in this remote zone was not a heralidst or
vexilologist, and perhaps he found too difficult to made the UJ
as had to be (specially in square form) and simplified the
design. Notice that even in W. Smith FTTAW the UJ is slighty
wrong. Or perhaps this image is taken from the published one in
1850 that was not absolutely in agreement with the real one.
Jaume Olle', 17 June 2002