You can use color to combine art, culture, and science in your style of photography. Color is capable of making breaking a scene’s mood as well as photo storyline. This article gives you a detailed description of how you can effectively use color in photography.
Although the camera lenses and our eyes are drawn to specific colors automatically, it is essential to know the science of colors and the technique behind matching colors to guide you in post-production work or else when in the field.
Color theory and the Wheel
The color wheel is an essential tool to help you when stuck on the color, to begin with. You will be able to create images with balanced and harmonious colors.
The science involved in color theory entails complementary colors for photography, similar colors and triadic colors which are all derived from the color wheel.
Colors affect our mood in a significant way. Different colors bring about mixed feelings. You need to skillfully use color temperatures and tones to create the desired framework in photography. I have highlighted below the primary colors and their meaning as well as the emotions they bring about.
Yellow- cheerfulness, creativity
Emphasize more on your favorite color
Whenever you are out with your camera, make it a habit of creating and designing your photographs in close association with your favorite color. Try photographing the color in odd locations and using different settings to determine the style and environment that works best for you.
Choose your weather and your time
You need to analyze how the weather will affect light during different day times in your location. Time also plays a critical role in determining colors to use.
You will realize that colors work cohesively during early in the morning and late in the afternoon. At midday, you are mostly forced to go for black and white.
Pastels, monochromatic and split toning
A monochromatic color can work well especially when tones are different, and shades are from one hue. If you like neutrals, you must add some colors in post-production using split toning. Moderate the contrast and clarity maintain the color softness.
Use the clarity and dehaze tool to add extra punch to the color. You can also adjust colors with the hue, saturation and luminance sliders. This will help you to control every color. Also, note when to change the vibrancy sliders to make the light right.
Polarizing filter increases vibrancy reduces glare and also post-production work. It is advisable you shoot raw to get maximum information for every photograph to enable you to have a higher color control.
Make your composition
To perfect in making your composition, begin with composition basics. Ensure that you have caught the viewer’s eyes. You can do so by repeating patterns and using the leading lines but ensure your composition is straightforward.
This refers to making combinations that will best please a person’s eyes. To achieve color harmony, you must learn the art of combining colors by ensuring that your choice colors complement each.
The key color
Choose one color that will dominate in your image. Doing so ensures you produce powerful images. In most cases, the primary color does well when used as the key color in your picture. The feeling is sharply brought out.
You must make deliberate efforts to excel in color photography. Equalize the weight you put on composition, technique, and framing so that you get a clear overview of your photographs story.