Coriolis flow Meter operating on the “Coriolis principle” contains a vibrating tube in which a fluid flow causes changes in frequency, phase shift or amplitude. The sensor signal is fed into the integrally mounted pc-board.
The resulting output signal is strictly proportional to the real mass flow rate, whereas thermal mass flow meters are dependent on the physical properties of the fluid. Coriolis mass flow measurement is fast and very accurate
Coriolis flowmeter work on the principle that the inertia created by fluid flowing through an oscillating tube causes the tube to twist in proportion to mass flow rate. Many Coriolis meters have two tubes.
They are made to vibrate in opposition to each other by means of a magnetic coil. Sensors in the form of magnet and coil assemblies are mounted on the inlet and the outlet of both flow tubes.
As the coils move through the magnetic field created by the magnet, they create a voltage in the form of a sine wave. These sine waves are the key to measuring mass flow.
Coriolis flowmeters are the most accurate flowmeters made. While much magnetic flow meter has accuracies in the range of 0.5 percent, many Coriolis flow meters achieve accuracy of 0.1 percent. It is the high accuracy of Coriolis flowmeters that is one of the major reasons for their extremely rapid growth over the past five years.
Companies that need flow meters for custody transfer, or want highly accurate measurements in terms of mass, have a good reason to select Coriolis flowmeter also very easy to installation
The unique Omega shaped Coriolis mass flow meter is not just shaped in this way for the sake of differentiation from other manufacturers, and the shape was not chosen because it was the only one not yet under patent protection.
The Rheonik mass flow meter is the result of intensive research work in the early 80s when mass flow meter technology came up. Dipl.-Ing. Karl Käppers worked on many different designs and tested them with regard to stability, reliability, and accuracy.read more …