When it comes to eating “right”, there is a lot more than just nutrition to think about. One must also consider the process behind food production and what it takes to get food to the plate. Meat, in particular, has a pretty troubling back story.
Not only does meat raise questions of ethical and moral standing, but it also has creates problems environmentally – not to mention the strong arguments against its use as a regular food group. Because of these things, many people have found it healthy, ethically appealing, and environmentally wise to quit meat or limit the consumption of meat.
Anyone who has grown up with the food knows that’s no easy task. Here are a few strategies that help you along the way!
Ease off Gradually
Just like anything, don’t expect to quit cold turkey (no pun intended). Quitting meat can start by choosing just one day out of the week not to eat meat. Easing off gradually is especially useful if those you regularly dine with are big meat eaters – it gives you a chance to test out your new commitment and discuss it with those who will see the change.
At first, start out small – perhaps just with certain meals. Lunch is an especially easy meal to turn vegetarian (or vegan) because many people are looking for something lighter, refreshing, and energizing to get them through the rest of the day – a salad packed with healthy vegetables will do just that.
As you progress, aim for 4 out of 7 days without meat. Go up to the point of you goal, and even consider going past it.
Move Type by Type
Another good tip is to quit meat by meat. That is, first quit pork, then beef, then chicken, etc. By knocking out particular ‘meat groups’, you allow yourself some foot room in the fight against meat. You may have been off beef and pork for 2 weeks, but are craving something meaty – grab an free range, organic chicken leg! Just be prepared to eventually switch that out with something if you are planning on going completely meat-free!
Keep Yourself Healthy
Above all, be sure you are still getting the proper nutrients with every meal. By far, not being healthy and not eating a well rounded meal will negatively affect changing your diet more than anything else. Besides, what’s the use of quitting meat if you’re not conscious enough to see the health benefits. Work vigilantly at making sure you have all you macronutirents covered – legumes, dark leafy greens, and hearty vegetables can help fill the void of meat, making them staples of the healthy meal.
Develop a healthy meal plan to ensure you’re getting the vitamins and minerals your body needs to keep going!
Living Meat Free
After taking steps like these, you’ll be well on your way to living meat free (or meat limited). From that, less pollution will be spilled into water supplies and released into air, fewer animals will suffer through the behemoth that is industrial food processing, and your body will begin to operate more efficiently, leading to better health. Just remember – it doesn’t happen overnight and it will require real commitment out of you!