Premenstrual Syndrome (PMS) Treatment by Chinese Medicine Is The Primary Option
What is Premenstrual Syndrome (PMS)?
So what does PMS mean? Premenstrual syndrome (PMS) is a group of symptoms that occur in women, typically one to two weeks before the period starts. The cause of PMS is unknown but clinically believes that may due to the sex steroids but may involve more complicated balanced levels of progesterone and estradiol. Women's lower abdominal sensitivity to reproductive hormones may be another cause.
In addition, there is a more severe form of PMS called Premenstrual Dysphoric Disorder (PMDD) that charactered with mental disturbance and emotional swing during the time between ovulation and menstrual period starts.
PMS is increasingly affecting more population and now recognised as a chronic disorder that is affecting people's lifestyle and interpersonal relationship.
What Are The PMS Symptoms?
PMS symptoms may involve physical and emotional symptoms that happen in the time of one to two weeks before the menstrual period starts. Symptoms often differ between women and may settle down at the time start of bleeding. PMS symptoms may be showing as abrupt acne, breasts tenderness, lower abdominal bloating, tiredness, irritability, and mood swings. There is also a risk for women suffering from chronic PMS symptoms develop into PMS induced depression or PMS depression.
What Is Acupuncture?
Acupuncture is an old therapeutic procedure that features the insertion of needles into specific pressure points of the body. The history of acupuncture goes back to 100 BC when it is believed to have discovered in China. The long history makes the procedure among the oldest practices in Chinese medicine. The technique recorded in “The Yellow Emperor’s Classic of Internal Medicine,” a medical publication that published around 100 BC in China.
This ancient practice has been performed by people for thousands of years and is believed to have many benefits. Among the benefits associated with acupuncture include relief against emotional disturbance such as frustrations, sleeping disorders, and stress. Scientific studies have supported claims that acupuncture does alleviate specific symptoms related to anxiousness.
How Can Acupuncture Help With PMS Relief?
PMS symptoms are a condition that almost all women suffer on an occasional basis. As common as these conditions are, there are few drug treatments available. On one hand, there are over-the-counter (OTC) drugs that reduce swelling and inflammation. These drugs treat the symptoms and do not regulate menstruation or change the long-term relief of the condition. Those who have PMS, PMDD or PMS depression are likely to have the same conditions on a monthly basis when treated with only these OTC drugs. On the other hand, there are prescription drugs such as birth control pills, patches or antidepressants that regulate menstrual cycles and psychological disorders. Though they are more effective, they often cause serious side effects, such as weight gain, hyperkalemia, clotting disorders, retinal thrombosis, cancer, liver damage, hypertriglyceridemia, hypertension, bleeding, and fertility impairment. In short, drug treatment options are limited between those that treat only symptoms and do not work well, and those that work well but may have significant side effects.
Acupuncture and herbal therapy, on the other hand, are effective to regulate menstruation and relieve PMS and dysmenorrhea. These treatments and herbs have analgesic effects to relieve pain, anti-inflammatory effects to reduce swelling and inflammation, and antispasmodic effects to relieve cramping. Furthermore, acupuncture and herbs have shown to have a marked effect to regulate hormones to promote normal menstruation and relieve stress and anxiety before period. However, this effect requires continuous use of herbs for at least one to three cycles to establish stable improvements. Herbal medicine and acupuncture therapy are beneficial for the treatment of premenstrual syndromes and menstrual disorders, as it treats both the symptoms and the cause of PMS symptoms and dysmenorrhea.
In conclusion, drugs may offer limited options for the treatment of dysmenorrhea. OTC drugs are ineffective and do not have lasting effects. Birth control pills are effective, but these drugs carry significant short- and long-term side effects. Acupuncture and herbal medicine, on the other hand, are effective for both immediate and long term benefits. Furthermore, they are natural and associated with few or no side effects. It would be beneficial for individuals with menstrual disorders explore these non-drug treatment options.
Use Qualified Acupuncturist To Get Rid Of Anxiety
Like all medical procedures, it is imperative that only a certified practitioner performs acupuncture. There have been a few recorded incidents where patients got infections after getting the medical procedure from unskilled practitioners.
Looking For a Remedy for Your PMS symptoms? Book a time with our registered and clinically experienced acupuncturist here
Acupuncture has proven to be a great success in dealing with PMS relief, pain period, frustrations, and stress. The practice remains an option of low-cost procedure of fighting emotional disturbance. At City Acupuncture Adelaide Clinic, we take pride at being the pioneering acupuncture facility in Adelaide. We prioritise in getting your emotional health back to its prime.
We have incorporated modern scientific knowledge into the ancient medical practice to provide you with an effective remedy for PMS relief such as emotional disturbance, stress, sleeping disorders, and anxiousness. By choosing us, you get access to the latest technology in acupuncture, including the state-of-the-art painless laser acupuncture. Our acupuncturists are all registered with the Australian Chinese Medicine Board, and so, they are highly skilled in this therapeutic procedure.
Try us today. Your emotional well-being is our highest concern!
How Can We Help
At Adelaide City Acupuncture, we start working with your pulse taking, tongue checking and physical palpation and examination. Then we will collect all related information about your diet, your overall lifestyle, exposure to toxins, hereditary factors and medications taking. Consequently, by working with both the symptoms and cause, we will form a treatment plan for your approval and treatments to follow.
Your acupuncture treatment may combine with other alternative medicine, such as Chinese herbs, Tui-Na massage, cupping and laser acupuncture. It can also use in conjunction with your other routine care and prescription medications. The treatments are painless and non-invasive, it will not affect your daily lifestyle during the treatment plan.
Evidence-based acupuncture may also improve your general health. By balancing the hormonal level and reducing stress, it can also help you feel and function better overall.
Our mission is to help you enjoyably regain your balanced health. At Adelaide City Acupuncture Clinic, We will work with you to find the best treatment solution for your healthcare needs, therefore achieve your quick and lasting pain relief. We are conveniently located in the CBD and easily accessible through both private and public transport. Email or Call Us (08) 8221 5880 today to learn more about our natural Healthcare Programme options or to schedule your consultation online.