While some may follow the notion that practice makes perfect, it may be more accurate to say that practice makes permanence. The human body and brain are easily trained, and the patterns we perform become habit whether or not they are correct. Posture, for example, can be a product of our repeated movement. A ballet dancer who practices standing tall and engaging the back muscles will have excellent posture, while someone working slumped over at a desk all day will likely have slouching shoulders. This is why it’s important to strengthen the muscles and create habits with our body that will have long-lasting, positive effects. We are often asked whether or not Correct Toes can or should be worn at night or while sitting. While there is nothing wrong with this, using Correct Toes while inactive won’t provide the results that Correct Toes are capable of.
Here’s what we recommend to get the most out of Correct Toes and create healthful, permanent changes:
Just like with any muscle in the body, strength is formed by working muscle groups. When you go to the gym with the goal to strengthen your arms, you would be wise to focus on exercises that encourage arm motion. The feet are no different—you must move your feet for your feet to strengthen. The simplest way to strengthen your feet is to allow them to move as they were naturally designed. Performing weight-bearing activities while wearing Correct Toes ensures that your feet are held in an aligned position, so while you give your feet a workout by walking, running, etc., they are doing so in proper form.
It is no secret that our brains and bodies talk to each other. This neuromuscular connection aids in reminding your muscles to maintain the changes that are made. Movement triggers the brain to retain information about patterns of movement. When you use Correct Toes while active, your brain remembers this aligned position, and the repeated activity will create permanence in the shape of your feet.
The Shoe Problem.
While strength and activity are important for muscle memory, so are environmental influences. The purpose of the shoes you wear should be to accommodate a strong, healthy foot (not just make a fashion statement). Healthful shoes are flat (zero-drop), widest at the ends of the toes and flexible. These features allow your foot to move naturally, while at the same time evenly distributing your body weight throughout your feet and toes. Our Correct Toes approved shoe list boasts a variety of footwear options with these features.
A naturally shaped shoe creates a solid foundation for your whole body. On the contrary, if a shoe is too rigid it will act like a cast, which eventually starts to weaken your foot muscles. Also, if the shoe is tapered and too narrow, your toes will be pushed inward and out of alignment—eventually taking on that unnatural pointed shape.
Following years or decades of wearing conventional and rigid footwear, our feet are prone to unnatural position and atrophy. Changing the shape or strength of your feet will take time, and should be implemented slowly. Once you begin to wear Correct Toes or naturally shaped footwear, these behaviors should be enforced regularly so as to continue making positive strength and mobility gains. Correct Toes have continued to prove their effectiveness when used as they were intended.