Your cells talk to each other.
And your health, longevity, and ability to prevent and fight disease all depend on what they are saying.
Like a little community, cells share messages that influence each others’ behavior. Research shows that cells who lose this ability to properly communicate with other cells may lose the ability to carry out their functions effectively.
It seems, just like with humans, social isolation is detrimental to cellular health.
The job of a cell is two-fold: it must not only regulate its own growth and behavior, but also direct the growth and behavior of the entire cellular system (you). Without proper signaling and guidance from the rest of the cell community, how could a cell possibly know what the system needs and how it should function to best support those needs?
Effective cell-to-cell communication is essential to maintain a healthy cellular environment.
HOW DO CELLS COMMUNICATE?
Cells communicate through a complex language of chemical signals: genetic codes, hormones, and proteins. All of these transmit important information about the cellular environment and influence individual cell formation and behavior.
Cells that are in close proximity to one another can communicate through contact, passing these chemical signals back and forth through tiny pores.
But what about long-distance communication?
Just like we use telephones or mail services to transport information to our long distance friends, cells utilize their own version of a courier service: exosomes.
WHAT ARE EXOSOMES?
Exosomes are tiny messenger bubbles released from cells. Acting as shuttles for important genetic material, they play an essential role in the cellular communication process.
Exosomes are not cells themselves, nor do they contain DNA. Rather, they behave somewhat like conductors, sending signals that instruct their target cells how to perform.
One millionth the size of a hair follicle, exosomes contain molecules, like proteins and RNA, from their cells of origin. They float from cell to cell, transporting these molecules--the genetic information that serves as the language of cells--and thus influence cell behavior. Studies indicate that exosomes actually enter into cells to release this information.
Exosomes have unique functions in many physiological processes, from immune function and wound healing to intercellular communication and regeneration.
EXOSOMES & REGENERATIVE MEDICINE
When cells degenerate over time, or as a result of injury or trauma, the health and function of our tissues and organs are affected.
The continual and progressive degeneration of cells is what causes degenerative diseases. These can affect the nervous system (neurodegenerative diseases like Alzheimer’s), the circulatory system (coronary artery disease), bones and joints (osteoarthritis), or lead to the pervasive growth of abnormal cells (cancer).
Typically, stem cells are responsible for cell rejuvenation but sometimes become hindered by external factors and are thus unable to provide all of the information needed for healing.
Regenerative medicine is centered on the idea of interrupting cellular degeneration by replacing or regenerating cells in order to establish normal or optimal function.
The exosomes found in young, healthy stem cells are particularly enriched with the proteins, lipids, and RNA messaging essential for cellular regeneration. Introducing external stem cell-derived exosomes can support the healing and regenerative efforts of existing stem cells by delivering new information to the cells.
Research shows that when these stem cell-derived exosomes are introduced to older cells, they can have powerful effects on regulating the regenerative processes in the body.
WHAT IS EXOSOME THERAPY?
Exosome therapy uses exosomes from young, healthy stem cells to optimize cellular communication and enhance the regenerative processes that promote healing, disease prevention, and longevity.
Unlike stem cell therapy, exosome therapy uses the stem cell’s messengers (exosomes), rather than the cells themselves, to stimulate healing and rejuvenate your own cells. Essentially, exosome therapy modulates the communication between cells by introducing highly communicative exosomes to transmit messages of healing and regeneration to target cells.
In this cutting-edge treatment, stem cell-derived exosomes are administered through an IV. This can be done alone or in combination with other regenerative therapies like PRP, cellular therapy, NAD, peptides, or aesthetic treatments, like microneedling, for added restorative benefits.
WHAT ARE THE BENEFITS?
As part of an anti-aging and longevity protocol, exosome therapy has been reported to improve cognition and mental clarity, reduce inflammation, increase athletic performance, and enhance sexual health.
Stem cell-derived exosomes have also been shown to have therapeutic properties in liver disease, regenerative potential in osteoarthritis, as well as protective effects against heart damage from a heart attack or artery blockage.
WHO IS IT FOR?
Anyone looking to optimize vitality and longevity, slow the aging process, or enhance physical, mental, or sexual performance should look into exosome therapy.
Exosome therapy may also be an option for people suffering from chronic inflammation, persistent bacterial infections like Lyme disease, autoimmune conditions, or degenerative diseases.
Exosome therapy has been hailed as the “new frontier” in stem cell therapy. At NEXT|HEALTH®, we are committed to staying on the forefront of medical advancements and we are excited to give you access to this cutting-edge treatment.
Dr. Darshan Shah is a physician, surgeon, entrepreneur, and is considered by many to be the "Doctor of the Future." His passion is educating the public on the newest technologies in health & wellness and how to look and feel your best!