For further information contact 0141 201 4429.
Chest tightness or pain
Coughing up blood or dirty spit
High temperature or excessive sweating particularly at night and lasting for two weeks or more
Loss of appetite
Prolonged cough -dry or with a spit
What are the symptoms?
It is possible for someone to contract TB and not show symptoms for one or two years after exposure. These people can test negative on screening, but go on to later develop symptoms.
You cannot contract TB by sharing the same dishes and household items and you cannot carry the TB germ back to your own family if you yourself have had contact with a TB case and have no symptoms.
You may catch TB if you are in prolonged contact with someone who is coughing up TB germs. You would need to have close prolonged contact with the person to become infected, although prolonged contact does not necessarily indicate that you have contracted the infection.
How do you catch it?
It is not a common disease but if it is not discovered and treated, then it can be serious.
TB is an infection caused by a germ, which usually affects the lungs but can also develop in other parts of the body, such as the kidney or glands.
What is Tuberculosis (TB)?
NOTES TO EDITORS:
The two schools are housed in completely separate buildings on independent sites and are run by a separate team of staff.
It is important to stress that this case is not linked to the two cases of TB in a member of staff and pupil at Notre Dame Primary School earlier this year.
Dr Oliver Blatchford, Consultant in Public Health Medicine for NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde, said: "This case is linked to an earlier diagnosis of TB within this pupil’s family and is in no way related to the school. Indeed this individual is showing none of the symptoms which can spread the TB bacteria, such as prolonged coughing, and therefore no risk has been presented to pupils at the school."
The pupil, who is responding well to treatment at home, is not thought to be infectious and as such public health experts do not plan to screen other pupils at the school.
The pupil has been identified as possibly having the infection after a close family member was diagnosed with TB.
The Public Health Protection Unit of NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde is investigating a suspected case of TB in a 15-year old pupil who attends Notre Dame High School in Glasgow.