Junior Cycle Science Timeline:
TO DO: Continue with chapter on motion. Students to practice questions on speed, velocity and acceleration.
DONE: Did the above. Homework: complete chapter questions 1-7 pages 304-5 and get exam papers from both companies.
TO DO: Go over test and correct. Give revision worksheet.
DONE: Did the above. Homework: complete worksheet.
TO DO: Discuss practical activity and run through questions.
DONE: Spent time recapping on calculating speeds and accelerations for the practical activity. Gave back tests. Homework: complete worksheet.
TO DO: Start chapter on motion. Practical activity to measure distances and time and time taken for vehicles to travel the length of nuns’ island.
DONE: Students completed the above practical and wrote it up. Homework: complete write-up, complete table of data, and calculate speeds and average acceleration. Draw graph of results.
TO DO: Test
DONE: Test given
TO DO: Due to be only a 20 minute class due to TY teacher meeting. Revision worksheets to be given.
DONE: Did the above. Homework: revise for test tomorrow.
TO DO: Practical activity: to use various measuring devices and record data and use the data in further calculations.
DONE: Students did the above, calculating masses, lengths, volumes and densities. Homework: complete the write-up of the activity in the lab notebook.
TO DO: Correct homework questions. Students to continue with workbook questions.
DONE: Did the above. Homework: complete pages 101-103 in the workbook for next Tuesday. Also, study for test next week.
TO DO: Discuss graph of results and practical activity carried out on Tuesday. Start Unit 10.1.
DONE: Did the above. Homework: complete questions 1-4 from the workbook pages 100-101.
TO DO: Practical activity to grow crystals of copper sulphate and write up activity. Also show video on solutions. Also students to practice drawing another solubility curve.
DONE: Did all of the above. Homework: complete the graph of the solubility of copper sulphate in water with temperature.
TO DO: Correct homework, and give back tests and discuss. Cover the topic of crystals.
DONE: Did the above. Talked about the CBA-2 and the christmas test upcoming. Homework: questions 1-6 page 170.
TO DO: Topic to be covered: graph plotting and interpreting.
DONE: Did the above. Homework: complete the fourth and final graph question given out.
Wednesday 10/10/18: No school due to whole-school well-being inservice for teachers
Tuesday 9/10/18: Due to be absent. Worksheets to be given by covering teacher.
TO DO: Test to be given
DONE: Gave test on nutrition, habitat study and solutions and solubility.
TO DO: Cover solution, solute, solvent, saturated, solubility. Graphing solubility curves.
DONE: Did the above. Homework: study for test tomorrow (Friday).
TO DO: Start solutions and crystallisation section. Practical activity to test solubility of sodium carbonate in water with temperature.
DONE: Did the above. Homework:
TO DO: Correct homework questions from the worksheet. Cover competition and interdependence. Recap on conservation.
DONE: Did the above. Homework: study for test next Wednesday.
TO DO: Continue with habitat study theory – cover adaptations.
DONE: Did the above. Homework: complete worksheet.
TO DO: Rocky seashore habitat study.
DONE: Did the above. Homework: describe in detail the 5 identified animals and 5 identified plants/flora.
TO DO: Correct homework questions 1-5 pages 143 and 144. Continue with theory of ecology.
DONE: Did the above. Homework: complete questions 6-9 page 144 and complete pages 38 and 39 of your workbooks for next Tuesday.
TO DO: Correct homework questions. Start the theory part of section 5.1 study of habitat.
DONE: Did the above. Covered biosphere, habitat, ecosystem, community, population, and food chains. Homework: questions 1-5 pages 143-4.
Tuesday 18/9/18: No school due to teacher CPD.
TO DO: Correct homework questions. Students to do extra questions from workbook – revision. Cover unbalanced diet and malnutrition.
DONE: Did the above. Homework: complete pages 12, 13, 14 and 15 in workbook for next Thursday.
TO DO: Review of the habitat study. Continue with Unit 2.1
DONE: Did the above. Covered food additives and preservatives and the food pyramid. Homework: questions 1-5 page 36.
TO DO: Habitat study.
DONE: Introduced habitat study to students and went to Terryland Forest Park and conducted habitat study – identifying plants and animals as well as conducting a distribution study and measuring some abiotic factors. Homework: none given as we got back to school too late.
TO DO: Correct homework questions from the worksheets. Cover the topics of food additives and balanced diet.
DONE: Students to do chapter questions and worksheet questions, if time. Homework: complete chapter questions at the end of unit 1.2.
TO DO: Correct homework questions and students to do questions from their own workbooks. Finish off the food groups.
DONE: Did the above. Homework: complete questions from pages 8, 9, 10 and 11 of the workbook.
TO DO: Correct/discuss HW. Bring in samples of nutritional information labels and students are to discuss which are healthy and which are unhealthy. Students are also to do a Benedict’s test.
DONE: Did all of the above. Homework: students to complete a worksheet given out.
TO DO: Discuss with students topics to be covered. Start on
DONE: Started unit 2.1: Nutrition and well-being. Discussed the constituents of food and their general functions. Homework: learn off the six definitions on page 24.