FAQsClick on a question to reveal its answer
Arthritis is a name for a group of conditions affecting the joints. These conditions cause damage to the joints, usually resulting in pain and stiffness. Arthritis can affect many different parts of the joint and nearly every joint in the body
Arthritis can affect anyone including children and young people. One in four South Australians has arthritis. Many people think that arthritis is a normal part of ageing, this is not true. Sixty per cent of people with arthritis are between the ages of 15 - 64. Arthritis can affect people from all backgrounds, ages and lifestyles.
There are over 100 forms of arthritis. Each type affects you and your joints in different ways. Some forms of arthritis can also involve other parts of the body, such as the eyes.
There is no cure for most forms of arthritis. While there are treatments that can effectively control symptoms, you should be wary of any products or treatments that claim to cure arthritis.
Arthritis costs the economy about $23.9 billion a year. Emotionally and socially, the hidden costs of arthritis are immeasurable.
1 in 4 South Australians suffer from arthritis. Arthritis impacts directly upon 3.85 million people, or 18.5 per cent of the population, and indirectly on their businesses, colleagues, friends and family.
No, you do not need to be a member to attend any of our seminars and courses. You do need to be a member to participate within the support groups. Arthritis SA can advise you how to join - it's easy and a minimal cost. The advantages of being a member of Arthritis SA are: You receive our magazine featuring news, tips and helpful information about the issues that affect you, three times a year. You can use our Resource Centre which has an extensive collection of books, DVDs and CDs on arthritis and other musculoskeletal conditions. You can be notified in advance about arthritis and osteoporosis seminars. You will be supporting research and programs funded by Arthritis SA.