Q7 Stop the Bullying
Emma a 14-year old girl is a victim of cyberbullying when a former friend repeatedly sends hurtful messages.
Video from CommonSense Education
Direct link to video on YouTube
Can you identify a cyberbully and be prepared to take the bully out of Cyberbully? Learn some ways to protect yourself online.
Bullying: Bullying is a form of aggressive behavior manifested by the use of force or coercion to affect others, particularly when the behavior is habitual and involves an imbalance of power.
Cyberbullying: Cyberbullying is bullying that takes place using electronic technology. Electronic technology includes devices and equipment such as cell phones, computers, and tablets as well as communication tools including social media sites, text messages, chat, and websites.
I Can Statements
- be safe on the Internet
- be polite while communicating with others on the Internet
1. Watch video above by Emma.
2. Next watch this one by Ricardo about "Making Fun of Others Online" also from Common Sense Media, but posted on YouTube.
3. Discuss in your class or with a friend, and then make a list of the types of things which are hurtful that:
- pre-teens and teens tell each other in person;
- things they tell to someone else about someone; and
- things they post online or text. Use specific examples for these.
4. Were your examples different in the three lists?
5. In your classroom with your teacher or an adult at home, share your list and the examples. Discuss why you think this happens and positive ways you can deal with these types of situations.
Awareness and Prevention - web site
Bullying It's not what it used to be - TedTalks
"I see that and it's not OK" video ***Download the emoticon like this one from their site (for iOS, Android, Keyboard)
6. Write down three or more things that you could do if this happens (or happened) to you, and/or how you could help a friend if something like in the videos happens to them.
Completing this Quest
Save to your File Space or print the file and submit it as instructed by your teacher.
Check off this Quest on the 21t4s roadmap
Proceed to the next Quest – Nobody Likes a Bully
Competencies & Standards
MITECS Michigan Integrated Technology Competencies for Students, and
2. Digital Citizen
b. Engage in positive, safe, legal and ethical behavior when using technology, including social interactions online or when using networked devices
c. Demonstrate an understanding of and respect for the rights and obligations of using and sharing intellectual property