Epistaxis, commonly known as the nosebleed, is an acute hemorrhage from the nostril, nasal cavity or the nasopharynx.
Epistaxis can be divided into 2 categories, anterior bleeds and posterior bleeds, on the basis of the site where the bleeding originates.
Nosebleeds usually involve only one nostril, but occasionally, if one nostril is blocked by a blood clot, the blood comes out through the other nostril or down the back of the throat.
The amount of bleeding varies, with posterior bleeds normally having the maximum amount of blood loss.Vomiting and nausea are also symptoms if there is excess blood flow, leading to swallowing.
Though most nosebleeds do not have a common or easily identifiable cause, trauma is one of the biggest contributors to epistaxis. Nose picking and repeated use of nasal sprays give rise to many anterior bleeds. Other causes include sinusitis, upper respiratory tract infections, and allergies that can potentially damage the respiratory lining, resulting in nosebleeds.
Some of the other factors that cause nosebleeds are:
Bumps Or Falls
Headache, Flu Or High Fever
Homeopathic treatment starts first with understanding the case history of the patient. Post case analysis, the treatment first acts on the affected area and works on stopping the bleeding, removing the swelling, reducing the pain, and healing the injured tissues. Once this is done, the underlying cause of epistaxis is identified and worked upon.
There are special anti-hemorrhagic medicines like hammemalis and millifolium which work beautifully to prevent severe blood loss during acute attacks of epistaxis.
In homeopathy, there are over 300 medicines which provide relief to epistaxis. However the combinations of the concoctions vary from patient to patient, and is determined by the clinician at the time of case analysis.
My son (2.5 years old) was suffering from fever, cold and cough every month. If he will go to school one day, next 10 days he will not go to school
JOSHI PATTABHIRead More
My kid who is 3 yrs old had been suffering from severe cold and cough once in every 2 weeks for almost 8 mnths. After lot of research, I shifted from
Dr. Sanjay is awesome. He is very patient, professional, keen to details, pleasant and too good. I have been visiting him the past 4 years and every time
SHRIYA JAINRead More