We take every step necessary to ensure our products are safe for health and the environment over the entire life cycle of the product from the moment we carry out research on it until it is sold, or even eliminated. Find out how we do it:
We identify the physio-chemical, toxicological and ecotoxicological elements of the chemical products and classify them according to market standards.
We inform of the dangers of each product through data sheets and danger warnings.
Every time we incorporate a new substance or different application for a product, we evaluate the exposure risks it has. This helps us to recognize the conditions for a safe use of the product.
As well as complying with all current legislation and rules, we also participate in voluntary programs for the sector at a national, European and international level.
All our customers have information available on the product, its distribution, legislation, and how to use it in a safe manner. Besides this, we carry out regular evaluations to make sure that product safety is fulfilled and we develop improvement programs.
GHS and CLP
In order to identify hazardous products we follow the classification systems GHS and CLP. The Globally Harmonized System of Classification and Labeling of Chemicals (GHS) by the United Nations gives us common criteria to be met internationally. As such we can classify chemical substances according to their danger, and label them with standard warning images and messages used across the world.
The Classification, Labelling and Packaging Regulation (CLP) enables us to identify dangerous substances on a European Union level. We also have a global emergency help service in the case of an accident.
We comply with the Registration, Evaluation, Authorisation and Restriction of Chemicals (REACH) regulations. In this way, we ensure that all our products protect human health and the environment. REACH also aims to promote innovation and competitiveness in the sector within the EU, as well as promoting alternative means to avoid testing on animals.