Lalleman argues that the idea of creation can already be found in Jeremiah. Jeremiah 4-Jeremiah 5 has parallels in Genesis 1-2 as well as in Jeremiah 33. She believes that there is insufficient ground to assume that Jeremiah 33 represents a post-Jeremiah development. Jeremiah uses also creation as a framework for his proclamation of judgment and doom.
This article is part of a series of studies on the author of the book of Jeremiah. The author notes the message and character of Jeremiah the prophet.
Looking at Jeremiah 2:5, this article shows how life is without God. Without God life is empty, and men worship powerless gods instead of the living God.
How should the lack of chronology and the many genres in Jeremiah be understood in an effort to find a unifying plot in the book? This article uses literary-critical principles to analyze Jeremiah. The author wants to exegete the book in its received order. He makes use of plot analysis to discover unifying elements. He explains what a plot is and how it functions, whether plots function in Hebrew prophecy, and then gives an overview of his understanding of Jeremiah's plot.
The order of the arrangement of the content of the book of Jeremiah can be perplexing. This study attempts to articulate certain basic assumptions that distinguish evangelicalism's approach to the organization of the prophecy, and to analyze the evidence by which its chapters may be dated. Payne proceeds to formulate a chronological picture of the sequence of the different parts and proposes an explanation for the present arrangement of the book.
How should we understand the promise of the new covenant in Jeremiah 31:31-34? What are the continuities and discontinuities between the covenants? Kaiser reflects on the issues at stake—the content of the new covenant, the contrast with the Mosaic covenant, and Jeremiah 30 to Jeremiah 33 as a "book of comfort."
This article considers the interpretation of Jeremiah 7:22.
Christians face many challenges and struggles - struggles with sin within, the devil's assault, and the world's temptations. How can the Christian find rest in such a world? This article shows that God’s throne and sanctuary is a place of finding such a rest. God’s throne is a place of purity, peace and protection.
This essay examines the literary structure and message of one section of the book of Jeremiah. The focus is on the largely narrative section in Jeremiah 26-Jeremiah 45. It suggests a strategy for a holistic reading of this section. The author hopes that this will contribute to a better understanding of the literary and theological unity of the book of Jeremiah as a whole.
Jeremiah 29:11 is often interpreted in an individualistic way. This article shows how the passage ought to be interpreted, in light of its context.
What is the literary structure of the composition of the oracles against Babylon in Jeremiah 50 and Jeremiah 51? This study hopes to demonstrate that the composition of the oracles is not disordered but rather a well-ordered complex of structurally related elements. The thesis is that the composition is comprised of six movements set within a common framework.