Inspiration for comments on the report
Jozefien collected some tips and example sentences to provide constructive feedback on the students' reports.
Six concrete tools for achieving inclusive classroom management
Does it sometimes seem to you that inclusive work is in conflict with keeping good class management? That chaos and noise arise when you deviate from the traditional instruction methods?
No reason to panic. With the help of the right tools, …
Improve digital skills? Then you must be able to measure them first!
This Kennisnet article examines the teachers' ICT skills. When are teachers skilled in digital form? And how can this be measured?
Teacher, ICT co-ordinator, …
Smartphones at school, a democratic decision
More and more schools are opting for a total ban on smartphones. Pupils would perform worse due to the continuous presence of their smartphone. In addition, they would no longer be able to have real commitments, mental rest or physical activities …
Teacher, ICT co-ordinator
Working with high achievers in secondary school
In this study you can read how you can get started with highly gifted students in secondary.
Crisis signaling plan: Plan of action in the event of a crisis situation
A practical example of a crisis signaling plan for a student with ASD.
The plan is divided into three phases, from the quiet phase to a crisis phase.
At each stage it is clearly stated which steps the teacher and student must take.
Teacher, Learning mentor
Twelve 'inefficient' building blocks for good education
In this article, Michiel Lucassen provides a number of building blocks that can provide good education, but that are therefore not immediately supported by research.
It is a supplement to the book Wise Lessons, twelve building blocks for effective …
Teacher, Learning mentor
Digitization: Setting limits
Rinke Vanhoeck was triggered by the tweet from Katrien Partyka , candidate chairman of CD&V. He wrote this newsletter.
Due to the digitization of certain elements from education, such as communication, agenda and tasks, the button never seems …
A Guide to Report Inappropriate Content on Social Media
The purpose of this guide is to provide students and educators with adequate information about what they can do to report inappropriate or offensive content to administrators of a social media application.
The social media applications that are …
Organisation, company, NPO
Paragraph in the Cloud: Latest solution for reading software
The Sensotec web app is the most flexible solution for using compensating (reading) software. This online web app is an additional tool that is offered with a web license on the compensating (read-out) software Alinea.