Decaying tooth is one of the most common issues that bog down the early childhood days. It is the result of destruction and breakdown of the tooth enamel, which is the external, hard surface of teeth. The decay of tooth ultimately leads to cavities or holes in a tooth.
The Root Causes Behind Teeth Decay!
It is caused mainly by bacteria as well as other factors. It is also caused when food particles rich in carbohydrates stay back in between two teeth or on the surface of a tooth. These food particles include milk and soda, candy and raisins, fruit juices and cakes, bread and cereals.
Bacteria that stay in the oral cavity change these food particles into acid. Now, this combination of bacteria, saliva, food and acid combine to form something that is called plague. It sticks to teeth, and the acid acts upon the enamel, disintegrating it and causing cavities.
When that happens, the only way to turn to is an experienced dentist in Adelaide at a reputed dental clinic and have the affected tooth treated. What better clinic can you find than Churchill Dental Studio? Indeed, we are one of the most reliable names, when it comes to treating teeth cavity.
Who Are at Maximum Risk Among Children?
Everyone has bacteria in their mouth and children are no exception. So from that point of view, every kid is prone to cavities in teeth. However, the following activities will raise the risk of a cavity by manifold.
- Not washing mouth properly after meals, which increases the level of bacteria inside the mouth. It increases the probability of cavity or decay.
- Diets that are highly rich in starches and sugars.
- Water supply with very little or no fluoride in it.
- Poor oral hygiene.
- Less than normal saliva flow.
The Signs and Symptoms
The decay can very well be different for different children. Still, there are some common signs, which will unmistakably tell that a tooth is developing cavity and decay.
At first, white spots start appearing on the affected areas of the tooth. These are the first signs of the enamel beginning to disintegrate. At this stage, the tooth may develop sensitivity to cold, sweet or heat.
Next, early signs of cavity start appearing on the tooth. Initially, it remains brown.
Subsequently, the cavity only becomes deeper, and the decay intensifies. And with time, it turns darker brown, and then black.
The symptoms of decay and cavity in teeth vary from one child to another. In some cases, they do not cause symptoms. At times, children cannot even know that they have a cavity in a tooth until their dentist discovers it on a regular visit to the dental clinic. However, in some cases, the child may feel:
- Pain in and around the area surrounding the tooth
- Sensitivity to certain foods, sweets, hot and cold drinks.
How is the Decay Diagnosed in Children?
Our dentist generally diagnoses teeth decay by referring to the medical history, thorough examination of the child’s mouth, conducting dental x-ray.
One Word of Caution
Upon the first hints of uneasiness that your child reports about in the teeth, you need to get to a reputed dental clinic and consult an experienced dentist without any delay whatsoever. While the decay cannot be reserved, further decay can be stopped with proper care and treatment.
Churchill Dental Studio is home to some of the most reputed dentists. For further query, call us at (08) 8262 3277 or 0451 690 418.