The eyes of Dr. Eckleburg symbolize in this chapter advertising and materialism gone mad, one of the central themes of the plot". The primary focus of Gatsby that in the beginning of the novel was Daisy is portrayed as a shortcoming on his part.
Develop and organize arguments 5. Write the introduction 6. Write the body paragraphs 7. Write the conclusion 1. Now all you have to do is choose one.
Do yourself a favor and pick a topic that interests you. If you are asked to come up with a topic by yourself, though, you might start to feel a little panicked. Maybe you have too many ideas—or none at all.
Take a deep breath and start by asking yourself these questions: Did a particular image, line, or scene linger in your mind for a long time? If it fascinated you, chances are you can draw on it to write a fascinating essay. Confusing moments in a work of literature are like a loose thread in a sweater: Ask yourself why the author chose to write about that character or scene the way he or she did and you might tap into some important insights about the work as a whole.
Did you notice any patterns? Is there a phrase that the main character uses constantly or an image that repeats throughout the book? Did you notice any contradictions or ironies? Great works of literature are complex; great literary essays recognize and explain those complexities.
Maybe the main character acts one way around his family and a completely different way around his friends and associates.
The best questions invite critical debates and discussions, not just a rehashing of the summary. Finally, remember to keep the scope of your question in mind: Conversely, is this a topic big enough to fill the required length? Frankenstein and his monster alike? Keep track of passages, symbols, images, or scenes that deal with your topic.
These are the elements that you will analyze in your essay, and which you will offer as evidence to support your arguments.
For more on the parts of literary works, see the Glossary of Literary Terms at the end of this section. Elements of Story These are the whats of the work—what happens, where it happens, and to whom it happens. All of the events and actions of the work.
The people who act and are acted upon in a literary work. The main character of a work is known as the protagonist. The central tension in the work. When and where the work takes place. Elements of setting include location, time period, time of day, weather, social atmosphere, and economic conditions.
The person telling the story. The narrator may straightforwardly report what happens, convey the subjective opinions and perceptions of one or more characters, or provide commentary and opinion in his or her own voice.
The main ideas or messages of the work—usually abstract ideas about people, society, or life in general. A work may have many themes, which may be in tension with one another.
Elements of Style These are the hows—how the characters speak, how the story is constructed, and how language is used throughout the work.
How the parts of the work are assembled. Some novels are narrated in a linear, chronological fashion, while others skip around in time. Some plays follow a traditional three-or five-act structure, while others are a series of loosely connected scenes.
Some authors deliberately leave gaps in their works, leaving readers to puzzle out the missing information. The perspective from which a story is told.
In first-person point of view, the narrator involves him or herself in the story.The Great Gatsby, F. Scott Fitzgerald’s Jazz Age novel about the impossibility of recapturing the past, was initially a feelthefish.com, the story of Gatsby’s doomed love for the unattainable Daisy is considered a defining novel of the 20th century.
Explore a character analysis of Gatsby, plot summary, and important quotes. The best advice I ever got about reading came from the critic and scholar Louis Menand. Back in , I spent six months in Boston and, for the fun of it, sat in on a lit seminar he was teaching.
RCL Exclusive Dean Friedman’s “Ariel” Is “The Great Gatsby” of Music Tim Sommer breaks down the brilliance of the ’70s cult classic. If you print or download from this site, please consider making at least a $ donation through PayPal.
Sandra Effinger [email protected] DropBox Access -- Binder from summer workshops ( pages), various lists and handouts housed on my r etired AP English page have been migrated. An invitation will be issued to $ donors. Buy essay online at professional essay writing service.
Order custom research academic papers from the best trusted company. Just find a great help for students in need. Lowest prices, first-rate place and eagerness to work on any type, topic, page count or level of assignment you want. How to write an expository essay?
This type of essay is aimed to explain some subject by presenting a very clear and complete picture of other people’s views on this certain situation or event.