Sarin attack in Syria | Letter
President Donald Trump's press secretary Sean Spicer was chastised for stating that even Adolf Hitler didn't use chemical weapons against his opponents.
This was in regard to Syrian president Bashar al-Assad's use of sarin against civilians, including women and children, based on U.S. intelligence.
Spicer soon had to apologize after Jewish-Americans groups complained, as Hitler had gassed millions of European Jews, innocent noncombatants, during the Second World War.
Although Hitler had sarin (it was invented in Germany in 1938), he and his main henchman Heinrich Himmler used a chemical agent known as Zyklon B.
Years before the Nazis made use of it to kill the Jews en masse, Zyklon B was in fact used as a pesticide and rodenticide in the United States.
However, Spicer is partially correct, as Hitler did not order the use of chemical weapons against the Allied soldiers in WWII.
But in World War I, Germany did use sulfur mustard gas against British, French, American, and Canadians fighting on the Western Front.
The British may have used mustard gas first against the German military, nonetheless, both sides used mustard gas toward the end of the world war. The "war to end all wars," according to president Woodrow Wilson.
In a recent article in the New York Times, "Riddle Of Why Hitler Didn't Use Sarin Gas Remains Unsolved," William J. Broad factually points out that Hitler gassed innocent civilians as does Assad, the Fuhrer never used gas as a "military weapon" against the Allies.
Broad presents several theories for this but does not mention in his article that British Prime Minister Winston Churchill is on record confiding to his inner military circle that Britain was seriously prepared to counter any chemical weapons Hitler might use with secret chemical weapons of its own.
This information was conveyed to Berlin through neutral third parties.
Perhaps if Spicer had explained himself more fully on this issue, he may not have had himself misunderstood.
Incidentally, both my grandfathers fought in France in WWI and were mustard gassed, and even though the U.S. Army had provided our "doughboys" with gas masks, one of them suffered from the effects all of his life.