Useful ways to use Social Media in the classroom
The first thing that comes to mind when we hear the word “Social Media” is Facebook, Twitter, Instagram etc. But the truth is Social media is much bigger than that, and there are huge benefits of using it in the classroom.
Social media can prove to be a detriment to classroom learning when students are using it inappropriately to communicate during a lesson. However, it no longer has to be this way.
There are numerous teachers that resent the fact their students are obsessed with social media. When students constantly text and post comments during class time, this has a proven negative impact on classroom learning. At the same time, teachers feel like they are constantly fighting a losing battle to maintain their student’s attentiveness in class.
By changing the approach to learning using social media, you can stop fighting an uphill battle and get students excited about learning using interactive classroom activities. As a teacher, social media also allows you to continue to do what you love
Here are several useful ways to use social media as an educational tool in your classroom while enhancing classroom learning.
Engage students in learning geography using Twitter and Google Earth.
Students can use Twitter and Google Earth to enhance their geography lessons by using a combination of these platforms. Teachers have used their network of followers on Twitter to create interesting and engaging geography lessons using networking in real-time.
Use Skype to organise a virtual field trip.
If you are studying a specific topic that makes it difficult for students to learn more on a traditional field trip, you can set up classroom field trips using the videoconferencing service,
Skype. Students can take an all-day field trip without leaving the classroom.
If the location you want to take your students to has the Skype videoconferencing system, you simply connect to the location using an Internet connection and the Skype app. This is a great way for students to engage in learning on various topics including Earth Science, Art, Social Studies, Language Arts, and much more. The field trips can also be tailored to meet specific learning objectives in the core curriculum.
Create a social classroom on Edmodo.
Edmodo is a classroom social media platform that allows you to easily create a digital classroom. Edmodo is comprised of millions of users and provides many educational tools for creating a complete social classroom. Using Edmodo, students can receive feedback in real-time and take quizzes on the platform. There are also tools that allow you to create a calendar of due dates for assignments, create a survey on various topics, upload messages and images, post new assignments, and much more. Your students can also get help with assignments by posting questions to the classroom community.
Additionally, Edmodo offers a Global Read Aloud program to help students improve their reading and public speaking skills. As a teacher, you can use the platform to collaborate with other educators as well as share ideas and lesson plans for new inspirations.
Use Google Drive to help students work together on assignments in and out of school.
Google Drive is a free tool that provides additional ways for students to participate and work together. Google Drive is a editing and file sharing site that simplifies group work and collaboration. As a result of Google Drive being a cloud application, it can be accessed from anywhere which allows students to work together on assignments after school hours.
Included with Google Drive is an area that shows the history of group collaboration. This feature provides a way for you to see who contributed what and when. Projects can be set up in Google Drive before you ask students to contribute.