What is Human Chorionic Gonadotropin?
HCG or Human Chorionic Gonadotropin is not just another diet pill or artificial appetite suppressant. HCG is a luteinizing hormone that is naturally produced at low levels in the bodies of both men and women, and at high levels in pregnant women.
Call to Schedule Your Appointment
How Does HCG Work?
A British doctor named A.T.W. Simeons discovered that HCG enables the body to access all of a pregnant woman’s stored fat supply, thereby providing the developing fetus with a constant supply of nutrients. This explains how pregnant women who are undernourished or can’t keep food down because of morning sickness still have healthy. In other words, HCG helps the body access and burn its stored fat, and it works this way in men and women.
Types of Fat
There are three kinds of fat:
- Structural fat – Supports healthy organs and is therefore vital.
- Normal fat – Functions as source of energy that the body reserves and can freely access when the nutritional fat intake is insufficient.
- Abnormal/Stored fat – Unwanted, unsightly, and dangerous fat that can lead to weight gain and health problems.
In addition to discovering the role of HCG in pregnancies, Dr. Simeons observed a dramatic loss of abnormal fat (e.g., belly fat) in boys he was treating with HCG in order to raise their testosterone levels. He then began to put obese patients on very low calorie diets along with daily HCG. This HCG diet program directly targets abnormal, excess fat that is stored in the body. Unlike other “diets”, this program helps your patients quickly lose large amounts of fat, but not muscle, all while having less appetite, and most importantly the weight stays off long term.
Why Does HCG Work?
HCG is a natural amino-peptide protein that exists in every tissue of the human body and because it is found in all living things in minuscule amounts, taking HCG is safe. During pregnancy HCG is produced by the embryo daily in a quantity that is hundreds of thousands of times higher than the amount your patients will be using with this protocol. The high levels of HCG do not harm the mother or the child and it actually protects the baby, especially in a situation where a pregnant woman is malnourished due to a lack of food, or eating nutrient poor foods. In fact, the presence of HCG signals the body to pull calories and nutrients from all of the regions where abnormal fat is stored in order to feed the baby. Through this same mechanism, HCG will provide patients with anywhere from 2000-4000 calories daily from their stored, abnormal fat. Therefore, your patients will not feel hungry on this program even though they are only eating a very low calorie diet of 500-800 calories per day. The HCG diet has been used for more than 50 years and has been shown to support weight loss and sustained weight management in individuals who follow the low calorie diet and HCG protocol precisely.
Schedule A Consultation
To learn more about HCG, contact our office today at (630) 818-SKIN(7546) to schedule an appointment!