Asthma in Summer
For children and adults who suffer with asthma, summer can be both a blessing and a curse.
Asthma attacks are linked to an increase in pollen, heat, and rain followed by high temperatures that allow the growth of mold. Additionally, asthma in summer is caused by poorer air quality, which can affect the average person, but has more serious consequences for people suffering with chronic breathing ailments (asthma, emphysema, bronchitis, allergies). Spending more time outdoors in warm weather can help alleviate some symptoms.
- Changes in weather
- Grill smoke, campfire smoke, as well as cigarette smoke
- Chlorine can induce asthma-like symptoms in some people
- Smog and air pollution
Always be prepared for seasonal triggers and make sure not to avoid taking your prescribed medications. And, if necessary, never leave your home for long periods without an inhaler–many triggers are unavoidable.
Knowing what might cause a mild to severe asthma attack is the best protection and will ensure that sufferers will have a safe and enjoyable summer.
If you are on prescribed medications for any condition, and you need help affording your prescriptions, download a free Watertree Health Prescription Discount Card or request a card be mailed to you. It provides significant discounts on almost all recommended medications (brand and generic). Most experts agree, taking your medicines as prescribed improves overall health and wellbeing and lowers cost of health care for everyone.
References: Medicine.net, American College of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology, Live Science, Hello Life, WebMD
Instructions and Disclaimer: The content on this website is designed for informational purposes only. It is not intended to be a substitute for informed medical advice or care. You should not use this information to diagnose or treat any health problems or illnesses. Always consult your health care provider with any questions or concerns you might have regarding your health.
Tell us if this was helpful and let us know what other topics you might like to see us cover in our blog.
Get your Prescription Discount Card now and start saving up to 80% on the medications you use every day!
Save now on these medications and others: