Preventive treatment with Neuraminidase inhibitors (e.g. zanamivir, oseltamivir). 3 studies conducted, with 863 children. Prevents 1 case of influenza transmission when given to 12 children in households were a member already has the Flu. Mild side effects, including vomiting.
If a household member has the flu, consider this treatment:
It prevents 8% of flu transmissions, but may evoke vomiting.
Works best if taken within 2 days of being exposed to the flu, and should be taken for 10 consecutive days.
For example: Oseltamivir (Tamiflu), Zanamivir (Relenza)
healthy Children, 2 to 16 years old
Varies according to age, weight and treatment. Oseltamivir usually up to 75 mg, twice-daily, for 5 days. Zanamivir usually up to 30 mg, twice-daily, for 10 days.
Prevention of Influenza infection, symptoms and complications
In households were a member already has the Flu, it prevents 1 case of influenza transmission and flu symptoms when the treatment is given to 12 children.
Common side effects include vomiting, diarrhea, nausea, headache, nosebleeds and trouble sleeping. Rare side effects may include psychiatric symptoms, trouble breathing and seizures.
Flu (influenza virus infection and symptoms).
Symptoms and signs:
Cough, dizziness, fever, headache, nausea, pains, runny nose, sore throat, vomiting and aches.
Ear infection, lung infection, Seizures.
Visitors at this page also visited
Neuraminidase inhibitors (NAIs) are a class of drugs which block the neuraminidase enzyme. They are commonly used as antiviral drugs because they block the function of viral neuraminidases of the influenza virus, by preventing its reproduction by budding from the host cell. Oseltamivir (Tamiflu) a prodrug, Zanamivir (Relenza), Laninamivir (Inavir), and Peramivir belong to this class. (source)
Similar pages on this site
Good to know
Scientific Studies: Last Week Tonight
John Oliver (HBO)
Poll: expectations from online healthcare resources
Answer 4 multiple choice questions, to help us improve our service