TEACHING OF LANGUAGE (ENGLISH/HINDI)
A suggested general sequence of activities:
Classes I and II
To build familiarity with the language (through primarily spoken or spoken-and-written input) in meaningful situations.
To shift emphasis from masterly learning of this limited input (a single text book presented over a year) to regular exposure of meaningful inputs i.e. textbooks, other print material such as big books, class libraries, learner magazines, newspaper columns, radio/audio cassettes etc.
To stress on `pseudo-production` of comprehended input, such as the learning of rhymes, poems, drama and the enacting of plays etc.
NOTE: In addition to the activities given in the textbooks, children need to be engaged in different activities to develop listening, speaking, reading and writing skills.
Classes III to V (PROSE LESSON)
1. General introduction of a lesson through an activity/game/story/discussion/ Visual clips etc.
A brief introduction of the lesson by the teacher
3. a) Silent reading of the lesson divided in to smaller chunks by children
b) Guessing of word meanings
d) Teachers to ask children one by one to answer the question and call them one by one to the blackboard to write the answer on it
e) Teachers to explain the words, sentences or paragraphs not understood by children
4. a) Reading aloud to the class by the teacher followed by loud reading by children
b) Choral reading
c) Loud reading by each child independently
5. Discussion of new words with proper pronunciation, meaning and the use in meaningful context
6. Discussion of new structures in meaningful context and production of the new structures in a meaningful paragraph
7. Dictation- Prepared dictation or Unprepared dictation or Auto-dictation
8. Role play or Dramatization or discussion on the given topic with meaningful inputs provided to children in advance
9. Discussion of questions and other activities given at the end of the lesson and completion of the same by Children
10. The theme of the lesson to be highlighted, related to day-to-day life underlining the importance of value
Classes III to V (Poems)
1.General introduction of a poem through question-answer activity or other meaningful activities
2.A brief introduction of the poem by the teacher
3.Poem recitation by the teacher with proper intonation
4.Children to recite the poem along with the teacher
5.Poem recitation by each child with proper intonation
6.Discussion of the meaning of words, stanzas etc. not understood by children
7.Discussion of questions and other activities given at the end of the poem and completion of the same by children
TEACHING OF MATHEMATICS
A suggested general sequence of activities
Before children work on the page of the book, introduce the relevant idea/concept through an activity/game/story/discussion/PPT (Visual clips) etc.
Consolidate the idea/concept through exercises for the whole class on the blackboard
Discuss the relevant page of the book, talk about pictures, what is needed to be done about various symbols used on the page etc., then ask the children to work on the pages of the book independently
Allow discussion among the children while working on the book
Check children`s work everyday
If there are `mistakes` rather than just making of writing the `correct` answer, try to guess the child`s reasons behind a given answer
Give children extra exercises/activities to start from their own understanding and to lead to the mathematical thinking you want them to achieve
The concept area of the lesson to be highlighted and related to day-to-day life underlining the importance of value
TEACHING OF ENVIRONMENTAL STUDIES
A suggested general sequence of activities
1. Introduction of the relevant idea/concept through an activity/game/story/discussion/PPT (Visual clips) etc.
2. Consolidate the idea/concept through activities for the whole class on the blackboard
3. Discuss the relevant page of the book, talk about pictures etc. linking the idea/concept from day-to-day life
4. Ask the children to read the relevant page silently for language comprehension followed by activities for articulation of the given facts through observation and recording, identification, analyzing, drawing inference
5. Ask the children to connect the facts observed or experienced with their day-to-day life
6. The theme/sub theme of the lesson to be highlighted and related to day-to-day life underlining the importance of value