The Institution of Slavery in the American Civil Warby Rit Nosotro
Change Over Time essay
Describe the impact of the institution of slavery upon the US Civil War. Mention Haitian emancipation, the 13th Amendment, abolitionists, and black soldiers.
As one of America’s most fierce and bloody wars, the Civil War is never to be forgotten, specifically by the race of African American citizens who remembered what their ancestors, as slaves, did to turn the values, laws, and attitude of America upside down. The impact of the institution of slavery during the Civil War was phenomenal. Not only was slavery a huge cause for the outbreak of war, but it greatly impacted the war itself and law, both in America and around the world through the Haitian emancipation, the 13th amendment, fierce abolitionists, and black soldiers.
When Abraham Lincoln was elected President of the United States for his first term in, the North was strongly opposed to slavery, whereas the South was on the cutting edge of economic success, but only by the means of malicious mistreatment of their many slaves. Trouble began to brew on a cloudy horizon. Lincoln was both loved and hated by his people because of differences in opinion between the North and the South was so great; war was inevitable. Although Lincoln did indeed see the oncoming war as a necessary procedure, he did not come to this conclusion easily, as he knew this meant fighting within a nation, and bloodshed. Still, he did realize the need to save and preserve the union and end slavery. However, even before the thought of a civil war against slavery in America was entertained, influences occurred in other places. In 1802, a French man, Toussaint L’Ouerture led a rebellion of slaves in now Haiti, and “transformed French Saint Domingue, one of the most productive European colonies of its day into an independent state run by former slaves and the descendents of slaves.” Essentially, this revolution of mistreated slaves in Haiti triggered revolts and demonstrations in the US, lit a flame for an American civil war, and gave slaves both a new hope and vision of freedom one day. A book critic states, “It produced the world’s first example of wholesale emancipation of colonial representation in a metropolitan assembly, and of full racial equality in a European colony.”
Once the dissention was brought forth in America, anti-slavery societies formed in the North, and abolitionists voiced their views about the cruelty and injustice of slavery publicly, hoping to gather a crowd of supporters. One such abolitionist was named John Brown who was a fierce opponent to slavery before and during the civil war. He rounded up rebellious slaves to start a rebellion. Brown was hanged when he was found guilty of trying to give guns to slaves. Another famous advocate of the anti-slavery cause was the renowned Harriet Tubman, who lived from 1820 to 1913. This courageous woman, a former slave herself, was the founder and operator of the Underground Railroad. She led more than 19 rescue operations and sent 300 slaves to safety past the northern border in the US, and even more during the war. Another leader of the slave revolution was Nat Turner, who led a revolt within Virginia with the help of fellow slaves after he had killed his master. Although Turner banded 60 slaves to revolt, he was eventually captured and hanged. Stories were also told of escaped slaves banding together, living in the mountains in their own villages, and creating an army of black soldiers to rebel against the Southern plantation owners. These abolitionists, avid supporters of the civil war cause, and against slavery, paved the way for freedom by their devotion, though many of them were killed in the process.
Amidst the civil war, on September 23, 1862, Abraham Lincoln issued the Emancipation Proclamation. This statement decreed that “all slaves would be declared free in those states still in rebellion against the US on January 1, 1863.” The 13th amendment had originally declared in the first section that, “Neither slavery nor involuntary servitude, except as a punishment for crime whereof the party shall have been duly convicted, shall exist within the United States, or any place subject to their jurisdiction.” However, this amendment was later ratified by Lincoln in 1865 so that this would apply to all states; even those in the South. Slavery was finally abolished, thus ending the civil war.
Although the Civil War itself had ended, hatred and bitter thoughts of revenge remained between the white and black peoples of America for centuries. Bigamy and racism divided our land, and caused the first ever fight within a nation. Though the rip that this hatred caused was mended, the stitches and scars remain to this day. The institution of slavery not only shaped the outcome of the civil war through people, documents, and prior revolutions, but it shaped the very nature of out nation today.
1. Who on this list was NOT an abolitionist or against the idea of slavery?
a. Harriet Tubman
b. John Brown
c. Toussaint L’Ouerture
d. John Knox
2. On what Caribbean Island was the “ “ Proclamation?
c. Dominican Republic
d. Puerto Rico
3. Who was President during the civil war time period?
a. John Knox Polk
b. William Henry Harrison
c. Millard Fillmore
d. Abraham Lincoln
1. “The Kingfisher Children’s Encyclopedia” Kingfisher Books:
New York, 1992
John Paton, Editor in Chief
2. “The Great Documents of Western Civilization” Chilton Books: Philadelphia, 1965 Viorst, Milton
3. Clapham, Francis M. “Picture History of the World” Grosset and Dunlap: New York, 1986
“Making Sense of the Haitian Revolution”
5. Encyclopedia of US History: American Civil War
“The 13th Amendment”
Additional information about <http://hyperhistory.net/apwh/essays/cot/t4w25uscivilwarslavery.htm>
Focus on Facts
The above essay was donated to hyperhistory.net.
of inaccuracies or plagiarism.
Post a link to this essay,
a great essay
on your blog or website :
|Comparative Essays||Biographies||Doc. Based Questions||Change Over Time|