We often meet people in our lives who skip meals regularly, either due to work pressure, lack of sleep, lack of time or just preoccupation. While the way your body reacts to a skipped meal depends on your health and age; skipping meals can do a great deal of damage to your body.
SKIPPING A MEAL ≠ PLANNED FASTING
For starters, the above equation is the basis of this blog. Fasting since age old times has been a well-planned exercise that prepares our body for both pre and post the exercise to achieve the net effect – Detoxification.
Glucose shut down
Energy demand for body peaks in the morning, especially because of overnight fasting. Your body expects calories the most in the morning. When you skip breakfast, your body continues in its sleep mode, THE RESULT – expect your day to be sluggish and moody. You also put yourself at risk of running low on essential nutrients resulting in poor mental function, fatigue and other health risks.
Skipping meals does not translate to weight loss. The human body again intelligently just stops fat burn during starvation and instead stores up the fat which in turn results in weight gain. NEXT STEP – these storage areas tend to project you out of shape on mirrors. Even if you do see weight loss it may very well be muscles and not fat.
Ditch out – eat out
Extended work hours after skipping food; your stomach cries loud for something to eat. This only builds the craving. Your body is intelligent enough to understand your pattern of skipping meals, and hence starts stocking energy in the form of fat. VERDICT – you just got fooled by your body.
Hunger PANGS or BANGS
When you are not listening to those signals sent by your brain for hunger, the sugar levels in your body lowers, making you give a piece of your brain to everyone. WARNING – bad mood and irritation is contagious.
No food for thought
With lower blood sugar levels due to skipped meals, you may feel it impossible to exercise. Worse you may stop your workout midway as you just don’t have the energy to continue.
Eat Right, Exercise Hard, Live Well. Until my next blog, this is Divya signing-out. Stay Fit and Stay Happy.