What is CBD?
CBD is an acronym for Cannabidiol (Can-a-bid-i-ol), a prominent naturally occurring class of molecules called cannabinoids found in the plant genus Cannabis Sativa L. CBD comprises up to 40% of the plant and is one of over 60 plus compounds found in cannabis. Of these compounds, CBD and THC are usually present in the highest concentrations, and are therefore the most recognized and studied. CBD is a non-psychoactive component of the plant that possesses a wide range of benefits and does not cause a high, unlike THC. Our bodies are made up of an endocannabinoid system and uses cannabinoids to maintain healthy cells and according to researchers, CBD may be the single most important cannabinoid ever discovered.
You can find our 3rd party cannabinoid, terpene & chemical test results here.
CBD, actually known as Cannabinol, is a chemical compound found naturally in the cannabis plant. It is not mind altering like marijuana, which means CBD will not make you high. Over the past 40 years, there have been numerous studies that highlight the potential of CBD. Researchers have discovered that human endocannabinoid system, which is the system that CBD interacts with.
Hemp extract can be used to describe any cannabis extract. But it doesn’t mean it will be high in CBD as not all hemp plants contain CBD.
CBD extract can be used to describe a CBD rich cannabis extract.
THC is the cannabinoid that is targeted in drug tests. These tests look for the metabolic products of THC and begin with e.g a simple urine test sample. The test uses antibodies to detect THC and the metabolite it produces. There is no such thing as a CBD drug test because CBD is not a drug.
The endocannabinoid system is a homeostatic regulator of neuronal activity and almost every other physiological system in the body. It has a regulatory role on pain, inflammation, memory, emotion, sleep and metabolic function. It comprises a vast network of receptors in the brain, central and peripheral nervous system and cannabis-like compounds called endocannabinoids.
Plant cannabinoids like CBD and THC interact with the endocannabinoid system, which researchers believe may explain some of the reported physiological effects of the cannabis plant.
All are actually cannabis plants, however hemp or industrial hemp is a term commonly used for cannabis strains that contain very low levels of THC, to be precise below 0.2% THC. Marijuana in general is a word used for plants that contain high amounts of THC.
There are some scientific experiments that indicate that cannabinoids work in a similar way to the endocannabinoids that the human body already produces in healthy people. The mechanisms of action are still not clarified and there are no conclusive studies that show any clear pathways.
According to mainstream science there is no evidence that cannabis has any positive effect on the human body. Until research has been done with many people over long period of time, it will be very difficult to answer this question.
The cannabinoids that the cannabis plant produces are very similar to endocannabinoids produced by the human body, and therefore could have huge potential in helping the body to find a balance. However to claim anything, there is a need for large randomized, double blind placebo trials over a very long period of time to be able to prove any positive effects.