Where can I find information about the human body?
Entry last updated: 19/12/19
The human body is made up of many different parts, all of which have a special function or job. When several parts work together they are called body systems. The study of the human body is called human anatomy.
Parts of the body
Here is a list of some of the parts that make up the human body. The resources suggested below will help you find information about these and other body parts and body systems.
Body systems: several organs working together to do a particular job, like the digestive system.
Brain: is part of the nervous system and controls all the body's activities.
Cells: very small parts that form the basis of all living things. Cells join together to form tissue.
Ears: work with the brain to process sounds so you can hear.
Eyes: the brain controls the function of the eyes enabling you to see.
Heart: the organ that pumps blood around the body and is part of the circulatory system.
Lungs: the organs that are responsible for breathing as part of the respiratory system.
Muscles: enable our arms and legs and other body parts to move, and are part of the muscular system.
Organs: are formed from tissue and each one has a particular job as part of an organ system.
Skeleton: supports and protects internal organs as part of the skeletal system.
Skin: covers and protects the whole body as part of the Integumentary system.
Here are some websites that have information about the human body.
This is a great website for all kinds of information, including the human body. It has lots of quick facts and interactive diagrams.
- Choose the Human body tile on the front page
- choose a topic from the list eg Digestion
- or watch a video eg Utterly amazing human body.
Tips: Websites that have .com in the address can have good information, but you need to assess how reliable it is. Check the About DK link on the website, to find out what the company’s mission and values are.
KidsHealth is a great website with all sorts of information about your health, including topics like how the body works. There are three sections on the site – one for kids, one for teens and another for parents. Each article includes the name of the person who wrote it and when it was written, which helps us know it’s reliable.
- Go to the for kids section
- choose How the body works from the menu on the left
- find quizzes, articles and activities on body parts like kidneys, tongue, stomach and more.
Tips: Websites that have .org in the address can have good information, but you need to assess how reliable it is. Check the About Kidshealth link on the website to find out what the organisation’s mission and values are.
Innerbody is a human anatomy website. This interactive site opens with diagrams of each body system, which you can then explore in detail. For example, the interactive skeleton allows you to discover every bone in the human body with names and facts about each one.
You can also find out about organs:
- Go to Explore at the top of the page
- open the drop down arrow
- then hover over Major organs and choose from the list of organs.
Tips: Websites that have .com or .co in the address can have good information, but you need to assess how reliable it is. Check the About us link at the bottom of the page to find out who has put the information on the website.
Britannica School is one of the EPIC databases. EPIC is a collection of reliable resources covering lots of different topics. It’s put together especially for New Zealand school students and helps to answer questions like this.
- Use the search bar and type 'human body'
- choose the article Human body
- explore links like eye, ear, or the cardiovascular system and nervous system
- or, search for particular organs and body parts like heart, brain, or skin.
Tips: To get to the EPIC resources you will need a password from your school librarian first. Or you can chat with one of our AnyQuestions librarians between 1 and 6pm Monday to Friday and they will help you online. Some EPIC databases may also be available through your public library.
Human body by Bipasha Choudhury.
Human body : questions & answers by Nancy Dickmann.
Stuff you should know about the human body by John Farndon.
Understanding our organs by Lucy Beevor.
SCIS no: 1896610