Our editors will review what you’ve submitted and determine whether to revise the article.Join Britannica's Publishing Partner Program and our community of experts to gain a global audience for your work!
Homeomorphism, in mathematics, a correspondence between two figures or surfaces or other geometrical objects, defined by a one-to-one mapping that is continuous in both directions. The vertical projection shown in the sets up such a one-to-one correspondence between the straight segment x and the curved interval y. If x and y are topologically equivalent, there is a function h: x → y such that h is continuous, h is onto (each point of y corresponds to a point of x), h is one-to-one, and the inverse function, h−1, is continuous. Thus h is called a homeomorphism.
A topological property is defined to be a property that is preserved under a homeomorphism. Examples are connectedness, compactness, and, for a plane domain, the number of components of the boundary. The most general type of objects for which homeomorphisms can be defined are topological spaces. Two spaces are called topologically equivalent if there exists a homeomorphism between them. The properties of size and straightness in Euclidean space are not topological properties, while the connectedness of a figure is. Any simple polygon is homeomorphic to a circle; all figures homeomorphic to a circle are called simple closed curves. These curves have this topological property: they remain connected if one point is removed, but they become disconnected if two points are removed. A figure-eight curve is not homeomorphic to a circle because removing a single point—the crossing point—leaves a disconnected set with two components.
Learn More in these related Britannica articles:
topology: HomeomorphismAn intrinsic definition of topological equivalence (independent of any larger ambient space) involves a special type of function known as a homeomorphism. A function
his a homeomorphism, and objects Xand Yare said to be homeomorphic, if and only if the function…
homology…surfaces or higher-dimensional spaces are homeomorphic, then their homology groups in each dimension are isomorphic (
seefoundations of mathematics: Isomorphic structures and mathematics: Algebraic topology).…
connectedness…that remains unchanged after a homeomorphism—that is, a transformation in which the figure is deformed without tearing or folding. A point is called a limit point of a set in the Euclidean plane if there is no minimum distance from that point to members of the set; for example, the…