The Regional and Global Results of the Yom Kippur War and its Related Security Councils Resolutions Essay
The Regional and Global Results of the Yom Kippur War and its Related Security Councils Resolutions
At around 2 o’clock in the afternoon, on the 6th of October 1973, in the Middle East, the Syrian and the Egyptian military forces massively attacked Israel. The attack was made on Yom Kippur, the holiest and most sacred day of the Jewish year (Bard 2008). This attack was followed by a conflict known as the “Yom Kippur War” in the West and as the “Ramadan War” in the Arab countries. This war is also called the 1973 Arab-Israeli War.
The roots of the Yom Kippur War started in the unending dispute between the Jews and the Arabs. Since the triumph of the Jews in the Palestinian’s civil war and since the proclamation of the Israel’s state on the 14th of May, 1948, a series of wars has taken place between Israel and its Arab neighboring countries.
On the 6th of October, 1973, during the Jewish Day of Atonement or the Yom Kippur, Syria and Egypt unleashed a surprise attack on Israeli defenses. The military forces of Israel were caught off guard on their most important religious celebration. Moreover, they suffered from heavy losses. As it had to face war on two borders against its well-armed opponents, Israel was forced to the verge of annihilation. Nevertheless, the Israeli forces came together and weeks after the battle and with the aid of airlifted equipment and supplies from USA, Israel succeeded in pushing the Arabs back. This war included one of the history’s largest tank battles.
The Israeli forces also evicted Syrians out of the Golan Heights. A series of hostilities and conflicts between Egypt and Israel was agreed upon officially on the 11th of November of the same year. However, Mr. Henry Kissinger, USA’s secretary of state, had to intervene the following year, to make sure that the ceasefire between Israel and Syria would be permanent.
The Yom Kippur War had deep regional and global results. For Israel, the Yom Kippur War was a frightening experience. Despite the ultimate success of the Israel Defense Forces on the battlefield, the Yom Kippur War was still considered as a military and diplomatic failure. For the Arab States, on the other hand, the Yom Kippur War was a psychological victory despite their defeat in the end.
This war also stirred a serious and severe crisis between the superpower countries when the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics (USSR) threatened to send their troops to the Middle East to implement ceasefire between the Arab and the Israeli. Eventually, the tension cooled down and the clash between the superpower countries was avoided. This finally led to the Camp David Peace Treaty and Oslo Peace Accords signing.
Background: Conditions that Led to the Yom Kippur War
The Yom Kippur War rooted from the Israel’s independence war, the first Arab-Israeli conflict which occurred right after Israel’s foundation in 1948. Another fighting out of conflict broke out again in 1956 in the heat of the Suez crisis. When Egypt stopped controlling the Suez Canal and prohibited Israeli from shipping from the Wakaba Gulf, Israel attacked Egypt as part of its military operation together with the French and the British. However, because of the international demands, Israel had to forcefully withdraw from its borders.
By 1967, the Egyptian troops were rearmed by Soviet Union with weapons. President Nasser, Egypt’s president, sent troops to the Sinai Peninsula and blocked Israeli’s shipping once again. Israel decided to take a move in response to Egypt’s aggressive moves. In a brilliantly executed and stunning preemptive attack, Israel routed the military forces of Jordan, Egypt, and Syria. This Israel’s military triumph was a shameful defeat for Arab military and political leaders.
After this triumphant war, Israel took over the territories previously controlled by the Arabs, including the Golan Heights, West Bank, the Sinai Peninsula, and the Gaza Strip.
Yom Kippur War Results
The Yom Kippur War was a profound and intense shock to Israel. Even though the war was considered as victory and triumph for Israel having successfully defended itself from the attacks of larger Arab countries, it left a negative legacy for Israel. There were many significant repercussions within Israel, as well as its relations with other countries, particularly the United States.
Yom Kippur War Regional Effects
The Yom Kippur War had a destructive effect on Israel. Over 6,000 Israeli troops died, injured, or wounded during the eighteen days of battle. The destruction of equipment and the turn down in its production and exports of its products as a result of mobilization reached almost US$7 billion. This amount is equivalent to the country’s gross national product (GNP) for one whole year. Most important effect is that the image maintained by an invincible Israel since the war in June 1967 was destroyed forever.
Taking into consideration the disadvantages brought by the participation of Israel Defense Forces in the war, their ultimate accomplishments were outstanding. Undoubtedly, among the several factors that turned the table, the most notable was the IDF reservists’ heroic performance. Facing a combat at a moment’s notice, the citizen soldiers of Israel saved the country and their fellowmen from military humiliation. That achievement exerted an intense effect on the country’s strategic planning. Although the conclusion and the results of this achievement were questioned in the later years, the IDF reservists’ performance was still considered as a justification of the force structure of IDF as a whole. For this reason, the retention of the IDF’s military service’s traditional framework was not at all affected.
The war in June 1967 had given Israel and its declining Labor Party a badly needed confidence and morale booster; however, the October 1973 events shook as a whole, the country’s self-confidence and cast a dark shadow over the Labor elite’s competence. In addition, the war-weary public became especially critical of Israel’s Minister of Defense Dayan.
The Agranat Commission, an organization created right after the war in order to determine responsibilities for Israel’s military forces’ unpreparedness, stated in its April 1974 interim report that the group could not take Dayan’s qualifications into account. The report further stated that Dayan should be called civilian defense minister instead of Minister of Defense. For this reason, the Agranat Commission concluded that Israel’s Minister of Defense did not take any personal responsibility. The commission even claimed that Dayan’s ministerial responsibility was more of a political and public question instead of a judicial one. Dayan submitted his resignation letter to Prime Minister Golda Meir; however, the latter did not accept it. The Agranat Commission even blamed the Israeli military, and suggested the dismissal of the Army Chief of Staff, David Elazar.
When the Agranat Commission report was published, Prime Minister Meir took full responsibility. The prime minister resigned from his post on the 11th of April, 1974 and his resignation led to the establishment of Israel’s very first Rabin government. Despite his resignation, Prime Minister Meir remained a major influence in the country’s Labor Party.
The Israeli government established by Yitzhak Rabin in 1974 entered into an interim agreement with Egypt and into a disengagement agreement with Syria an Egypt. These agreements led to the establishment of the “territories for peace” principle.
Yom Kippur War: Effects in the Relations with the USA
The Yom Kippur War started by Syria and Egypt caused huge and significant initial losses of material and personnel. Urgently, Israel needed more planes, ammunition, and tanks. The Soviet Union helped the Arab attackers with supplies while Israel asked help from the United States. Israel needed that help urgently with their survival at stake. After 3 days of discussion and deliberation, USA finally agreed to help Israel by replacing all its losses.
The resupply set a shift in the American policy in motion. This was set to solidify the relation of the US and Israel. The vulnerability of Israel during the Yom Kippur War caused it to become increasingly dependent on the United States military, diplomatic, and economic aid. This 1973 war started out an escalating regional arm race where Israel was pushed to compete with the Arab countries, newly enriched with the skyrocketing prices of oil. Simultaneously, Nixon saw the Israeli military forces’ power as a considerable benefit to the US to offset the Soviet Union’s inroads to Israel as well as to promote regional stability.
As a result of the Yom Kippur War, the US quadrupled all the foreign aid it gave to Israel and took over France’s position as the largest arms supplier of Israel. The policy of maintaining the qualitative edge of Israel over its neighboring countries was born right after the war. This policy was based on the appreciation of the US of Israel’s role as Western values’ defender is a hostile region, as well as on the Cold War’s calculus of contrasting the Soviet Union’s client states.
As a result of the war, Nixon’s administration became dedicated and committed to promoting peace so as to replace or offset the Soviet’s influence to the Arab countries, as well as to end the crippling effects and repercussions of the Arab oil restriction in the US, Japan, and Europe. Before the Yom Kippur War, the Congress hardly managed to approve $500 million loan range to Israel. However, after the war, the US had been granting Israel with $2.1 billion per year, half in grants and half in loans. Almost all the money was used to acquire American-made military equipment and hardware. After five years, Israel began receiving $3 billion grant as stipulated in the Camp David Accords in 1978, which led to the Israeli-Egyptian peace treaty in 1979.
Yom Kippur War: Effects in the Relations with the Arab Neighbors
The Yom Kippur War had greatly demonstrated to Israel’s Arab neighbors that Israel could never be crushed on the battleground even under circumstances favorable for the Arabs. This, as a result, led to a higher diplomacy interest as the means to have an edge over Israel.
As an effect of the US Secretary of State Henry Kissinger’s intensive efforts, Israel departed from the Suez Canal and its east bank just behind the cease-fire zone supervised by United Nations. Also, at the Syrian front, the Israeli territorial gains created in the war were surrendered. Immediately after the war, the diplomatic relations of Syrian and Egyptian with the US, which was wrecked since the war in 1967, were resumed. The Yom Kippur War also led to the Suez Canal’s clearance. This war also brought about a sudden and major shift in the power of Middle East which eventually led to the 1979 Israeli-Egyptian peace treaty signing.
Right after the Yom Kippur War, many African states and other Third World countries followed the earlier actions of the Soviet Union and disengaged from their diplomatic relation with Israel. During the 1975 UN General Assembly, the “Zionism equals racism” resolution was passed. Moreover, the Palestine Liberation Organization, whose international status was strengthened in 1974, continued attacking Israel. In turn, Israel refused to have any relation with the PLO.
Post Ceasefire Negotiation
The organized battle on all fronts ended on October 26. However, the ceasefire failed to end the erratic clashes along the ceasefire lines. It also did not dissipate the military tensions. Without any means of supply and with cutoff of the third Army, it was indeed an effective hostage to Israel.
Kissinger threatened to give support to the withdrawal resolution of United Nations. However, before Israel could respond to this threat, Hafez Ismail, the national security advisor of Egypt, sent a stunning message to Kissinger, saying that Egypt was ready to enter into direct negotiations with the Israelis but Israel must first agree to permit the delivery of non-military supplies to their army and that Israel must first comply with the complete ceasefire.
The negotiations took place on the 28th of October, between Muhammad al-Ghani al-Gamasy, Egypt’s major general and Aharon Yariv, Israel’s major general. In the end, Kissinger brought Egypt’s proposal to Sadat without any disagreement or debate.
The checkpoints of United Nations were brought in to take over Israeli checkpoint. The non-military supplies of Egypt were also allowed to reach the Egypt’s base and there was also an exchange of the prisoners-of-war.
The Geneva summit followed, and eventually, a peace agreement was worked out. On the 18th of January, Israel entered into a pullback agreement in the west side of Suez Canal, and their very last troops were withdrawn on the 5th of March, 1974.
Eventually, Henry Kissinger’s shuttle diplomacy created a disengagement agreement on the 31st of May, 1974, based on the withdrawal of Israeli to the Purple Line, prisoners-of-war exchange, and the UN buffer zone establishment. This resulted in the establishment of the United Nations Disengagement and Observer Force to supervise peace in the Golan.
Related Security Councils Resolutions
In accordance with the joint proposal made by the US and the Soviet Union, the United Nations Security Council Resolution 338 or S/RES/338 was approved on the 22nd of October, 1973. This resolution called for a permanent ceasefire in the Yom Kippur War. This resolution set the ceasefire to take effect on that same day, not later that 6:52 in the evening. The resolution states (emphasis in original):
The Security Council
1. Calls upon all parties to the present fighting to cease all firing and terminate all military activity immediately, no later than 12 hours after the moment of the adoption of this decision, in the positions they now occupy;
2. Calls upon the parties concerned to start immediately after the cease-fire the implementation of Security Council Resolution 242 (1967) in all of its parts;
3. Decides that, immediately and concurrently with the cease-fire, negotiations shall start between the parties concerned under appropriate auspices aimed at establishing a just and durable peace in the Middle East (Avraham 479).
The term “appropriate auspices” in the resolution was interpreted as Soviet or American rather than the United Nations auspices. The third clause helped in establishing the framework for the 1973 Geneva Conference held in December, 1973.
The supposed importance of the 338 resolution in the conflict between the Arabs and the Israelis allegedly stems from “decides” stated in the third clause which is apprehended for the binding of the 242 resolution. Nevertheless, the decision in the third clause does not really relate to the 242 resolution, but rather to start the negotiations on a just and durable peace in the Middle East. This led to the holding of the Geneva Conference; however, Syria did not attend this conference.
The argument moves on. In the United Nations Charter Article 25, it is stated that the United Nations members agree to acknowledge and perform the Security Council’s decisions. It is also generally acknowledged that the resolutions of the Security Council, approved in the exercise of the primary responsibility for maintaining international peace in compliance to the UN Charter, are required on the member states.
The scholars studying this resolution state that the word “decide” connotes it as the Council’s decision; thereby, invoking the article 25’s binding nature. Moreover, the legal force added by this resolution to the Resolution 242 is said to be the reason that the SC 242 and Resolution 338 are usually referred together with the legal documents related to the conflict.
There are some scholars who have also promoted the position that this resolution was actually passed as a non-binding recommendation of Chapter VI while there are some who claim that this was actually recommended as a binding resolution of Chapter VII.
This resolution was approved by 14 at the 1747th UNSC meeting, with only one member not participating in the held voting. This was the People’s Republic of China. Despite the terms stipulated in the resolution, the fighting continued and this led to the Resolution 339, the only resolution that resulted in a ceasefire.
The United Nations Security Council Resolution 339 or the S/RES/339 was passed on the 23rd of October, 1973 to implement the Yom Kippur War ceasefire where the United Nations Security Council Resolution 338 which was passed two days before the adoption of Resolution 339 had failed (Hasanayn 285). After the Egyptian forces did not comply with the terms of the ceasefire, the Israeli forces used this to make considerable military gains.
The Resolution 339 mainly confirmed the terms stated in the Resolution 388, turning the forces of the two parties back in place where the ceasefire took effect, as well as the request made by the Secretary General of the United Nations to carry out measures and actions placing observers to oversee the ceasefire.
The Camp David Accords
The government established by Yitzhak Rabin was constrained and restricted by different scandals, and he was obliged to step down from his position in 1977. The Likud party, the right-wing party, which was under the leadership of Benachem Begin, took place after winning the elections. This was a first historical change in the Israel’s political landscape since Israel was founded.
Sadat, who joined the war for the recovery of Sinai, grew impatient at the slow pace and progress of the peace process. In November of 1977, Sadat took the unparalleled step of going to Israel. He was the very first Arab leader who explicitly recognized that Israel has the right to exist.
Sadat’s act speeded up the peace process. US President Jimmy Carter asked Begin and Sadat to attend a summit at the Camp David for the final peace negotiation. The negotiation took place for 12 days from the 5th to 17th of September, 1978 (Donald 371). In the end, the negotiation succeeded and in 1979, both Egypt and Israel signed the Israel-Egypt Peace Treaty. Because of this and to have a lasting peace and good relation with Egypt, Israel decided to withdraw its settlers and troops from the Sinai.
Many members of the Arab community were furious at the successful peace negotiation between Egypt and Israel. This led to Egypt’s expulsion from the Arab League.
Two years later, on the 6th of October, 1981, Sadat was assassinated while he was in a parade celebrating the eighth anniversary of the start of the Yom Kippur War. He was assassinated by Army members who became furious because of the negotiations he made with Israel.
The Yom Kippur War is an inconclusive and damaging fourth Arab-Israeli war. It was initiated by Syria and Egypt on the 6th of October, 1973, right on the Yom Kippur, a Jewish holy day and during Ramadan, Islam’s fasting month. The war lasted until the 26th of October, 1973. The war that eventually drew the Soviet Union and the United States into a tortuous confrontation trying to defend their respective allies was started with the subtle goal of persuading Israel to enter into negotiations more favorable for the Arab countries.
Despite the success initially enjoyed by the Syrian and the Egyptian forces, the Yom Kippur War proved once more how effective and efficient the Israeli military forces could be. Immediately after the initial setbacks, the war largely boosted the morale of the Israelis. Even though there was a coordinated attack on the two fronts, Israel survived and pushed back the nations that were initially broken through the defenses of Israel.
Aside from the weaponry, the Americans also provided the Israelis with intelligence. What appeared to be instinctive devastating counter-attacks from the Israelis were actually based on information provided by the American intelligence. In essence, Israel knew where to find their enemy and how to coordinate an attack accordingly.
Moreover, the Yom Kippur War also served the Arab nations a salutary lesson. The failure of the Syrian and the Egyptian forces to defeat and win over Israel forced Sadat to adopt a diplomatic approach. This war also encouraged Palestinians to carry out extreme actions.
Indeed, with the experience of Israel and Arab nations, the Yom Kippur War provides the lesson that not all victories are positive. The negative part of victory would only show up as an aftermath and effect of the war.
Bard, Mitchell. The Yom Kippur War. 18 September, 2008. 07 May, 2009. ;http://www.jewishvirtuallibrary.org/jsource/History/73_War.html;.
Avraham, Adan. On the Banks of the Suez: An Israeli General’s Personal Account of the Yom Kippur War. California: Presidio Press, 1980.
Hasanayn, Haykal. The Road to Ramadan. New York: Times, 1975.
Donald, N. Warriors Against Israel. Vermont: Amana Books, 1988.