There are several
topologies suitable for the access network: tree, ring, or bus. A PON can also
be deployed in redundant configuration as double ring or doubletree; or redundancy
may be added only to a part of the PON, say the trunk of the tree. For the rest
of this article, we will focus our attention on the tree topology; however, most
of the conclusions made are equally relevant to other topologies
transmissions in a PON are performed between Optical Line Terminal (OLT) and Optical
Network Units (ONU). Therefore, in the downstream direction (from OLT to ONUs),
a PON is a point-to-multipoint network, and in the upstream direction it is a
multipoint-to-point network. The OLT resides in the local exchange (central office),
connecting the optical access network to an IP, ATM, or SONET backbone. The ONU
is located either at the curb (FTTC solution), or at the end-user location (FTTH,
FTTB solutions), and provides broadband voice, data, and video services. In the
downstream direction, a PON is a P2MP network, and in the upstream direction it
is a MP2P network.
The advantages of using
PONs in subscriber access networks are numerous.
1. PONs allow for long reach
between central offices and customer premises, operating at distances over 20km.
PONs minimizes fiber deployment in both the local exchange office and local loop.
PONs provides higher bandwidth due to deeper fiber penetration, offering gigabit
per second solutions.
4. Operating in the downstream as a broadcast network,
PONs allow for video broadcasting as either IP video or analog video using a separate
5. PONs eliminate the necessity to install active multiplexer
at splitting locations thus relieving network operators
6. Being optically
transparent end to end PONs allow upgrades to higher bit rates or additional wavelengths.
One possible way of separating the channels is to use wavelength
division multiplexing (WDM) in which each ONU operates at a different wavelength.
While a simple solution, it remains cost prohibitive for an access network.
WDM solution would require either tunable receiver or a receiver array at the
OLT to receive multiple channels. An even more serious problem for network operators
would be wavelength-specific ONU inventory instead of having just one type of
ONU, there would be multiple types of ONUs based on their laser wavelength .It
would also be more problematic for an unqualified user to replace a defective
ONU. Using tunable lasers in ONUs is too expensive at the current state of technology.
For these reasons a WDM PON network is not an attractive solution in today's environment.
You may also like this : EDGE, Holographic Data Storage , Integer Fast Fourier Transform, NRAM, Orthogonal Frequency Division Multiplplexing , Ovonic Unified Memory, 4G Wireless Systems , Daknet, AC Performance Of Nanoelectronics , High Performance DSP Architectures, Millipede , Free Space Laser Communications, Short Message Service (SMS), Conditional Access System , SyncML, Virtual keyboard, High Altitude Aeronautical Platforms, MANET , Smart Fabrics, Dynamic Virtual Private Network, Blue Tooth, Autonomic Computing , Voice Over Internet Protocol, Artificial Neural Network (ANN) , DNA Based Computing, Digital Subscriber Line , Freenet, Access gateways , Free Space Optics, Introduction to the Internet Protocols, High Altitude Aeronautical Platforms, Fiber Distributed Data Interface , Hyper-Threading technology , IMode, Cyberterrorism Adding Intelligence to Internet, Self-Managing Computing, Unified Modeling Language (UML), Socket Programming, SAM, VoCable , ATM with an Eye,Mind Reading Computer, Blue Brain, 6G Wireless, Touch Screens,IT Seminar Reports, PPT and PDF.