ANIMATION PROGRAM OVERVIEW
Animation is a process that involves a broad set of skills, practices and technologies that communicate through motion, design and visual narrative. Students studying animation at CMU will develop the artistic vision and technical skills necessary to produce powerful visual stories, in a positive, supportive and creative community.
The animation program provides students with a broad exposure to animation as an industry and as an internationally celebrated artform. Students can choose to work in a variety of media from hand-drawn animation, to traditional stop-motion techniques, to 3D computer animation. The topics they study will include character design, storyboarding, modeling, character and effects animation, and more. As students progress they are encouraged to focus on specific areas of interest while contributing to a variety of advanced production opportunities.
Students that graduate with a BFA in Animation will leave CMU with a broad set of skills and will be able to work in a variety of areas including the entertainment industry, illustration and advertising, prototyping and design for manufacturing, and the medical media industry.
The Department of Art and Design has an active animation student organization (Animation Super Station) that meets on a regular basis to screen films, host speakers and support individual projects.
ANIMATION AT CMU
Dedicated Animation Lab:
Animation at CMU combines traditional animation tools along-side advanced digital technology. Our dedicated Animation Computer lab is outfitted with powerful double-monitor workstations which include 27” Imac computers and Wacom Cintiqs for on-screen digital drawing, sculpting and animation. Each workstation is fully loaded with industry grade softwares to support a variety of animation workflows including 2D motion graphics, 3D animation and tradigital animation (a combination of traditional drawing and digital production tools).
Above: Dedicated Animation Computer Lab
Traditional Media Animation Labs:
Our Traditional Media Animation Labs are designed for playful exploration in a variety of analogue media such as clay, paper cut-out and even sand animation. Each workstation is outfitted with a professional DSLR camera, Imac computer and industry grade software for capturing and processing frame-by-frame animation.
Above: Advanced Traditional Animation Labs