Brushing our teeth is a very good thing for our oral hygiene and overall health, but what matters is the type of toothpaste we use daily as they conatin some toxins which are harmful like triclosan, fluoride and sodium lauryl sulfate.
How does these toxins affect our health
Fluoride affect the bones and pineal gland, and it can also affect the function of our brain.
Triclosan is known as endocine disruptor which causes the hormone regulation to be altered.
Sodium lauryl sulfate, can be used as foaming agent and is a possible carcinogen, and sodium lauryl sulfate causes gum inflammation and irritate the gums.
As discussed above the toothpaste we do buy from the markets are of no use since it alters our health in different ways and form, and if you would be taught how to make your own toothpaste at home it would be more convincing and true because you’ll know about every ingredient used as you’ll be making it yourself just with natural ingredients from you kitchen.
Benefits of Extra-Virgin Coconut Oil
It has good enough lauric acid which possesses the natural anti-inflammatory and antimicrobial effects.
It reduces plaque on your teeth.
In addition extra-virgin coconut oil helps in preventing problems like toothaches, bad breath (halitosis) and gum diseases.
In promoting and maintaining oral health, coconut oil, olive oil, sesame oil are very effective preventive agents.
Also a study reveals that if coconut oil is used for oil swishing, the plaque formation is decreased.
Benefits of Turmeric
Turmeric is just another ingredient that is ver important and beneficial to our overall oral health.
It has the properties of antibacterial, anti-plaque and anti-inflammatory, which helps in keeping dental problems away.
Turmeric helps in whitening the teeth.
Plaque and gingivitis can be controlled by turmeric mouthwash.
Benefits of Baking Soda (Sodium Bicarbonate)
This is another abrasive agent which helps in brightening and whitening of the teeth.
It reduces the risk of bad breath through nuetralizing of acids in the mouth.
Making a paste or powder of baking soda is very effective in removing plaque more than other products of non-baking soda.
Benefits of Peppermint Extract
Powdered peppermint in ancient times is used to fight and prevent bad breath and also helps to whiten the teeth.
It also provide nice flavor.
It can inhibit the formation of biofilm which is directly linked to the cavities due to it therapeutic importance.
How To Make Toothpaste With Natural Ingredients At Home
Extra-virgin coconut oil
Baking soda (Sodium Bicarbonate)
Peppermint Extract (This is optional, your may decide to use it or not)
Other things you’ll need:
Put in a bowl 2 tablespoon of extra-virgin coconut oil.
Now, add 2 tablespoon of baking soda into the bowl.
Next, add 10 to 15 drops of peppermint extract.
Again in the bowl add 1/2 to 1 teaspoon turmeric.
Use a rubber spoon or a spatula to mix the ingredients for few minutes till a smooth paste is obtained.
Now the homemade toothpaste is ready, and don’t forget to store it in an airtight container inside a fridge or a refrigerator.
Note: Do not use peppermint oil instead of the extract because no essential oil should be included in the paste
How To Use:
Use a spatula to take out a small amount of the homemade toothpaste. (Do not dip your toothbrush in the homemade toothpaste)
Use this spatual to speard the homemade toothpaste on your toothbrush.
Now, brush your teeth as usual (Note: This toothpaste does not foam because no soapy ingredient used in making it)
After brushing your teeth with the homemade toothpaste rinse your mouth with warm water.
To avoid turmeric stains make sure to wash your spatula or spoon and toothbrush.
Brush your teeth using tis toothpaste twice daily.
More Info: This homemade toothpaste can last for several months and if it begins to dry try and add a little coconut oil and mix thoroughly before use, and the turmeric used in this homemade toothpaste would not in any way stain your teeth instead it would make your teeth more white.