Stem-cell research, drug legalisation, digital privacy, hate crimes, and eating dogs or other animals are all up for discussion between students taking part in a new challenge.
The Ethics Olympiad rewards top performers for their careful, deep and perceptive thinking.
It’s a useful way for students to build ethical decision-making muscle and hone an ability to respectfully discuss deeply contentious questions before facing an increasingly complex and divided world.
The Olympiad draws teams from independent, Catholic and public schools across Australia.
Philosophy and ethics teacher Matthew Wills is the guiding hand behind it, as well as the annual Australian schools Philosophon.
Both challenges have grown from small local meets between schools to become international challenges.
This year’s Ethics Olympiad has seen more than 300 teams register in Australia and New Zealand at multi-school events hosted in state capitals, with a next round of deep thinking among students planned to take place in November.
“There’s a real emphasis on promoting respectful dialogue around ethical issues,” says Wills. Teachers judge the round-robin meets, with university philosophers and ethicists judging the finals in each city.
Students who confess to being ‘super nervous’ before an Ethics Olympiad, with no idea what to expect, have been pleasantly surprised, Wills says.
“The fact that they get to interact with students from all sorts of other schools, state schools interacting with private schools, Catholic schools – the unique thing is that they are interacting with each other around ethical issues,” he says.
“Some students might come with assumptions about what position, for example, a Catholic student might take compared with a state school student and it’s a refreshing experience because they are all keen to work through different issues in an open-minded way.”
Ethics contests differ from debates, where each side is assigned a view; rather, students defend positions about an issue they believe are right.
The eventual winners are those who have shown the deepest critical, collaborative and careful thinking.
Wills was appointed the project manager co-ordinating the Philosophon at the Federation of Australasian Philosophy in Schools Associations (FAPSA) two years ago, and is manager of the Ethics Olympiad Australasia.
Before that, he spent a decade as the head of an academic department in Perth where he organised philosophy competitions between schools.
He says the inspiration for the Ethics Olympiad came in part from the United States’ Ethics Bowl, which began as an inter-college tournament more than 30 years ago and now takes place in thousands of US high schools. The University of St Andrews in the United Kingdom also runs an ethics challenge, the John Stuart Mill Cup.
For Ethics Bowl, students receive case studies about a month beforehand so they can formulate well-structured and logical answers. They are then quizzed by opposing teams and are required to challenge or strengthen the other teams’ arguments.
It’s taken very seriously in US schools, Wills says, with some schools hiring coaches to beef up their squads.
“In the Ethics Olympiad, students must argue a particular position carefully and thoughtfully. They are not judged solely on being able to put forward a reasoned argument, but also how well they take into consideration the alternative view to the position they have taken,” he says.
“Students get rewarded for respectful dialogue and building on each others’ arguments.”
TRY THIS CASE STUDY AT HOME
Here’s a middle years Ethics Olympiad for the family to contemplate. It uses a segment from the hit 1995 film Babe to kick off discussion among young minds.
Babe is the story of a pig who comes to live on a farm. It features talking animals who help Babe learn to become a unique asset - a pig who rounds up sheep. When we first meet Babe, we hear from the farm dog that the farmer won’t eat him because the farmer will only eat animals that are stupid.
The segment shows Babe arriving at the farm. A group of sheepdog puppies run up to their mother.
Puppy 1: What is it, Mum?
Mother dog: It’s a pig.
Puppy 2: They’ll eat him when he’s big enough.
Puppy 1: Will he eat us when we are big enough?
Mother dog: Good heavens, no. The bosses only eat stupid animals like sheep and ducks and chickens.
Cut to a scene in the barn.
Puppy 1: He does look stupid, Mum.
Mother dog: Not as stupid as sheep, mind you, but pigs are definitely stupid.
Babe: Excuse me, no we’re not.
Mother dog: Good heavens, who are you?
Babe: I’m a large white.
Mother dog: Yes, that’s your breed, dear. What’s your name?
Babe: I don’t know.
Mother dog: Well, what did your mother call you to tell you apart from your brothers and sisters?
Babe: Our mum called us all the same.
Mother dog: And what was that, dear?
Babe: She called us all Babe.
(1) Do you think it is OK to eat animals as long as they are stupid?
(2) Which animals would you not eat and why?
(3) All animals can experience pain. Is this relevant to the question of whether it is OK to eat them?
(4) In Asia some people eat dogs. In Europe some eat horses. Is this any more disgusting than eating cows or pigs?
(5) Should we all be vegetarians?