Japanese toy maker keeps wooden spinning tops and toys alive
Fourth generation craftsman Masaaki Hiroi, 80, loves making traditional spinning tops and other wooden toys. This is his story, in his own words.
Fourth generation craftsman Masaaki Hiroi, 80, loves making traditional spinning tops and other wooden toys. This is his story, in his own words.
HFCS is ubiquitous in the modern processed food supply. It's added to pizza sauce, salad dressings, ketchup and "whole wheat" breads. Did you know it's often contaminated with the toxic heavy metal mercury?
Toddlers are terrible listeners. This is a fact. Part of it is because they aren’t developmentally ready to internalize things you’re telling them. That makes it necessary to repeat yourself a bajillion times. Which is also why you don’t see a lot of toddlers who are talk-therapists. And why you never feel better when you’re telling them about your anxiety over all those TPS reports at work.
Here are eight vital life skills that children aren’t taught in school:
1. Independence: Teaching children, a little at a time, to be independent, can show them that they can make decisions on their own. Letting them make their own mistakes can teach them valuable lessons they’ll carry with them.
2. Compassion: Compassion is needed to work well with others, to care for other people and to find happiness through making other people happy.
3. Individuality: They need to be taught that we come in all sizes, shapes and colors, and it is perfectly OK to be unique.
4. Welcoming Change: Teaching children that change isn’t something to be afraid of – just something to prepare for – can help them in so many aspects throughout their life.
5. Happiness: Many parents coddle their children in an attempt to keep them happy and safe, but it can make children rely on their parents for their happiness. Teaching a child from an early age that they can be happy on their own, by things like playing, reading and imagining, is a valuable life lesson.
6. Finding Passion: Many people struggle with finding their passion. Helping a child find what he or she is passionate about by allowing them to try a bunch of different things can help them find a source of lifelong internal happiness and motivation. Encourage the adventure, but let children decide on their own, where they find passion.
7. Asking questions: Teaching children that asking questions is a good thing, can encourage their curiosity and help them continue to seek knowledge in different aspects of life.
8. Solving problems: Constantly solving a child’s problems for them won’t help them as they grow. They need to know that they can solve problems on their own. New skills, a new environment, a new job – they’re all just problems to be solved. Modeling problem solving and allowing children to come up with their solution ideas can help them develop confidence and let them know that whatever comes their way, they are capable of handling it.
One of the major criticisms of these typologies is how culturally determined they are. So what does research say about the pros and cons of each of these parenting styles?
It's so simple, but a lot of people have no idea it's even a thing.
We decided to create our own DIY Treasure Chest for Toddlers using a baby wipes container and baby food lids to kick off our first activity. And I just happened to have some gold spray paint leftover from our Solomon’s Temple blocks to make our makeshift “treasure chest” and gold coins a little more authentic-looking.
Here are some dangers involved in hair pins on babies -- choking, stragulation, allergic reaction, hear loss, etc. It may sound terrifying, but this does not mean you need to take away all the lovely pins from your child. Just be aware where the potential (no matter how unlikely it is) dangers can arise so that you don't get caught off guard if anything happens.
In 1971, professor Julian Stanley founded the Study of Mathematically Precocious Youth (SMPY) program. SMPY is “the longest-running current longitudinal survey of intellectually talented children,” Nature reports. For the last 45 years it’s tracked the accomplishments of over 5,000 gifted children – and they’ve shaped our world.
Forget fancy superfoods. These nutritious powerhouse will prove worthy friend for you and your family.
SINGAPORE: Malay-Muslim community leaders support an idea to make the Asatizah Recognition Scheme (ARS) compulsory for all Islamic religious teachers. The decade-old scheme recognises teachers and scholars who meet the minimum standards of qualification to preach and teach Islamic religious knowledge.
When our kids get fussy with food, our go-to is a PB & J. And if desperate times call for desperate measures, maybe we’ll cut them into star shapes to spare us all the headache of a mealtime tantrum. But one mom who is putting our sandies to shame is Laleh Mohmedi.
Recently, Sean took his son to grab dinner at a Chinese restaurant. He couldn’t help but notice that there was something oddly familiar about their unassuming waitress. “Over small talk and water refills, I got the sense that this single mom didn’t want to be there, but had to be there and she was doing her best to smile,” Sean wrote on Facebook. “It tore my heart out.”
A Missouri mom has seen immense support online after she opened up about her battle with anxiety and depression and how it’s affected her as a mother.
This week in parenting you learned that the reason your kid trusts you might have something to do with you being really, really ridiculously good looking. But if your good looks aren’t exactly translating in the bedroom, a statistician thinks Game Of Thrones is to blame for your lack of literal game. Parents of thumbsuckers and nail biters were given reason to rejoice, because their kids might have fewer allergies later in life. Plus you found out what the hell Pokémon Go is, and while it’s no Nintendo NES Classic Edition, at least it will get you kid outside. All this news and more, because every week is busy when you’re a parent.
New ideas for sandwiches, wraps, mini-pizzas and more tasty lunch recipes for kids.
Storm-Manea Ellyatt is calling bull on the facade of parenthood displayed on social media. Instead of posting a highlight reel of her life, she’s getting real about the daily struggles she faces as a mother — and she invites everyone to join her.
“All those cute bonds ads, miniature Nike shoes, adorable baby shower gifts, baby spam on Instagram, squad dates with your mum posse and those god damn laceylaners lied to me,” she wrote on Thursday, listing her failed expectations about parenting based on how it’s conveyed by ads, TV and online.
“Not once did I see an ad with a mum locked in her cupboard crying in her leaked stained pjs from 3 days ago, covered in sweat and vomit, praying to every god imaginable for the strength and patience to go back to the s**tshow that is now their life,” she wrote. “The once calm, poised, patient goddess, who could sling cocktials, swear with sailors and dance uninhibited until tomorrow afternoon, can bearly hold a conversation, hold her eyes open or the tears back from this new found ‘bliss.’”
Whenever your baby or toddler takes a serious tumble — from a couch, bed, highchair, crib, or countertop, for example — you'll need to do a thorough check for injuries, especially if he falls on his head or back.
You'll want to make sure that your child doesn't have any serious wounds, that he hasn't broken any bones, and that he hasn't suffered a concussion or other internal damage, including a serious head injury (such as a skull fracture or intracranial injury). Falls can be serious, but baby and toddler bones are soft, so they don't fracture as easily as those of an older child.
Children are increasingly at risk from essential oils that are often used in natural remedies, a Tennessee poison center reports. The oils, which are derived from plants and used in aromatic and homeopathic products, can cause harm when consumed. And children face a heightened risk from exposure.
You might think it’s cute – that big, wet and slobbery tongue reaching out from your canine’s jaw and affectionately lapping at your face. But what if I told you there was something quite sinister about it?
No, I’m not saying your beloved Fido is trying to harm you. Your little (or big) furry friend genuinely is trying to display affection. Too bad the same can’t be said for all the bacteria on the dog’s tongue.
Too bad the same can’t be said for all the bacteria on the dog’s tongue.
This post was originally titled 'Notes to Self' but I'm thinking we could all do with some reminders. Here are some notes for all Montessori parents.
Why make your own baby food when there are so many good commercial brands available? Homemade baby food produces less waste (by the time a baby is 12 months old, he’s emptied 600 jars of baby food on average), costs less, contains no chemicals or additives and is fresher. Besides, it’s simple! Here’s how to make your own baby food purees, plus some easy recipe ideas to get your started.
As far as we're concerned, the whole point of having kids is tweeting the absurd and vaguely disturbing things they say. There's nothing quite like seeing inside the mind of a tiny person who hasn't yet been shaped cultural norms (and common decency). And we owe the Twitter famous and fabulous Kelly Oxford a huge thank you for bringing us the wise words of her seven-year-old daughter, Bea.
Kids put together the strangest outfits. You’d think this is because kids can’t be bothered with style (so many more important things to do!), but that’s not the case. Kids care very much about what they wear.
Gaining more than 19 million views, Dr.Hamilton's "Hold" will solve your misery of calming your baby!
1. Get the timing right: Make your tot’s appointment for a time when they’re alert and rested.
2. Parent by example: Mums and dads have the greatest influence on their tyke’s dental health. Your child will pick up on your anxiety, so focus on staying cool, calm, collected and confident.
3. No surprises: Bambinos handle dental procedures best when their parents know what to expect and have prepared them for the experience.
4. Look on the bright side: Answer your tot’s questions in a positive way. For example, use words like ‘healthy’ instead of ‘hurt’ and definitely steer clear of scary dental anecdotes!
5. Come prepared: Take along some questions about your child’s oral health.
6. Over to them! When the big day arrives, give your mini-mite some control over their dental visit, such as choosing their own ‘tooth doctor outfit’. Then it’s time to climb into the exciting dentist’s chair and let the check-up begin!
Because it doesn’t look like the world is going back to pen and paper anytime soon, here are some of the best i-alternatives (and one iPad) that can be your kid’s new study buddy.
When we laugh off behaviors and compare them to different stages, we minimize the needs of the individual child.
Faced with skyrocketing real estate prices, some Vancouver parents are taking an unusual step to ensure their children won’t be driven out of the city when they grow up. Those parents, and in some cases grandparents, have taken to buying property for young children then renting it out until the kids are old enough to move in.
Make a monster slime sensory writing tray for such a fun way to learn to write the alphabet, practise phonics, name writing and sight words! The googly eyes are so much extra fun and this theme could be paired with many fantastic monster story books too.
One of the best documentary series that will thrill people of all gender and ages. It consists of total 11 episodes, each featuring a specific biosphere of our planet Earth. Narrated by David Attenborough, BBC put their best resources into making this stellar work. Watch one episode, you will come out amazed.
Ask any parent about ear infections, and you will most likely hear one horror story after another. Ear infection, or Otitis Media, is the most common reason for visits to the paediatrician’s office. It is estimated that over 30 million visits are made every year in an attempt to deal with this problem.
1. For Toddlers ages 1-4, make sure your toilets seats in the toilets are kept closed. Doors are also to be closed always in bathrooms and the laundry rooms.
The only disadvantage children of single parents face is the knowledge that their mum is being judged.
Real voices, real lanterns, and they are just mesmerising.
The widening education gap between the rich and the poor is not news to those who work in education, many of whom have been struggling to close the gap beginning the day poor children enter kindergarten or preschool. But one unlikely soldier has joined the fight: a pediatric surgeon who wants to get started way before kindergarten. She wants to start closing the gap the day babies are born.
The longest recorded case of hiccups lasted for 68 years … and was caused by a falling hog. While that level of severity is extremely uncommon, most of us are no stranger to an occasional case of the hiccups. But what causes these ‘hics’ in the first place? John Cameron takes us into the diaphragm to find out.
Who here is a parent to a toddler who has not given a smartphone to her child to keep him occupied? If that question were asked in a room full of parents, we'd be surprised if a lot of hands went up.
The teacher tells you that your little one is very well-behaved in school. However, it is the direct opposite when she’s at home.
Results showed that particles of the virus were still present 24 hours after the toy was contaminated with a humidity of up to 60 percent.
Unfortunately, people do not think that viruses can come from inanimate objects, according to Richard Bearden II, lead author of the study from Georgia State University. Bearden explains that the common notion is that viruses come from other people.
It’s not just educational videos and gadgets.
Among the signs: feeling sad or withdrawn for two weeks or more may indicate depression, and intense fears or worries that get in the way of daily activities may indicate an anxiety disorder.
- The researchers looked at 105 healthy children younger than 3 who had surgery to repair an inguinal hernia, a common operation of early childhood.
- Between the ages of 8 and 15, researchers assessed the children's IQ, language, behavior and mental functions, including memory, learning, attention and thinking speed.
-The children were no different than siblings who were not exposed to general anesthesia at a young age, the study found.
“Oh my god!” the mother squealed. “Baby, are you OK? Did that hurt? What hurts, baby? What hurts?” The little girl commenced sobbing as what I deemed a nice save turned into a tragedy warranting a call to 911.
Yup, I make my almost 2-year-old and 5-year-old go to bed at 7 and 7:30 p.m., respectively. I know—you think I’m rigid, no fun, that I’m denying my kids a joyful childhood because they rarely get to frolic outside at dusk. I get a lot of crap for it. “Can’t you just … ?” My friends ask. No. I’m sorry, no, I can’t.
Kids attempt to explain the secrets of life -- and it's hilarious!
A child needs a good partner in learning. Instead of telling our children to read more, maybe we can start putting aside our time to join them in this can't-emphasize-enough activity that will expand your child's potentials.