Try for a moment to imagine strolling aimlessly through your backyard, admiring the luscious green scenery for a bandit marked critter scurries your way. Well I’m sorry to say that you’re sadly mistaken and this black-eyed critter is the best host for a dreadful disease called Rabies. Now of course not every stray animal you see is going to have rabies, however, there are many telling signs which you could associate and use to avoid such encounters.
First off, Rabies is a viral disease that affects the nervous system of humans and other creatures. It’s largely moved by saliva entering a wound which in turn travels through your blood stream to your brain causing inflammation and swelling. The most common hosts for rabies in the United States are bats, though worldwide, dogs are the dominant source for transmission. Other animals that could carry rabies are raccoons, skunks, foxes and any other stray mammal.
Maintaining these carriers from society has become quite a task. Animal Wildlife Removal experts pride themselves on keeping the roads safe from rabid mammals. They’ll come to your house, business or property and remove any animal deemed unfit for its environment. They are naturally regulated by state regulations to trap and relocate this animal appropriately.
The greatest issue face by wildlife removal specialists is educating others about the best way to take care of potential rabies exposure. If you’re bitten by an animal it’s very important to immediately call 911. It is also important to try capture your enemy to use for testing to make certain the animal is or is not a host for rabies. If unable to test the animal you could be in for a wild ride of month long treatments costing up to two thousand dollars.
It is important to never handle a wild animal: dog, squirrel, skunk, or raccoon that you’re unsure of. Ensuring that your children know and to inform an adult if they see a sick or injured animal and not to touch is also very important. The most frequent deaths from rabies exposure are in kids.
So when it comes to admiring and handling cuddly stray creatures, think twice. Call your local wildlife removal experts for advice on the best way to handle any wildlife in your area.