Showing all 11 results
Black tea is made from the leaves of a bush called Camellia sinensis. A process called oxidation turns the leaves from green to a dark brownish-black color. Oxidation means the leaves are exposed to moist, oxygen-rich air.
Black tea is a type of tea that is more oxidized than oolong, green, and white teas. Black tea is generally stronger in flavour than the less oxidized teas. All four types are made from leaves of the shrub (or small tree) Camellia sinensis.
Cinnamon tea is not only delicious, it’s also good for you. Cinnamon tea has been used to accelerate weight loss, improve immunity, and prevent chronic disease. Discover everything cinnamon tea has to offer and pour yourself a cup of spicy goodness.
Earl Grey tea, believe it or not, is not its own category of tea. It falls into the category of flavored teas. Flavored teas include any type of tea—white, green, oolong, black—that has been scented or flavored with fruit, flowers, spices, oils, extracts, and natural or artificial flavors.
Ginger tea’s healing properties and qualities make it useful for treating Vata imbalances, such as digestive issues, because it improves all three phases of gastrointestinal function (digestion, absorption, and elimination, ea made from ginger has high levels of vitamin C and amino acids,
Green tea is a type of tea that is made from Camellia sinensis leaves and buds that have not undergone the same withering and oxidation process used to make oolong teas and black teas
Green tea is a type of tea that is made from Camellia sinensis leaves and buds that have not undergone the same withering and oxidation process used to make oolong teas and black teas. Green tea originated in China, but its production and manufacture has spread to many other countries in Asia.
Black tea can inhibit your body’s ability to absorb iron, and lemon juice also counteracts this because it supports the body’s ability to absorb iron. Lemon juice and black tea both contain diuretics, which can help keep you from retaining water.
Mint tea is an herbal tea that is appreciated around the world for its fresh aroma and soothing taste. Mint tea benefits are widely promoted, but not all of them are supported by scientific studies. Other types of mint tea—such as Skinny Mint Tea—have become popular based, in part, on the benefits of mint tea.
Whether for drinking hot or over ice, Bein Tea has premium loose-leaf & full leaf teas made with the finest ingredients sourced from across the globe.