Nowadays, liquid level monitoring system plays a vital role in water, oil, automotive and also gas industries. This article discusses leak detection in the liquid level monitoring system to detect and also avoid the loss of liquid. In order to avoid the leakage of the liquid in the storage tank sensors are placed in the tank. For instance, pumping oil into a storage tank needs liquid-level monitoring to avoid leakage.Difficult liquid out of a silo into bottles also needs liquid level monitoring for volume control.
What is an Internet of Things?
Generally, the term internet of things referred to as the Internet of Objects, that will change everything including ourselves. This may look like a bold statement, but study the outcome the Internet before has had in different fields like education, communications, science, business, government.Humanity. Clearly, the Internet is one of the most important and controlling creations in the antiquity of humanity. Now study that, it specifies the additional development of the Internet, taking a huge leap in its ability to gather, analyze, and distribute data that we can go into knowledge, information, wisdom, etc.
The significant features of IoT (Internet of Things) involve connectivity, active engagement, artificial intelligence, sensors and the usage of minor devices. The hardware of the internet of things comprises of IoT-sensors, standard devices, nd IoT- wearable electronics
Liquid Level Monitoring System Using Internet of Things
The proposed system relates to the field of IoT (Internet of Things) in the liquid level monitoring system. The main objective of this project is to design a smart system for guessing exactly the level of liquid in the tank and stop the flow of liquid and leakage. The recent developments in the area of the internet of things have provided solutions to measure the amount and liquid level in a liquid transmission system using sensor based wireless technology. The operation of the intelligent liquid level monitoring system is discussed below.
The hardware and software requirements of the liquid lever monitoring system mainly include Atmega 328 microcontroller, Wifi Modem, Required Resistors, Capacitors, 12V transformer, ultrasonic, sensors, Diodes, LED’s, LCD Display, Arduino Compiler, MC Programming Language: Embedded C and IOT Gecko.
This project IOT based Liquid Level Monitoring system is a very advanced system which will update the users regarding the liquid level in the tank and will stop it from overflowing. To demonstrate the proposed system makes use of four containers. For this, this project uses ultrasonic sensors located over the containers to notice the level of the liquid and compare it with the depth of the containers. The essential component used in the proposed system is ‘AVR family microcontroller’ and also Wifi modem for sending data, LCD screen and also a buzzer.
This project is powered by a 12V transformer. The status of the liquid level in the containers can be displayed on the LCD screen. But a web page is made to display the status of the user monitoring it. The web page provides a graphical vision of the containers and highlights the level of the liquid in color in order to display the liquid level. The LCD display screen displays the status of the liquid level. The system places on the buzzer when the collected liquid level in the tank crosses the set limit. Therefore, this project helps to stop the excess of water by notifying about the liquid levels of the containers by offering a graphical image of the containers through a web page.
From the above information, we can conclude that an internet of things based liquid level monitoring project has a special mechanism, to keep the operator warned in case of overflow of liquid. There are 4 vessels used in this system and every vessel is attached to an ultrasonic sensor that is arranged over the container. The sensor used in the project and monitoring systems has a wide range of similar applications. The proposed system is used to measure, equate depth of the container and level of the liquid.
Thus, this is all about liquid level monitoring system using internet of things. We hope that you have got a better understanding of this concept. Furthermore, any queries regarding this concept or to implement sensor-based projects, please give your feedback by commenting in the comment section below. Here is a question for you, what is the function of an ultrasonic sensor?