The appearance of a lump near the big toe shows that the growth of bones. The disease is called hallux valgus and require compulsory treatment. This disease is seen not only seals, but also severe pain. If it hurts the bone on the thumb, and people feel uncomfortable while walking, you should pay attention to health. Pain indicate irregularities in the work of the ligaments, bones, tendons and joints. On the background hallux valgus is often appear and other diseases, such as arthrosis of the metatarsophalangeal joints, bursitis in the chronic form, a flat, transverse, or combined type, and other irregularities. Therefore, it is important that you know the causes and treatment of the disease.
Often the disease appears in women at the time, when men hallux valgus bypasses. To explain it simply: women prefer comfortable shoes, beautiful narrow high heeled shoes, even if the pain bunions on the big toes. With regular use you notice dimpled skin on the legs. If you close this eye problem gradually valgus, the foot for the transformation and for the provision of pain on the person.
Between wear small shoes is the curvature of the foot in unnatural position. Often the best legs in the wrong position, which leads to the growth of the bone on the little toe.
In addition to uncomfortable shoes, there are also other reasons. The majority of experts speaks to the high content of uric acid in the blood, which interfere with purine metabolism. Further, the joints and cartilage are deposited small crystals of the acid. Increase uric acid may occur because of taking certain medications, diet, stress, and heavy physical work.
A number of reasons, that may appear on the foot stone:
These include diabetes, arthritis, osteoarthritis, gout, thyroid disease and menopause.
Most people who are faced with the disease after 40 years. After this age the human body changes which affect the formation of bumps on the foot. In women can be attributed to such changes, menopause and metabolic disorders. The curvature of the foot may occur after following a strict diet in which a person does not receive the necessary substances and microelements.
If the growing bone of the great toe in a young age, this means a serious disturbance in the body. For example, failure of the endocrine system, but can also occur after injuries of the foot.
If there is a predisposition to the disease, you must see your doctor regularly and to avoid. With flat feet need special shoes or orthotics that reduce the load on the phalanges.
This is usually a distinction is made between the following types of deformation:
Also, the disease is classified according to importance. Easy stage is characterized by a small deviation to 20 degrees, the middle finger deviates from 25 to 35 and heavy more than 35 degrees. The rate of disease depends on the mode and duration of treatment, however, the exact stage can be the doctor after a series of diagnostic procedures.
If the lump grew to the feet, should be to visit the health institutions. In order to timely identify the disease and seek help the doctor, should know the primary symptoms, as well as view photos.
Initially, a slight discomfort and pain when walking. The man notices that his feet began to get tired quickly, the shoes rubs on the area of the bulging bone around your finger, often occurs corns. Over time, the condition worse: a flat-rate continues to grow, the bending of the large and second toes, swelling and the skin in the damaged area become red.
Cones of growth, thus is the man nagging pain through the foot. On the second, third and ring fingers of the feet are often visible calluses and dry skin.
In the case of advanced disease of the bones in the leg, even during rest. A bump on the big toe very noticeable also in the shoes, wearing, causing discomfort. On the little finger, which may occur, corn and heavy fading. Gradually the pain of moving to the whole foot.
What if there was a hard knot? To determine the right diagnosis, you need to visit your doctor. He will review and installation of the pre-stage of the disease. On examination the physician observes not only to changes in the bones, but also on the surface of the foot, determining its sensitivity and functioning. At the front desk should be more accurate to say, the specialist about how it hurts the bones of the foot around the big toe, prescription strain and physical exertion.
After the examination the doctor is required to designate additional studies, which include:
There are two ways to treat the disease. The first is a cardinal measure, which is the removal of the build-up to the toe surgically or with a laser. A simpler way is to stop the growth of bones. The most effective method of treatment depends on the severity of the disease, the health and recommendations of the doctor. In any case, you need to be prepared for this, that home treatment is often long and cannot be interrupted.
A simple stage is usually properly different physiological treatments, compresses and clamps. For the treatment of the bone on the thumb, and the same methods is required if it is impossible to carry out the surgical procedure. Massage, electrophoresis, ultrasound, and other treatments help relieve pain and muscle tension, restore circulation and nutrition of tissues. Often patients are prescribed the use of special fasteners: insert, splints, bandages. Can be used night or day. All types of to fix the phalanx in position and do not allow that during the walking movement. Having regard to the recommendations of a doctor, regular wearing of the lining the bones of the big toe and nutrition, diseases that can be withdrawn.
Special attention is recommended to pay shoes. If you're growing bones in the legs, it is best to fold the narrow models. Give priority to need orthopedic shoes that will reduce pressure on the phalanx, and will not foot for the transformation ahead. The shoes should be soft, comfortable and virtually no heel (maximum height 4 cm). With flat feet, it is necessary to choose a model with a rigid heel and insoles. It is better to put them in order, taking into account all the peculiarities of the foot.
For removing the fused bones of moderate and severe will help the surgeon. Modern technology to remove the bone on the little toe and other toes, it does not require a long recovery period. Also, after removal of the bones, the 3 stages, the person begins to walk normally after 3-4 days. During the surgical procedure uses a special attachment that secures the damaged joint from the inside. They are made of titanium and the setting during the operation of the joint. After removing the lump on my foot near the big toe is the alignment of the phalanges, which prevents the re-development of hallux valgus. It is also possible that the implementation of the malotravtichnuyu operation with miniinvazivnykh techniques. During surgery this method uses micro-instruments, which are inserted under the skin through small incisions and to reduce the growths. If you want to perform the surgery most efficiently helps the x-ray. The surgery is performed only with a small deformity, or when the appearance of the bones in the thumb.
After this, when the person needs to follow some rules. For example, to choose shoes from natural materials on a low heel, and use orthotics. After cutting a large build-up may require the wearing of tyres or a retainer.
In the treatment of the bones of the foot non-invasive method, you can try other ways. Before treatment folk remedies valgus deformity, it is better to consult a doctor. Tools, such as various ointments, tinctures, herbal compresses and other remedies against pain and edema, which is used for the treatment of bunions on the foot of the thumb
To reduce the pain, you can use the following methods:
To reduce the inflammatory process, you can use propolis and clay. Propolis knead with the hands until it is soft and apply to the affected area. You can also do a tincture with alcohol, moisten the bandage and apply. Clay helps to remove toxic substances from the tissues. It is necessary to soften the water, a dense spread of the loaf and leave to stand for 2 hours.
Not for the growth of the bones in the toes after the treatment, you need to carefully monitor their health. You must follow a proper balanced diet. The diet should contain food with high content of calcium and other minerals. You will also need to abandon heavy physical exertion for a long time. Replace the hard training after surgery on stretching exercises of the lower extremities.
The observance of simple rules that will ensure complete deliverance from the disease. Do not forget visiting the hospital after the surgery. Every six months, you need to visit a podiatrist and surgeon for review. In the case of the deterioration should immediately start treating the bones in the foot thumb again.