They knew about the beneficial effects of music for a very long time, since ancient times. The first to appreciate the therapeutic effect of the sounds of Pythagoras. Incidentally, he proposed the concept of “musical medicine”. The great scientist used some melodies “to heal the passivity of the soul. So that she would not lose hope and mourn herself,” other melodies “against rage and anger, against the delusions of the soul.
Stories are known instances when music performed real miracles. In the XVI century in Italy. For example, the population of several large provinces was covered by an extraordinary mental epidemic.
Thousands of people fell into a deep stupor, frozen in stillness, stopped eating and drinking. All of these people were obsessed with the belief that they were bitten by a poisonous tarantula. From the state of numbness of the sick, only special dance music. Starting with a very slow rhythm and gradually speeding up to fierce dancing, led out. From it came the world famous tarantella.
In the XIV century, Western Europe was embraced by a grand epidemic of the famous Vitto dance. Crowds of frantically twitching demon-possessed people roamed the streets of cities and villages. Shouting inarticulate sounds, obscenity and blasphemy, falling with foam at the mouth. The epidemic quickly stopped only where the authorities were able to call on musicians and instrumentalists who played slow, calm, pacifying music.
The secret of music unraveled?
Only now scientists have begun to understand how music affects the human body. It turns out that our brain perceives music at the same time with both hemispheres. The left hemisphere feels the rhythm, and the right one feels the timbre and melody.
The strongest effect on the human body has a rhythm. The rhythms of musical works lie in the range from 2.2 to 4 vibrations per second, which is very close to the frequency of breathing and heartbeat. The body of a person listening to music, as it adapts to it. As a result, the mood and performance increase, pain sensitivity decreases, sleep normalizes, and a stable heart rate and respiration are restored. By the way, music has a beneficial effect not only on humans, but also on animals and even plants.
What is the most useful music?
What kind of music acts on us the most beneficial? As psychologists and psychotherapists found out, these are, above all, classical works. And from each particular disease help quite specific compositions. Here are some examples.
- Brahms' Lullaby, Debussy’s Moonlight, Schubert’s, Mazurka and Chopin’s Preludes, and Strauss’s waltzes will help calm down.
- Beethoven’s Moonlight Sonata, Bach’s Cantata No. 2 by Hachn and Haydn’s Symphony, Bach’s Italian Concert will relieve neuroses and irritability.
- Blood pressure and heart activity will bring Mendelssohn’s “Wedding March”, Chopin's “Nocturne in D-Minor” and “Concerto in D-Minor” for Bach's violin to normal.
- A headache relieves audition polonaise Oginsky, “Hungarian Rhapsody” Liszt, “Fidelio” Beethoven.
- The “Peer Gynt” suite of Grieg, The Sad Waltz of Sibelius, Schumann’s “Dreams”, plays by Tchaikovsky will relieve insomnia.
- From gastritis will help "Sonata N7" Beethoven.
- “Ave Maria” Schubert, “Moonlight Sonata” by Beethoven, “The Swan” by Saint-Saens, “The Snowstorm” by Sviridov is suitable for the treatment of alcoholism and smoking.
- From epilepsy help “Sonata K448” Mozart.
But do not think that only classical music is useful. Hard rock is also capable of healing. Surgeons and therapists, for example, often use Pink Floyd compositions in their practice.
Will music replace antidepressants?
English psychotherapists have found that sedatives and antidepressants can be successfully replaced by classical music.
The administration of the Westminster Hospital in London equipped the wards with sound reproducing apparatus. A survey conducted by doctors showed that this innovation helped three out of four patients.
Most of them answered that regular sessions of musical psychotherapy soothe, reduce stress and depression. And generally improve their psychological state, not worse than consulting a psychologist, psychoanalyst, or psychoanalysis session.
In addition, the researchers found that periodic listening to classical music lowers blood pressure in patients with hypertension. And reduces the frequency of depressions that occur as a complication after chemotherapy.
Watch out, music!
Music, unfortunately, can turn from friend to enemy. The Department of Acoustics at Moscow State University recently conducted a study of the most aggressive samples of rock and pop music. The computer decomposed sounds into frequencies, overtones, noises, and then simulated the properties of human tissue and figured out how music affects the body. And that's what happened.
The frequency of the main rhythm of the composition “Deep Ash” “Smoke on the water” is from two to four hertz. Such jumps, and even at a volume of 40-50 decibels, cause strong excitement. Up to a temporary loss of control over oneself, aggressiveness towards others, or, conversely, negative emotions to oneself.
Anyone who is predisposed to nervous disorders, mental illness and depression. After two or three times listening to such a composition, can expect an exacerbation or nervous breakdown. Noise sounds or non-harmonic overtones harm the nervous system. A person's hands are shaking. And at the same time the content of adrenaline and other hormones increases in the blood.
Seventh graders, after 10 minutes of listening to rock songs, temporarily forgot the multiplication table. The audience in the concert halls could not answer the questions: “What is your name?”, “Where are you?”, “What year is it now?”
The composition of the “Beatles” “Helter Skelter” is an example. When, at first glance, pleasant and euphonic music may turn out to be no less harmful. Here, the main rhythm (about 6.4 hertz) is in the area of resonance frequencies of the chest and abdomen that is dangerous for a person.
When listening to this composition, sudden pain in the abdomen and chest may appear. In addition, since the main rhythm of the composition is in frequency close to the frequency of one of the rhythms of the brain. There is a real threat of resonance coincidence of these frequencies. As shown by experiments with animals, such a coincidence of frequencies often leads to very madness.
Even a 10-minute “enjoyment” of rock music at a volume of 100 decibels reduces the ear's sensitivity to such an extent that partial hearing loss occurs. And at rock concerts, the intensity of sound often reaches 120 decibels, which is not far from the pain threshold.
So enjoy your music without excess and stay healthy!