If you create websites, web applications or mobile apps, or in general, if you write any type of code, then, it's always good to use a version control system. This course will teach about one of the most popular and widely used version control systems today.
Nowadays any of the professional developer or designer needs to know how to work with Git and GitHub. Git allows you to record different versions of your project and lets you go back in time and check previous states of the project. As for the GitHub, it's an online service where you can share your code to the world and also it allows us to collaborate with different developers. so you if you want to learn those things then this is the right course for you.
The course consists of lots of different topics. We will start from Git basics, where you can learn about how to install Git. We will go through the basics of the terminal, we will create our first local repository, and you will see how to save different versions of the project, as the snapshots, using commits.
Next, we will move on and learn about how to go back in time and check the previous states of the project, update them or even delete with help of git checkout,git revert and git reset.
Once we get some solid knowledge about Git, then we will start learning about the basics of GitHub. We will go through the topics, such as creating the repository on GitHub, connecting the local repository to a remote one, making commits and much more.
Next, we will move on and see how to work with one of the greatest features of Git, which is branching. You will learn about how to deal with branches locally and also, remotely. After that, we will refer to kinda complex stuff. We will show you how to merge branches with different methods, and also, how to deal with merge conflicts.
Next, it should be followed by forking and contributing. You will learn about how to copy someone else's remote repository on your GitHub account, how to clone it to your local computer and how to contribute to the original project.
Finally, we will discuss how to collaborate on GitHub. We will go through some really important topics, such as, how to set up a collaboration team, how to define different rules for collaborators and much other stuff.
Throughout the course, if you have any questions, then you can feel free and post them in Q/A section, you will get fast and helpful support.
'CodeAndCreate' is a Web Development company. It consists of professional web developers, web designers and experienced instructors. 'CodeAndCreate' creates well designed online educational courses.
We believe that writing code is very important, but it is more important to understand how the code really works, therefore our educational lectures serve to that purpose.
We are excited to be here and we are eager to share our knowledge and experience.
Looking forward to seeing you inside our courses.
Frequently Asked Questions
It is an online tutorial that covers a specific part of a topic in several sections. An Expert teaches the students with theoretical knowledge as well as with practical examples which makes it easy for students to understand.
A Course helps the user understand a specific part of a concept. While a path and E-Degrees are broader aspects and help the user understand more than just a small area of the concept.
A Course will help you understand any particular topic. For instance, if you are a beginner and want to learn about the basics of any topic in a fluent manner within a short period of time, a Course would be best for you to choose.
We have an inbuilt question-answer system to help you with your queries. Our support staff will be answering all your questions regarding the content of the Course.
How it works
The offer includes all live courses, Deals and E-Degrees.
Bogo Offer will be applied automatically upon adding 2nd Course, Deal or E-degree in the Cart. Offer Price will be reflected in Checkout Total
You can buy multiple courses or deals using your cart but they have to be in combo of 2 to get benefit of the offer.
We are free to withdraw any product from this offer based at our own discretion.