The American Journal of Psychiatry published a research study which proposed that while ADHD (attention deficit hyperactivity disorder) is most typically thought of as a pediatric and adolescent disorder, approximately 4.4% of adults in the U.S. have symptoms of ADHD that were either never addressed as a child, or where the adult is unaware that they have the disorder. If you’ve been exhibiting any symptoms of ADHD, Atlanta psychiatrist Dr. Hege can provide an evaluation and prescribe medications to help.
Diagnosis of Adult ADHD is Difficult & Often Missed
There are over 230 million adults 18 years of age and older in the U.S., accounting for 76% of the country’s total population. The numbers show that over 10 million adults not only show symptoms of ADHD, they also exhibit co-morbid disorders; such as bipolar disorder or obsessive compulsive disorder, which significantly complicate a diagnosis and have an impact on the treatment options.
Many physicians and mental health professionals often miss the appropriate diagnosis of ADHD in adults as the symptoms manifest differently in adults then they do with the children they commonly diagnose with ADHD. The Mayo Clinic takes note that adult ADHD symptoms are intermixed with numerous issues such as having a poor employment history, difficulty with academic work, unstable long term relationships, being accident prone, and struggling with substance abuse to name a few.
Symptoms of Adult ADHD
Adults with symptoms of ADHD also exhibit anxiety and mood disorders, depression, impulse control disorders and demonstrate impairments in executive functioning; these higher levels of cognitive functioning directly impact on the ability to perform as an employee, a parent, a spouse, and as a productive member of society.
Executive function refers to the brain’s ability to focus, integrate and manage multiple tasks, organize thoughts and ideas, as well as appropriately handle emotional control. An adult with ADHD would also exhibit problems with memory and recall, ability to complete routine tasks, distractibility, and difficulty with timeliness. Impairment in any of the areas of executive function is tightly interlaced with the symptoms of adult ADHD.
Atlanta Adult ADHD Specialist
Working with a specialist in adult ADHD is critical for a comprehensive evaluation and diagnosis followed by the development of a specific medication regime. Dr. Darvin Hege is a highly respected Atlanta adult ADHD specialist, who not only treats the symptoms, he also successfully focuses on the foundational causative factor of ADHD bringing his patients satisfaction and enjoyment in their lives.
If you or a loved one is exhibiting any of the symptoms for adult ADHD, please call Dr. Hege, for an initial appointment and evaluation.