Chinchillas are increasingly common rodents in homes. The domestic species is a hybrid between the short-tailed chinchilla (Chinchilla chinchilla) and the long-tailed chinchilla (Chinchilla lanigera) and is found only in captivity. It is a herbivorous, nocturnal and very sociable animal that can become an ideal companion.
The life expectancy of a chinchilla will depend largely on its care and diet. Although we will also find great differences in how much a chinchilla lives in captivity and in nature.
How long does a domestic chinchilla live?
Domestic chinchillas live 12 – 15 years on average, although there are cases in which they live up to 25. In addition to the genetic factor, a proper diet and environment greatly influence their health status and, therefore, How many years will he remain by our side?
For the life of our chinchilla to be as long as possible, we must take into account some important points when it comes to their care:
Domestic chinchillas are herbivorous. You can offer them all kinds of vegetables; The greater the variety, the better. Avoid those with a high water content, which feel worse than the most fibrous ones. You should also provide alfalfa and water daily and, occasionally, you can offer an insect.
To avoid nutritional deficiencies it is highly recommended to buy food for chinchillas, so you will ensure a complete diet. In Tiendanimal you can find brands such as Vitakraft, Versele-Laga and Lolo Pets.
The environment also influences how many years a chinchilla lives, because the happier and more comfortable it is, the longer it will be.
The cage must be large and very spacious, with several floors so you can move and climb. It is advisable that you have a white wood chip base to increase your comfort. In addition, the cage should be located in a cool and dry place, away from moisture and drafts and protected from heat.
Chinchillas need daily exercise to keep fit and avoid overweight and stress. They love to run, jump and climb and must have a space that allows it. In addition to the shelves, you can place an exercise ball in the cage and drop them from time to time to play in a wider area.
It is an animal that is stressed very easily and continuous shocks can reduce the life expectancy of the chinchilla. That is why you need to be in a quiet environment without too many changes in your routine.
5 Respect your habits
Chinchillas are nocturnal animals, so they usually sleep during the day and be active when night falls. You must not interrupt your sleep and you must respect their schedules.
6 Prohibited baths with water
Chinchillas should never bathe with soap or water. There are special sands for them in which they roll to clean their fur and eliminate bad smell and dirt.
How long does a chinchilla live in the wild?
The life expectancy of chinchillas in nature is about 10 years (less than half of what they can live in captivity), due among other things to their natural predators.
If, in addition to knowing how long a chinchilla lives, you want to know more details about their care, check out the different articles we have on the blog: nutrition, how to bathe them, how to know if they are pregnant, how to choose the appropriate cage and much more .