College Preparedness Statistics
With the ever-increasing importance of college entrance and aptitude tests in today's educational setting, we believe it's important to share our most recent PLAN, ACT, and SAT test results.
The PLAN Test Results
The PLAN test is best described as a "pre-ACT" test. PLAN is a series of 145 questions in the areas of English, math, reading and science. PLAN is typically administered to students in the fall of their sophomore year. This guidance resource helps students measure their current academic development, explore career opportunities, and is a powerful predictor of success on the ACT. The results of the PLAN test can also help schools identify which academic areas should be considered a higher priority in order to improve academic achievement for their students.
As you can see, our students score consistently score significantly higher than both the National and State averages year after year. In fact, the results from this year's PLAN test show that our students on average scored over 16% higher than the National average and 14% higher than the Minnesota average scores.
The ACT Test Results
The ACT is a series of 215 questions which act as a means for evaluating students' knowledge in relation to their counterparts all over the United States. The ACT exam tests students in four main areas; English, mathematics, reading, and science, with an optional writing test. The ACT is not an IQ test, rather the exam is meant to reflect knowledge that the student has acquired through their high school curriculum. ACT scores are required by many US universities and universally accepted for college admission. In addition, many scholarships are based, either fully or in part, on the ACT scores of a student.
Over the last three years, Saint John's Prep has also seen its ACT Composite results score significantly higher compared to the Minnesota and National averages. Over the past three years, the ACT results of Saint John's Prep students have been 9.3% higher than the Minnesota average and 14.3% higher than the National average.
The SAT Test Results
The SAT is the nation's most widely used college admission test and is accepted by virtually all colleges and universities. The SAT tests student in the subjects of reading, writing, and math skills, all of which are skills obtained through their high school curriculum. The test is also an indicator of a students' readiness to perform at the collegiate level. The SAT provides the opportunity to connect to scholarship opportunities as well as place out of certain college courses.
In keeping with the Saint John's Prep trend of attaining excellent test scores, our students have consistently scored higher than the SAT National averages year after year. From 2008-2010, our students average a score that was 100 points higher than the national average. While the class of 2011 continues taking the test, the students at Prep who have already completed the SAT test are attaining higher average scores than achieved the three years prior.
As evidenced by the above PLAN, ACT, and SAT results of the last three years, our emphasis on academic rigor and spiritual growth continues to show that we offer a strong Catholic/Benedictine education for local, national, and international students, and consistently provide the best possible preparation for college.
National Merit Scholars
- 2011-2012: Two finalists
- 2009-2010: One finalist
- 2008-2009: One semi-finalist, two commended
- 2007-2008: One finalist, three commended