English - Vietnamese Dictionary
individual /,indi'vidjuəl/Concise Dictionary
- tính từ
- riêng, riêng lẻ, cá nhân
- individual interest: quyền lợi cá nhân
- to give individual attention to someone: chú ý đến ai
- độc đáo, riêng biệt, đặc biệt
- an individual style of writing: một văn phòng độc đáo
+a human being
+a single organism
+being or characteristic of a single thing or person
+separate and distinct from others of the same kind
+characteristic of or meant for a single person or thing
+concerning one person exclusively
Advanced English Dictionary
1 single, sole, particular, separate, distinct, discrete, solitary, lone:
Consider the entire utterance, not just the individual words.
2 singular, special, specific, idiosyncratic, own, characteristic, distinctive, individualistic, unique, peculiar, personal, proper; unitary:
She has her individual style of dressing.
3 person, human (being), (living) soul, mortal; one, party:
In a democracy each individual is entitled to one vote.
adjective, nounCollocation Dictionary
1 [only before noun] (often used after each) considered separately rather than as part of a group: We interviewed each individual member of the community. + The minister refused to comment on individual cases.
2 [only before noun] connected with one person; designed for one person: respect for individual freedom + an individual pizza
3 (usually approving) typical of one particular person or thing in a way that is different from others
a highly individual style of dress
1 a person considered separately rather than as part of a group: The competition is open to both teams and individuals. + Treatment depends on the individual involved. + donations from private individuals (= ordinary people rather than companies, the government, etc.) + The school's reputation was ruined by the bad behaviour of a few individuals. + the rights of the individual
2 a person who is original and very different from others: She's grown into quite an individual.
3 (informal, usually disapproving) a person of a particular type, especially a strange one: an odd-looking individual + So this individual came up and demanded money.
outstanding, talented | key | powerful | creative | average, ordinary
Their research shows that the average individual watches around three and a half hours of television per day.
He was carrying out his functions as a trustee in the course of his business, rather than as a private individual.
| single | particular, certain
The motives influencing a particular individual may change from time to time.
| autonomous, independent
His philosophy is about becoming aware of oneself as an autonomous individual.
Society does not consist of isolated individuals, but people in a network of relationships.
She saw the artist as a unique individual, possessing a heightened awareness of reality.
a group of like-minded individuals
The book recommends that you sign ‘Yours sincerely’ if you are send
We welcome applications from suitably qualified individuals.
We know that all human individuals are unique.
VERB + INDIVIDUAL
treat sb as
Theteacher should treat each pupil asan individual.
INDIVIDUAL + VERB
Althoughindividuals vary widely, the bonesof the average female skeleton aresmaller and lighter than the male.
INDIVIDUAL + NOUN
His writingsare concerned with religiousphenomena at the individual level.
No single individual had done somuch for the development of themotor vehicle.
| concern for the individual, the freedom of the individual
the issue of thefreedom of the individual versusthe intervention of the state
| a group of individuals
She hadtaken a group of individuals andmade them into a superb team. |
the individual concerned
It's upto the individual concerned tocontact the police.
| the needs of the individual
Each course has tobe tailored to the needs of theindividual.
| respect for the individual, vary from individual to individual
Eating habits arebound to vary from individual toindividual.
Random quote: It isn't where you come from, it's where you're going that counts.: Ella FitzgeraldLatest queries: evaluate, thwart, attach, hydrocephalus, canvass, shark, constant, presumptive, minor, dimension, wrong-foot, t., range, eccentric, contextualize, witty, uneven, belongs, roving, individual,