Typically, houseplants are purchased simply for the look and feel they can add to rooms and environments. Plants can increase the overall interior design of a home or a workspace, making it feel more natural and comfortable. However, most people don’t realize that indoor plants are more useful than just increasing your office or home interior design.
Plants at work have a few hidden benefits, including increased productivity and fresher air. On top of that, one of the most interesting benefits of plants in the office is the increase in creative thinking. Creativity is a crucial part of a business and leads to employees feeling more successful and satisfied. But often creative ideas are hard to come by- especially when cooped up in an office all day.
Fear no more! Indoor plants, trees, and flowers are here to save the day by sparking creativity in you and your employees. According to a research study conducted by Texas A&M University, plants can boost creativity by 15% or more within the workplace. Although this idea might sound a bit unusual, there is actually some science to back the discovery up.
One theory of why plants at work may increase creative thinking dates back thousands of years and has to do with the evolution of the human species. According to some theorists, plants in the office increase creativity through the association with past generations and how they survived. Years ago when our ancestors found themselves surrounded by foliage and trees, it often meant being near various food sources. This led to our ancestors feeling calmer and less worried about their next meal and where it was going to come from, leaving more room for feeling helpful, happy, and creative. This is an interesting theory, and it just might explain why plants in the office have shown an increase in creativity.
Another theory has to do with certain colors. The color green has been found to be associated with productivity, creativity, and action. In one study, German researchers had subjects glance at certain colors for two seconds before doing a creative task. They found that the color green boosted people’s creative output more than other colors, including white, grey, red, and blue. The author of the study, Dr. Stephanie Lichtenfeld, suggests that the link between green and creativity boils down to green being a signal of growth. Lichtenfeld states, “Green may serve as a cue that evokes the motivation to strive for improvement and task mastery, which in turn may facilitate growth,” So think of indoor plants as the green light at the intersection of creativity and motivation.
Being surrounded by natural green plants enables employees and co-workers to think more freely. The introduction of plants in the office can also help people feel more comfortable in the workplace, replacing old, stale office surroundings with fresh, natural elements. Employees will feel like the environment is completely new, more inviting, and open for creative thinking.
The benefits of plants in the office include sparking creativity and could impact your business. If your company deals in marketing, product development, and advertising, creativity is a major part of your business. Consider adding a few plants at work to liven up the space as well as spark some creative thinking in your employees.
If you are unsure of which plants will thrive the best in your office environment, contact us and we can help you find the perfect plants! We will also help you design your interior space, making it feel comforting and inviting while also increasing productivity, air freshness, and creativity. On top of that, we also offer plant maintenance. This means we send expert horticulture technicians to your office weekly- maintaining the health of your plant selection. We know that creativity is important in your office, so add some indoor plants to boost creative thinking today!