Endodontics and Endodontists
Nothing is as good as a natural tooth! And sometimes your natural tooth may need root canal (endodontic) treatment for it to remain a healthy part of your mouth. Most patients report that having root canal (endodontic) treatment today is as unremarkable as having a cavity filled.
Who is an “endodontist”?
An endodontist is a dentist with special training in diagnosing and treating problems associated with the inside of the tooth. They do only endodontic procedures in their practices because they are specialists. To become specialists, they complete dental school and an additional two or more years of advanced training in endodontics, one of the nine specialties recognized by the American Dental Association. They perform routine as well as difficult and very complex endodontic procedures, including retreatment of previous root canals that have not healed completely. Endodontists are also experienced at finding the cause of oral and facial pain that has been difficult to diagnose.
Endodontists have advanced surgical and nonsurgical skills that make them uniquely qualified to treat routine as well as complex cases. The care that an endodontist provides is supported by intensive education on how to perform the very best endodontics. Endodontists also attend continuing education courses after they are in practice, so they are knowledgeable about state-of-the-art research, clinical procedures, and technology.
Root Canal Treatment
During root canal or endodontic treatment, the inflamed or infected pulp is removed and the inside of the tooth is carefully cleaned and disinfected, then filled and sealed. Afterwards, the tooth is restored with a crown or filling for protection.
With proper care, even teeth that have had root canal treatment can last a lifetime. But sometimes, a tooth that has been treated doesn't heal properly and can become painful or diseased months or even years after treatment.
Cracked teetch, apart from if they were received accidentially, refer to cracks extending from the chewing surface vertically toward the root. Early diagnosis is important in this case to save the tooth. A cracked tooth left untreated will get worse as time goes by and can result in a loss of the tooth. Early treatment is essential.
Cone Beam Computed Tomography
Cone beam computed tomography is a medical imaging technique consisting of X-ray computed tomography where the X-rays are divergent, forming a cone. We use this advanced technology in our practice.