Last updated on June 23rd, 2017 at 01:23 am
Romania belongs to the group of East European countries, located in the south-eastern part of the continent. It is bordered by Moldova, Serbia, Hungary, Ukraine and Bulgaria and also has an access to the Black Sea on the East. Romania is home to almost 20 million people and it belongs to the more populous countries in the European Union.
The country also cover a total area of around 238 thousand square kilometres. There is also several ethnic group within the country, although Romanians represent the vast majority (followed by smaller group of Hungarians and Roma people among others). The official language is Romanian.
Romanian capital city is Bucharest, which is also the largest one and simultaneously works as the financial, political and cultural hub of Romania. The country’s economy belongs to the upper group of middle income ones, yet growing quite rapidly in recent years, especially after the transformation of its focus to services mainly. It is a member of the European Union and also NATO.
Smaller medieval towns and beautiful historical sites are a remnant of the charming past. The territory Romania occupies today was inhabited by humans around 40 thousand years ago. Various migrating nations and kingdoms has ruled the area (including the Dacian Kingdom), followed by the integration to the Roman Empire or the Ottoman Empire.
The modern history includes the year of 1862 and the formation of the national state of Romania (unification of Moldavia and Wallachia at that time). The territory then fell under the Hungarian rule and goes through hard times, especially during the World War II, fighting against the Soviet Union. Yet, eventually, Romania voted for democracy in early 20s and has been positively developing ever since.
The main appeal of Romania is the unspoiled natural beauty represented mostly by the dramatic peaks of Carpathian Mountains and the vast lush meadows along the Danube river (the second longest river in Europe) – both inviting for endless number of outdoor activities such as hiking or camping.
Another highlight is indisputably the Bran Castle connected to the Dracula legend. Apart from this particular one, Romania is dotted with equally beautiful and mysterious castles, ruins and smaller medieval towns, all bringing the fascinating atmosphere of the past. Talking about past and history, the culture formed over the years is a strong asset of Romanian people and indeed, a top experience.