Let's say you're that professional basketball player mentioned above, and you start to address your audience when suddenly you stutter and mumble, you use the wrong sports terminology or you mispronounce that terminologyand you stare at your shoes the entire time you're talking.
Then discuss the degrees to which the advertisements match the demographics of the likely intended audience of the television program.
Intrinsic ethos is strong when the rhetor expresses himself or herself confidently and intelligently, using language that is appropriate for the audience. Explain that these are more specific types of strategies that advertisers use and that many overlap with pathos, logos, and ethos.
Sometimes you have a very specific idea of who the audience is, but sometimes you just have a very general idea. Of course, owning a bookstore or a hardware store or a flower shop was actually never that simple.
To be able to correctly identify appeals to logos, pathos, and ethos in a text. The art of persuasion. We use the term logos to describe what kind of rhetorical appeal is being made, not to evaluate whether or not an appeal makes sense to us as observers or to the audience being addressed.
As an observer, you can recognize that the rhetor is attempting to use logos to persuade the audience, but that recognition doesn't mean the rhetor is succeeding. When the rhetor is known by the audience to be experienced and an expert on the topic, their extrinsic ethos is strong.
I hope this will resolve some confusion. Can targeting a specific demographic sometimes encourage stereotyping? Students should understand that these rhetorical strategies are similar to those used in a persuasive writing assignment, and that they will use these strategies when creating their own commercial by the end of this unit.
Students are to prepare to justify why they interpreted the specific appeal as they did and offer possible reasons for such a strategy. Zeros however, are a real problem. Sometimes we give formal presentations to propose new ideas to our boss; sometimes we create fliers to encourage people to come to a local concert; and sometimes we simply need to convince our neighbor that sharing the cost of a fence is worth the investment.
Analogy A claim about the qualities of one thing using a comparison about another thing. Concluding Discussion Step 3Concluding discussion with students Discuss the following: Credibility or trust; The rhetor cites credible sources or establishes own credibility through professional tone or title.
Have students use these factors and any other prior knowledge they may have of the show to determine the probable demographics.
The instructor will then show a second clip a different speech given in the same context and repeat the process. Whatever the reason, being persuasive is a critical part of life if we want things to work out in our favor.
Instead, it's your job to decide whether or not an argument will be perceived by the audience as logical. Did you hear a radio ad about children dying in Africa? I'm willing to stand on.
Remind students that they will need to have their completed Commercial Dig activity ready for discussion in the next session. Session Six Students will use this session to begin to synthesize all they have learned about advertising and begin creating a commercial for a fictional product.
Concluding Discussion Step 3Concluding discussion with students Discuss the following: Infomercials and short magazine articles featuring new products are also acceptable. The art of persuasion. Close the session by explaining to students that in future sessions, they will be examining existing advertisements with their new analytical skill and applying it to creating ads of their own.
Below, each of these appeals is explained in more detail. Kennedy In other words, Aristotle argues that there are three elements to the art of persuasion: He calls them ethos, logos, and pathos. There is no extra credit, but there may be additional opportunities to show proficiency.
All are important elements that we need to think about carefully. Have students complete the "After the program" response question at the bottom of the Targeted Commercials handout. They conclude that regardless of your experience, the way you're expressing yourself reveals that you are not someone to be taken seriously.
Has the rhetor made effective use of rhetoric in trying to persuade the audience? Positive shopping experiences on the site can help online buyers make an effective decision. For example, you may mention that patriotism is a strategy meant to evoke certain emotions, and would therefore constitute a use of pathos.
According to Alan Greenspan, U. Example Let's say a rhetor is trying to convince an audience of middle-class Americans to donate money to a hurricane relief fund.
So the new power plant will be dangerous.Other key terms that relate to argumentative writing include: bias, stereotype, fact, opinion, bandwagon, assertion, ethos, pathos, logos, kairos and many more.
To create a good argument, one must support it with reasons and evidence. Worksheet Worksheet. Thank you for visiting here. Below is a great picture for Eros Pathos Logos jimmyhogg.com have been hunting for this picture via net and it came from reputable source.
In academic writing, ethos and logos are given more respect than pathos. An essay that relies primarily on pathos, with little use of ethos or logos, is unlikely to. This mini lesson is designed to introduce sixth grade ELA students to the concept of appeals to ethos, pathos, and logos.
The activity in this mini lesson asks students to look at advertisements and determine what appeal the creators of the advertisement were trying to make based on a handout provided by the teacher. It's official: teenagers are obsessed with taking pictures of themselves.
91% of all teenagers have taken a "selfie" according to the Pew Center for Internet research. The successful implementation of ethos, pathos, and logos in writing or speech depends on the effectiveness of different rhetorical strategies.
There are many different rhetorical strategies (and rhetorical fallacies!) that can strengthen or weaken an argument.Download