New strain of baby calf pnuemonia prompts MSU study
BOZEMAN – — Researchers from Montana State University Extension and Washington State University are asking Montana beef cattle producers and veterinarians to participate in a voluntary online survey to learn more about a novel form of neonatal calf pneumonia found in Montana.
Rachel Endecott, MSU Extension beef specialist, and colleagues at WSU said that a unique form of neonatal calf pneumonia has been diagnosed in several Montana beef herds over the last 6-8 years. The majority of affected calves are relatively normal at birth, but go on to develop signs of pneumonia within the first 1-4 days of life and die because of respiratory failure. A small proportion of calves with this problem are born dead.
Though tissue samples from these animals return with a diagnosis of pneumoina, a specific cause for the affliciton has not been idendified. Researchers believe that affected herds typically experience a 3 to 5 percent increase in calf losses associated with this problem the first year it is recognized.
MSU Extension and WSU researchers will use the data collected through these surveys to investigate the prevalence of this form of neonatal calf pneumonia in Montana and to better estimate its impact on producers.
The surveys can be found online at animalrangeextension.montana.edu/beef.
EPA launches challenge to recycle livestock waste
WASHINGTON – — The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency is partnering with the U.S. Department of Agriculture to launch the Nutrient Recycling Challenge, a competition to develop affordable technologies that recycle nutrients from livestock waste.
Every year, livestock producers manage more than one billion tons of manure. Challenge participants will develop technologies that extract nutrients from livestock manure to generate products with environmental and economic benefits that farmers can use or sell.
“Scientists and engineers are already building technologies that can recover nutrients, but further development is needed to make them more effective and affordable,” said EPA Administrator Gina McCarthy. “The Nutrient Recycling Challenge will harness the power of competition to find solutions that are a win-win for farmers, the environment and the economy.”
Phase I of the challange, which begins Nov. 16 and ends Jan. 15, calls for papers outlining ideas for these technologies. Phase I prizes will be announced in March and include up to $20,000 cash; invitation to a two-day partnering and investor summit in Washington, DC; and entry into subsequent phases of the challenge with larger awards.
Final awards will be announced in January 2017, with farm demonstration pilots to follow.
For more information: www.nutrientrecyclingchallenge.org
Montana farmers recieving new safety-net payments
BOZEMAN – – USDA Montana Farm Service Agency (FSA) Executive Director, Bruce Nelson announced Nov. 10 that Montana farms enrolled in new safety-net programs established by the 2014 Farm Bill have begun to receive financial assistance. The programs, known as Agriculture Risk Coverage (ARC) and Price Loss Coverage (PLC), are designed to protect against unexpected drops in crop prices or revenues due to market downturns.
“These new safety-net programs provide assistance when prices and revenues fall below normal, unlike the previous direct payments program that provided funds even in good years,” Nelson said.
Many county offices in Montana are issuing payments to eligible producers with base acres of covered commodities that suffered a revenue loss from previous years if those producers were enrolled in the 2014 ARC-County program. To date, no crops grown in Montana have qualified for assistance under the 2014 PLC program.
“Payments by county can vary because average county yields will differ,” Nelson said.
Statewide, approximately 4,140 farms participated in ARC-County and approximately 25,334 farms participated in PLC. More details on the price and yield information used to calculate the financial assistance from the safety-net programs is available on the FSA website at http://www.fsa.usda.gov/arc-plc and www.fsa.usda.gov/mt.
Montana Ag in the Classroom releases Invasive Species Project
HELENA – – The Montana Agriculture in the Classroom program has released a comprehensive educational project on invasive species to help increase public awareness, identification, and reporting procedures.
Over the past hundred years many plants, insects, and animals have been introduced into North America. Not all of them become invasive and push aside native varieties, but when they do, it can be devastating for the environment and economy, and even impact human health.
“The impact to agriculture and the environment can total in the millions of dollars once an invasive species is introduced,” said Montana Department of Agriculture Director Ron de Yong. “Where introduction does occur, we need to increase our ability to respond with education to identify and report threats from potential invasive species.”
The Montana Invasive Species Education project includes identification cards, a poster, pocket guides, and other resource materials. Educators will be provided with lesson plans, a curriculum book on invasive species, and other materials aligned to state learning standards.
Invasive species addressed in this project include: insects, plant diseases, nematodes, snails, clams, mollusks, crustaceans, reptiles, amphibians, fish, and noxious weeds. The project is available on the Montana Department of Agriculture website or by contacting Lorri Brenneman at LBrenneman@mt.gov.