Gender, Age, and Race as Social Inequalities
What exactly does social inequality mean? Social inequality can be described as the lack by society, to view a particular people or persons as equal, whether because of their religion, gender, race, or color disposition. It is in essence, the imbalance allocation of resources that are seen to favor a particular group of a particular ethnicity or religious background and deprive the rest. Some still rely on traditional words such as marginalization. For social inequality to be said to be happening, there are several factors that must be met. They include the fact that there is a small group which acts as the victims or the ones being marginalized, and the superior group that acts as the ones with a particular large majority and therefore deserve more from their perspective. This particular topic is in my own opinion, is very flammable and has continued to elicit different reactions from different people who air their views on social inequalities. This is because social inequality in the society has its own implications which will be discussed in length in this particular paper.
Why the subject Arises
Perhaps it is due to the fact that not everybody in power is follower of the principle that power alone makes one superior that another and thus entitled to more than that particular person, that the subject is gaining voice albeit gradually. Social inequalities as a form of discrimination, is a very unhealthy game for the society. This is because the society needs everybody to play a particular role in nation building which is found to be lacking due to social discrimination. First of all, we need to look into some of the areas where social discrimination is bound to happen. In many cases, we have heard of discrimination at the workplace where one gets to be promoted and progress because they are probably from the same denomination as the human resource manger or the boss, while another who is from a different but relatively small minority group, gets to toil for years, doing a lot of hard work which is rarely rewarded,. Another example of is when one as an individual, is seeking work or happens to go for a particular interview. In this case, I will talk about nepotism because on many occasions, the position being applied is not filled by an individual because they are qualified; rather it is filled because they happen to be a relation of the company’s managing director or CEO for that matter. In this case, the interview is just a formality for the many interviewees who are ignorant of the fact that there is no job. This in essence makes the particular individual who turned up for that interview, lag behind because and as a result, become marginalized on educational grounds.
Even on public transport systems, we have discrimination especially that of color or origin. I recently went to the airport to pick one of my colleagues’ who had travelled abroad to Germany and pestered him with many questions. He is of African origin and as I was talking to him, he kept warning me that if in any way I managed to head to Germany for any reason, I should not take the metro trains. He insinuated that racism is one of the major discriminative acts that are likely to take place to a black person. He himself was a victim twice and he narrated that he would see a place where there was apparently a vacancy and head to it. On his side there probably would be a white guy who would proceed to do the rude act of standing up and opting to stay that way for the rest of the journey, rather than share a seat with a “monkey” for that is what they refer blacks to. My friend was very disheartened and could not believe that such a simple act as that of sharing a seat which was rightfully his, would make other people feel offended by his presence. He may not have suffered from social stigma, but other people may not have the same will power that he had to remain calm.
The subject that arises as it affects every individual in the society whether or not they are the victims or the superior majority. This is because if you take for example a situation where one needs urgently to access a medical facility and has no money, and then they are directed to cheap facilities that are of their standards and where they are likely not to get professional help. In contrast, because another individual has the required resources to afford a quality medical facility, they are accorded this privilege. If it comes down to life and death, the life of the first individual is viewed as worthless in comparison to the latter individual who has money. If it is like this, then it is justified to insinuate that discrimination brings the lack of progress in the society. It is important for leaders to realize that if the issue is not addressed and fully recognized as an impediment to progress, then many developing and developed nations alike stand to lose a lot.
Causes and Solutions of Discrimination
I am not in particular of the notion that there exists any justification for social discrimination against any living human being. It is my opinion that this acts of discrimination are degrading to the status of the victims as I believe that every person is born unique but equal to the others, and should therefore be treated as so. There are many reason s that I can think of that would make an individual or individuals are discriminative to a certain particular ethnicity or minority group. The very first one that I believe is the main cause of this pressing issue is the fact that it has been learned and shared and thus has become like a culture for certain people. For example, if maybe my dada used to hate black people, and constantly spoken negatively about them, then I will naturally grow to be just like him or even worse. This is because I have grown in a system where the authority disregards black people and has thus influenced my perception of those very people
Another cause for social inequality which is very common but ignored most of the time is the fact that many individuals are greedy and selfish. There is no application of the proverbial saying of I am my brother’s keeper. Thus everyone is for himself and every person only looks after their own interests. If I may talk about a particular ideology which in my own view, has served to further propagate social inequalities, then I will definitely point an accusing finger at capitalism. If one looks closely and keenly at countries that practice this as a form of economic basis, then it will be found out that these particular countries have the highest number of social discriminative acts and it is no wonder that this vice has continued to flourish in those particular countries. Capitalism allows for an individual to lose touch of the fact that there exist other human beings in the worlds who will in one way or another; rely on them for a particular reason. I think that capitalism is fuelled by selfishness and in essence, nurturers the individual person who professes it greatness, into a greedy and selfish person.
It is imperative that we understand that even though it may seem that discrimination and social inequality is mostly prevalent in developed countries, it is also very important to realize how much the vice affects the third world nations. Discrimination in third world nation’s dates back to many years after the scramble and partition of Africa. The colonialists cultivated a culture of the superior race even with a minimal majority in terms of their numbers. Thus it naturally became a culture for tem and when they left, little or nothing was done to resolve or correct this perception. Thus leaders who came into power exerted even more pressure on their subjects, something that is selfishly motivated. Many of the third world countries did not change their constitutions to suite them and thus it only suited a particular majority who ended up as the sole owners of most of the state corporations and industries. As a result, social inequality thus gained its basis and continues to be an impediment for the very progress of those particular nations.
I sincerely think that there can be found a solution to this particular vice which has affected very many people worldwide. Millions continue to be deprived of what is rightfully theirs because there seems to be no stop to it. If the society in my opinion, wishes to start turning this perception around, then it is the responsibility of each and every one of us, to be watchful of our brothers and sisters. What I am talking about is to introduce and popularize socialism not in the negative light it is normally discussed in, but rather as an alternative system of governance where the state own virtually every industry and income generating activity by its subjects. This in my opinion will serve to cultivate the culture of hospitality among people and to make every one look similar. For example, in the school scenario, if it is found that one of the pupils of students is constantly discriminated upon due to the fact that they cannot afford proper school wear, then I suggest that the school administration impose a regulation that makes every student to have the same e type of school uniform and this will go a long way in ensuring that every student perceives the other as an equal and not as a rival.
On the government level, it is disheartening to realize that most of the leaders who continue to commit this type of atrocities are still in power and have the space and command to continue their despicable acts. Let me be very clear on this; not every nation has its leadership system infiltrated by such individuals, but I would only comment on third world countries whose system of governance is very authoritarian and thus has the biggest potential of turning individual leaders into tyrants. It will be a very geed start if those countries chose to instead, perform a complete overhaul of their governance system to accommodate new and better policies that reflect more on the national level, and will help in decreasing the notion that if one has power and money, then they can exert influence on the ones who do not have power.
Social inequalities in a global perspective
Earlier on I spoke of the fact that many developing countries are faced by this vice more that the developed countries. This particular statement allows the reader to realize that if the issue is left hanging and untouched, then it will generate into full blown tyrannical ruling in many countries. This has already happened and has led to disastrous events and results such as the 1994 Rwandan genocide, where it is believe that more than 800,000 people were killed in a civil war fuelled by ethnic rivalry. This was not their doing, but rather that of the leaders who facilitated its very existence. It is very bad that a particular group in a society views themselves as being marginalized. Therefore their only source and hope for survival will be to engage in criminal activities which will definitely led them to even disastrous results as they could lose their lives or end up in jail. These individuals are then referred to buy society as being incompatible with others whereas it is the fact that they were not fully accommodated by society that made term who they are.
In the case of Rwanda, it needed only a little coaxing for such individuals with frustrated minds to engage in a war for which they understood very little other than the fact that their rivals always acted as their superiors because the president w of the same ethnicity as them. Globally, I would attribute the many social inequalities that happen in other nations to ignorance and illiteracy and the fact that the perception that the government can do very little to alter any change. If this is so, then I believe Karl Marx’s theory of social revolution is bound to happen either way because the poor and the marginalized will have no place to turn to, something that would make them rebel against t the very system that currently oppresses them. It is very hard to predict whether or not such a happening can be made possible bearing in mind that the system is so closely tied and that those very ties go back to many years ago which makes this particular vice, a culture for many people. There is very little that one can do to create a big impression on whether or not these inequalities are justified, but if I have to speak my mind, then I will definitely blame the advent of capitalism and its proponents.