Voice recognition systems have come a long way since the 1950’s and now everyone has been exposed to its efficacy. Popular smartphones like the iPhone and Samsung’s Galaxy series have their own personal voice assistants which can not only understand you, but also communicate and entertain you with their intelligent, witty, and quirky replies. However, this is not the end.
Speech recognition is being researched and improved further, thanks to funding by major tech companies such as Google and Apple. It won’t be long when voice recognition will become an integral part of people’s lives and you will be utilizing this piece of technology in your homes, cars, security systems, etc. The future of voice recognition is filled with potential.
Let’s take a quick look at how the future of speech recognition will be accompanied by voice activated systems.
More and More Voice Assistants Will Spring Up
Nowadays, the most popular voice assistants are Cortana, Google Now, and Siri. But in the near future, many new intelligent voice activated systems will be developed. How would this be possible? This will be made possible through APIs based on the cloud. There are many companies that offer the opportunity to build intelligent voice portals and interfaces like MindMeld, Expect Labs, api.ai, and wit.ai.
Your Computer Will Listen to You-All the Time
You must have seen sci-fi movies where human beings interact with computer and machines in the same way as they do with other human beings. Presently, computers have become extremely powerful and they can process data, recognize, and listen better than human beings.
A time will come when voice activated computer systems will constantly hear what you have to say and this will change the method by which people interact with machines. For example, wearable devices, automobiles, and conference rooms will actively be seeking input; since information is a vital asset nowadays, the availability of it at your fingertips no matter the time or location will alter the world.
You Will be Able to Control Everything, Including Your Toaster
Voice recognition systems are becoming more complex and advanced with the passage of time and it won’t be long when you will control everything in your home using nothing but your voice. For example, you can safely bid farewell to switches and remote controls as you will be using your voice to turn on the TV, switch off the lights, command the toaster, light the stove, lock the door, and control the water faucet.
Your smartphone will become smarter and hence, you will no longer need to access accounts or enter passwords to download something. You will be able to command your phone to do it and it would, in matter of seconds.