1-2-3 Come Do Some More Pumpkin Activities With Me
“Show Me the Number” is a super-fun, “print & go” booklet, which will help students practice a variety of standards that involve numbers 1-10, as well as 2D shapes.
The pumpkin’s eyes have these shapes:
circle, oval, triangle, square, rectangle, hexagon, pentagon, octagon, rhombus and trapezoid.
I’ve included the latter shapes, as we do a lot of activities with pattern blocks.
Having different eye shapes, makes things more interesting and allows you to cover another standard. Woo hoo!
There are 6 pattern pages, with 2 pages on a one-page pattern; which provides a “just the right size” booklet for children to make.
I have a room helper run off, cut and collate the booklets for me.
When they’re done, I collect the booklets, then pass them out the next day, when they complete pumpkin #2.
You can also space things out, and do every other day.
This is a quick, easy and fun “table top” activity for my young fives.
Since the prep has already been done, it’s easy-peasy for me, and I have a lesson for two weeks!
My students feel empowered, and can get right down to business. I’ve already given directions the previous day, so they know what to do.
On the last day, I do pumpkin #10 as well as the last page, where students trace and write the numbers.
I try to time things, so that they are finishing up on Halloween party day, which can be rather hectic, so this is one less thing I have to make.
Afterwards, children have a nice little keepsake to take home.
I’ve also included a (full page) set of colorful pumpkin posters.
Use them to introduce the lesson, as a sample for when students are working on that matching page, as a border, bulletin board, flashcards, or sequencing center.
Today's featured FREEBIE also has a pumpkin theme. Are your students working on transitions and "how to" "directional" writing?
"How to make a pumpkin pie" is a quick, easy and fun activity to help them practice.
The packet includes printable patterns, completed sample, recipe, list of transitions, transition poster, a graphing extension, Venn diagram activity, plus an adjective worksheet.
Well that's it for today. Thanks for popping in.
I'm contemplating whether I should buy another pumpkin today...
We weren't sure what was eating holes in our pumpkins, then today we caught the culprit.
An obviously hungry squirrel happily chomped away, with no fear that we'd fuss.
I just peeked out the window and the baby pumpkin is pretty much gone, except for the stem and a few bites.....hmmmm.
"When black cats prowl and pumpkins gleam; may luck be yours on Halloween." - Unknown