Know About The Nutrition Facts And Incredible Health Benefits Of Walnuts
Walnuts are tree nuts that have been a part of the human diet for thousands of years. Walnuts are rich in omega 3 fatty acids and have a good amount of antioxidants when compared to other foods. These nuts are good for brain health and helpful in preventing cancer and heart disease.
Walnuts are consumed often as a snack. It can be added to salads, pastas, soups, breakfast cereals and baked goods. They are even used to make walnut oil which is used in salad dressings.
Walnuts consist of 65 percent fat and 15 percent protein. They have a low carb content, most of it being fibre.
Like most nuts, the calories in walnuts come from fat. Thus, they are a high calorie energy dense food. In spite of being rich in fat and high in calories, studies say that walnuts don’t seem to increase the risk obesity.
Walnuts have omega 6 fatty acid- linoleic acid and omega 3 fatty acid- ALA. Walnuts are the only nuts to have ALA in good amounts. It is linked to various health benefits.
Vitamins and minerals
Walnuts have the following vitamins and minerals:
Walnuts are known to contain bioactive plant compounds too. They are immensely rich in antioxidants. Some of the plant compounds present in walnuts are:
- Ellagic Acid
Health benefits of walnuts
Consumption of walnuts have been linked to several health benefits. Let us have a look!
Heart disease or cardiovascular disease is a broader term used for diseases related to the blood vessels and heart. In several cases, heart diseases can be prevented by adopting a healthy lifestyle such as consuming nuts.
Walnuts are known to be able to combat the risk factors of heart disease as follows:
- They lower the bad cholesterol ‘LDL’
- They reduce inflammation
- The function of blood vessels is improved by cutting down the risk of the buildup of plaque in the arteries.
Prevention of cancer
Cancer is a disease that is characterized by abnormal growth of cells. Several kinds of cancers can be prevented by consuming a healthy diet, exercising regularly and following a healthy lifestyle.
Being rich in several plant compounds, walnuts can be a great part of the diet that prevents cancer.
The bio-active compounds in walnuts with anti-cancer properties are:
- Omega-3 fatty acids
- Ellagic acid and related compounds
Walnuts are promising but we can make stronger claims after clinical trilas are conducted on humans.
A lot of human studies say that consuming nuts can improve the function of the brain. Walnuts are known to be helpful in warding off depression and age-related decline of the brain.
According to a study, regular walnut consumption by the elderly has been linked to immense memory improvement. However, the studies being observational cannot prove that walnuts can improve brain function.
There are a few more studies that provide stronger evidence. In an 8 week study, 64 young and healthy adults were made to eat walnuts and it was found that it improved comprehension. However, improvements in reasoning, memory and mood were not detected. To be sure, more studies need to be carried out.
The final word
Walnuts are healthy and you would be doing your health a favour by including them in your diet.
Hope you found this post useful!
You may also like reading-