Presentation on theme: "Use P.186 to complete activity 1complete The Burgess concentric ring model of urban land use (land use structure of an HIC)concentric urban Areas of the."— Presentation transcript:
Use P.186 to complete activity 1complete The Burgess concentric ring model of urban land use (land use structure of an HIC)concentric urban Areas of the cityLand use in an HIC Areas of cityLand use in an LIC CBD Inner City Suburbs Rural-urban fringe How does the land use and structure of city differ between HIC’s and LIC’s? The land use structure of an LIC
Areas of the city Land use in an HIC Areas of cityLand use in an LIC CBDShops, offices and entertainment CBDOffices and shops Rich house Inner CityManufacturing industry closed down e.g. Tetley factory, Leeds. Terraced houses have been improved and new apartments built e.g. along Leeds Canal Inner cityHigh class residential area, with large villas and modern expensive apartments SuburbsSemi-detached housing and bigger gardens SuburbsCheaper housing Poorer quality Rural-urban fringe New housing estates, larger houses and retail parks Rural-urban fringePoor quality housing, shanty towns (favelas) IndustryFound along main roads into the city
What are the problems facing people in rich cities? 10 th March 2015 U: the 5 main issues in British Cities K: of the strategies introduced in Birmingham to ease these problems
Not enough good quality housing Too much traffic and pollution A CBD with rundown or unused building A mixed culture with ethnic segregation Problems in the inner city – high unemployment What are the 5 main issues facing British Cities?
Birmingham is the UK’s second largest city. It’s vibrant and buzzing. With a population of 1.074 million (2011), all sorts of people from different cultures live and work there. 1. What does Birmingham have to offer people? Draw a spider diagram using P.188
Why did McDonalds change colour? Rebranding an area involves giving it a new image, so it attracts development and employment and leads to an upward spiral What is your impression of this area? Eastside in Birmingham, is being rebranded as a ‘learning and technology quarter’ Read P.189 – 1. How is Eastside being developed? 2. What benefits will it bring to the area? 3. Summarise the New Deals for Communities project
Where can the government build new houses? 11 th March 2015 U: the different government strategies to improve the UK’s inner cities K: of how London’s Docklands was regenerated by a government project
Issue 1: HousingHousing Population in the UK has increased by 10.5 per cent since 1971. We could have population of 65 million by 2025 The number of households has risen by 30 per cent since 1971. Most of this increase is because more people live alone – 7 million (12% in 2009) New single person households account for 70% of the increased demand for housing – why? Due to people leaving home, marrying later, getting divorce and living longer The government target is to build 240,000 new houses every year by 2016, with 60% being built on a brownfield site. But with a shortage of land greenfield sites will also be used.brownfield site Where can the government build new houses? 11 th March 2015
Advantages of building on brownfield sites Advantages of building on greenfield sites 1. 2. 1. 2. Disadvantages of building on brownfield sites Disadvantages of building on greenfield sites 1. 2. 1. 2.
1. What sort of accommodation would the following people want? A 32 year old single man who has just started a new office job in the CBD A married couple with 3 children, two dogs and a rabbit! An elderly lady who lives on her own and can’t drive 2. Which part of the city would each one probably want to live in (eg. CBD, suburbs), and why? A riverside apartment, Leeds A retirement bungalow, Otley A family home, ? 3. Now read P. 190 and complete question 1a & b P.191
Inner city issues Governments have had a variety of strategies to improve living in inner cities since 1945 – most famously building cheap flats in the 1960’s and 1970’s as quick fixes – What does this mean? Recent strategies now try to involve private funding and the local community. Strategy 1. Urban Development Corporations (UDCs) Major strategy introduced in the 1980’s with the London Docklands Development Corporation (LDDC) 11 more UDC’s were developed around the UK. These were large scale projects where major changes occurred with the help of both public and private funding. LDDC finished in 1998. In total £1.86 billion of public money was invested and £7.7 billion from the private sector.LDDC Strategy 2: City Challenge Hulme, Manchester Strategy 3: Sustainable communities
The Urban living scheme in Birmingham LozellsLozells and Birchfield are neighbourhoods in the northwest of Birmingham's’ inner city. Housing in these areas are being re-developed as part of the government funded Urban living scheme Read the text book P.191 – What was the scheme trying to improve? What happened to the old Victorian terraced buildings in South Lozells? What did they do to the old houses? What did they do to the large Victorian houses? How did this help to improve the area? In Birchfield flats have been demolished to create space for new mixed residential development Urban redevelopment
Review of end of unit test on Tourism 17 th March 2015 Minimum target grade = Challenging target grade = Tourism test result = /28 % Grade Read my comments and use the mark scheme to review the progress you have made. What score/level did you achieve on Q6b? How could you improve? What score/level did you achieve on Q6c(iii)? How could you improve? What score/level did you achieve on Q6? How could you improve? How well have you done overall in relation to your minimum and challenging target grade? How could you improve? Write down 1 or 2 targets e.g. Next time I need to make sure I use map evidence and grid references.
Issue 2: Multicultural issues 2. How can the UK councils help to support people who speak different languages?languages 3. How does Birmingham council help people? P.192 1. Why does ethnic segregation happen?
Issue 3: Traffic in citiesTraffic 1. What are the main problems facing UK cities? facing UK cities? 2. What is happening in Birmingham ? 3. Now complete Q3 P.193