Introduction: Breast USG is an established and accurate tool for the primary evaluation of breast lumps and pathology. It also compliments X-ray mammography in further evaluation and characterization of breast masses and thus avoids surgeries in benign breast diseases and pathology. Method: For USG examination of the breast lumps, a linear-array transducer of MHz frequency is required with a good resolution machine.
The aim of this study was to evaluate the relation of some ultrasound morphological parameters to biological characteristics in breast carcinoma. Ultrasound data from breast masses were collected. We found a variety of ultrasound features that varied between the groups.
A lump in the breast is a cause of great concern. High frequency, high-resolution USG helps in its evaluation. This is exemplified in women with dense breast tissue where USG is useful in detecting small breast cancers that are not seen on mammography.
Breast lumps are a very common complaint for women of all ages. Breast lumps may occur spontaneously or gradually and may be accompanied by other symptoms such as breast painchanges in the skin or changes in the nipple. A breast lump may or may not be noticeable to the patient; normal breast tissue can be quite lumpy in some women and some lumps can be small or located deep in the breast.
Non-cancerous and cancerous breast lumps can be very different from each other when it comes to how they feel during a breast exam and what they look like in imaging tests. However, a number of benign breast changes mimic breast cancerso it sometimes takes further testing to know for sure what's going on in your breast. How a breast mass feels can give a doctor a fairly good idea whether a lump is a breast cancer tumor or a benign mass.
This term is used to describe what is seen on an ultrasound scan. Ultrasound uses sound waves that are absorbed by or bounce off of tissues, organs, and muscles. The waves form the black and white image you see on an ultrasound screen.
One of the things we run into are 'little bright objects'. These foci are enhancing areas of less than 5mm in diameter and are too small to characterize. They have persistent type 1 curves.
Breast cysts are round or oval structures filled with fluid. Most breast cysts are benign and do not increase your risk of breast cancer. They can be very tiny, or they can be large enough to feel through the skin or see on an imaging test a grossly evident cyst, or gross cyst. Many cysts fall somewhere in between.
Annual screening with MRI and mammography beginning at age 30 for high-risk women is felt to be effective. Although breast cancer is relatively common and remains the second leading cause of death in women, the majority of findings discovered on imaging which undergo percutaneous biopsy are benign. Furthermore, when there is radiology-pathology discordance following image-guided biopsy, surgical excision is subsequently performed.
Irregular hypoechoic masses in the breast do not always indicate malignancies. Many benign breast diseases present with irregular hypoechoic masses that can mimic carcinoma on ultrasonography. Some of these diseases such as inflammation and trauma-related breast lesions could be suspected from a patient's symptoms and personal history.