A gusset is a device, often triangular, used to reinforce a connection between two components. Gussets are commonly used in
engineering, sewingand armour.
In sewing, a gusset is a triangular or square piece of fabric inserted into a seam to add breadth or reduce stress. Gussets were used at the shoulders, underarms, and hems of traditional
shirts and chemises made of rectangular lengths of linento shape the garments to the body. [Burnham, Dorothy, "Cut My Cote", Royal Ontario Museum, 1973.]
Gussets are used in manufacturing of modern tights or
pantyhoseto add breadth at the crotch seam; these gussets are often made of breathable fabrics for hygiene.
Gusset is also an alternate spelling of
gousset, a component of late Medievalarmor.
Gusset plates are frequently used to fuse any number of load-bearing
columns with beams or trussmembers together. The members can be bolted, riveted or welded to the gusset plate.
A failure in a gusset plate resulted in the collapse of the 300 foot NRAO antenna. [cite web |url=http://www.gb.nrao.edu/fgdocs/300ft/300ft.html |title=300Foot Telescope Collapse |publisher=NRAO] Similarly, the
National Transportation Safety Board(NTSB) indicated that rupture of the gusset plates of the I-35W Mississippi River bridgein Minneapolis, Minnesota, may have been the initiating factor in the bridge's collapse.
Wikimedia Foundation. 2010.
Look at other dictionaries:
Gusset — Gus set, n. [F. gousset armpit, fob, gusset, dim. of gousse pod, husk; cf. It. guscio shell, or W. cwysed gore, gusset.] 1. A small piece of cloth inserted in a garment, for the purpose of strengthening some part or giving it a tapering… … The Collaborative International Dictionary of English
gusset — [gus′it] n. [ME guschet < OFr gousset] 1. a piece of chain mail or a metal plate protecting the opening of a joint in a suit of armor 2. a triangular or diamond shaped piece sewn into a garment, glove, etc. to make it stronger or roomier 3. a… … English World dictionary
gusset — early 14c., from O.Fr. gosset armpit; piece of armor for the armpit (13c.), apparently from gousse вЂњshell of a nut,вЂќ of unknown origin. Originally an armorer s term; of clothing from 1560s … Etymology dictionary
gusset — ► NOUN 1) a piece of material sewn into a garment to strengthen or enlarge a part of it, e.g. the crotch of an undergarment. 2) a bracket strengthening an angle of a structure. ORIGIN Old French gousset small pod or shell … English terms dictionary
gusset — UK [ˈɡʌsɪt] / US [ˈɡʌsət] noun [countable] Word forms gusset : singular gusset plural gussets a small extra piece of cloth sewn into a piece of clothing, especially underwear, to make it stronger or more comfortable … English dictionary
gusset — noun Etymology: Middle English, piece of armor covering the joints in a suit of armor, from Anglo French goussete Date: circa 1570 1. a usually diamond shaped or triangular insert in a seam (as of a sleeve, pocketbook, or shoe upper) to provide… … New Collegiate Dictionary
gusset — /ˈgʌsət / (say gusuht) noun 1. an angular piece of material inserted in a garment to strengthen, enlarge or give freedom of movement to some part of it. 2. a metal bracket for strengthening a structure at a joint or angle. 3. Armour a. a mail… … Australian English dictionary
gusset — /gus it/, n. 1. a small, triangular piece of material inserted into a shirt, shoe, etc., to improve the fit or for reinforcement. Cf. godet (def. 1), gore3 (def. 1). 2. Civil Engin. a plate for uniting structural members at a joint, as in a steel … Universalium
gusset — noun a) A small piece of cloth inserted in a garment, for the purpose of strengthening some part or giving it a tapering enlargement. b) A small piece of mail, providing some protection where two plates of armor are joined, usually at the elbows … Wiktionary
Gusset — Her. A *charge in the form of a line drawn from its top left or right (*sinister or *dexter *chief) to the central point of the shield, then continuing straight downwards. It is a mark of *abatement. If the line emerges from the shield s sinister … Dictionary of Medieval Terms and Phrases