The apocalypse may still be a few years away, but arts and culture have long been affected by the world’s socioeconomic decline. Most recently, the Greek National Orchestra and Chorus took a heart-wrenching blow when the nation’s government announced their June 15, 2013 performance was to be their last.
As the performers played and sang in between sobs, music lovers around the world came to an important realization: we can’t let the arts die along with the rest of society. Here are a few tips on how to stay cultured following the apocalypse.
Sing, Sing, and Sing Some More
We don’t really know what conditions will be like following the apocalypse. Even if we lose worldly possessions, though, we’ll still have one very important thing — our voices. That’s why it’s imperative that we keep singing whenever possible. Sing anything you can remember, whether it’s a Backstreet Boys song or Beethoven’s Fifth Symphony. Sure, you may annoy your friends, but what’s worse — annoying your companions or losing your culture?
Leave Drawings Everywhere
People from long ago carved drawings in rock, in caves — really any surface they could find. As a result of their effects, some early Egyptian and other cultures survived the ages. Practice your drawing as often as you can. If you get good enough, maybe you’ll leave behind something of value.
Create a Sculpture
There should be lots of old machinery and broken furniture lying around after the end of the world. Basically, these are the materials that comprise much of today’s modern art, so there’s absolutely no reason why sculpture should die.
Fashion an Instrument from the Rubble
No one knows for sure what the future will hold, but many imagine post-apocalyptic society will be rather nomadic. Why not look back to the medieval times, and form a band of traveling minstrels? You can make an instrument out of almost anything. A few tin cans and sticks become a drum set, and tying a few metal strings or old cords to pieces of scrap metal gives you a basic guitar.
In the future, life will be tough. There will be neither a doctor to go to for medical problems, nor the 12 Palms addiction rehab center to help you cope with a drug addiction. Traveling with a band of singing journeymen may offer an escape from the world around you.
If All Else Fails, Try Not to Become Illiterate
In today’s society, the ability to read is still considered important. In the future, that may not be true, but remember — literacy is the key to maintaining and preserving culture. Oral traditions can die out, but written ones will be remembered. Practice reading and writing every day, and carve messages into rock for future generations.
Adrienne is a skeptical blogger who writes on a variety of topics.