RRS Discovery was the last traditional wooden three-masted ship to be built in Britain. Designed for Antarctic research, she was launched as a Royal Research Ship (RRS) in 1901. Her first mission was the British National Antarctic Expedition, carrying Robert Falcon Scott and Ernest Shackleton on their first, successful journey to the Antarctic, known as the Discovery Expedition.
She is now the centrepiece of visitor attraction in her home, Dundee.
Following on from the Frigate Unicorn, which is also docked in the city of Dundee, we have another vessel with a haunting story to tell.
This amazing ship, with such in-depth history, has been subject to ghostly behaviour that can not be explained by staff or visitors alike.
This has come on to my radar in the past and a full Investigation was carried out. The information gathered was mostly via the excellent Fiona Williamson in conjunction with Bryan Boyle, gifted Clairvoyant from Leslie, who joined us for the first time.
There was no hard data gathered that could explain or provide further proof form a left brain scientific angle. This however, does not mean anything in the grand scheme of things, working on location far surpasses just scientific models or only intuitive impressions. There is more depth, and a whole brain perspective required, in such research and study of cases such as this.
Throughout the vessel, we have footsteps that are very evident, yet, no physical source is available. This leaves only that of a non-physical probability. Many have attributed these ghostly footsteps to a past crew member, who followed Captain Scott to the Antarctic.
However, there are have been some theories that they [footsteps] may in fact be that of a young man, whom fell to his death from the crow’s nest.
An apparition has been seen in one of the cabins, also, a ghostly boy has been seen running around the ship.
Ghostly shadows are frequently reported, along with the ghostly figure of a young sailor, so real, as in physically solid, that visitors stop and talk to him.
This is a must, for a visit, by all you paranormal enthusiasts and hobbyists.
More updates will be added in the future, stay tuned!
Feel free to leave your comments or constructive criticisms below.
Paranormal Research & Consciousness Exploration
Contact Ryan: Ryan@Haunted-Scotland.co.uk
“the last traditional wooden three-masted ship to be built in Britain. Designed for Antarctic research, she was launched as a Royal Research Ship (RRS) in 1901.”
Generated by Facebook Photo Fetcher 2