5 Dental Myths, Debunked
There are a ton of misconceptions about dental care out there. Sometimes it can be hard to separate fact from fiction, so to help you understand dental care better we have taken the time to debunk five most common myths that people think to be true.
Myth 1: Brushing hard cleans your teeth better
This has been around for a long time. The fact is that brushing too hard can only hurt your teeth and gums. In fact, aggressive brushing can impact your teeth that are supplemented with a crown by jolting the core and causing the crown to lose its fixture. In addition, aggressive brushing can harm the enamel that actually protects your teeth from cavities. The key is to brush your teeth longer than harder, using gentle strokes.
Myth 2: Flossing doesn’t make much of a difference
Flossing has been recommended by professional dentists all over the world since the beginning of dental care practices. Flossing is entirely a different cleaning activity than the brushing, but most people don’t really understand the difference. Brushing cleans the surface of the teeth while flossing goes deep in between the teeth to remove food debris that is left behind after brushing. Generally, brushing does not remove food stuck in between the teeth.
Myth 3: Sugar is the only culprit when it comes to cavities
It’s true that sugar does the most damage but it is completely false that it’s the only culprit. All foods can cause cavities if you don’t follow your dental care regimen. Every time you eat something, you trigger the bacteria in the mouth that starts to corrode the surface of the teeth where the food debris lies, which directly results in cavities in the long run. Brushing and flossing your teeth after every meal ensures that the cavity-causing bacteria doesn’t have anything to feast on.
Myth 4: Gum disease only causes problems for mouth
Gum disease is a serious condition that impacts your gums and teeth in the long run. Lack of proper care can actually lead to tooth loss. But the damaging effects of gum disease are not limited to just your mouth. Research shows that untreated gum disease can actually lead to hypertension and diabetes. In an unlikely event, it may also lead to certain forms of cancer that are caused due to chronic inflammation.
Myth 5: You don’t need a dentist unless something bothers you
Dental checkup should be a regular part of your life. Most dental specialists Dubai recommend at least 2-3 dental visits every year to make sure that everything is the way it is supposed to be. During a dental exam, your specialist will look for cavities and plague that may become a bigger problem in the future. In addition, you need to get regular dental cleaning (scaling and polishing) to clear away any signs of plague that may lead to gum disease if left untreated. In any case, during a dental exam, your specialist will let you know what is best for your dental health.
The whole point of going to the dentist is to make sure that there is nothing wrong with your teeth. It’s a precautionary measure that can save your teeth in the long run.