In this day and age, the amount and range of toothpastes that line the shelves of stores can be overwhelming. In fact, shopping for toothpaste is an excellent example of information overload. You see all kinds of products, from ice-cream-flavored toothpaste to the newest whitening technology. As people become limp under this information overload, they often end up making the wrong choice and later regretting their buy. This is not to say that these toothpastes will harm your teeth in any way; the bottom line is that some toothpaste may not cater to your specific needs. Therefore, it is extremely important to know what aspects one ought to look out for when buying new toothpaste. Such knowledge can be gained simply by getting acquainted with the labels on various toothpastes.
Fluoride is perhaps the most sought-after ingredient in toothpaste; most, if not all, toothpastes contain fluoride. Fluoride helps to keep teeth healthy and is of particular importance for children and the elderly. It also protects tooth enamel from eroding, as well as preventing cavities and plaque buildup. When using fluoride-based toothpaste, make sure you do not ingest it because ingestion can cause dental fluorosis. For children, it is a good idea to use only a pea-sized amount of toothpaste during every brushing.
Whitening toothpaste is a popular option among many buyers. This type of toothpaste is quite different from teeth whitening kits; the latter contain a much greater amount of peroxide. Some whitening toothpastes don’t even use peroxide; they use an abrasive agent. Basically, whitening toothpaste helps to clean the surface stains on your teeth, thereby helping to whiten and improve the coloring.
If you have suffered from gingivitis in the past then antibacterial toothpaste is a good choice for you. This type of toothpaste has triclosan; it protects the teeth and gums against bacterial infections. At the same time, you should not depend entirely on antibacterial toothpaste to solve gum disease; it is better to see a dentist and supplement your treatment with antibacterial toothpaste.
If your teeth are sensitive to sweet or even cold food items, consider using toothpaste designed for sensitive teeth. Such toothpaste blocks the gap between your teeth and gums – a result of enamel erosion – so that the nerve is not affected when this area around your teeth roots is exposed to particularly cold or sweet foods.
Finally, for individuals seeking toothpaste that doesn’t use any chemicals, natural toothpaste is also available in many retail outlets and drugstores. These toothpastes use peppermint oil, Aloe Vera and myrrh to keep your teeth healthy, while steering clear of fluoride and triclosan. This is a good option for children when they start brushing their teeth. For more information on the wide range of preventative dentistry services available at Comprehensive Dental Care Queanbeyan Canberra, please contact our friendly team at (02) 6297 1303