A study of school design has discovered that school layouts can influence a child's development by as much as 25 percent -- positively or negatively -- over the course of an academic year.
The 751 pupils using 34 classrooms across seven primary schools in Blackpool were studied over the 2011-12 academic year by the University of Salford's School of the Built Environment and architecture firm Nightingale Associates. Standardised data -- such as age, gender and academic performance -- were collected on each child at the start and end of the year, while each classroom was rated for quality on ten different environmental factors, such as orientation for natural light, shape, colour, temperature and acoustics.
The results, published in Building and the Environment, revealed that the architecture and design of classrooms has a significant role to play in influencing academic performance. Six of the environmental factors -- colour, choice, connection, complexity, flexibility and light -- were clearly correlated with grade scores.
Architect Peter Barrett, the study's lead author, said: "This is the first time a holistic assessment has been made that successfully links the overall impact directly to learning rates in schools. The impact identified is in fact greater than we imagined." According to the results, once the differences between the "worst" and "best" designed classrooms looked at in the study were taken into account, it was found the be the equivalent to the progress a typical pupil would be expected to make over a year.
The results are particularly interesting as the coaltion government has introduced a controversial range of standardised templates for new school buildings, with the expressed purpose of reducing the costs of hiring architects. An insistence on a range of strictly-defined design features -- including a ban on curved walls and certain kinds of insulated wall and ETFE roofs, sticking to one size for windows and doors, encouraging stacking of blocks on top of each other, and an emphasis on "basic" finishes to interior decorations like balustrades -- replaces the previous Labour government's more architecturally extravagant Building Schools for the Future programme, which was cancelled by education secretary Michael Gove.
He has claimed that his department's new Priority School Building Programme, and its basic plans, will put an end to a situation which he believes existed only to "make architects richer".
Unsurprisingly, the design proposals have been met with disapproval from architects. The Royal Institute of British Architects issued a statement criticising the templates for introducing a "one size fits all" format that ignored the needs for flexibility in modern teaching environments. It also worried that the standard corridors would be too small for large numbers of students, the environmental impact of the buildings would be higher than expected, and that the templates ignored the statutory requirement to be accessible for students and teachers with disabilities.