Before surgery, the joints adjacent to the defective knee (hip and ankle) are carefully evaluated. This is important to ensure optimal outcome and recovery from the surgery. Replacing a knee joint that is adjacent to a severely damaged joint may not yield significant improvement in function as the nearby joint may become more painful if it is abnormal. Furthermore, all medications that the patient is taking are reviewed. Blood-thinning medications such as warfarin (Coumadin) and anti-inflammatory medications such as aspirin may have to be adjusted or discontinued prior to surgery.
Routine blood tests of liver and kidney function and urine tests are evaluated for signs of anemia, infection, or abnormal metabolism.
Chest X-ray and EKG are performed to exclude significant heart and lung disease that may preclude surgery or anesthesia.
Finally, a knee replacement surgery is less likely to have good long-term outcome if the patient’s Excess body weight.
A consultant orthopaedic surgeon might have suggested the patient that Total Knee Joint Replacement done if in case patient is suffering from unbearable pain in the joints, suffering from swelling, stiffness or difficulty in walking, sitting etc. The treatment involves a complete surgery done under general anesthesia.
During a total knee replacement, the end of the femur bone is removed and replaced with a metal shell. The end of the lower leg bone (tibia) is also removed and replaced with a channeled plastic piece with a metal stem. Depending on the condition of the kneecap portion of the knee joint, a plastic “button” may also be added under the kneecap surface. The artificial components of a total knee replacement are referred to as the prosthesis.
Then after an 8-12 inches cut is made towards the knee, after which the natural knee joint, which is much like a cup sized bone gets replaced with an artificial, similar looking material.
The artificial joint is attached to the thigh bone, shin and knee cap either with cement or a special material. When both artificial joint are fit together they will rely on the surrounding muscles and ligaments for support and function.
Most of the knee replacement surgeries are successful if the patients take care of him. Most people experience a great comfort and a huge recovery after this surgery. The improvements are drastic and pain almost vanishes away from the body.
People are asked to be careful about stand position and movement with the help of joint just after the surgery to the next 3-4 days. They can need support with stick during walking and start a new painless chapter in their lives.
Physiotherapy is helpful to provide the strengths in the body’s muscles, so this is certainly recommended. After about 6 weeks, most of the patients are truly happy with the results.