Do Lots of SAT Word Problems
I’m going to start with the Math strategy, since I feel it is perhaps the most overlooked among all the uproar about higher-level math and the no-calculator section. Become good at long word problems. That’s because much of the test is going to be made up of long word problems, the kind where the math isn’t super complex but is buried in 12-lines of text, and you have to figure out what the problem is asking.
While this might not seem bad if you do two or three of these questions in a row, but after six such problems your brain is going to become tired, much as it does on a long reading passage. So practice doing long sets of word problems. By doing so you’ll avoid what will likely be countless careless errors, all because you were burnt out from sifting through all that text.
Take Actual Practice Tests from College Board
It’s easy to get caught up in the idea that the SAT is testing higher-level math. After all, this is the kind of math that some of us have never even learned before. Now, I’m not saying to avoid prepping this kind of math (you should definitely learn the unit circle and the basics of imaginary numbers). What I see some students doing is overly fixating on this area by going through dense trig textbooks or pre-calculus books.
The test, however, focuses on a small sliver of information from these concepts, usually at the basic end of the spectrum. Additionally, it asks questions in a very specific manner. Therefore, it’s best that you do actual practice questions and practice tests to get an idea of exactly how the test will deal with a certain concept. Of course, the concept reviews in most prep books are really helpful. Just make sure to not always review, but to actually do practice questions.
Learn To Do Math Without a Calculator
While this might sound like a no brainer, the temptation to use a calculator whenever you prep is big. After all, it’s 2016, so when don’t you use a calculator when doing math. Unless you want to flounder test day, you should put down that calculator and rely either on mental math or the old pencil. The following are some sums you should be able to do in your head:
For anything more advanced, use a pencil. If you are not use to working out problems this way, start soon. You’ll be glad you did.
More from Magoosh
About Chris Lele
Chris Lele is the GRE and SAT Curriculum Manager (and vocabulary wizard) at Magoosh Online Test Prep. In his time at Magoosh, he has inspired countless students across the globe, turning what is otherwise a daunting experience into an opportunity for learning, growth, and fun. Some of his students have even gone on to get near perfect scores. Chris is also very popular on the internet. His GRE channel on YouTube has over 10 million views. You can read Chris's awesome blog posts on the Magoosh GRE blog and High School blog! You can follow him on Twitter and Facebook!
Leave a Reply
Magoosh blog comment policy: To create the best experience for our readers, we will approve and respond to comments that are relevant to the article, general enough to be helpful to other students, concise, and well-written! :) If your comment was not approved, it likely did not adhere to these guidelines. If you are a Premium Magoosh student and would like more personalized service, you can use the Help tab on the Magoosh dashboard. Thanks!