eucalyptus oil production economics
Post on 03-Apr-2015
Embed Size (px)
An economic assessment of the role of commercial tree crops to achieve greenhouse gas neutrality in predominantly grazing systems of south-western Australia Abstract The results of this analysis show that a long-term tree crop plantation is effective at reducing carbon emissions from a predominantly grazing farming system. However, if the plantations are destumped, much of the carbon will be returned to the atmosphere in time, in which case benefits are confined to their ability to buy time for the development of less-polluting technologies. The accreditation of commercial tree crops may provide a socially and politically feasible solution for medium-term environmental policy. The benefits of the policy would be strengthened if implemented in conjunction with salinity abatement policy.
Elizabeth H. Petersen, National Centre for Development Studies, The Australian National University, Canberra ACT 0200, Australia Steven Schilizzi, Agricultural and Resource Economics, Faculty of Agriculture, University of Western Australia, Nedlands WA 6907, Australia David Bennett, NRMC Pty Ltd (Natural Resource Management Consultants), PO Box 217, North Fremantle WA 6159, Australia
Keywords: Greenhouse gas abatement; whole-farm modelling; commercial trees
Contributed paper presented at the 46th Annual Conference of the Australian Agricultural and Resource Economics Scoiety, Canberra, 13th 15th February 2002
The authors gratefully acknowledge the helpful comments of anonymous reviewers and the financial support of Agriculture Western Australia. This paper was.
Many scientists claim that atmospheric concentrations of greenhouse gases have increased markedly due to human activity, such as the burning of fossil fuels, land clearing and agricultural production. These scientists argue that increases in
atmospheric greenhouse gases are having a discernible impact on climatic conditions, especially global warming (Intergovernmental Panel for Climate Change 2001). Concern for the risks of human induced climate change, and the realisation that addressing the issue requires an international co-operative effort, led to the establishment of the United Nations Framework Convention for Climate Change. One of the most significant initiatives of the parties to the Convention is the Kyoto Protocol, an agreement that requires ratifying countries to restrict emissions to a specified percentage of 1990 emissions (United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change 1997). Australia is a signatory to, but has not ratified, the Protocol. If ratified, Australia will have to restrict emissions to 108 percent of 1990 levels in the first commitment period of 2008 to 2012. Most Australian emissions have their source in the burning of fossil fuels (53 percent in 1990, 55 percent in 1996); however, agriculture is the second biggest contributor (16 percent in 1990, 20 percent in 1996). Ruminant livestock are the greatest source of emissions in the agricultural sector, contributing 70 percent of agricultural emissions (although emissions from livestock decreased by 5.1 percent from 1990 to 1998 (NGGI 1998a), mostly due to the drop in sheep numbers associated with the drop in wool price).
This analysis specifically focuses on the Great Southern region of Western Australia, a region with relatively high-rainfall compared with other agricultural regions in the state. Petersen et al. (2001) found that, in the absence of carbon sinks, there are few economically feasible management options for greenhouse gas abatement in the region due to the dependence of the system on ruminant livestock (typically 85 percent of the system is grazed). Any abatement policy would rapidly cause the present system to become unprofitable unless swift technological change provided alternative enterprises or reduced emission levels in current practices. Given current conditions, any abatement policy to decrease agricultural emissions in predominantly grazing systems is likely to be politically impossible.
The aim of this paper is to contribute to the environmental policy debate by assessing the viability of a commercial tree crop, specifically oil mallee, for greenhouse gas abatement on mixed cropping enterprises in Western Australia. The introduction of a commercial tree crop is considered to be an example of a technological change; however, the use of forests and other plantations as carbon sinks under the Kyoto Protocol is a contentious issue (as the Sixth Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change at The Hague (COP6) demonstrated). The properties of trees as a carbon sink are not yet well understood and are difficult to define and measure. In addition, certain signatories to the Protocol are resisting the inclusion of trees as sinks on the grounds that it allows parties to continue the burning of fossil fuels at a higher rate.
Another criticism of using trees as a carbon sink is that the effect is only temporary. Carbon will be released into the atmosphere at harvest and with the treatment of the harvested timber. However, defenders of this criticism argue that tree crops could permanently contribute to reductions in atmospheric carbon levels if they are used to replace products that take a lot of energy to produce, i.e. replacing steel, aluminium and cement with wood products. Irrespective of the time period for which the carbon is sequestered, it is generally argued that accrediting tree crops as carbon sinks will buy time so that new less polluting technologies (such as alternative energy sources) can be developed (Shea 1999). The displacement of fossil fuels for energy generation cannot be counted as a benefit given that one source of carbon emitting fuel will be replaced by an approximately equivalent one.
In recognition of the argument that carbon sequestration from trees is temporary, only carbon sequestered by the trees in the long-term is considered in this analysis. It is assumed that each time carbon is removed from the farm through tree harvests, the on-farm pool of carbon is reduced by the same amount. Hence, it is assumed that all sequestered carbon is released again through time in the various uses of the biomass. This means that only the carbon sequestered by the trees during the six years before the first harvest (as subsequent harvests will be offset by the growth of trees prior to the next harvest), and the carbon accumulated in the rootstock, is used to offset other emissions on the farm. It is assumed that the planting of trees is permanent, although 3
benefits and costs are only calculated for a 30 year time period. In time, if the trees are destumped, the only abatement benefits from tree planting are from buying of time for the development of less polluting technologies (for example, solar and wind technologies).
Another benefit of reforestation is the possible reduction in the extent of dryland salinity. Along with biodiversity degradation, dryland salinity is the most important environmental problem facing Western Australia and has received much public attention (Western Australian Government 1998). Campbell et al. (2000) argue that the Great Southern region has the potential for being the region with the highest proportion of land affected by salinity in the state. Secondary dryland salinity is directly linked to Australias history of land clearing that started with European settlement. It is caused by the increase of recharge into the soil profile causing the water table to rise and eventually to intercept the soil surface, bringing salt with it (Wood 1925). The impact of reforestation on recharge abatement in the Great
Southern is also investigated in this paper as an extra benefit derived from reforestation.
The paper proceeds as follows.
In Section 2 the methodology of the study is
presented, giving a brief discussion of the tree crop species analysed (oil mallee) and the modelling techniques used. Results are presented with discussion in Section 3. Some conclusions are drawn in the final section.
The instrument of analysis is a linear programming model of a steady-state singleperiod representation of a farming system. Named MIDAS (Model of an Integrated Dryland Agricultural System), the model was originally developed for the Merredin region of Western Australia, but has since been calibrated for several other regions. MIDAS includes the relevant biological complexities and interactions between enterprises in a typical wool or wheat belt farming system by employing a whole-farm modelling framework (Pannell 1996). MIDAS has been used to analyse issues
concerning greenhouse gas abatement (Petersen et al. 2001), farm management (Schmidt and Pannell 1996), agricultural policy (Morrison and Young 1991) and research (Pannell 1999). 4
The Great Southern region was chosen as, due to its soil-climate constraints, it supports a predominantly grazing farming system. Ruminant livestock contribute far more greenhouse gases than crops, especially non-irrigated crops. This region is
approximately one million hectares in size with approximately 1000 farms of an average of 1100 hectares (Australian Bureau of Statistics 1997). Readers are referred to Morrison and Young (1991) and Young (1995) for detailed expositions of the nature and structure of the Great Southern MIDAS model (GSM) (which excludes accounting for greenhouse gas emissions). Petersen et al. (2001) present a detailed description of the developments made to the standard version of GSM to include greenhouse gas emissions. A brief description of GSM and the modelling of
greenhouse gas emissions is presented in Section 2.1, and a detailed discussion of the inclusion of the tree crop in GSM is documented in Section 2.2