The last thing you want on mowing day is a battery that won't start your riding mower. Fortunately, finding a suitable replacement for a dead battery is not difficult since most riding mowers will accept batteries of a standard size and voltage. Variations in battery construction, though, can make some batteries a better choice than others, and some replacement batteries might not work in your mower at all.
The voltage rating of a battery is a measure of how much current can flow through it at a given time. Nearly all riding lawn mower batteries are 12-volt batteries, as are most automotive and other vehicle batteries. Some batteries labelled as mower batteries are higher voltage -- as much as 36 or 40 volts -- but these are usually specialized batteries made to power electric walk-behind mowers and shouldn't be confused with riding mower batteries.
Size and Terminal Position
Batteries are classified by their physical size, and individual size categories are given a "group number" by the Battery Council International. Most riding lawn mower batteries are group U1 batteries; they are about 8.3 inches long, 5.1 inches wide and 7.25 inches high. There are two types of these batteries, differentiated by the position of their positive terminals. U1 batteries have their positive terminals on the left, and U1R batteries have their positive terminals on the right. The difference is significant because the length of a mower's battery cables can prevent a battery with the incorrect terminal position from fitting. Always check the terminal position of your old battery before you buy a replacement.
Batteries are made with metal plates submerged in a sulfuric acid solution, and in conventional batteries, the plates are made of lead impregnated with antimony. The disadvantage of this type of construction is that batteries tend to lose charge over time, even when they're not in use, and the antimony content of the plates causes corrosion of the battery components. Some newer batteries incorporate calcium into their plates, which helps to reduce problems with self-discharge and corrosion; calcium batteries are also less prone to damage from vibration and impact. Absorbed glass mat and gel cell batteries limit the amount of liquid acid in the battery, so the battery won't spill if it tips over.
Cold Cranking Amps
Batteries are rated in regard to the "cold cranking amps" they can produce. The CCA rating measures how much current the battery can deliver in 30 seconds at zero degrees Fahrenheit; the higher the number, the more power the battery can put out in a quick burst at low temperatures. Although you're unlikely to be using your riding mower when the temperature is below zero, the CCA rating can give you an idea of how robust the battery will be on chilly days.