Bummer! This is just a preview. You need to be signed in with a Basic account to view the entire video.
Rapid Development with Bootstrap2:01 with Guil Hernandez
In this course, you'll learn how Bootstrap, one of the most popular open source front-end frameworks, can help you build a functional design and layout in little time. This course assumes you have a basic understanding of HTML and CSS, so make sure you complete the prerequisites for this course before continuing.
Advantages of Bootstrap
- Bootstrap makes front end web development faster and easier using some of the latest front end tools
- Bootstrap provides reusable HTML and CSS for common elements like buttons, forms, navigations, grids and more
- One of the best parts about Bootstrap is cross-browser compatibility
- Your code will work on every device, from phones to tablets, to desktop computers
When you start to build a website or app,
how often do you ask yourself what front-end tools should I use?
What about the layout?
Should I use floats, a grid system, or venture in a flexbox?
Do I use pixels or ems for the typography and media queries?
What about browser compatibility?
And so on and so on.
Sometimes the toughest part about building a website or
app is knowing where to start or how to design and build the thing.
I'm Guil, a fine-art teacher here at Treehouse.
In this course,
I'll teach you how Bootstrap, one of the most popular open source front-end
frameworks can help you build a functional design and layout in little time.
One of the biggest advantages of using Bootstrap is development speed.
Bootstrap makes web development faster and easier, using some of the latest and
most advanced front-end tools.
So instead of designing and coding your site app from scratch, you can
take advantage of Bootstrap's ready-made components to help you get started.
The bootstrap framework comes with reusable HTML and CSS for common elements,
like buttons, forms, navigations, grids and lots more.
And you can easily add interactivity to many of the components with over a dozen
And one of the best parts about Bootstrap is cross-browser compatibility.
There's no need to spend hours testing how your responsive design looks and
works in IE, Safari, Firefox, and Chrome.
Bootstrap already figured out that part for us.
It offers you tried and tested cross-browser code that just works.
In fact, your code will work on every device,
from phones to tablets to desktop devices.
This will all start to make more sense once we crack open
the Bootstrap documentation, and begin building a website for
By the end of this course, you'll know how to use Bootstrap to streamline and
speed up your front-end work load.
But before we start, this course assumes you have a basic understanding of HTML and
CSS, so make sure you complete the prerequisites for
this course before continuing.
You need to sign up for Treehouse in order to download course files.Sign up