Hyper-pigmentation is a skin problem in which special cells called “Melanocytes”, that reside in the deep part of the skin called the “Basal Layer”, become over-active and start producing extra ‘Melanin’. Melanin is the pigment that gives the skin its color and this excess production of Melanin is a symptom of the over-activity of Melanocytes leading to problems like Dark Spots, Patches on cheeks (Melasma), Stubborn Tanning, Hyper-pigmentation etc.
Freckles are circular spots which are usually tan or light brown in color. While freckles are an extremely common type of hyperpigmentation, very small in size they are more often seen among people with a lighter skin tone.
Overexposure to sun can be a reason; freckles can easily become a concern if one does not practice adequate sun protection. Long-term exposure to the UV rays from the sun can cause the surfacing of new freckles and the darkening of existing ones. Therefore, the best prevention is to make sure that you are applying an adequate amount of sunblock regularly.
Developed from cured pimples wounds Squeezing of pimples: When extraction is not carried out professionally, instead of pushing the pus out, one may be pushing it further down. The skin and the tissue beneath it may also get damaged in the process, increasing the chances of inflammation and the risk of scarring. they may take months to fade off if left untreated but they are easy to treat with chemical peels or medication with healing properties
Acne is a chronic, inflammatory skin condition that causes spots and pimples, especially on the face, shoulders, back, neck, chest, and upper arms. . They are most likely to occur around puberty, but they can happen at any age. During puberty, hormone changes can cause the sebaceous glands, located at the base of hair follicles, to become overactive. Hormones stimulate the sebaceous glands to make more sebum; Pores become clogged when there is too much sebum and too many dead skin cells. Which forms acne or pimple?