Presentation on theme: "SWITCHING TO COMMON CORE. What is Common Core? Common Core is a new set of standards our country is adapting PARCC is designing- *Partnership for Assessment."— Presentation transcript:
What is Common Core? Common Core is a new set of standards our country is adapting PARCC is designing- *Partnership for Assessment of Readiness for College and Careers Student will be ready out of high school for career or college
CCSS Standards are designed specifically for k-12. Build off one another Ideally, high expectations drive the entire system – from states to districts to classrooms – towards excellence and increase the outcomes and opportunities for all students.
CCSS Aligned with college and work expectations Focused and coherent Include rigorous content and application of knowledge through high- order skills Build upon strengths and lessons of current state standards Internationally benchmarked so that all students are prepared to succeed in our global economy and society Based on evidence and research
Why is this important?? States currently have their own set of standards…meaning every state expects different levels out of our students Our students need to be able to compete on fair grounds with ours not only in our country, but around the world.
The Switch… How PARCC is aligned to the CCSS and grounded in the shifts at the heart of the CCSS. PARCC assessments will be tightly aligned to the Common Core State Standards and grounded in the key shifts at the heart of the Common Core State Standards. There are three shifts in mathematics and three in English language arts (ELA)/literacy, described below. These are shifts the Standards require of teachers and students – and they will be reflected in the PARCC assessments as well. This will help ensure that the assessments mirror the expectations of the classroom.
The Switch Common Core Shifts for ELA/Literacy Complexity: The standards require regular practice with complex text and its academic language Evidence: The standards emphasize reading and writing grounded in evidence from text, both literary and informational Knowledge: The standards require building knowledge through content rich non-fiction Common Core Shifts for Mathematics Focus: The standards focus in on the key content, skills and practices at each grade level Coherence: Content in the standards builds across the grades, and major topics are linked within grades Rigor: In major topics, the standards highlight conceptual understanding, procedural skill and fluency, and application
ELA Four strands Reading (including Reading Foundational Skills) Writing Speaking and Listening Language
Examples… Kindergarten: With prompting and support from teacher, Students describe the relationship between key events in an overall story to corresponding scenes illustrated. Define the role of an author and illustrator.
ELA- Reading Foundational Skills Four categories (standards 1−4) Print concepts (K−1) Phonological awareness (K−1) Phonics and word recognition (K−5) Fluency (K−5)
Writing Writing types/purposes (standards 1−3) Writing arguments Writing informative/explanatory texts Writing narratives Strong and growing across-the-curriculum emphasis on students writing arguments and informative/explanatory texts
Writing Production and distribution of writing (standards 4−6) Developing and strengthening writing Using technology to produce and enhance writing Research (standards 7−9) Engaging in research and writing about sources Range of writing (standard 10) Writing routinely over various time frames
Speaking and Listening Comprehension and collaboration (standards 1−3) Day-to-day, purposeful academic talk in one-on- one, small-group, and large-group settings Presentation of knowledge and ideas (standards 4−6) Formal sharing of information and concepts, including through the use of technology
Language Conventions of standard English Knowledge of language (standards 1−3) Using standard English in formal writing and speaking Using language effectively and recognizing language varieties Vocabulary (standards 4−6) Determining word meanings and word nuances Acquiring general academic and domain-specific words and phrases
Reading Balance of literature and informational texts Text complexity Writing Emphasis on argument and informative/explanatory writing Writing about sources Speaking and Listening Inclusion of formal and informal talk Language Stress on general academic and domain-specific vocabulary
Literature vs. Informational GradeLiteratureInformation al K-550% 6-845%55% 9-1230%70%
Lexile Levels Text Complexity in Grade Old Lexile Range Lexile Ranges Aligned to Common Core K-1n/a 2-3450-725450-790 4-5645-845770-980 6-8860-1010955-1155 9-10960-11151080-1305 11-CCR1070-12201215-1355
Math Practices Standards for Mathematical Practice Carry across all grade levels Describe habits of mind of a mathematically expert student Standards for Mathematical Content K-8 standards presented by grade level Organized into domains that progress over several grades Grade introductions give 2–4 focal points at each grade level High school standards presented by conceptual theme (Number & Quantity, Algebra, Functions, Modeling, Geometry, Statistics & Probability)