Download This Sample
This sample is exclusively for KidsKonnect members!
To download this worksheet, click the button below to signup for free (it only takes a minute) and you'll be brought right back to this page to start the download!
Sign Me Up
Franklin D. Roosevelt, commonly known by his initials FDR, was an American statesman and political leader who served as the 32nd President of the United States. He was Democrat and was elected four times and served from March 1933 to his death in April 1945. He was a central figure in world events during the mid-20th century, leading the United States during a time of worldwide economic depression and total war in World War II. See the fact file below for more information on Franklin Delano Roosevelt.
Franklin Delano Roosevelt
Date of Birth
January 30, 1882
Date of Death
April 12, 1945
Place of Birth
Hyde Park, New York
James Roosevelt, Sara
The Roosevelts had six children, five of whom survived infancy:
Anna Eleanor Jr., James, Franklin Delano Jr., Elliott and John Aspinwall
Groton Boarding school, Harvard University, Columbia Law School
Reason for Fame
Franklin Delano Roosevelt was the 32nd President of the United States.
He was elected to his first term in office during the Great Depression.
He named his approach to the economic situation the New Deal.
Roosevelt also signed legislation which provided direct assistance to individuals,
such as the Social Security Act.
The only American president elected to more than two terms.
Roosevelt served 4 terms as president. FDR’s combination of optimism and economic activism is often credited with keeping the country’s economic crisis from
developing into a political crisis.
He led the United States through most of World War II.
In 1921, when Roosevelt was 39, he contacted polio.
Franklin Delano Roosevelt is considered to be one of America’s greatest presidents.
Franklin D. Roosevelt Worksheets
This bundle includes 13 ready-to-use Franklin D. Roosevelt worksheets that are perfect for students to learn Franklin D. Roosevelt, commonly known by his initials FDR, was an American statesman and political leader who served as the 32nd President of the United States. He was Democrat and was elected four times and served from March 1933 to his death in April 1945.
This download includes the following worksheets:
- Franklin Roosevelt Facts
- Political Timeline
- Health Maze
- Word Code
- Word Building
- Leading Acrostic
- Roosevelt and the Great Depression
- Vocabulary Check
- Word Search
- Roosevelt and the World War II
- The Popular Pup
Link/cite this page
If you reference any of the content on this page on your own website, please use the code below to cite this page as the original source.
Link will appear as Franklin D. Roosevelt Facts & Worksheets: https://kidskonnect.com - KidsKonnect, January 2, 2017
Use With Any Curriculum
These worksheets have been specifically designed for use with any international curriculum. You can use these worksheets as-is, or edit them using Google Slides to make them more specific to your own student ability levels and curriculum standards.