What is the Project About?
1 out of 3 internet users worldwide is a child. As internet use by children and teenagers increases, so do concerns about their online safety. Sure, the internet exposes our youth to a wealth of opportunity, but also many risks that may have a detrimental impact on their human rights.
That’s where the The BEWARE Project steps in! BEWARE is designed to raise awareness among youths about potential dangers online, whilst equipping them with the knowledge and power to protect themselves. Initiatives will reach young people, youth workers and other EU citizens to become empowered and responsible digital users.
Why is it Important?
The online-safety messages most young users are receiving are still based around a singular concept which focuses largely on adult-to-child crime, rather than on what the growing bodies of both Net-safety and social media research have found. We also want to target the peer-to-peer part of online safety which is increasingly fostering harassment and cyberbullying, as well as the growing threat of information and identity theft.
How will BEWARE achieve its mission?
It’s important the messages we deliver throughout the project are relevant to young people, its intended beneficiaries. Net safety needs to respect youth ideals, embrace the technologies they love, use social media in the instruction process, and address the positive reasons for safe use of social technology. We intend to focus on safety for positive outcomes, rather than safety from bad ones.
5 European Superheroes (otherwise known as Project Partners) will join forces to execute a detailed set of project objectives set out to improve the knowledge and skills of specifically selected sidekicks (target groups). Each parnter has extensive super powers in a sepecific sector relating to the projects needs including – education, research, information technology, web development and e-learning.
Together we will join forces to combat online villains through various intellectual tools including, an online Guide, extensive training and an interactive game!