Monday, 01 Oct 2018
Dia de los Muertos (Day of the Dead) is a Mexican holiday for celebrating and honoring those who have passed. One tradition includes building ofrendas (altars) honoring the deceased using brightly colored skulls, marigolds, and possessions of the departed. Instead of sugar, our skulls are paper mache, but we invite you to decorate them in the spirit of Dia de los Muertos using paint, glitter, gems, flowers and other adornments.
How can an evidence-based approach to implicit bias promote greater equity and inclusion within STEM teaching and learning? Join us on Mondays in October to explore this question in depth alongside future faculty from all disciplines, levels, and roles within STEM.
While the current bodies of literature on implicit bias are extensive, fewer studies focus on its scope in STEM teaching and learning. In the first session of this CIRTLCast series, invited speakers will discuss the prevalence of implicit bias in STEM, particularly in the context of higher education. We will define and discuss key terms, such as equity, oppression, privilege, and microaggressions.
"Get Out the Vote Plays," Tiffany Antone, lecturer in music and theatre will curate short, nonpartisan plays. This lunchtime series features facets of composition and art through a series of readings or performances curated by Iowa State faculty. Bring your lunch or stop by Bookends Café on your way.
What defines effective teaching, and how do we measure it? These questions are critically important to the teaching mission and to faculty careers. The ISU Faculty Handbook states that "When teaching is part of the faculty assignment, effectiveness is an essential criterion for advancement." CELT will be hosting two nationally recognized scholars who will share their research on Evaluating Teaching Effectiveness, with particular focus on:
Learn the fundamentals of woodworking equipment while creating a tool carrier. Leave class with knowledge of proper machinery use, and, most importantly, woodshop safety.
4 weeks beginning Monday, October 1, 6:00 - 8:30 p.m. Join professional photographer and instructor Mark Stoltenberg for a four-part class covering the basics of photography including equipment (and how to use it), depth of field, aperture, light, composition, finding your subject & "tips and tricks".
Flowing, graceful, and distinctive are just a few words to describe the wonderful group of garden plants known as ornamental grasses.