Plastic pipettes are eyedropper-like fluid transfer tools. They’re often graduated along the stem, with mL and half-milliliter markings. Plastic pipettes are disposable, but can sometimes be reused depending on what you use them for.
You’ll often see them sized based on the stem volume, but they can hold additional fluid in the bulb.
Maybe you’ve seen pipettes before, even if a long time ago in high school science class, or maybe it’s new to you. I’m sure some of you use them regularly, and if so, what do you use them for?
I haven’t used pipettes of any kind for a few years now, but they came in very handy when I worked in a research lab. Disposable plastic pipettes aren’t very accurate, at least compared to glass ones, but they’re inexpensive and quick and easy to use.
I just ordered a 100-pack from Amazon, for some playtime projects I have in mind for my son, but will stash a few into my toolbox.
For playing around, I think we can use these for food coloring and water “experiments,” and maybe adding vinegar into baking soda reactions.
For tool-related use, I’ll try using them for precise cutting fluid application. I’ve been using gel-based cutting fluid and a brush, but want to back to an applicator for certain tasks. Sometimes I just need a little bit, but a lot of the applicators I’ve seen are sized for machine shop use. The same with dispensing bottles – they deliver way too much fluid at a time.
They can also be used to hold alcohol, which will make my life easier when cleaning small parts. I don’t know why I haven’t thought of this before! In a lab, I always had alcohol in a large dispensing bottle. But for home or workshop use, the small amounts I use, and how infrequently I use it, would lead to too much evaporation and fluid loss.
The pipettes I ordered are made from low-density polyethylene, which stands up pretty well to a range of chemicals, but be sure to check a chemical compatibility chart.
The temperature range is said to be -50° to 90°C.
Price: ~$5.50 for 100
Buy Now(via Amazon)
The brand is Karter Scientific, which I had not heard of before, but they sell a variety of laboratory supplies. I’m hoping that the pipettes are of better quality than the no-name pipettes sold for “home makeup” use.