(A) Hazardous waste munitions and hazardous waste explosives storage units must be designed and operated with containment systems, controls, and monitoring, that:
(1) Minimize the potential for detonation or other means of release of hazardous waste, hazardous constituents, hazardous decomposition products, or contaminated run-off, to the soil, ground water, surface water, and atmosphere;
(2) Provide a primary barrier, which may be a container (including a shell) or tank, designed to contain the hazardous waste;
(3) For wastes stored outdoors, provide that the waste and containers will not be in standing precipitation;
(4) For liquid wastes, provide a secondary containment system that assures that any released liquids are contained and promptly detected and removed from the waste area, or vapor detection system that assures that any released liquids or vapors are promptly detected and an appropriate response taken (e.g., additional containment, such as overpacking, or removal from the waste area); and
(5) Provide monitoring and inspection procedures that assure the controls and containment systems are working as designed and that releases that may adversely impact human health or the environment are not escaping from the unit.
(1) Earth-covered magazines. Earth-covered magazines must be:
(a) Constructed of waterproofed, reinforced concrete or structural steel arches, with steel doors that are kept closed when not being accessed;
(b) Designed and constructed:
(i) To be of sufficient strength and thickness to support the weight of any explosives or munitions stored and any equipment used in the unit;
(ii) To provide working space for personnel and equipment in the unit; and
(iii) To withstand movement activities that occur in the unit; and
(c) Located and designed, with walls and earthen covers that direct an explosion in the unit in a safe direction, so as to minimize the propagation of an explosion to adjacent units and to minimize other effects of any explosion.
(2) Above-ground magazines. Above-ground magazines must be located and designed so as to minimize the propagation of an explosion to adjacent units and to minimize other effects of any explosion.
(3) Outdoor or open storage areas. Outdoor or open storage areas must be located and designed so as to minimize the propagation of an explosion to adjacent units and to minimize other effects of any explosion.
(C) Hazardous waste munitions and hazardous waste explosives must be stored in accordance with a standard operating procedure specifying procedures to ensure safety, security, and environmental protection. If these procedures serve the same purpose as the security and inspection requirements of rule 3745-65-14 of the Administrative Code, the preparedness and prevention procedures of rules 3745-65-30 to 3745-65-37 of the Administrative Code, and the contingency plan and emergency procedures requirements of rules 3745-65-50 to 3745-65-56 of the Administrative Code, then these procedures will be used to fulfill those requirements.
(D) Hazardous waste munitions and hazardous waste explosives must be packaged to ensure safety in handling and storage.
(E) Hazardous waste munitions and hazardous waste explosives must be inventoried at least annually.
(F) Hazardous waste munitions and hazardous waste explosives and their storage units must be inspected and monitored as necessary to ensure explosives safety and to ensure that there is no migration of contaminants out of the unit.