There are different kind of washing machines and dryers, however even with the best washing machine, if you use the wrong detergent you have the risk to remain with stained garments and not enough scented.
To obtain a perfect wash there are 4 variable elements that cooperate together: mechanical action; chemical action; temperature and time.
These elements are inter-linked. In fact, as the professor Herbert Sinner said in 1959, these variables influence each other and they are the main elements to optimize the wash.
Thanks to his theory the SINNER CIRCLE became famous.
By increasing one of the quadrants it is possible to decrease the remaining three. For example by increasing the temperature it is possible to reduce the washing time, the mechanical and the chemical action (so it means reducing the detergent dosage).
For this reason all our products have been developed by considering the synergy of these 4 elements. We develop and produce highly efficient detergents, with innovative molecules that can decrease the other three elements of the SINNER circle. So this allows us to decrease the mechanical action (by avoiding a manual pre-brushing), decrease the time and energy used in order to reduce the environmental impact of the wash.
Now we will talk about the washing of white garments:
White garments are made of fibres that reflect 100% the light so making them appear white to human eye.
Usually they are undyed or they have been treated with particular metal oxides which completely reflect the light.
The whiteness, or non-colour, is highly appreciated for giving a sense of purity to the whole garment.
However this whiteness can be slowly damaged because the dirt suspended in the water can be re-deposited on fibres during the wash, resulting a grey tinge and the white loses it purity. Moreover it is recommended to avoid washing white and coloured garments together (above avoid brand new coloured garments or garments with very bright colours).
In case of mixed washes it is highly recommended to use colour absorbing sheet (link to Secure Color) or liquid products (link to Biocolor) which prevent colour transfer between the garments.
Nevertheless, even if you don’t mix whites and colours, the small problem of greying can appear many wash cycles. This happens because garment fibres act as filters that capture particles in the water during the wash cycle.
In order to avoid this phenomenon and revive the pure whiteness of your white garments you have to use the right detergent, Dr. Conedera recommends the detergent: HYGIENFRESH WHITE XTRA.
White Xtra detergent, which is a highly concentrated enzymatic detergent which cleans and eliminates difficult stains, also contains optical brighteners to revive and make whites brilliant again, as well as innovative polymers to prevent greying.
The latest generation anti-greying polymers act during wash, by complexing and stopping the suspended dirt and micro-minerals, which are always present in the water, to prevent them being redeposited onto the garments.
Thanks to this revolutionary component, your whites will remain always white, wash after wash.
In the picture you can see a normal white garment after 10 washes at 40 °C with standard detergent and with HygienFresh White Xtra which contains the anti-greying polymers.
Diagram of absorption and emission of electromagnetic radiations by an optical brightener
Optical brighteners are special molecules which increase the apparent whiteness of garments.
They are photoactive molecules which transform Ultraviolet light (UV), non visible to human eye into visible light, therefore resulting in a brightness and an incomparable whiteness.
Moreover, optical brighteners, don’t have any negative effect on garments with white fibres mixed with coloured fibres. In fact, black will appear more intense, thanks to the greater difference between black fibres and a white fibres, and the white fibres appears even more white for exactly the same reason.
A liquid with optical brighteners is fluorescent under the UV light action.
So for a whiter white...
- use the right detergent with brighteners and anti-greying polymer (such as HygienFresh White Xtra)
- do not mix white garments with garments with brilliant colours during the wash
- In case of old stains or pigments stains (such as wine, mould blood), help the detergent by using an oxygen-based bleach. (such as Hygienfresh OXON).