FOR ALMOST four days this week, Peru teetered on a machete's edge. As crowds gathered in cities across the country in protest at what they claimed was electoral fraud, President Alberto Fujimori stayed closeted with advisers, and diplomats from the United States and other countries urged him to delay declaring victory. In the end, the pressure told: on April 12th, three days after the presidential election, the authorities announced that with almost 98% of the ballots counted Mr Fujimori had 49.84% of the vote, just short of an absolute majority.
That means he will face a run-off ballot against Alejandro Toledo, an American-educated economist of Andean Indian descent, who had 40.3%. Like Mr Fujimori himself in an election in 1990, in six weeks Mr Toledo had come from nowhere in the polls. The president is not a man to be underestimated, but for the first time in a decade he now faces the real prospect of defeat.
The news brought ecstatic celebration from some 40,000 of Mr Toledo's supporters, who had jammed into Lima's Plaza San Martin to denounce what they claimed were irregularities in voting and a rigged count aimed at stealing the election for Mr Fujimori. Protests in the capital and around the country the previous night had been largely peaceful, but on election night police had tear-gassed Mr Toledo's supporters when they marched to the presidential palace.
These protests had come at the end of one of the dirtiest election campaigns in Peru's spotty democratic history. The opposition complained of irregularities during voting, such as ballot slips with Mr Toledo's name excised. But after the polls closed, matters worsened, according to Eduardo Stein, a former Guatemalan foreign minister who headed a team of observers from the Organisation of American States (OAS).
The National Electoral Processes Office (ONPE), the supposedly independent electoral body set up under Mr Fujimori's government, had promised a result within hours of the vote. But the collection of ballots was chaotic. The computer system was not designed to allow monitoring of the count, and was vulnerable to outside interference, according to Mr Stein.
The day after voting, observers found most of ONPE's computer centres closed. Yet ONPE announced partial results showing Mr Fujimori within a whisker of an absolute majority. These results were “coming out of nowhere,” said Mr Stein. “Something very sinister is going on.”
Sample counts completed on election night by polling firms and by Transparency, an observer body financed by foreign governments, all showed Mr Fujimori with 47-48%, pointing to a run-off. Citing these counts, the OAS, the United States and several European governments took the unusual step of stating publicly that they expected there to be a second round. Without one, the United States would raise “serious questions”, warned Joe Lockhart, the White House spokesman.
Francisco Tudela, Mr Fujimori's vice-presidential candidate, criticised “international intervention”, and accused Mr Toledo of sedition. But if Mr Fujimori had been tempted to defy international opprobrium, he appears to have changed his mind.
Even so, the second round, due early in June, will be tight. Unless it is held far more cleanly than this week's vote, a crisis may merely have been postponed.
The president has support among many Peruvians, especially those from poor and remote Andean villages and coastal shantytowns, both because of his success in the early 1990s in overcoming terrorism and hyperinflation, and because of his record of building schools, health clinics and roads. But in his quest to prolong his rule, his regime has become increasingly authoritarian.
As Mr Toledo's challenge gathered, the government's tendency to silence opposing views became ever more heavy-handed. On the campaign's final day, while the president's closing rally was at one point being transmitted simultaneously by all seven free-access television channels, those of opposition candidates did not appear at all. On election day, only one free-access channel provided full coverage, and it switched abruptly to a Mexican comedy film when Mr Toledo's protests began. For ordinary Peruvians, there is a news blackout.
Mr Toledo wants greater media access, and has called for new electoral officials to be appointed: even before the election, a senior ONPE official had been suspended over his involvement in a scheme in which 1m voter signatures were forged to register a pro-Fujimori party. Such changes are essential to ensure the legitimacy of the election result, but they will be resisted by Mr Fujimori. Much will depend on how hard the outside world, especially the United States, is prepared to push for a fair election. American officials increasingly dislike Mr Fujimori's authoritarianism. They could oppose IMF support to Peru, and cut their own financial aid ($176m this year), though much of this is for fighting drugs.
Were they to do so, that would be in part because in Mr Toledo, for the first time in a decade, Peru would seem to have a credible opposition. For all his populist flourishes and the impulsiveness he sometimes shows under pressure, Mr Toledo has indicated that in broad terms he would stick to Mr Fujimori's market economics.
In six weeks, he has united a fractious opposition, and cut into Mr Fujimori's support. That gives him great momentum for the second round. But the president is a skilful and patient politician. He will appeal to Peruvians' deep, and justified, fear of instability. He is not beaten yet.
Deep down, however, this week has seen a big break in Peruvian politics. The country is now evenly split, between those who cleave to Mr Fujimori and those who want him to depart. His power is no longer inevitable. The election campaign and the vote count have shown that it is increasingly arbitrary. That may start to worry the financial markets, which have hitherto doted on Peru's president. Whatever the outcome of the second round, Mr Fujimori's decline has begun, and looks irreversible.
This article appeared in the The Americas section of the print edition under the headline "A second chance for Toledo, and Peru"