Introduction to Visual Basic
Make learning about Visual Basic program codes and concepts a little easier with this free online IT course.
Take this certificate on your own.
Start now and learn at your own pace.
CertificationView course modules
First, this course will teach you how to perform a custom installation for Visual Studio 2015. Then you will learn the fundamentals of programming including writing and debugging code, proper syntax, the order of operations, the flow of control, comparison operators, and program logic tools and models. Once you have mastered the features of the Visual Basic programming language, you will learn how to create your own Visual Basic program and build applications on a Windows platform.
Next, you will learn where to type your Visual Basic code and get a better understanding of the syntax of Visual Basic. The course will cover code files, solutions, data types, variables, and other functions of visual basics that are necessary to know in order to successfully create an application for your end users. You will also learn about the If, Then, and Else statements, and how each statement can be used in your code to create different functions.
This video-based Visual Basic programming course will enable you to see first-hand how Visual Basic works. The course is perfect for software programming professionals and those working in the IT industry who would like to learn more about Visual Basic. It is also valuable to learners who are considering a career in software programming. So check out the course and learn how to write your own Visual Basic code in just a few short hours!Start Course Now
Module 1: Starting a New Project in Visual Basic
Installing Visual Studio
Creating Your First Visual Basic Program
Understanding Your First Visual Basic Program
Module 2: Writing Code with Visual Basic
Working with Code Files, Projects, and Solutions
Understanding Data Types and Variables
Branching with the If... Then... Else Decision Statement
Module 3: Introduction to Visual Basic Assessment
Having completed this course you will be able to: - Explain the fundamentals of programming. - Describe the features of the Visual Basic programming language. - Build applications on a Windows platform. - Select a custom installation for Visual Studio 2015. - Explain where to type your Visual Basic code. - Define the syntax of Visual Basic. - Explain how code files are organised into projects and solutions. - Describe where projects are stored by default on your computer. - Describe how to initialise variables. - Explain how an integer is used.
All Alison courses are free to enrol, study and complete. To successfully complete this Certificate course and become an Alison Graduate, you need to achieve 80% or higher in each course assessment. Once you have completed this Certificate course, you have the option to acquire an official Certificate, which is a great way to share your achievement with the world. Your Alison Certificate is:
Ideal for sharing with potential employers - include it in your CV, professional social media profiles and job applications
An indication of your commitment to continuously learn, upskill and achieve high results
An incentive for you to continue empowering yourself through lifelong learning
Alison offers 3 types of Certificates for completed Certificate courses:
Digital Certificate - a downloadable Certificate in PDF format, immediately available to you when you complete your purchase
Certificate - a physical version of your officially branded and security-marked Certificate, posted to you with FREE shipping
Framed Certificate - a physical version of your officially branded and security-marked Certificate in a stylish frame, posted to you with FREE shipping
All Certificates are available to purchase through the Alison Shop. For more information on purchasing Alison Certificates, please visit our FAQs. If you decide not to purchase your Alison Certificate, you can still demonstrate your achievement by sharing your Learner Record or Learner Achievement Verification, both of which are accessible from your Dashboard. For more details on our Certificate pricing, please visit our Pricing Page.
Free, Online Introduction to Visual Basic Course
This Course has been revised!
For a more enjoyable learning experience, we recommend that you study the mobile-friendly republished version of this course.Take me to revised course.