It is a common belief that losing weight is all about dieting and trying to control what you eat. However, that's not entirely true. It is very important for us to understand that one needs to adopt measures which lead to a healthier lifestyle and have a long lasting impact. A lifestyle change will ensure that you lose weight and stay that way.
Short-term fad diets can never be realistic or sustainable. Here are some easy and doable tips that you may know but often neglect. Stick to these rules to lose weight or maintain it naturally:
Don't Miss These
1. Do not forget the portion size: Be wise when you choose the portion size. Eating the right portions can be a great challenge for people trying to lose weight. One should always start with small portions of food and add on a little, if required. Make sure you do not eat too quickly in the beginning as you might end up overeating. Also, if you are planning to eat out then start with a bowl of salad or stir fry to avoid excess calorie intake. The veggies contain fiber that will prevent you from eating too much in one go.
2. Say no to skipping meals: Many of us believe that if we skip our meals, then we can easily lose weight but that's an incorrect notion. Skipping meals puts your body in the starvation mode and which eventually leads to accumulation of fat cells. Also, when you skip a meal you tend to overeat during the next meal, increasing the risk of weight gain. Make sure you eat small and frequent meals and opt for healthy snacks in between so that your metabolism is boosted, you are satiated and your energy levels are up.
3. Let water be your best friend: Water helps in keeping you full for a longer duration which in turn reduces your chances of going overboard with food. Keep yourself well hydrated at all times. Sometimes, your body may confuse thirst with hunger.
4. Snack right: Who wouldn't love to sneak in some snacks? But it is important that you choose the right snack. Go for a cup of yoghurt, a fresh fruit, a handful of nuts, whole wheat munchies or some salad sticks with hummus. Try your own version of a healthy snack by combining carbohydrates with proteins, for instance- a pear or apple with a teaspoon of a peanut or almond butter or a whole wheat cracker with 10grams of feta cheese. Such options keep you full for longer and provide a feeling of satiety.
5. Don't forget to exercise regularly: You should definitely find some time to indulge in physical activities like 25-30 minutes or walking or running. If you are unable to hit the gym then try and go for a walk or do some yoga. Not just that, you can also indulge in your favorite sport such as squash, tennis, badminton or cricket which would all help in keeping you fit and healthy.
6. Maintain a diet diary: Maintaining a dietary log is of utmost importance as you will be able to track what you have been consuming the entire day and how many calories you've consumed. You should also track your water intake and the daily physical activity to maintain the same routine day by day.
All said and done, losing weight is not a difficult task. You just have to eat the right things, not starve yourself. Fitness and health is far more desirable than blind weight loss.
About the Author:
Huda Shaikh is a Mumbai based clinical nutritionist and dietician. She has completed her Masters in Clinical Nutrition and Dietetics from Dr. B.M.N College of Homescience, which is affiliated to the S.N.D.T University. She believes that it is important to eat well and exercise in order to have a healthy body and has helped people suffering from various ailments. A passionate cook, Huda has developed many healthy recipes thanks to her love for cooking.
The opinions expressed within this article are the personal opinions of the author. NDTV is not responsible for the accuracy, completeness, suitability, or validity of any information on this article. All information is provided on an as-is basis. The information, facts or opinions appearing in the article do not reflect the views of NDTV and NDTV does not assume any responsibility or liability for the same.