Earth and Ocean Sciences
Environmental Technology (CC BY-NC-SA)
Learn about environmental technology in the contexts of HazMat, Safety, and Water Quality. Environmental students have the opportunity to earn nationally recognized federal certificates from the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) and are prepared for positions focusing on environmental issues, laboratory and field tests, and workplace safety.
To Bee or not to Bee (CC BY)
A series of workshops that aims to express the importance of bees to our planet by teaching about pollination, bee diversity, and the adaptions that honey bees have made in their hives to allow them to be efficient in their jobs. There are three detailed lesson plans based on the following topics: pollination, bee diversity, and hexagons in the beehive.
American Environmental History (CC BY-NC-SA)
This text surveys findings of the new field of Environmental History about how the environment of the Americas influenced the actions of people here and how people affected their environments, from prehistory to the present.
B.C. Open Textbook Collection: Earth Sciences (Various CC licences)
A collection of open textbooks relating to various topics in earth sciences.
How do we talk about the environment? Does this communication reveal and construct meaning? Is the environment expressed and foregrounded in the new landscape of digital media? An interdisciplinary collection that draws together research and answers from media and communication studies, social sciences, modern history, and folklore studies.
Environmental ScienceBites (CC BY-NC)
This book was written by undergraduate students at The Ohio State University (OSU) who were enrolled in the class Introduction to Environmental Science. The chapters describe some of Earth’s major environmental challenges and discuss ways that humans are using cutting-edge science and engineering to provide sustainable solutions to these problems.
Environmental ScienceBites: Volume 2 (CC BY-NC)
The second volume of the Environmental ScienceBites book was authored by 30 unique undergraduate students enrolled in the course Introduction to Environmental Science at OSU. The book highlights both articles and posters describing critical environmental issues important to the first-time authors.
This volume provides evidence and insights about the potential of forests to reducing global hunger and malnutrition, exploring the different roles of landscapes, and the governance approaches that are required for the equitable delivery of these benefits.
Geosciences LibreTexts Library (CC BY-NC-SA)
A collection of open textbooks, assignments, and other educational resources on the subject of geosciences.
What Works in Conservation 2018 (CC BY)
This book provides an assessment of the effectiveness of 1277 conservation interventions based on summarized scientific evidence.