horse chestnut is a plant. its seed, bark, flower, and leaves are used to make medication. horse chestnut includes substantial quantities of a poison known as esculin and can reason loss of life if eaten uncooked.
be careful no longer to confuse aesculus hippocastanum (horse chestnut) with aesculus californica (california buckeye) or aesculus glabra (ohio buckeye). some human beings name any of these vegetation horse chestnut. this records applies to aesculus hippocastanum.
horse chestnut seed and leaf are used for treating varicose veins, hemorrhoids, and swollen veins (phlebitis).
horse chestnut seed is used for diarrhea, fever, and enlarged prostate.
horse chestnut seeds may be processed in order that the energetic chemicals are separated out and concentrated. the resulting "extract" is used for treating a blood flow problem known as chronic venous insufficiency.
horse chestnut leaf is used for eczema, menstrual ache, soft tissue swelling from bone fracture and sprains, cough, arthritis, and joint pain.
horse chestnut branch bark is used for malaria and dysentery.
some humans follow horse chestnut branch bark to the pores and skin for lupus and pores and skin ulcers.
other names is horse chestnut known via:
aescin, aescine, aesculus hippocastanum, buckeye, castaño de indias, châtaignier de mer, châtaignier des chevaux, chestnut, conker tree, escine, fake-châtaignier, hippocastani cortex, hippocastani flos, hippocastani folium, hippocastani semen, hippocastanum vulgare gaertn, marron europeen, marronnier, marronnier blanc, marronnier commun, marronnier d'inde, marronnier des chevaux, pu, spanish chestnut, venastat, venostasin retard, venostat, white chestnut.
likely effective for:
varicose veins and different circulatory problems (continual venous insufficiency). taking horse chestnut seed extract containing 16% to 20% of the chemical aescin can lessen a few signs of negative blood move, consisting of varicose veins, ache, tiredness, swelling in the legs, itching, and water retention. however, some early research shows that horse chestnut is probably less powerful than pycnogenol for decreasing leg swelling and cramps.