Articles from Aids To Forensic Medicine And Toxicology
Sale Of Poisons; Scheduled Poisons
Marriage And Divorce
Lead And Its Preparations
Arsenic And Its Preparations
Treatment Of Poisoning
The chief vegetable purgatives are aloes, colocynth, gamboge, jalap,
scammony, seeds of castor-oil plant, croton-oil, elaterium, the
hellebores, and colchicum. All these have, either alone or combined,
proved fatal. The active principle in aloes is aloin; of jalap, jalapin;
of white hellebore, veratria; and of colchicum, colchicin. Morrison's
pills contain aloes and colocynth; aloes is also the chief ingredient in
Symptoms.--Vomiting, purging, tenesmus, etc., followed by cold sweats,
collapse, or convulsions.
Post-Mortem Appearances.--Inflammation of alimentary canal;
ulceration, softening, and submucous effusion of dark blood.
Treatment.--Diluents, opium, stimulants, abdominal fomentations, etc.
Certain of these irritant poisons exert a marked influence on the
central nervous system, as the following:
=Laburnum= (Cytisis Laburnum).--All parts of the plant are poisonous;
the seeds, which are contained in pods, are often eaten by children.
Contains the alkaloid cytisine, which is also contained in arnica. It
has a bitter taste, and is powerfully toxic. Symptoms are purging,
vomiting, restlessness, followed by drowsiness, insensibility, and
convulsive twitchings. Death due to respiratory paralysis. Most of the
cases are in children. Treatment consists of stomach-pump or emetics,
stimulants freely, artificial respiration, warmth and friction to the
surface of the body.
=Yew= (Taxus baccata) contains the alkaloid taxine. The symptoms are
convulsions, insensibility, coma, dilated pupils, pallor, laboured
breathing, collapse. Death may occur suddenly. Treatment as above.
Post-mortem appearances not characteristic, but fragments of leaves or
berries may be found in the stomach and intestines.
=Arum= (Arum Maculatum).--This plant, commonly known as 'lords and
ladies,' is common in the woods, and the berries may be eaten by
children. It gives rise to symptoms of irritant poisoning, vomiting,
purging, dilated pupils, convulsions, followed by insensibility, coma,
Many plants have an intensely irritating action on the skin, and when
absorbed act as active poisons.
=Rhus toxicodendron= is the poison oak or poison ivy. Poisoning by this
plant is rare in England, though not uncommon in the United States. Mere
contact with the leaves or branches will in many people set up an acute
dermatitis, with much oedema and hyperæmia of the skin. The inflammation
spreads rapidly, and there is formation of blebs with much itching.
There is often great constitutional disturbance, nausea, vomiting,
diarrhoea, and pains in the abdomen. The effects may last a week, and
the skin may desquamate.
=Primula obconica= is another plant which, when handled, gives rise to
an acute dermatitis of an erysipelatous character. The face swells, and
large blisters form on the cheeks and chin.
Next: Opium And Morphine
Previous: Gaseous Poisons