An important way to use technology is to help your kids cultivate the habit of reading and writing from the very beginning.
Kids are fond of using mobile devices and guiding them to use these devices in good ways is our responsibility.
Below is a list of Android apps that your kids must know for better reading and writing habits!
Check it out:
This game is for preschoolers to blend sounds into words, read and form simple words, identify spoken words and learn word families. Divided in six sections, it is easy for kids to enjoy while learning step by step.
“Monkey Junior offers a comprehensive reading program for kids with multiple reading games which will help them to learn to read and expand their vocabulary. With a wide range of reading for kids courses (and growing), you will find suitable courses and reading activities that suit your child’s current reading skills.
A great app for the beginners. Learn to read according to your pace and develop the basic literacy skills of kids with this app. Along with reading, work on phonics as the app gives you the feature to tap and listen to the sound of particular letters and words.
This app turns your mobile device into an expansive library of digital books for children up to 8 years old. All MeeGenius books are available with read-along word highlighting, rich illustrations, and engaging story narration.
*** FEATURED IN THE NEW YORK TIMES: LEARN TO READ WITH TABLETS ARTICLE!***
This app works as a learning to read platform for young students. Kids can tap on any word to have it read out loud. Not just the whole page, but the words they find difficulty with. Also, the Quizzes feature help cement reading comprehension.
Get your child’s favorite fairy tales, folk stories and timeless classics with brilliant illustrations, read along text and voice narration that’s perfect for kids of all ages. These are interactive books that actually read themselves. Older children can read along with the narrator, getting a literary head start through a combination of text, pictures, and listening.
The awards speak for the likeability of the app:
- 2012 Parents Choice Approved
- Winner 2011 Editor's Choice Award, Children's Technology Review
- 15 Great Apps for Kids, Babble.com
- Parenting Magazine “Best App for Kids”
Children get to read with phonic based interactive games. With simple drag and drop interface the app is easy to use.
These are some of the selected must read stories, some in a fun game feature for you and the young ones to read and play.
A great app. Children get to learn how to read simple words, placing words to their correct position, identification of objects and more. Improve your kids’ preschool reading skills with this fantastic Story Book game full of stories, songs and narration!
Students are engaged in letter recognition accompanied by charming animations. Phonics Flashcards follow up each lesson. Students learn at a natural pace. New words are introduced right after teaching the individual phonetic components. The student then reads complete stories accompanied by the beautiful original color illustrations.
This is a set of fun literacy games for the kids aged between 3-6.
Give your children the Power to Read with this collection of four “Super WHY” interactive games. Your child can play along with each of the four main characters from the TV series: Alpha Pig, Princess Presto, Wonder Red, and Super Why, while practicing the alphabet, rhyming, spelling, writing and reading.
Join Tammy the frog on a journey through four exciting activities (this Lite version contains only two activities) as she hops from one screen to the next to learn and review commonly used English words from the list of 220 words. There are five levels of vocabulary for the child to learn and review.
Parents need to know that Writing Wizard - Kids Learn to Write Letters & Words is a highly customizable app that helps kids practice tracing letters, numbers, and words while learning letter names and phonetic sounds. Audio and visual prompts show kids exactly where to trace from the start of the letter to the finish.
An award-winning educational software publisher introduces Action Sight Words Games & Flash Cards for Reading Success. This app helps kids develop grip over elementary words via reading and amazing educational games.
Aimed at preschoolers and first graders, My First Letters turns letter tracing from a boring task to a spectacular adventure. While helping the little ladybugs to find their way to their mother, your kid will learn writing without even noticing it.
Which other apps do you use? Share with us in the comment section below.