The company's also building a new launchpad and expanding its headquarters.
Military forces have a long association with spaceflight, with modern rockets evolving from missiles developed during World War II. Today's armed forces rely on space-based assets for reconnaissance, weather tracking, communication, navigation and more. The U.S. Air Force regularly launches GPS and missile-defense tracking satellites, and operates two classified X-37B robotic space planes. Learn more about military satellites, space weapon, the Space Force and more here.
Related Topics: NASA
Boeing has withdrawn from Experimental Spaceplane, a U.S. Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) program designed to increase the nation's access to space.
The final Rockot booster converted from an intercontinental ballistic missile launched into space Friday (Dec. 27) carrying a trio Russian satellites and a military payload into orbit.
President Trump has signed the 2020 National Defense Authorization Act and with it directed the establishment of the U.S. Space Force as the sixth branch of the armed forces.
A Russian Soyuz rocket launched a top-secret military satellite designed to scope out other satellites in space on Monday (Nov. 25), according to government reports.
The U.S. Air Force must change the way it does business to fight the growing threat to the nation's dominance of the final frontier, military officials say.
A look at the U.S. Air Force's unmanned X-37B space plane, which has flown four secret, long-duration missions in Earth orbit to date.
At an upcoming summit in early December, NATO is expected to declare space as a "warfighting domain," partly in response to new developments in technology.
The United States Air Force Space Command began conducting the 13th Schriever Wargame at Maxwell Air Force Base in Alabama yesterday (Sept. 4).
It was only a matter of time: Amateur sleuths think they've tracked down the satellite that took a high-resolution image of the aftermath of an Iranian missile disaster.
The United States Space Command is officially here. And U.S. President Donald Trump says that before long, the U.S. will establish a Space Force for space defense.
The protection of trade routes and lines of communication are traditional military responsibilities, and this will continue to be true as cislunar space becomes "high ground."
The robotic X-37B has been circling Earth for nearly 719 days on its latest mystery mission, which is known as Orbital Test Vehicle 5 (OTV-5).
The last Delta IV Medium rocket ever to fly successfully launched the second GPS III Magellan navigation satellite for the U.S. Air Force Thursday (Aug. 22).
It's time for United Launch Alliance's Delta IV Medium rocket to retire. Luckily, you have one last chance to watch the rocket launch live.
The United States Space Command will officially be up and running by the end of the month, Vice President Mike Pence said today (Aug. 20) at a meeting of the National Space Council.
Current page: 1