When hypnotherapy developed to the mid-20th century, Milton h. Erickson, who founded the American society for clinical hypnosis (ASCH), was the most recognized person: he created “story-telling hypnosis” and “unconscious learning” on his own. Therefore, he was honored as the “father of hypnotic medicine”. Erickson’s greatness lies in his perseverance and his learning process. He was born color-blind and tone-deaf; Infected with Poliovirus at the age of 17, he was paralyzed in bed, the only thing that could move was his eyes. After several efforts, he discovered that he could observe subtle changes in people and things, and break down ordinary human behavior into subtle key actions and feelings. With this amazing discovery, he was able to use his healing potential and strong will to get himself moving again, and finally he was able to stand up and walk. His ability to heal himself is incredible.
After the rebirth, Erickson entered the university department of psychology. Erickson once happened to see the teacher perform hypnotism in front of the others. With his keen observation, he soon learned the technique of hypnosis. As soon as the teacher left, he did the same with the teacher’s hypnosis, and soon hypnotized the person who had just removed the hypnosis. Since then, he has been proud of this talent, no matter any hypnosis can be learned by only watching it once, which inspired his strong interest in studying hypnosis, and finally created the “indirect suggestion hypnosis method”. The magic of this hypnotic technique is that the hypnotic effect can be achieved by intermingling hypnotic Suggestions and instructions in conversation and action without prior notice to the hypnotized person. He had proudly said that there was no one who could not be hypnotized. He only needs to find out the weaknesses of the defense heart through keen observation, and then use special hypnotic grammar or well-designed movements to confuse the thinking logic, even the unconscious can be hypnotized without realizing it.
Erickson also has an amazing technique of indirect hypnosis, which is to hypnotize “B” before trying to hypnotize “A” and then order “B” to hypnotize “A”. In one of Erickson’s hypnotic records, there is a real case of a psychiatrist who was so familiar with psychopathology that he was so defensive and resistant that he could not receive psychotherapy at all. So troubled by years of mental dysfunction, he drove all the way to find the famous Erickson. Because the psychiatrist had too strong defense and could not enter hypnosis at all, Erickson came up with a way: he first went to the next room to hypnotize a person without psychological knowledge, and then ordered the patient in deep hypnosis to sleepwalk back to hypnotize that psychiatrist, and soon achieved the goal, also cured the psychiatrist’s illness. Erickson became very famous after the hypnotherapy.
Another of Erickson’s specialties is “storytelling hypnosis,” which is used in patients who are overly defensive or have low hypnotic sensitivity. To hypnotize these special patients, Erickson often had to tell stories for hours with great wisdom, patience, and energy, adding many hints and instructions until the hypnosis worked. In addition, he can hypnotize himself and others’ subconscious minds to “automatically learning”, and this technique has helped many people learn new knowledge and new skills, including his students, friends, patients and themselves. Once he even magically let his best friend get a lawyer’s license under his hypnosis.
It is said that Erickson had just obtained a doctor’s license and started the business. The traditional medical profession did not believe in the effect of hypnotherapy, and therefore threatened to revoke his doctor’s license if he continued to treat patients with hypnosis. As a result, he actually hypnotized the members of the American Medical Association on the spot, and persuaded the committee members to believe that hypnotherapy was indeed safe and effective, and thus kept his doctor’s license, which was a good story. He really deserves to be “The Father of Modern Hypnotherapy.”