If you suddenly feel a sharp pain, such as a toothache, or get an infection, you do not need a doctor immediately, but help can be found in natural antibiotics. There are foods that not only can alleviate pain but can even completely cure. These are just some of the natural antibiotics that you probably have in your house.
Garlic has been mentioned since there is a written history. The food was mentioned in the literature of the ancient kingdom of Babylon, Persia, Greece and Rome. Garlic demonstrated treats or assists in treating a number of diseases, and one of the strong active ingredients in it is called allicin.
It is a compound that has antibacterial and antifungal properties, which in garlic plays the role of the defense mechanism against bacteria. Scientists have shown that allicin destroys many bacteria, including some that are often resistant to standard antibiotics. Garlic effectively cures a toothache, earache, throat, cough, and many other diseases or infections.
In its raw form is used as an antibacterial agent (antibiotic) long before the synthetic antibiotics have been developed throughout the world for a variety of wounds and diseases.
Today is scientifically proven that this sweet remedy has antifungal and antibacterial properties that can cure skin rashes, burns and abrasions, clean your teeth and mouth of bacteria and stop bleeding gums, and is effective in the treatment of boils and blisters.
A study published in 2010 in the “Journal FASEB” was first explained how honey kills bacteria. This research has shown that bees produce protein defensin-1, which are added in between, and just make this protein the basis for developing new drugs that fight the bacteria resistant to current antibiotics, known as a superbug.
In one study it was found that cinnamon can kill most of the bacteria found in hospitals, in the second that can kill bacteria resistant to standard antibiotics, and the third that the cinnamon mortal enemy of the bacteria Escherichia coli.
Scientists at Kansas State University, for research purposes, infected apple juice with about a million bacteria Escherichia coli. Just one teaspoon of cinnamon killed 99.5 percent of bacteria for three days at room temperature.
“If cinnamon can destroy Escherichia coli, then it will leave the consequences to other bacteria transmitted by food”, it was concluded in this study.
Many people believed that the sage is the key to a long life. This plant is for thousands of years used as an antibiotic. Sage especially helps with throat problems, respiratory infections, and infections in the mouth. It is also useful for stomach infections and intestinal problems.
Sage helps to reduce fever, chills and body aches that occur at the beginning of cold and flu. It is scientifically proven that it has a moderate, but extensive antibacterial, antifungal and antiviral properties, and today it is regularly used in the manufacture of a number of modern medicines.
Even today dentists use clove oil as antiseptic and disinfecting root canals. Eugenol, which is found in large quantities in the Clove, is the primary antimicrobial compound of the plant which many scientists have documented around the world.
If you want to alleviate a toothache, it is enough to chew cloves for a few minutes and the pain may completely stop within two hours. However, clove is most effective when it turns into oil.
It was found that clove oil has strong antifungal activity against fungal pathogens, ie, this oil is killing more than 60 species of bacteria, 15 fungi, and several viruses.