The Romanov family, who had ruled Russia since the seventeenth century, was overthrown and the monarchy was no more. There are several reasons why this happened: Military defeats World War I was a total disaster for Russia.
Sometime in the middle of the 19th century, Russia entered a phase of internal crisis that in would culminate in revolution.
Its causes were not so much economic or social as political and cultural. Ill-equipped and poorly led, Russian armies suffered catastrophic losses in campaign after campaign against German armies.
The war made revolution inevitable in two ways: Riots over the scarcity of food broke out in the capital, Petrograd formerly St. When his brother, Grand Duke Michael, refused the throne, more than years of rule by the Romanov dynasty came to an end.
The 2, delegates to this soviet were chosen from factories and military units in and around Petrograd. The Provisional Government was unable to countermand the order. All that now prevented the Petrograd Soviet from openly declaring itself the real government of Russia was fear of provoking a conservative coup.
Between March and October the Provisional Government was reorganized four times.
The first government was composed entirely of liberal ministers, with the exception of the Socialist Revolutionary Aleksandr F.
The subsequent governments were coalitions. None of them, however, was able to cope adequately with the major problems afflicting the country: Meanwhile, soviets on the Petrograd model, in far closer contact with the sentiments of the people than the Provisional Government was, had been organized in cities and major towns and in the army.
One reason was that radical socialists increasingly dominated the soviet movement. Kerensky became head of the Provisional Government in July and put down a coup attempted by army commander in chief Lavr Georgiyevich Kornilov according to some historians, Kerensky may have initially plotted with Kornilov in the hope of gaining control over the Petrograd Soviet.
By September the Bolsheviks and their allies, the Left Socialist Revolutionaries, had overtaken the Socialist Revolutionaries and Mensheviks and held majorities in both the Petrograd and Moscow soviets.
Although a previous coup attempt the July Days had failed, the time now seemed ripe. On October 24—25 November 6—7 the Bolsheviks and Left Socialist Revolutionaries staged a nearly bloodless coup, occupying government buildings, telegraph stations, and other strategic points.
The Second All-Russian Congress of Soviets, which convened in Petrograd simultaneously with the coup, approved the formation of a new government composed mainly of Bolshevik commissars. Petersburg during the Russian Revolution ofincluding a view of Vladimir Ilich Lenin speaking to a crowd.In , two revolutions completely changed the fabric of Russia.
First, the February Russian Revolution toppled the Russian monarchy and established a Provisional Government. Then in October, a second Russian Revolution placed the Bolsheviks as the leaders of Russia, resulting in the creation of.
In the space of a few days in February , Tsarist Russia came to an end. The Romanov family, who had ruled Russia since the seventeenth century, was overthrown and the monarchy was no more. Sep 08, · The February Revolution was the first of two revolutions in Russia in It was centered on Petrograd (now known as St.
Petersburg), then Russian capital, on Women's Day in March (late February. February Revolution; February Revolution Russian History - February Revolution of Overthrow in Russia.
On the background of the complicated political situation caused by the war various political parties tried to reach their objectives. In February St. Petersburg became the arena of demonstrations and armed conflicts.
In Russia, the February Revolution (known as such because of Russia’s use of the Julian calendar) begins on this day in , when riots and strikes over the scarcity of food erupt in Petrograd. February Revolution, (March 8–12 [Feb. 24–28, old style], ), the first stage of the Russian Revolution of , in which the monarchy was overthrown and replaced by .