Stay on target
Last month, the first photo of a black hole amazed people worldwide. Following this stellar debut, astronomers want to take sharper black hole images that can be used to test Albert Einstein’s theory of relativity. To accomplish this task, the European Space Agency (ESA) and astronomers from Radboud University are suggesting a new concept that involves sending radio telescopes into space.
The team, which presented their plans in Astronomy & Astrophysics, proposed an idea that involved placing two or three satellites in a circular orbit around our planet that will detect black holes, said a Radboud University press release. The concept, which is called the “Event Horizon Imager (EHI),” is demonstrated in the study with simulations of what photos of the Sagittarius A* black hole would look like if they were taken by this type of satellites.
The first picture of a black hole was awesome, but the next ones need to be sharper, astrophysicists @Radboud_Uni think. They have a plan to achieve just that: why not send some radiotelescopes into space. #changeperspectivehttps://t.co/LHEumM7aLj pic.twitter.com/MWzyJP2oQX
— Radboud University (@Radboud_Uni) May 6, 2019
“It has many advantages to use satellites instead of fixed radio telescopes on Earth, as was done with the Event Horizon Telescope (EHT). In space you can make observations with higher radio frequencies, because those frequencies are filtered out of the earth by the atmosphere,” Freek Roelofs, first author of the publication, said in the press release. “The distance between the telescopes also increases in space. With this a big leap forward can be made. We could take photos with a resolution that is more than five times higher than the EHT.”
These sharper black hole images would be beneficial for astronomers, because they might lead to better information on how Einstein’s general theory of relativity can be tested. With clearer black hole images, astronomers would be able to study black holes’ intricate details and potentially note small deviations from Einstein’s theory. The EHI can photograph around five extra black holes that are smaller in size compared to the black holes that the EHT currently focuses on. The simulated observation photos (shown above in the tweet) make it slightly easier to spot each black hole’s different characteristics.
Even though this potential concept seems promising, there are some technological challenges to address. The simulation shows what astronomers could see with different variations of the technique, and for this, they leveraged models of the behavior of the plasma around the black hole and radiation emitted through it. In collaboration with researchers from ESA/ESTEC, the team will have to study the position and speed of satellites in the future, and how they exchange data, for the technique to efficiently work.
“The concept requires you to be able to know the position and speed of the satellites very well,” Volodymyr Kudriashov, researcher at the Radboud Radio Lab and also working at ESA/ESTEC, said in the press release. “But we think the project is really feasible.”
More on Geek.com: