World history chap 11
Bju chapter 11 test notes
Terms in this set (67)
What was the Renaissance?
The period during the fourteenth through the sixteenth centuries in european history in which learning and the arts revived and flourished
What does the word "Renaissance" mean
French word meaning rebirth
How did the Renaissance man view the Middle Ages
As a backward unimportant interval between the achievement of classical culture and the glory of his own modern age
What did the Renaissance emphasize
Human individuality, ability, and dignity
What is humanism
An overemphasis on human worth and ability, leading man to glorify himself instead of God
Who were known as humanists
Those who studied the liberal arts
What is another name for humanities
The liberal arts
What subjects were included in the humanities
History, science, grammar, classical literature, and philosophy
What was the goal of Renaissance education
To develop a well rounded individual
What period of history did the Renaissance humanists admire
The classical age of Ancient Greece and Rome
What did humanists consider to be the true source of evil?
What did they consider to be the remedy for sin?
Who received special honor from the humanists because of his achievements?
What was Cicero?
A renowned scholar, lawyer, statesman, an eloquent orator, and a master of literary expression
Why did Renaissance scholars seek ancient manuscripts?
They were so fascinated by classical literature that they sought them out
Where did the Renaissance begin?
How did the Renaissance spread throughout Europe?
It was carried abroad by students who had studied in Italy and merchants who traded with Italian cities
What are patrons?
Sponsors of artists
Who were the most famous of the Renaissance patrons?
The Medici family
Who was the most notable and most generous patron of the Medici family?
Lorenzo de Medici called Il Magnifico
What city became the most influential city of the Renaissance movement?
Who were the Medici?
Prominent Italians who were wealthy through commerce and banking.
Who was Francesco Petrarch?
The pioneer of Renaissance humanism and one of the most important figures in Italian literature
What did Petrarch write about?
Nature, his pride in his homeland, and his love for Laura
Who is known as the father of humanism?
Who wrote the famous book on etiquette, The Courtier?
Who was Niccolo Machiavelli?
Author of several important and influential works on government including, The Prince
How did the Italian humanists differ from the Northern humanists?
Northern humanists had a greater interest in religious matters
Who was Erasmus?
Acclaimed as the prince of humanists, and the most honored and influential scholar of the Renaissance
What book did Erasmus write?
In praise of folly
Who was Sir Thomas more?
A close friend of Erasmus and an English humanist
What book did Sir Thomas More write?
Who entered the service of King Henry VIII and was beheaded for treason
Who wrote a satire on chivalry?
What was the title of this satire?
Miguel de Cervantes
Who is considered the greatest playwright of all time?
Who is known as the Father of Renaissance painting?
Giotto di Bondone
What are frescoes?
Paintings on wet plaster
What did Masaccio accomplish?
He created a 3D effect in his paintings
Who added movement to Renaissance art?
Who was Girolamo Savonrola?
A Dominican friar who sought to bring moral reform to the city of Florence and to the Roman Church
Who were the most famous High Renaissance painters?
Da Vinci, Raphael, and Michaelangelo
Who was known as the ideal Renaissance man?
Leonardo da Vinci
Who painted the School of AThens?
Who painted the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel?
During the High Renaissance was city became the cultural center of Italy?
What wealthy beautiful city, became the leading center of culture during the late Renaissance?
What was Titian known for?
He was the leading figure of the Venetian School of painting
Who was the little dyer from Venice
What is Durer remembered for?
His woodcarvings and engravings
Who is considered the finest portrait painter of the Northern Renaissance?
Who became the official court painter of Henry VIII?
Who was Jan Van Eyck?
He was the first one to use oil paints
What was Pieter Brughel remembered for?
His genre paintings
What are genre paintings?
Paintings that depict scenes of everyday life
What did Lorenzo Ghiberti construct?
Doors for one of the entrances to the baptistery of Florence
What did Filippo Brunelleschi construct?
Dome for the cathedral of Florence
WHo was the leading sculptor of the Renaissance?
What was the most prominent type of musical composition during the early Middle Ages?
What was the most popular instrument of the day?
Who was the Flemish composer that made both secular and sacred works?
Josqin des Prez
What were the positive consequences of the Renaissance?
The Renaissance promoted a spirit of inquiry, it revived an interest in the old literature and language, it developed movable-type printing, it made education more widely available to the middle class, and it stressed the importance of the individual
What were the negative consequences of the Renaisssance?
The secular emphasis in the Renaissance helped weaken moral restraints, humanists embraced the evils of classical culture, people started to worship classical ideas along with classical forms, many embraced the error that ignorance is a source of evil and education is the remedy, and it made people believe that man is basically good
Who was the most famous composer of church music during the Renaissance?
What is polyphonic music?
Music consisting of many melodies.
Who was a master of polyphonic music?
Contrast medieval and secular art.
Medieval art emphasized the spiritual realm, it was flat and 2 dimensional, and the artists did not seek personal glory. Renaissance art emphasized the present physical world, it has a realistic 3D aspect, and it's artists sought to be known for their work.
What are unaccompanied Latin songs that combined different melodies and words with a plainsong melody?
Who wrote Discourses on the First Ten Books of LIvy?
YOU MIGHT ALSO LIKE...
World History Chp 11
BJU World History Chapter 11
World History Chapter 11 Test Review
History chapter 11
OTHER SETS BY THIS CREATOR
Air Quality Guide
THIS SET IS OFTEN IN FOLDERS WITH...
World History Ch. 11
Italian & Northern Renaissance
Modern World Fall final