A small, faint galaxy may claim the title of the most distant object known – breaking a record that was set just two weeks ago.
The new find appears to lie 13.2 billion light-years away from Earth and reveals what the earliest galaxies looked like.
Light from this galaxy may have formed a mere 460 million years after the Big Bang, which formed the Universe 13.7 billion years ago, say its discoverers.
The previous record-holder, reported in February 2004, dates back to 750 million years after the birth of the Universe.
“We are approaching the youngest ages of galaxies,” says Roser Pelló, an astronomer at the Observatoire Midi-Pyrénées in France and co-leader of the discovery team.
Astronomers have been steadily probing further back in time and space to see when and how the first stars and galaxies formed from dense gas clouds. This murky period was known as the Dark Ages and lasted about one billion years. The radiation from these first stellar objects may have broken apart the clouds’ atomic hydrogen into ions – a process known as re-ionisation – to make space transparent.
So far only 30 or so objects have been found that date to the universe’s first billion years. But Pelló believes observations such as hers show early galaxies “could be one of the main sources of re-ionisation if they are numerous”.
Bent and magnified
The far-flung galaxy was discovered using one of the four 8.2-metre telescopes comprising the European Southern Observatory’s Very Large Telescope (VLT) in Chile. Focusing on a single region of sky for an average of three to six hours at a time, the international team used an infrared imager and spectrograph called ISAAC to detect a single telling emission line that appeared to arise from hydrogen.
But the distant galaxy was only visible because of a chance geometric alignment. A massive galaxy cluster called Abell 1835 lies between the new galaxy and Earth. Abell 1835’s gravity bent and magnified the distant galaxy’s light, making it between 25 and 100 times brighter.
Early galaxies actively form stars, producing a telltale spike of ultraviolet radiation from hydrogen. But the light from distant objects gets stretched by the expansion of the Universe, which allows astronomers to calculate vast distances using a measure called redshift.
This galaxy appears to lie at a redshift of 10.0. The previous record holder for the most distant object is a galaxy at redshift 7.0, reported just two weeks ago by a team led by one of the researchers in this study.
This result is “very exciting,” says Andrew Bunker, an astronomer at the University of Exeter, UK. “A jump to redshift ten from redshift six is significant and unprecedented.”
Researchers also urge caution in interpreting the result. “The authors are to be congratulated on their approach and observational technique,” says Donald Schneider, an astronomer at Pennsylvania State University, US. But he says the redshift of 10.0 is “not ironclad” and points out that some previous claims of high-redshift discoveries have been “retracted when additional observations were obtained.”
The researchers themselves acknowledge the galaxy might lie closer than redshift 10.0. That could occur if the emission line arises not from hydrogen but from other elements, such as oxygen or nitrogen. A star-forming galaxy at redshift 2.5, for example, could account for the observed emission – but this would be unlikely to reveal the distinctive spectra seen, they say.
The researchers have requested observing time on the Hubble Space Telescope to confirm their result.
Named Abell 1835 IR1916, the new galaxy appears to form stars at the rate of between one and five suns per year and contains ten thousand times less matter than our Milky Way. Such small, star-forming galaxies are expected in the early Universe as they are thought to be the building blocks of the large galaxies seen today.
Journal reference: Astronomy & Astrophysics (vol 416, p L35)