Sadaqa Jariya – Continuous Charity
Water Wells Development
Schools & Orphan Housing
Development & Sadaqa Jariya
The development of strong communities calls for safe and stable facilities from where goods and services can be provided, so that healthcare, education, shelter and community wellness can consistently promote social development.
- Food Security and Nutrition
- Water Supply
- Education and Skills Training
- Shelter and Clothing
The development of strong communities calls for safe and stable facilities from where goods and services can be provided, so that healthcare, education, shelter and community wellness can consistently promote social development. Zakat Foundation uses local resources to establish buildings that offer services that address the needs of the community, support wholesome development, and are appropriate for their environments.
Food Security and Nutrition: Zakat Foundation addresses the roots causes of poverty through long-term solutions that ensure permanent access to nutritious food.
Water Supply: Zakat Foundation provides water supplies in the form of water wells and hand pumps to some of the more hard-to-reach, impoverished places in the world.
Healthcare: Zakat Foundation promotes equal access to basic healthcare services so that men and women will be healthy enough to support their families and so that children can thrive and attend school regularly.
Livelihood: Zakat Foundation encourages long-term sustainability for families by providing livestock that can contribute to various aspects of a family’s life.
Education and Skills Training: Zakat Foundation believes that education catalyzes change as it provides the information and skills needed to ensure permanent access to the basic rights of food, water, shelter, health, work and dignity while addressing the roots of chronic poverty and hunger.
Shelter and Clothing: Zakat Foundation uses local resources to establish shelters as well as to provide clothing to those in need to help protect from environmental elements and to preserve human dignity.
Infrastructure: Zakat Foundation builds schools, mosques, and other structures that serve as vital supporters of daily life as well as hubs of information, education, and other necessary amenities for Muslims and non-Muslims alike.
Results From The Field
Zakat Foundation’s Mission to Provide Clean Water Globally
Diseases from dirty water kill more people every year than all forms of violence, including war. In response to this global issue, Zakat Foundation of America continues to install water wells and hand pumps to communities deprived of fresh sources of water. Zakat Foundation’s Mission to Provide Clean Water Globally-Since the water well program began, Zakat Foundation has constructed over 300 water wells and handpumps in Central Asia and the African continent serving over 1.4 million people.
You can support the water well program in a number of ways. Zakat Foundation is always looking forward to collaborating with youth groups or organizations who wish to fundraise for water wells. As a Zakat Foundation youth volunteer once said, “I absolutely do not think we are too young and small to take on these big problems. My rule as a follower of the Prophet (peace be upon him) is to help others and to never think you aren’t good enough. What you need is Allah, and your own belief in yourself.”
Building a Well for a Community Desperate for Clean Water
Zakat Foundation of America has just begun the building process for a well in Lwakhakha, a small market center in eastern Uganda bordering Kenya. Lwakhakha has approximately 3,000 people, the majority of whom are Bamasaba, a community that has embraced Islam as their religion because of similarities between their culture and Islam. The Bamasaba community is made up of peasant farmers.
The Bamasaba eat from what they farm and their shelters are comprised of huts made out of banana leaves or grass for roofs, while the walls are made of clay and stick. The few who are fortunate have clay houses with metal roofs.
Women and girls in the Bamasaba community are responsible for domestic chores, while men take care of the farms and livestock.
River Lwakhakha is the main source of water for this community and it posses many challenges. The women and girls use clay pots to fetch water from the river. As per their traditions, the Bamasaba do not boil drinking water, instead they store the water in clay pots in their huts.They wait for the water to decant, or for impurities to settle, before they drink it.
River Lwakhakha is very powerful and many who try to cross it do not succeed. Animals, like donkeys, which are used for crossing over into Kenya, end up drowning in the river. The force of River Lwakhakha has also swept away people trying to make it across. As a result, human corpses are often found floating in the river banks. This has intensified the danger of the spread of cholera in the area.
The community members also use the river for bathing, for cleansing rituals, and as a drinking source for their livestock. The water is severly contaminated and until now, the people had no choice but to use the water from the river.
This is why Zakat Foundation has come in to provide reliable, safe drinking water to the community. Zakat Foundation representatives note that the community has been extremely excited since the Zakat Foundation team first touched down in the area. The people have never seen an NGO in their community and the only humanitarian work they have heard of has been from what they have heard over the radio. The Bamasaba people are happy that they have not been forgotten and thank Zakat Foundation for choosing their community as the site for a new well.
Making a lasting difference in the world and donate to the One Year, 100 Wells campaign today.
New Water Wells Installed – North Pakistan
The Prophet Muhammad (peace and blessings upon him) once said, “The best charity is giving water to drink” (Al-Bukhari). Clean water is an essential resource for every community on earth, and therefore Zakat Foundation of America continues to keep the water well construction project at the forefront of its developmental programs by new water wells installed – North Pakistan .
Recently, Zakat Foundation helped partners in Pakistan install five new water wells across the Khyber Pakhtunkhwa province. Beneficiaries were also involved with the construction process so they could manage and maintain the wells. Each well has the capacity to impact at least 500 beneficiaries.
Interested in donating a water well? Zakat Foundation has worked with several organizations and community centers on sponsoring a water well project. Visit zakat.org or contact [email protected] for more details.
Celebrating Aqeeqah: Giving Thanks for the Gift of Clean Water
Sister Fatima had twin girls and, like many Muslim brothers and sisters, chose to have a aqeeqah for them (the Islamic tradition of sacrificing an animal after a child’s birth).
So when she and her husband did the aqeeqah, they asked their family to give du’a (prayer) instead of gifts. But if family felt compelled to give something physical, Fatima asked that it was a donation on behalf of her girls to Zakat Foundation of America.
She chose Zakat Foundation because she’s worked with the organization for years, largely with a youth group called Sisters Stepping Up (SSU). The group raised enough money to build seven water wells with Zakat Foundation. Sister Fatima said when she raises money, it’s always for a water project. In the case of her daughters’ aqeeqah, the family raised enough to construct two water wells in Ghana, each in a different village.
At the time, she wasn’t sure she’d get enough money for the well. She said some relatives were upset at the idea because they felt they were being deprived of giving their nieces gifts.
“When we kept up with it birthday after birthday, people were like, ‘okay, this is kind of nice,’” Sister Fatima said. “Zakat Foundation sent us pictures of the wells a year later, so then we sent them out to our whole aqeeqah invite list.”
“We told them, last year, the gifts that you gave, this is where it ended up. I think that made people see it’s a gift that lasted much longer than say a toy or an outfit. I think people found that rewarding, and so the next time when we did it for their birthday, they were more receptive to the idea.”
She added that she was partially inspired to do this because of a wedding she attended. There were cards on the table that said donations were made to a nonprofit in place of a party favor.
Now that her children are older, Sister Fatima and her husband went back and showed them the impact of the water wells built on their behalf. She said she didn’t want her kids to have so many toys and clothes that they didn’t need, or that they’d quickly outgrow. Instead, she and her husband wanted to show their gratitude to God for being blessed with children. They figured the best way to do that was through charitable giving, she said.
2012 One Year, 100 Wells
The One Year, 100 Wells Campaign is a plan to build 100 wells in various African countries in need of clean water. Among the countries we will be working in are Ghana, Somalia, Kenya, Uganda, the Ivory Coast and Burkina Faso.
The communities will play a role in building the wells to give residents a chance to contribute to this local project. We want them to feel like they played a vital role in bringing such a simple yet crucial blessing into their community; water.