Human papillomavirus (HPV) is one of the most common sexually transmitted diseases (STDs). HPV is the virus that causes genital warts.
In addition to causing genital warts, an HPV infection can mean trouble for both girls and guys:
In females, HPV infection can cause problems with the that may lead to cervical cancer. HPV infection also can cause problems that may lead to cancer in the vagina, vulva, anus, mouth, and throat.
In males, HPV infection may lead to cancer in the penis, anus, mouth, and throat.
New research suggests that HPV maybe linked to heart disease in women.
Both girls and guys can get HPV from sexual contact, including vaginal, oral, and anal sex. Most people infected with HPV don't know they have it because they don't notice any signs or problems. People do not always develop genital warts, but the virus is still in their system and it could be causing damage. This means that people with HPV can pass the infection to others without knowing it.
Because HPV can cause serious problems such as genital warts and some kinds of cancer, a vaccine is an important step in preventing infection and protecting against the spread of HPV.
That's why doctors recommend that all girls and guys get the vaccine at these ages:
For girls: from age 11 or 12 through age 26
For guys: from age 11 or 12 through age 21
The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has approved the HPV vaccine as safe for both guys and girls ages 9 to 26 years old.
The HPV vaccine is given as three injections over a 6-month period. The vaccine does not protect people who have been infected with HPV before they've been vaccinated. That's why getting the vaccine before having sex for the first time is the most effective way for it to help prevent the infection.
The vaccine doesn't protect against all types of HPV. Anyone having sex should get routine checkups and girls should get Pap smears when a doctor recommends it.
The HPV vaccine is not a replacement for using condoms to protect against other STDs when having sex.
Most of the side effects that people get from the HPV vaccine are minor. They may include swelling or pain at the site of the shot, or feeling faint after getting the vaccine. As with other vaccines, there is a small chance of an allergic reaction.
A few people have reported health problems after getting the shot. The FDA is monitoring the vaccine closely to make sure these are not caused by the vaccine itself.
Most people have no trouble with the vaccine. You can lessen your risk of side effects like fainting by sitting down for 15 minutes after each shot.
Protecting Yourself Against HPV
For people who are having sex, condoms offer some protection against HPV. Condoms can't completely prevent infections because hard-to-see warts can be outside the area covered by the condom. Also, condoms can break.
The only way to be completely sure about preventing HPV infections and other STDs is not to have sex (called abstinence).
Spermicidal foams, creams, and jellies have not been proven to protect against HPV or genital warts. If you have questions about the vaccine or are concerned about STDs, talk to your doctor.