What will be the winter of 2019-2020 in Russia
The first serious colds are still far enough away, but today meteorologists are trying to predict what the coming winter of 2019-2020 will be in different regions of Russia. Forecasters make their forecast by analyzing statistical data for previous years, as well as tracking climate changes and processes in the atmosphere. To get the most reliable picture, we suggest that you familiarize yourself with long-term weather forecasts, as well as folk signs. Which may indicate the approaching cold and prolonged (or vice versa, mild and warm) winters.
Geographical features of Russia
Speaking about the weather in Russia, it is always necessary to specify what region we are talking about, because the country is located in 4 climatic zones:
Naturally, the climatic conditions and temperature conditions in these regions have a number of significant differences. Moreover, even the weather in different regions of Russia located in the temperate zone is also not uniform. It affects the distance from the seas and mountains, as well as the peculiarities of the movement of air masses, which bring radical changes in weather conditions.
Winter in the arctic climate
Extremely short and cold summers (3-4 weeks) and long harsh winters with extremely low temperatures are typical for settlements located in the Arctic zone. It is here that records of the absolute minimum are recorded, although the average temperature for months does not look so frightening.
In the northernmost regions, the winter of 2019-2020, as always, will come in September, declaring itself to be night frosts and a sharp deterioration in the weather.
Winter in the subarctic climate
Winters in the subarctic zone are very severe, as strong winds and blizzards join low temperatures. Weather completely depends on the movement of air masses, bringing cyclones from the Arctic latitudes and short warming from the continental part of Russia.
The severity of the climate can be judged by the table of average temperatures of winter and summer in the settlements of the subarctic zone.
The meteorological forecast promises that for the Far East and northeast of Siberia, the winter of 2019-2020 will come at the end of September, although its arrival will be relatively mild, without sharp temperature jumps.
It is in the temperate zone that most of Russia is located. But here 4 more climatic zones are distinguished, which is due to the geographical features of the regions.
|Continental||Center and south of the West Siberian Plain||Hot summers and cold winters, little rain|
|Temperate continental||european part of Russia||Temperature conditions are different for the northern and southern parts, but the temperature rarely drops to -25ºС|
|Sharply continental||Eastern Siberia||Winters are snowy and very cold (up to -48 ºС)|
|Monsoon continental||South Far East||In the winter months, temperatures often drop below -30 ºС, but strong snowstorms are rare|
To understand when in different regions of the temperate zone to wait for the arrival of frosts and what approximately will be the winter of 2019-2020, you can get acquainted with the average temperature for months. According to forecasts of meteorologists, the coming season will not become extremely cold, which means that the average temperature will not differ much from the climatic norm.
The inhabitants of these regions of Russia will meet the first night frosts in October or at the very beginning of November (depending on the geographical location), while stable spring heat should be expected no earlier than the second half of April.
Winter in a subtropical climate
Subtropics cover only a small part of Russia, located on the Black Sea coast. Climate features also determine the proximity of the Caucasus Mountains, which impede the passage of cold air masses.
As a rule, winters in the subtropics are mild, stable snow cover is formed only in mountainous regions, and in coastal cities the temperature even in January and February is near zero and rarely drops below -10 ºС.
If you are looking for an interesting holiday destination in 2019 and 2020, we advise you to inquire what winter will be on the Crimean peninsula, because it is here that you can have a great rest at any time of the year. But a long-term forecast will not help much in determining the optimal dates, because the weather in coastal cities is inconsistent and the winter of 2020 will definitely bring surprises here in the form of sharp cooling, periods of heavy rains, piercing winds, and in some cities even snowfalls.
One thing is good - in a subtropical climate, such natural phenomena do not linger for a long time and quickly give way to thaws.
Weather in winter 2019-2020 in Moscow
The capital of Russia is located in the zone of temperate continental climate, which forms the features of the weather. Moreover, in different parts of the city the cold is felt a little differently. So, on the Sparrow Hills, the air temperature is usually slightly higher, and even in frost it feels always warmer than in other areas. This feature is due to the terrain - a steep slope that acts as a barrier to the wind.
According to forecasts of meteorologists, the winter of 2020 will be rather mild for the capital. Extremely low temperatures are not expected, although Muscovites, like other residents of temperate latitudes, are expected to have peculiar “temperature swings” - abrupt weather changes with a significant decrease or increase in air temperature.
Winter in Moscow will announce itself long before the onset of 2020 - the forecast promises frost and snow in November. Which, in fact, is the climatic norm for the region. So, the weather forecast platform “Well and the weather” promises residents and guests of the capital for the coming December, January and February such indicators:
As can be seen in the weather calendar, December promises to be very warm and snowy, while frosts will begin just before the New Year, which will not recede even in the first weeks of 2020.
Since ancient times, people have paid attention to how nature is preparing for the upcoming winter, because plants and animals almost unmistakably predict how severe the upcoming season will be.
To understand what the coming winter of 2019-2020 will be like in your region of Russia, we suggest paying attention to such signs indicating an early and cold winter:
- Birds hatch in flocks early and fly off to warmer climes.
- Near the villages you can often meet forest residents (foxes, wolves, hares).
- Wintering birds in Russia (bullfinches) arrive early.
- Hares change a fur coat early.
- Abundantly give birth to mountain ash.
- The first snow is when the trees have not yet thrown off the foliage.
- A multilayer "clothing" is formed on the bow.
Also, people noticed that almost never two very cold winters go in a row.
We suggest that you follow how plants and animals prepare in your city or village for the upcoming cold season and make your prediction of what winter will be in 2020 in your region of Russia, sharing observations and suggestions in the comments.