Political Parties of the United States Essay
Classification/Division Essay POLITICAL PARTIES OF THE UNITED STATES You can tell what your political stance is based on what political party suits you the best. The Republican Party is known for their conservative ideology and strong military involvement. The Democratic Party is known for their socially and fiscally liberal views. Libertarians are best known for views on extreme personal freedom. Let’s take a closer look at the political stances each of these parties represents. The Republican Party originated in Ripon, Wisconsin on February 28, 1854.
The reason for organizing this political party came from the opposition towards the expansion of slavery. Some political principles of the party include opposition of abortion and strong gun control. They generally support lower taxes across the board, honor individual property rights, and promote strong national defense. Republicans usually have conservative economic and social values. Many members of the party are also Christian. The Republican Party is often recognized by their official symbol, the elephant. Recent and popular advocates of the Republican Party are John McCain and Sarah Palin, who ran for the presidential election in 2008.
The Republican Party is one of the two major political parties in the United States. The Democratic Party, originally named the Democratic-Republican Party, is the oldest existing political party in the United States of America. The Democratic Party’s official symbol is the donkey. Democrats often support abortion, strong gun control, and homosexuality. They also tend to look to the government for the solution to problems. The Democratic Party defends the role of government in supporting our families and institutions. Democratic President Barack Obama is currently serving as the first African-American President.
The Democratic Party is the other major political party in the United States. Libertarians believe that living free and independent is the best way to live. The Libertarian Party believes that the only role government should play in society is to help individuals defend themselves form force and fraud. A Libertarian quote stated, “The Libertarian Party is for all who don’t want to push other people around and don’t want to be pushed around them selves. Live and let live is the Libertarian way. ” They are extremely liberal and don’t enforce many rules and regulations.
Many celebrities are advocates of this party. A few of these celebrities include Kurt Russell, Drew Carey, and Clint Eastwood. Nationwide, there are one hundred and fifty-three Libertarians holding elected offices. As stated earlier, you can tell what your political stance is based on what political party you agree with more. The Republican Party is often conservative. The Democratic Party is liberal and pro -government. The Libertarian Party is based on individualism. Altogether, the United States has a strong political society.
Cite this Political Parties of the United States Essay
Political Parties of the United States Essay. (2018, May 26). Retrieved from https://graduateway.com/political-parties-of-the-united-states-essay/