Reasons to Use Iron Ornamental Works
Ornamental ironwork is the art of working with iron wrought or cast when it is at a certain degree of heat to enable flexibility. This is used in making of stairs, grills, staircases, fire escapes, railings, gates and fences. Ornamental iron is also used to furnish or decorate homes and buildings because it is weatherproof. This ornamental iron gives the building or house a charming look when used as a gate or even in staircases. Traditionally built houses can be renovated using the ornamental iron.
Another use of the ornamental iron is making furniture.
The blacksmith is responsible for the heating of iron and forming it into different sizes and shapes. Big companies with the use of advanced technology have machines that heat, melt and mould iron into different shapes for commercial purposes. The process of cutting metal, bending it and then assembling it is called metal fabrication. It is also a value added process whereby raw material are used to create machines, parts and structures.
Metal fabrication usually involves the sheet metal and the structural steel. There are two processes involved in steel fabrication. The first process is forming of steel from the mixing and heating of all the raw materials. The other fabrication process is the use of an electric arc furnace to recycle steel. The type of steel used in the making of structures in different sizes and shapes is called structural steel. Structural steel is used to make the structures used in most construction projects. The structural steel structures are used because of their handiness thus they are able to withstand weight without sagging. This will also guarantee the structural integrity of the building is maintained.
The structural steel can also handle different stresses thanks to its flexibility. As compared to others, it is proven that building and structures that have long life spans use structural steel. Shielding rust from structural steel will ensure that it has an infinite life span. The ideal strength of the structural steel is maintained definitely when it is protected from rusting. Structural steel is environmental friendly because it has the capability to be recycled or reused. In renovations, the scrapped steel from the old structures can be sold to steel companies. The old steel is then recast by the steel companies into new products.
It is very common to use the structural steel as the base in most of structural designs that are creative and unique. This also makes the architectural and construction companies to highly consider the use of the structural steel because of its versatility. In Washington State some of the companies that deal with ornamental iron works, welding fabricators and structural steel include Rogue ironworks, Tactical fabrication, Tradecraft construction, Sound sanitary and fabrication Northwest stair and rail and many others.