Scientists have discovered the benefits of umbilical cord donation. This post-partum waste, instead of being thrown out, can potentially cure diseases like leukemia and save lives.
A recent study reveals that living under flight path roar causes diabetes due to rise of stress and sugar levels from noise pollution.
A fang blenny can painlessly deliver a potent opioid-laced fish venom that can disorient predators that make the mistake of eating them.
The mumps epidemic has fueled people's doubts about the vaccine. An expert admitted a new vaccine might have to be developed.
A study on HPV reveal that vaccines for the vaccine for the disease works better in fewer doses.
People suffering from severe eczema can finally have their treatment. It does however, come with a huge price tag.
Food and Drug Administration finally gave out their go signal to produce the treatment drug for multiple sclerosis.
A day care provider was charged with child abuse when a 2-year old under her care suffered effects of THC exposure after eating cookies she made.
Playing Tetris has been shown to help with some psychological challenges and a visual problem.
Statistical data revealed that majority of the heroin users are white people.
The United States is seeing dramatic increases in drug-addicted babies. These infants are exposed to addictive opioid drugs while in their mother's womb.
Research reveals how message prompts help people with depression play more often and longer.
A trial for stem cell therapy on men with impotence yielded positive results.
A new research reveals a cellular mechanism that is responsible for the occurrence of multiple sclerosis. This breakthrough can open new opportunities in finding a new treatment for multiple sclerosis.
As the world celebrated World Tuberculosis Day, a new battle front emerges as drug-resistant tuberculosis strains defy traditional treatments.
According to an article published in 2018 in the New York Post, a study that evaluated the oral health habits of 2,000 millennials discovered that many of them don't keep their mouths as clean as they could. The study reported that three out of 10 millennials brush their teeth once a day, and that the average millennial participating in the survey has gone more than two days in a row without brushing their teeth even once. Yet, the survey says, more than half of those polled indicated that they're worried about losing their teeth as a result of poor oral health.