|Uploaded:||September 28, 2009|
|Updated:||September 29, 2009|
This is a cool animal drawing that I did a few days ago. It is an animal character from a very funny animated movie called “Madagascar 2”, and I think you guys will find this lesson very fun, easy, and colorful. You will be getting a lesson on “how to draw a lemur step by step”. The three lemurs in Madagascar are King Julian, Maurice who is an aye-aye lemur, and then there is Mort who is the small one ounce mouse lemur. Of course as you can see this lemur is in cartoon form. That is because I wanted this online drawing lesson to be as easy as possible for you all to learn from. The lemur are small monkey like primates that live in their native land of Madagascar. I say that they are “monkey like” because that is exactly what these animals are. Lemurs are also known as being the primate before the primate or pre-primates. They have slender hands and feet that move just like a monkey, and they also have long snouts. Just like other monkey species, these animals come in a variety of colors ranging from grey, brown, a reddish color and even mixed shades. A lemur can weigh as little as one ounce, to fifteen pounds. The ones that weight around an ounce are called “pygmy mouse lemurs” and the largest of the species are called “indri lemurs”. These beautiful animals also have long tails that are either solid in color or striped. Like other primates these creatures are very social animals, which means they live in groups. They love spending most of their day in the trees and other bushes. The only species of lemur that splits up their days to the ground and trees, is the ringed tailed lemur. An interesting thing about these social animals is that they bath in the sun just like us, but they also do this to heat up their bodies. The diet of the lemur consist of leaves, different fruits, insects, and animals that are much smaller then themselves. All in all this is a cool lesson and I think you guys will like drawing one of the more popular character of the Dream Works movie Madagascar 2. Have fun teaching yourself “how to draw a lemur step by step” with this free online drawing lesson. I will be back once again with more fun things to draw. Peace out peeps and happy drawing!