Healthy Life is Australia’s home of ‘feel good’. Stress can cause or worsen symptoms of mania or depression. It is important to learn what causes your stress, ways to identify and deal with stressors, and ways to minimize your day-to-day stress level. Stress may be caused by a variety of factors, both external and internal, some of which you may not be aware of. Repeated or constant stress can lead to tension, chronic pain, anxiety, and an inability to enjoy life. With the right treatment and therapy, you can learn to anticipate and deal with stress, and with support, you can work on breaking out of stressful patterns or situations.
Choosing whole foods and cooking from scratch is a much healthier way to eat than buying pre-packaged or ready-meals which are high in fat and salt but very low in nutrients. To make sure you’re getting a variety of nutrients, vitamins and minerals into your body every day – a quick rule of thumb is to pick a variety of colours for your meals. Be the artist of your meals and paint a colour picture with a variety of yellow, red and green fruits and vegetables throughout the day.
People tend to know very little when it comes to the dangers of smoking,” says Alexander Prokhorov, M.D., Ph.D., professor of behavioral science at MD Anderson. What you should know , he says, is that all tobacco products – including e-cigarettes and smokeless tobacco – are dangerous and contain cancer-causing chemicals. So, using tobacco any in any form puts your life at risk.
Mellow Out Monday with Stressbusters at the MSE Q level from 8-10 p.m. Persistent stress has been shown to have many negative effects on our health, including: loss of sleep, mood disorders, cardiovascular risks, digestive disorders and decreased immune response which increases susceptibility to colds, flu and other illnesses.
Neurological disorders affect 1 in 10 Canadians of all ages. There is great urgency to identify and implement solutions that create healthier brains. Through innovative funding programs, exceptional people, and by focusing on four interconnected research themes, HBHL will transform how we view and treat the brain. Collaborating with educators and industry, HBHL will develop evidence-based programs that address the specific mental health and neurological challenges of Canadians and promote healthy living through supportive environments.