About History of Mylapore in Chennai, Tamilnadu
Mylapore is one of the important places in Chennai city and this place is being considered as one of the most important cultural and religious centers in the city of Chennai. Mylapore stretches from Triplicance and Teynampet in west side with Royapettah in north side. Mylapore was earlier under British rule for many centuries. Until 1749 mylapore was been ruled by portagues and meanwhile for 25 years it was under French control. After a number of years mylapore town was put rule into the hands of British Indian Company and soon after it conqueror the portuges rule over the town came to an end. After the end of portuges rule Arcot Nawab took its control and in 1749 mylapore was formed into the administration of presidency of madras and it is also noted that an area named Luzz Cornerwas been developed during this period.
Earlier mylpore was known as Vedapuri. According to history and religious beliefs godness Parvathy Devi in order to show her sorry for something done assumed the form of a peacock. Peacock means Mayil in Tamil, a vehicle of lord Muruga and as peacocks used to stay in these places it got its name as Mylapore. This area is also called by several other names such as Mayilarpil,Mayilai,Tirumayilai,Mahilup, Misapolis, Miraporand Malepur.
Later in late 19th and early 20th century, mylapore came to spot light as a commercial and intellectual hub of madras city and presently mylapore is the home for number of music sabhas and musicians with wide variety and categories of shops and as a well known place for Temples and Residential colonies. This place has become more cultural important because as various cultural events along with old cultural sabhas even now exists with several events organized round the year.
About Kapaleeswarar Temple in Mylapore, Tamilnadu
Kapaleeswarar Temple one to the most important and famous Tamilnadu temple finds its place of location in mylapore in Chennai city. The Temple structure is about 300 years old and Temple architecture stands for a fine example of Dravidian culture. This Temple is dedicated to lord Shiva and lord Shiva is worshiped as Kapaleswarar and godness parvathi is worshipped as Karpagambal here. The specialty of this Temple is that all 63 Nayanars – devotees of lord Shiva are taken out in a procession around the main street at the same time. The Temple is located at the southern part of Katcheri Road in south mylapore. The 37m Temple gopuram is carved with gods, godness and saints. The Temple courtyard also has a Punnai Tree one of the oldest trees in Chennai. The daily services at the Temple are named as Kalasandhi - Morning Pooja, Uchisandhi –Midday Pooja, Sayankalamsanthi -Evening Pooja and Arthajamasanthi- Late Night Pooja.
Kapaleeswarar Temple Theppam Float Festival
The Temple consists of a large water tank in front of the western gopuram. The float festival is mostly held in January or February every year which is being celebrated in a grand manner. A large number of crowds are gathered here on this occasion to worship their god and the 7 storied tower of this temple are illuminated with colorful lights and the tank in front with various floating lamps in the water are a pleasant and real treat to thousands of devotees gathered. Only during this festival the tank is full of water else in a dry condition. During this festival the god and godness are decorated with beautiful clothes and are taken in a decorated raft for procession. More over the temple is colorfully illuminated with lights acts as a best sightseeing during night hours.
News about Thai Poosam Theppam Festival 2012
This year 2012 the Theppam Float Festival will be held for 3 days at Kapaleeswarar Temple and it starts on 7th February 2012 and end by 9th February 2012. This festival is named as Thai Poosam Theppam Thiruvizhla as it coincides with the Thai Poosam.
On the first day at 6pm swamy Chandrasekaran will come out of the Theppam and move around the temple tank 5 times and bless the devotees. During this round Vedas will be chanted along with Thevaram, Nadeswaram and classical music.
On the second day lord Murugan will come out of the Theppam and move around the temple for 7 times.
On the third final day godness Valli and Dhevanani will move around the temple 9 times and bless their devotees.
The management expects huge crowd during this festival and due to this occasion several police and guards are being employed on duty and various security booth are being erected in different corners of the temple and with the help of Traffic department various diversion in its regular routes has been made and even several special buses are being operated on this occasion.
Places to stay in Mylapore
Mylapore has many places to stay ranging from 5 star, 3 star with budget hotels and lodges. The visitors can access their place of stay based on their budget and requirement.
Savera Hotel – R.K.Salai
M.G.M Grand – Santhome High Road
Shelter – Mylapore
Woodland – R.K.Salai
Niligris Nest – R.K.Salai
Manhattan – R.K.Salai
Sabaris Nest – R.K.Salai
Sangeetha Residency – Mylapore
Crystal Inn – Mylapore
Murudi Lodges – Mylapore
Vegetarian Restarurants in Mylapore:
Sukha Nivas – Mylapore
Nivedhanam – Mylapore
Ashivta – R.K Salai
Saravana Bhavan – R.K.Salai
Sangeetha – Mylapore
Vasantha Bhavan – Mylapore
Geethanjali – Mylapore
Shanthi Vihar – R.K.Salai
How to Reach Mylapore
1.Thirumalai Railway station is the boarding point and stop for Trains moving from Broadway to Velachery.
2.Mylapore is connected to Santhome High Road in north along with R.K.Salai on other side.
3.The nearest Airport would be Chennai Airport which is about 11km from Mylapore.
List of Bus Numbers and Routes towards Mylapore
29C – Perambur RS to Besant Nagar
21G – High Court to Tambaram
21 – High Court to Mandaveli
12G – Anna Square to Kalaingar Nagar
12B – Vadapalani BS to Foreshore Estate
S29C – Perambur BS to Thiruvanmayiur
5B – Mylapore to T.Nagar
A1 – Central to Thiruvanmayiur
M15 – Mylapore to Medavakkam
12 – T.Nagar to V.House
S1A – Thiruvattiyur BS to Thiruvanmayiur
45B – Anna Square to Guindy
M12C and L12 C – Saligramam to Mylapore
L1C – Ennore to Thiruvattiyur
L1 – Thiruvattiyur to Thiruvanmiyur
LT1 – Royapuram to Thiruvanmayiur
M21C – Central to Kannagai Nagar
M45E – Anna Square to Kilkattalai