Nature Bighorn Sheep During SnowfallA bighorn ram grazes on dry grasses during Winter in Yellowstone National Park, Wyoming during a light snowfall. An Afternoon SnackTwo coyotes pick apart a bull elk carcass in the snow in Yellowstone National Park, Wyoming. VersusA single gray wolf approaches a bison on alert with its tail in the air during a light snowfall in Yellowstone National Park. Mountain Goat WizardA close up of a male mountain goat. Nursing BisonA young bison nurses from its mother Yearling Moose and MotherA yearling moose is seen feeding on plants with its mother. A Tender MomentA young pronghorn antelope and it's mother touch noses in a grassy field. Grizzly Bear and CubsA female grizzly bear and her cubs walk in a grassy plain at the edge of the forest. The GrizA large grizzly bear walks near the treeline. Perched Yellow WarblerA yellow warbler is perched on a dry branch covered with lichen. Great Blue HeronA great blue heron sits in the tall grass. Colombian Ground SquirrelA small ground squirrel stands among the grasses. Grazing Cow Elk ReflectionA single cow elk is reflected in a still pond as it grazes along the shoreline. Cow Elk Looking BackA single cow elk looks to the rear as it grazes along the shoreline. Pouncing CoyoteA single coyote pounces on his prey in a grassy field filled with small yellow flowers. Idaho Moose HeadshotA young bull moose without antlers is seen close up in Bonner County, Idaho Coyote Close UpA coyote is seen in winter near the road in Yellowstone National Park. Coyote in a SnowstormA lone coyote in a snowstorm near Slough Creek in Yellowstone National Park. Red Fox on the HuntA single red fox is seen in a snowy forest setting. Red Fox in WinterAn individual red fox trots up a winter road. Grazing Bull Elk Close UpA bull elk munches on grasses in the snow. Bull Elk Looking BackA single bull elk is seen standing in the snow. Mountain Goat RestingA single mountain goat rests in the snow in Washington's Enchantment lakes area. Bighorn Sheep in SubalpineA bighorn ram stands among the trees. Pronghorn Antelope StandingA single pronghorn antelope stands on a grassy hillside. Bison RainstormBison graze and rest in the hills underneath a heavy rainstorm. December 31, 2011 by benchase Posted in and tagged with wildlife. RSS 2.0 feed.