During its first cycle, from 2004 to 2008, VI-EPSCoR studied the bio-complexity of coral reefs in the territory, looking at various aspects of reefs such as structural function. During the second cycle, which began in 2008 and will end in 2013, researchers studied ridge-to-reef relationships, incorporating all elements to find out how they act and interact.
“We want the third phase to fold into the human dimension – how we impact and are impacted,” said Nick Drayton, assistant director of the project.
While a few suggestions about the human dimension arose, a majority of residents were concerned about the threat invasive lionfish pose to the territory. Drayton said lionfish have gained international attention for their invasive behavior, but researchers are still looking for solutions to the problem.
The local EPSCoR group originally wanted to promote lionfish as an edible species, but with the discovery of ciguatera in many of the fish, program researchers worry it’s a dead end.
According to Henry Smith, VI-EPSCoR director, lionfish could become part of EPSCoR’s research as a small piece of the puzzle that includes hundreds of invasive species affecting our ecosystem.
Attendees also discussed projects such as generating power by harnessing water energy, while others suggested moving away from marine research into other areas that heavily affect the territory, such as agriculture and health issues.
Smith said they will narrow down the list of suggestions based on NSF’s priorities. He said the foundation has certain areas they will support. For example, research should be relevant to the territory and the University of the Virgin Islands should have the capacity to do the research.
Smith said researchers will evaluate NSF criteria, come up with general areas that include as many suggestions as possible and use that as a jumping off point.
Those ideas that do not fit into the general theme but are worthy of more research can receive incubator grants that fund additional research to help flesh out ideas so they can be part of the bigger picture in upcoming cycles.
“We’re helping generate revenue that not only goes to researchers, but finds its way into the community,” Drayton said, adding that EPSCoR is more of a facilitator.
“We provide funds for people to do things.”
The proposal for the third cycle is not due until October, so residents still have time to submit ideas. Please visit http://epscor.uvi.edu/ to submit information.