Introduction to Programming Concepts
The Introduction to Programming Concepts course is designed to help the learner take their first formal step into the world of programming. This is an entry-level course which covers object-oriented programming concepts. The content is geared toward those who are just beginning, need to update, or are investigating a career in the in-demand and growing field of computer programming.
Upon completion of this course, students will have the skills necessary to learn object-oriented programming languages, and, more importantly, understand those languages well.
General Language Courses
MTA Introduction to Programming Using Python
The MTA Introduction to Programming Using Python (98-381) course will introduce students to Python, a general-purpose programming language that is used to power websites, build games, and build general apps. Python is considered to be a little bit more of an "English-language" programming language, thus it is a good first real programming language to learn.
Upon completion of this course, students will have a general knowledge of Python and of basic programming concepts. Specifically, students will be able to use data types and operators, use decisions and loops, perform input and output operations, document and structure code, perform troubleshooting and error handling, and use modules and tools to perform operations.
Programming in C# Specialist
The Programming in C# Specialist course is THE course for students to start with when pursing a .NET development career. The C# language is not only widely used on multiple platforms, but other competing languages are similar and easier to learn once C# is learned.
Upon completion of this course and certification, students will be able to use C# to manage program flow, create and use types, debug applications, implement security, and implement data access.
Mobile App Development Track
MTA Introduction to Programming Using Java
The MTA Introduction to Programming Using Java (98-388) course is a great continuation from learning C# and will serve as a great lead-in toward learning how to develop mobile apps for Android, as Java is a primary language in Android app development. Plus, Java is used to build standalone apps.
Upon completion of this course, students will have a good introductory knowledge base in the Java programming language.
Android/iOS App Development
Release - Fall 2019
(Android Exam AND-801)
This course will introduce students to building mobile apps specifically for the Android and iOS platforms. Languages and development kits for both platforms are covered.
Upon completion of this course and certification, students will be able to use Android and iOS to develop basic mobile apps.
Web Development Track
MTA HTML5 Application Development Fundamentals
Upon completion of the course and certification, students will have intermediate-level knowledge of both HTML5 and CSS3.
MTA Introduction to Programming using HTML and CSS
The MTA Introduction to Programming Using HTML and CSS (98-383) course is an excellent course for those looking to gain employability skills in the area of web development. The material covers the objectives on the MTA 98-383 exam, putting a solid entry-level certification well within reach. Specifically, the course has two distinct parts: HTML (Hypertext Markup Language), which includes HTML fundamentals, document structuring, and multimedia presentation, and CSS (Cascading Style Sheets), which includes CSS fundamentals and styling webpages.
Developing ASP.NET MVC Web Applications
The Developing ASP.NET MVC Web Applications (70-486) course will teach students how to build robust web applications using ASP.NET and the model-view-controller (MVC) pattern. Specifically, this course covers designing the application architecture, designing the user experience, developing the user experience, troubleshooting and debugging web applications, and designing and implementing security.
Upon completion of this course and certification, students will know how to build ASP.NET MVC web applications. Passing this exam, along with either the 70-480 or 70-483 exams will earn you an MCSA Web Applications certification.
For more information, please contact a LearnKey Client Services representative.