Aging is inevitable, but some studies suggest the effects of aging can be reversed. Here are few facts that can help to reverse your age.
Few Habits that Can Cause Reverse Aging:
Smoking has been shown indicted for a laundry list of ills from heart disease to lung disorders, all of which can also foil your longevity plans.
Drink only in moderation
Alcohol can infuse every cell of yours , by damaging genes and inflaming your liver. A glass of wine a day for women and maybe two for men, but no more, may be mildly beneficial to health.
Cut saturated fat, up omega-3 fats.
Eat less or no red meat; lose the cake and ice cream; and consume more of complex carbs, such as whole grains, fruits, and vegetables; and get yourself plenty of fatty fish. The healthy fats in fishes like salmon, mackerel, and sardines help keep oxygen free-radical molecules from damaging your cells.
Consider moderating your total food intake.
Studies have proven in rats that a 30% calorie restriction means longer life. Also few studies in rhesus monkeys showing a gain in years from a reduction in food. Obviously, losing excess pounds means less strain on your system.
American Medical Association recently endorsed taking a daily multivitamin. In addition to the effective antioxidant vitamin C, CoQ10, vitamin E, alpha lipoic acid (another antioxidant), should be in your medicine cabinet.
Reprogram your vision of old age.
A study at Yale recently showed that those who had a positive view of growing older have lived seven years longer than those who griped about it.
The foods that can Reverse aging:
Here are few foods that meant to have the properties to combat aging process :
Brazil, cashew, macadamia —they’re all anti-aging heroes thanks to their cholesterol-lowering and anti-inflammatory effects
These seeds are high in calcium and rich in other minerals like iron, magnesium, phosphorous, and fiber. A mineral-rich diet, helps to get healthy bones for life.
Fortified Plant-Based Milk
Fortified plant milks are great for their optimal bone density- from hemp, soy, almond, or rice milk — fortified with calcium and vitamin D — is more good for bones. (source)
Pineapple is rich in a mineral called manganese, which is needed to activate an enzyme called prolidase. This Prolidase has role in formation of collagen in skin, which plays a role in skin strength and elasticity.
Dark chocolate is loaded with huge amounts of flavanols, which are believed to benefit appearance by increasing blood flow to the skin and also Flavanols absorb UV radiation, and protects your skin from the damaging effects of the sun.
Lemon and Lime Juice
Vitamin C has a critical role in keeping skin looking brighter and younger as per study published in the Journal of Clinical Nutrition and found that women who consumed greater amounts of it had smoother skin and fewer wrinkles.
These fruits have properties to protect against skin-damaging free radicals from sun exposure, stress, and pollution, and also they have vitamin C, which helps prevent the wrinkles.
This fruit contains lycopene, a natural sunblock, protecting it from ultraviolet rays that damage and age the skin, create sunspots.
Another good source of vitamin C not only helps to boost immunity, but also helps in keeping your body in better working order, but they also help build collagen.
Avocados are packed with huge inflammation-fighting fatty acids that keep your immune system functioning properly. They also help both your mind and body age.
Pomegranate seeds contain compounds that fight damage from free radicals and increase your body’s ability to preserve collagen
Olives are so incredible source of polyphenols and other phytonutrients that help protect your DNA and keep you looking and feeling younger
Soy foods are one of the excellent foods for healthy bones and your cardiovascular system. soy provides phytoestrogens, compounds which mimic estrogen, which have been shown to reduce bone loss and also risk for heart disease.
Mushrooms naturally contain vitamin D, without this vitamin you can’t properly absorb calcium, which will lead to osteoporosis, broken bones, and a hunched spine
they’re full of vitamin A that can help fight off fine lines and wrinkles by revitalizing damaged collagen.
This vegetables’ are also rich in vitamin A, which helps to restore and regenerate damaged collagen, an essential for the elasticity and regeneration of skin cells,
Beans and Lentils
The requirement for the protein increases as we age.These superfoods are loaded with plant-based essential amino acids to meet all of your protein requirements. beans and lentils are superior sources because they’re also loaded with disease-fighting fiber and phytochemicals.
Cooked tomatoes are loaded with lycopene, an antioxidant that protects the skin from damage, the cooking process helps to easy absorption of lycopene.
Yogurt is one of the great foods for keeping your cells young, but Opt for unsweetened versions and add fresh fruits and a touch of honey to temper tartness.
It is comfort food that’s rich in carbohydrates that boost your body’s feel-good hormone serotonin.There’s no better way to look and feel young than to feel happy.
Turmeric has the property to helping fight cell damage, chronic disease, and aging, keeping skin and all organs vibrant and in good condition. Its powerful pigment, curcumin, seems to help prevent telomere (the end caps of our DNA) from shortening, which is believed to be a lead cause in aging and degenerative diseases.
Stay hydrated !.Try diluting fruit juice (half water, half unsweetened juice), and add a pinch of salt. It’ll give your skin cells the hydration it needs to get that glowing, dewy look.
Few myths and facts about aging
Myth: Memory loss is always an inevitable part of aging
Dementia should be seen as only a modifiable health condition and, if it occurs, this should be followed as a medical condition, not a normal part of aging.
Studies find that many of the same risk factors that contribute to heart disease—high blood pressure, high cholesterol, diabetes and obesity… may also contribute to Alzheimer’s and other dementias.
Various research studies on the brains of the elderly people with and without dementia find significant blood vessel damage in those with hypertension.
Such vascular damage would shrink the amount of healthy brain tissue you have in reserve, reducing the amount available if a disease like Alzheimer’s.
It is not necessary that all aged people would sure suffer from dementia and memory loss.
Myth: Painful and Achy Joints are Unavoidable
Not exercising is what makes the achy joints inevitable as we age.
The Australian researchers at the Monash University Medical School had looked at women ages 40 to 67, and found that those who exercised at least once every two weeks for 20 minutes or more had more cartilage in their knees.
It suggests that being physically active made them less likely to develop arthritis. It is not necessary that all old people suffer from joint pains
Myth: it’s too late to start exercise in your 50s, 60s or 70s
It’s never too late!
A research study of 50 men and women with an average age of 87 worked out with weights for about 10 weeks and increased their muscle strength 113 percent.
They also increased their walking speed, a marker of overall physical health in the elderly.
Myth: Your Bones Become Fragile And Your Posture Bends as you age
Yes, Osteoporosis is definitely more common in older people, but it’s also very preventable.
A study of females over 100 years of age found that only 56 percent had osteoporosis, and their average age at diagnosis was 87.
Myth: Old Age Kills Libido
Sexual desire might decline a bit as you age, but that doesn’t typically occur until age 75.
A research survey of about 3,005 people ages of 57 to 85 found the chance of being sexually active dependent as much if not more on their health and their partner’s health than on their age.
Myth: Getting older is depressing so expect to be depressed
Depression is highly treatable. Various Studies have found that older people who are depressed are more likely to develop memory and learning problems, while other research links depression to an increased risk of death from numerous age-related diseases, including Parkinson’s disease, stroke and pneumonia.
Myth: Genes Play The Biggest Role In How You’ll Age
It is found that even if you’re born with the most healthiest set of genes, how you live your life determines how they behave over your lifespan.
Your genes can always be changed by what you eat, how much physical activity you get, and even your exposure to chemicals.
Myth: Women fear aging more so than men
A survey has conducted on behalf of the National Women’s Health Resource Center found that women tend to have a positive outlook on aging and to be inspired by others who also have positive attitudes.
Myth: Your Brain Stops Developing After Age 3
Studies show your brain continues to send out new connections and to strengthen existing ones throughout your life .
As long as you continue to challenge it. It really is your body’s ultimate muscle.
Myth: The Brain Shrinks With Age
This myth began with studies in 2002 showing that the hippocampus, the part of the brain that controls memory, was significantly smaller in older people than in younger people.
Was it age or stress that was responsible for the shrinking brains of older people? Probably stress.
Myth: Seniors Are Always Cranky And Unhappy
The researchers from Heidelberg, Germany, interviewed about 40 centenarians, they found that despite the significant physical and mental problems, 71 percent said they were happy, and more than half said they were as happy as they’d been at younger ages.
When the researchers compared them to a group of middle-age people, they found that both groups were just as happy. .
Myth: Old age means losing all my teeth
The New England Elders Dental Study found the beginnings of periodontal disease in over 3/4 of the 1150 persons examined.
Part of the problem, said these investigators, was that education and dental care for this population are overlooked by both dentists and the patients themselves.
Myth: The older I get, the sicker I’ll get
But old age doesn’t have to mean feeling sick or tired. An important part of staying well into the older years is keeping your immune system operating at its peak.
Calcium and magnesium supplementation helps some individuals with hypertension.
Most are helped by high potassium foods (fruits and vegetables), salt restriction and weight maintenance.
Keeping blood pressure under control can also decrease the risk of a stroke.
Adult-onset diabetes is usually treated best with dietary measures such as reducing simple sugars, consuming a lot of fiber and taking chromium supplements.
It’s estimated that half of all types of cancer are linked to diet. This explains why less fat, lots of fruits, vegetables and fiber, vitamins A, B6, C and E and zinc and selenium all appear to play a role in cancer prevention.
Myth: Urinary incontinence is considered a normal part of aging
Although urinary incontinence occurs more frequently among older adults (10%–42% of hospitalized elders).
Bladder retraining for those with urge or stress incontinence is still highly effective for older adults.
The Behavioral management is the first line of treatment for incontinence.
New advances in science for reversing aging :
1. Stem Cell Technology:
In 2016, the researchers from Salk Institute for Biological Studies in California have succeeded in reprogramming the cells of aging mice using induced pluripotent stem cells.
These stem cells are have generated from the adult cells, and there by allowed scientists to reprogram the skin cells to an embryonic state.
In their study, the researchers found that the mice whose cells had been reprogrammed lived 30% longer than the non-reprogrammed control group.
2. Targeting Mutant mtDNA:
In November of 2016, researchers at CalTech and UCLA discovered a method of manipulating the mitochondria of cells to effectively repair DNA.
Cells typically contain two types of DNA found in the mitochondria – normal mtDNA and mutant mtDNA.
The study noted that the build-up of mutant mtDNA over time causes cells to age and eventually die.
The study was concerned with whether or not autophagy, or the process through which cells eat themselves, could be used to target the mutant mtDNA and prevent the aging process.
3. Activating Splicing Factors:
In late 2017, BMC Cell Biology published research from the University of Exeter and the University of Brighton, both in the United Kingdom, which presented a breakthrough in reverse aging technology.
The work built upon a previous University of Exeter discovery, which found that splicing factors in cells become inactive with age.
The study found that by introducing reversalogues, similar to the chemical resveratrol which is found in red wine, splicing factors could be reactivated in older cells.
This meant that the cells would continue to divide like younger cells, rejuvenating the cells and preventing cell aging and death.
4. Rejuvenate Bio:
A secretive start-up within Harvard, known was Rejuvenate Bio, has been working on technology to reverse the process of aging in dogs.
Though little is known of the company’s research methods, it’s been suggested that they’re modifying certain genes as a way of targeting and eliminating risks of heart disease, kidney disease, and more.
5. Senolytic Drugs:
Combining Pre-Existing Medications to Achieve Reverse Aging
Just this month Nature Medicine published research from the National Institute of Aging which found that combining and injecting pre-existing drugs could extend lifespan and delay age-related health issues.
The study was conducted on mice, who were treated with dasatinib and quercetin.
Dasatinib is usually used to treat forms of leukemia, whereas quercetin is found in fruits and vegetables.
When treated with the medications, researchers found that senescent cells were selectively killed and the deterioration of speed and mobility of the mice significantly decreased.In fact, naturally aging mice treated with the drugs in the study lived 36% longer than their control group counterparts.
6. Synthetic Peptides:
new research emerge from the Marshall University Joan C. Edwards School of Medicine, which suggested that the Na/K-ATPase oxidant amplification loop (NAKL) could potentially be targetted for anti-aging interventions.
The researchers were also successful in testing pNaKtide, a synthetic peptide that could further reduce risks of illness and the effects of aging.
The researchers first tested their theories on mice who were raised on a Western diet, to antagonize the NAKL. This provided the evidence of aging, which was then treated with pNaKtide.
The treatment slowed the aging process that had been spurred on by the NAKL. They then tested the treatment on human dermal fibroblasts, and recorded similar results.
7. Smoothing Cells:
researchers from the University of Virginia School of Medicine found that many effects of aging, such as fatty liver disease, could be the result of cell nuclei wrinkling.
When the nuclei wrinkle, it prevents DNA from functioning as it should.
They believe that viruses could be modified to carry and deliver lamin – a protein that can smooth the cells.
Through doing this, the cells could function like young cells again, reversing the effects of aging and protecting against multiple health risks.
8. Young Blood:
Cell Reports published a study that suggested that the blood of young people could be instrumental in fighting against aging.
In the study, researchers found that when the blood from younger mice was introduced into the blood of older mice, it stimulated neuron and stem cell production in the older mouse’s brain.
This effectively led to their brains functioning more like those of their younger counterparts, reversing the effects of aging on their cognition.
9. Anti-Aging Pills:
Researchers from the Paul F. Glenn Center for the Biology of Aging at Harvard Medical School believe that they could be able to create anti-aging pills.
This comes as a result of a study published in March 2017, which saw scientists use nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD+) to reverse the signs of aging in mice.
NAD+ is a molecule found in cells which is crucial for maintaining healthy cell function and regulating cellular aging. In the experiment, the scientists put a few drops of NAD+ into the mice’s water.
Within hours, levels of NAD+ in their cells had risen significantly. Within a week, the tissues of the NAD+-fed mice had reversed to youthful levels.
10. Reverse Aging With Cannabis:
That’s what was suggested by research from the University of Bonn and The Hebrew University of Jerusalem which was published
The study saw researchers successfully reverse the biological state of the brain in mice aged 12 months and 18 months. The test mice were treated with THC in small, non-intoxicating doses for a period of four weeks. They were noted as out-performing the control group who had been given a placebo, and were shown to have similar cognitive performance to younger mice.
11. Anti-Aging Bacteria:
Some researchers believe that the key to reversing the aging process lies in a bacterium found in Easter Island. Rapamycin is already used in transplant medicines and as an immunosuppressant, but scientists now believe that it could be used to reverse the effects of aging.
12. Gene Deletion:
In 2015, researchers from the Buck Institute for Research on Ageing and the University of Washington revealed that, after ten years of research, they had succeeded in identifying and deleting genes that could prolong life. The researchers identified 238 cells which, when removed, resulted in a 60% increase in lifespan.(source)
For more related articles click: