Optometrist (Low Vision Rehabilitation)
Quick Links : Map of Optometrists (Low Vision Rehabilitation) per State | Number of Optometrists (Low Vision Rehabilitation) per State
Optometrists who specialize in low-vision care having training to assess visual function, prescribe low-vision devices, develop treatment plans, and recommend other vision rehabilitation services.
Source: American Optometric Association [1/1/2009: added definition, added source]
Additional Taxonomy Codes from Optometrists
Doctors of optometry (ODs) are the primary health care professionals for the eye. Optometrists examine, diagnose, treat, and manage diseases, injuries, and disorders of the visual system, the eye, and associated structures as well as identify related systemic conditions affecting the eye. An optometrist has completed pre-professional undergraduate education in a college or university and four years of professional education at a college of optometry, leading to the doctor of optometry (O.D.) degree. Some optometrists complete an optional residency in a specific area of practice. Optometrists are eye health care professionals state-licensed to diagnose and treat diseases and disorders of the eye and visual system.
Optometrist (Corneal and Contact Management)
The professional activities performed by an Optometrist related to the fitting of contact lenses to an eye, ongoing evaluation of the cornea's ability to sustain successful contact lens wear, and treatment of any external eye or corneal condition which can affect contact lens wear.
Optometrists who work in Pediatrics are concerned with the prevention, development, diagnosis, and treatment of visual problems in children.
Optometrist (Sports Vision)
An optometrist who offers services designed to care for unique vision care needs of athletes, which may include one of more of the following services: corrective vision care unique to a specific sporting environment; protective eyewear for the prevention of sports-related injuries; vision enhancement - which may include vision therapy and techniques to improve visual skills specific to the athlete's sport.
Optometrist (Vision Therapy)
Optometrists who specialize in vision therapy as a treatment process used to improve vision function. It includes a broad range of developmental and rehabilitative treatment programs individually prescribed to remediate specific sensory, motor and/or visual perceptual dysfunctions.
Optometrist (Occupational Vision)
Optometrists who work in Occupational Vision, the branch of environmental optometry, consider all aspects of the relationship between work and vision, visual performances, eye safety, and health.
← Back to parent taxonomy: Optometrists
Volume numbers are based on primary as well as secondary taxonomy codes of Providers.