Whenever you study and learn, several things inside your brain happen: new cells generate, new connections are created between the cells, and existing connections between certain cells are either strengthened or removed.
Studies have constantly revealed that a stimulating environment and the presence of beta-endorphin (the hormone in charge of good moods) lead to good cell growth in your brains. There are also several factors that affect your brain’s health.
It is imperative that you know what these are so that you can do something about it. When you age, some brain functions lose their strength. You wouldn’t want this to happen to you, now would you?
First and most important of all is regular physical exercise. This practice protects the brain and the way it processes information. It is also said to help prevent dementia. Exercise boosts level of brain-protective chemicals and reduces stress.
Aim for at least 30 minutes of exercise daily so that you can feel the benefits as you grow older. But aside from exercise, you also need adequate sleep. A good night’s sleep recharges the brain and allows the body to rest and heal.
Your brain consolidates memories while you snooze. Inadequate sleep affects the way your brain cells function and can greatly increase the risk of suffering from stroke or depression. About seven to nine hours of it daily is what’s ideal for everybody.
Also consider the amount of stress you have in your life. High levels of chronic stress are not only bad for your blood pressure, cholesterol, and other physical ailments, they also chip away the brain fitness and overall memory performance.
While you can’t eliminate stress entirely from your life, you can certainly minimize it to improve memory and brain health. This may be quite a challenge and this requires so much of your willpower. In the end, however, the habit will pay off.
Always think about your diet. There should be a good balance between all the nutrients. Your diet should also be low in cholesterol and saturated fat. You find a lot of these in junk and deep fried foods.
Stay away from fast food places. Instead, go for ones that are rich in omega-3 fatty acids. Fish and greens, in particular, are good for your brain. As an added bonus, you’ll see how the habit does wonders for your skin. Those benefits should at least inspire you to eat healthier meals.
Not many people know this, but social connections also help keep your mind in motion. Friendships and social networks are important, especially when you get older. Good mood hormones help create new brain cells and keep them healthy.
So every time you need to get away from work, don’t hesitate to phone a friend and spend some quality time with people who love you. Burdens feel a whole lot lighter when you know you can always count on someone to help carry the load.
A good mental workout keeps you sharp and focused. In other words, use your brain or lose all ability. Keeping the brain active and challenged increases its vitality, generates new brain cells, and bolsters connections and reserves.
Learning powerful stresss management techniques to relax and reduce stress in your life is crucial for maintaining a healthy body and mind. These stress management tips will help you to achieve a state of balance to live a better and happier life.
Visit us to get your free Stress Relief Tips ebook download today.