Reverse osmosis is a membrane filtration process that is used extensively for the desalination and purification of water. Our chemical products are based on advanced formulations and include RO membrane cleaners, scale inhibitors and antiscalants, biocides, antifoulants and de-chlorinators. Our advanced formulations have been developed specifically for the desalination and reverse osmosis sectors and offer significant safety, cost, environmental and operational performance benefits over traditional products. Reverse osmosis (RO) membrane performance can be negatively impacted by impurities that build up on the membrane surface during operations. Suspended solids, microorganisms and mineral scale can foul membrane elements. These deposits can cause loss in output and/or rejection levels and reduce total system performance.
Antiscalants are surface active materials that interfere with precipitation reactions in three primary ways:
Peracetic Acid can be applied for the deactivation of a large variety of pathogenic microorganisms. It also deactivates viruses and spores. Peracetic Acid activity is hardly influenced by organic compounds that are present in the Water. Peracetic Acid is used mainly in the Food Industry, where it is applied as a cleanser and as a disinfectant. It is applied for bacteria and fungi removal from fruits and vegetables. It was also used for the disinfection of recycled rinsing water for foodstuffs.
Peracetic acid is applied for the disinfection of medical supplies and to prevent bio film formation in pulp industries. It can be applied during water purification as a disinfectant and for Plumming Disinfection. Peracetic acid is suitable for cooling tower water disinfection; it effectively prevents bio film formation and controls Legionella bacteria. Active constituent common name and synonyms : Peroxyacetic Acid; Peracetic Acid; Acetic Peroxide; Acetyl Hydroperoxide.
Super Absorbent Polymer is a new type macro molecular synthetic material that can absorb water of hundreds times of its weight in a short time. It is one kind of functionality macromolecule polymer which is non-toxic, non-irritating and non-corrosive. It can not conflagrate and blast.
Super Absorbent Polymers, otherwise known as SAP, absorbent polymers, absorbent gels, super soakers, super slurpers, gel crystals, are materials that swell in water to form a clear gel made up of separate, individual particles. Unlike a sponge, in which water can be wrung out easily, the hydrated gel particles retain the absorbed water even under pressure. This unique ability to hold absorbed water, even against pressure, is the primary benefit of using super absorbent polymers.
ACURO offer an extensive range of advanced; scientifically formulated treatment products manufactured to the highest international quality and environmental standards for guaranteed performance.
ACURO high performance chemical treatment products are used successfully around the world in many of the most demanding commercial, municipal and industrial process environments where they help to improve productivity, optimize performance and reduce equipment life-cycle costs.
ACURO's full range of scientifically formulated treatment products includes high performance water treatment chemicals for steam boilers, cooling water systems, cooling towers and closed circuits; wastewater and effluent treatment chemicals, high performance industrial chemicals, reverse osmosis membrane products, eco-friendly biological formulations, advanced polymers and much more. For further details simply select a product title.
Our product list includes:
|Alum Non Ferric|
|Poly Aluminium Chloride|
|Ferric Chloride powder|
|Ferric Chloride Liquid|
|Trisodium Phosphate (TSP)|
|Sodium tripoly Phosphate (STPP)|
|Sodium Hexameta Phosphate (SHMP)|
|Sodium Metabisulphite (SMBS)|
The Business Unit Liquid Purification Technologies (LPT) of specialty chemicals company Lanxess is one of the most important suppliers for liquid separation procedures worldwide. It holds a leading position in the development and production of ion exchange resins and is strongly committed to the further development of reverse osmosis membrane elements.
Ion exchange resins are used to remove dissolved particles from liquids. Therefore, functional groups are bonded to the polymer beads. These functionalized polymers adsorb particular anions or cations from the liquid and discharge others. Water treatment is the best-known and biggest field of application for ion exchange resins. In household, such applications are used among others to soften water. They ensure that the calcium ions responsible for water hardness are replaced by sodium ions.
Ion exchange resins are also used in industry, for example in power generation. There, Lewatit is used in the production of ultra-pure boiler feed water and steam to avoid incrustations and corrosion. This improves the efficiency, operating reliability and lifetime of power plants.
In the cleaning of industrial effluent and treatment of groundwater, the removal of toxic substances plays a key role. Lanxess has a range of special Lewatit resins that, are able to selectively remove, for example, heavy metal ions and organic pollutants from (waste)water.
Other fields of application for ion exchange resins include semi-conductor production, galvanic industry (recovery and treatment of metals such as gold, copper, nickel or cobalt in hydrometallurgy), pharmaceuticals, the food and beverage industry. In the production of crystal suger and liquid sugar syrup, Lewatit allows the brown cane sugar to be turned into the beloved white product and ensures that sugar also tastes like sugar. Lewatit ion exchange resins are also reliable catalysts which are crucial for many chemical reactions.
Oxidation involves the introduction of an oxidizing agent which chemically reacts with the iron or manganese to form an insoluble particle which can then be physically filtered out through a media bed.
Oxidation can be carried out one of the following methods:
The process of oxidation followed by filtration is fairly easy and is often the treatment of choice. The use of ion exchange resins for the removal of iron and manganese has limited application due to the requirement that the contaminants be in dissolved form and at very low levels. This is due to the tendency of oxygen to react with the iron and managanes and therefore, increase the potential for plugging and buildup on the resin surface. Iron fouling is a common, and sometimes, irreversible problem with ion exchange treatment.
Treatment technologies for Iron and Manganese Removal from Groundwater:
A Corrosion Inhibitor is a chemical compound that slows down or stops the corrosion (normally rusting) of the metallic parts of a well or drill.In general, a typically effective corrosion inhibitor will provide 95% protection at a concentration of 80 ppm and 90% at a concentration of 40 ppm. One of the methods in which the inhibitor can work is the creation of a passivation layer – that is a thin layer or film on the surface of the material that acts as a barrier between the corrosive substance and the metal.
In the oil industry, Corrosion Inhibitors are designed to protect against water, both fresh and brine, biological deposits, carbon dioxide (anaerobic corrosion), hydrogen sulfide and other organic acids associated with drilling in all oil-field types.