The Victory Column is a monument in Berlin, Germany. Designed by Heinrich Strack after 1864 to commemorate the Prussian victory in the Danish-Prussian War, by the time it was inaugurated on 2 September 1873, Prussia had also defeated Austria in the Austro-Prussian War (1866) and France in the Franco-Prussian War (1870–71), giving the statue a new purpose. Different from the original plans, these later victories in the so-called unification wars inspired the addition of the bronze sculpture of Victoria, 8.3 metres high and weighing 35 tonnes, designed by Friedrich Drake. Berliners, with their fondness for giving nicknames to buildings, call the statue Goldelse, meaning something like Golden Lizzy.
The monument of George Benkovski is above Koprivshtitsa. Georgi Benkovski himself (real name Gavril Gruev Hlutev) was a Bulgarian revolutionary, a major figure in the organization and leader of the April Uprising of 1876 in the 4th Revolutionary District. Benkovski George was born in that town on September 21, 1843.
The Washington Monument is an obelisk on the National Mall in Washington, D.C., built to commemorate the first American president, General George Washington. The monument, made of marble, granite, and bluestone gneiss, is both the world tallest stone structure and the world tallest obelisk, standing 169.294 meters.
The largest and most impressive monument of Vasil Levski was inaugurated on 27 May 1964 in Lovech. It is a symbol of the city and is part of the crest for 40 years. Lovech is the capital of the great apostle of revolutionary activity, in which he spends the most time. Quarter Varosha and Drastene is related to the activity of Vasil Levski.
The Taj Mahal (crown of palaces, also The Taj) is a white marble mausoleum located in Agra, Uttar Pradesh, India. It was built by Mughal emperor Shah Jahan in memory of his third wife, Mumtaz Mahal. The Taj Mahal is widely recognized as /the jewel of Muslim art in India and one of the universally admired masterpieces of the world's heritage/. Taj Mahal is regarded by many as the finest example of Mughal architecture, a style that combines elements from Islamic, Persian, Ottoman Turkish and Indian architectural styles.
The Tsar Bell (Russian: Царь–колокол), also known as the Tsarsky Kolokol, Tsar Kolokol III, or Royal Bell, is a 6.14 meters tall, 6.6 meters diameter bell on display on the grounds of the Moscow Kremlin. The bell was commissioned by Empress Anna Ivanovna, niece of Peter the Great. The present bell is sometimes referred to as Kolokol III (Bell III), because it is the third generation. The Tsar Bell is located between the Ivan the Great Bell Tower and the Kremlin Wall.
The Statue of Liberty (Liberty Enlightening the World) is a colossal neoclassical sculpture on Liberty Island in New York Harbor, designed by Frédéric Bartholdi and dedicated on October 28, 1886. The statue, a gift to the United States from the people of France, is of a robed female figure representing Libertas, the Roman goddess of freedom, who bears a torch and a tabula ansata (a tablet evoking the law) upon which is inscribed the date of the American Declaration of Independence, July 4, 1776.
The Ciudad Mitad del Mundo (Middle of the World City) is a tract of land owned by the prefecture of the province of Pichincha, Ecuador. It is located at San Antonio parish of the canton of Quito, north of the center of Quito. The grounds contain the Museo Etnogrаfico Mitad del Mundo, a museum about the indigenous ethnography of Ecuador.
The Genghis Khan Statue is a 40 m tall statue of Genghis Khan on horseback, on the bank of the Tuul River at Tsonjin Boldog (54 km east of the Mongolian capital Ulan Bator), where according to legend, he found a golden whip. The statue is symbolically pointed east towards his birthplace. It is on top of the Genghis Khan Statue Complex, a visitor centre, itself 10 m tall, with 36 columns representing the 36 khans from Genghis to Ligdan Khan.
Create your Landmarks list and mark landmarks as visited and want to visit.
The Boyana Church owes its world fame above all to the frescoes from 1259, which demonstrate the exceptional achievements of mediaeval Bulgarian culture.
Top 10 Landmarks
in a category
Top 10 Landmarks
in a country
Tips for Trips
Top 10 Landmarks
Top 10 Legends of Landmarks
"The further one goes the less one knows."