Join us in the fight for children's health! Have a look at how you can support this cause.
Standing Up For Our Children's Health
At UpStanding Kids, we're working to get standing desks into classrooms and end the epidemic of sitting.
We've reached a critical point in the health of our children. Kids are spending up to 85% of their day sitting down. These sedentary lifestyles are not what humans were built for, and it leads to an array of health problems which can follow children through their adult lives.
The corporate world is beginning to accept the huge amount of research done on the issue of sitting, and implement changes to combat the problems caused. Why not start at the beginning-with our kids?
Not only is standing better for their health, it has also been shown to improve focus in the classroom. It allows the kids more freedom to fidget, something that children need to do. Children often have seemingly endless energy; we can't bundle all of it into a chair all day and expect the best results for their health or their learning.
Standing desks are a simple and effective solution to a big problem. Help us in our mission at UpStanding Kids. Take a stand in the cause to help our children be more engaged at school, have better health, and be more active and happy. To learn more, see the video below.
SITTING VS STANDING:
WHY THE STANDING DESK IS SO IMPORTANT
A few facts:
- Standing desks allow children to fidget, which is often important in helping them focus, especially those with ADHD
- Sitting is a major factor in a range of orthopedic issues, including headaches, neck pain, lower back pain, diaphragm dysfunction, hernias and more
- Children of normal weight can burn 15-25% more calories using standing desks, while obese children can burn 25-35% more
- Our bodies compress when seated, causing many structures to switch off
Watch the video to see Peter Parker, founder and CEO of UpStanding Kids, speak about the importance of the standing desk, and the detrimental health effects of sitting.
Thanks to Education Technology Solutions for the video.