Many people across the world use alcohol, and people living with diabetes are no exception. How might the practice affect individuals with diabetes?
Undoubtedly, alcohol consumption is very relevant to diabetes management. Briefly, alcohol use can improve insulin sensitivity and inhibit glucose production in the liver, leading to increased risk of low blood glucose levels. Interestingly, moderate drinking may have protective effects against the development of type 2 diabetes. It may also reduce cardiovascular disease risk, which is an especially important parameter for individuals with diabetes. Excessive drinking, however, can have considerable detrimental effects on health and is never advised.
It appears that although many people with diabetes drink alcohol, patients with type 1 diabetes and type 2 diabetes do not receive enough education about safe drinking practices. “Alcohol consumption by diabetes patients is often inadequately assessed and addressed in their medical care. Brief interventions to reduce at-risk drinking have been well validated in a variety of patient populations and offer the potential to improve diabetes treatment adherence and outcome,” researchers summarize.
In This Section
Type 2 Diabetes and Alcohol
It is well-established that excessive alcohol consumption can lead to pancreatic inflammation (pancreatitis). Over time, alcohol abuse can even lead to beta cell damage. However, moderate alcohol consumption has been shown to be protective against the development of type 2 diabetes. “Alcohol consumption reduces the incidence of T2D, however, binge drinking seems to increase the incidence”, researchers describe.
Interestingly, moderate alcohol consumption can increase insulin sensitivity and may even offer protective cardiovascular effects. Research shows that ethanol can increase pancreatic blood flow and increase the second-phase insulin secretion response. When it comes to the potential heart health benefits, “favorable changes in several cardiovascular biomarkers…provide indirect pathophysiological support for a protective effect of moderate alcohol use on coronary heart disease,” researchers summarize.
As far as an increased risk of low blood glucose during and after alcohol consumption, research shows that it does not appear to increase the risk in diet-controlled patients. However, the risks are higher for patients who use sulphonylurea drugs. For patients who take insulin, the risks are also higher, as dosing may need to be adjusted to account for the increase in insulin sensitivity.
Interestingly, long-term alcohol use is associated with better glycemic control in patients with type 2 diabetes. Researchers propose that this is likely a direct result of the increased insulin sensitivity.
Type 1 Diabetes and Alcohol
All people with type 1 diabetes utilize insulin to control their blood glucose levels, and alcohol consumption can affect the appropriate insulin dose for many individuals. In general, for most people, alcohol consumption can result in lower insulin requirements under typical circumstances.
“There is no evidence to suggest that individuals with type 1 diabetes adopt a different approach to their use of alcohol than the rest of the population… in patients treated with insulin, alcohol has been implicated in up to one-fifth of hospital attendances with hypoglycemia. Alcohol may be associated with hypoglycemia in a number of ways. First, ingestion of even small amounts may impair the ability of the individual to detect the onset of hypoglycemia at a stage when they are still able to take appropriate action, i.e., eat carbohydrates. Second, hypoglycemia per se may be mistaken for intoxication by third parties with legal as well as health consequences. Third, alcohol has been shown in some studies to directly impair the hormonal counterregulatory responses to low blood glucose levels. Fourth, recent data indicate that small amounts of alcohol can augment the cognitive deficits associated with hypoglycemia in individuals with type 1 diabetes,” researchers describe.
Thus, it is imperative for individuals with type 1 diabetes to be aware of the potential risks and how to mitigate them. This is of particular concern for college students who are new to drinking alcohol. Research has shown that young adults with type 1 diabetes are likely to engage in “risky drinking practices.” In assessing data collected from students age 18-25, the researchers found that this was of particular concern for those in their first year, who “[may be] anxious about how their diabetes fit into their student lives.”
Finally, it is important to note that on top of concerns about low blood glucose levels, sustained high blood glucose levels along with excessive alcohol consumption can also be extremely dangerous. This is because high blood glucose levels, in combination with dehydration, and higher ketone levels that can present as a direct result of alcohol consumption can put the individual at risk of diabetic ketoacidosis, a life-threatening complication.
Safe Drinking Practices for People with Diabetes
It is critically important to be aware of your blood glucose level when drinking, and for up to 24 hours afterward, as alcohol can have pronounced effects on blood glucose levels. In particular, individuals who use blood glucose lowering drugs, such as sulphonylureas and/or insulin should be especially vigilant and aware that medication doses may need to be reduced (or additional carbohydrates may need to be consumed) when drinking.
According to the American Diabetes Association (ADA), “If adults with type 1 diabetes choose to drink alcohol, they should be advised to do so in moderation (one drink per day or less for adult women and two drinks per day or less for adult men). Discussion with a health care provider is advised to explore potential interactions with medications. Adults should be advised that alcohol can lower blood glucose levels and that driving after drinking alcohol is contraindicated.”
Here are some other elements that people with diabetes should be aware of when it comes to drinking alcohol:
- It is a good idea to wear a medical alert bracelet (or to have another indicator) so that a hypoglycemic episode is not confused with intoxication
- It is important for someone you are with to know that you have diabetes and how drinking may cause complications
- You may need to decrease your medication doses or consume additional carbohydrate (and protein) to prevent hypoglycemia
- It is important to be mindful of the glucose content in some drinks (e.g., mixers, syrups, etc.) that can increase blood glucose levels
You can also read more about the ADA recommendations here.
Overall, moderate and responsible alcohol use by people with diabetes should not be of concern. As long as the individual is not binge drinking and keeping a close watch on blood glucose levels during and the day following alcohol consumption, there is little reason people with diabetes shouldn’t be able to safely partake in drinking alcohol. Moderate alcohol use may even have some benefits when it comes to improving insulin sensitivity and reducing cardiovascular risk.
It is particularly important to be mindful of low blood glucose, as “extensive clinical experience indicates that unexpected, frequent, and prolonged hypoglycemia is a substantial problem after alcohol ingestion in both type 1 and 2 diabetic subjects.” In contrast, it is also very important to be mindful of high blood glucose levels when drinking. In particular, excessive alcohol consumption can lead to altered ketone metabolism. For individuals with high blood glucose levels and excessive alcohol consumption, ketoacidosis may be a concern.
It is important to remember that in addition to blood glucose-related concerns, excessive alcohol consumption for individuals with diabetes can have the same detrimental effects as for an individual without diabetes—namely an increased risk of cancer, mental disorders, and liver injury, among others.
It is a good idea to talk to your healthcare provider about your drinking habits if you have questions about adjusting your medications when consuming alcohol, or if you are concerned about your alcohol use. Finally, research shows that it is imperative for young adults with type 1 diabetes to receive the appropriate support and education to stay safe if they choose to drink alcohol. It is essential for parents and doctors to be involved and informed, especially during the high school and college years.
American Diabetes Association; “Alcohol” (2017) http://www.diabetes.org/food-and-fitness/food/what-can-i-eat/making-healthy-food-choices/alcohol.html
Balfe M; “Alcohol, diabetes and the student body” (2007) Health, Risk & Society 9(3): 241-257. https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/13698570701488951?scroll=top&needAccess=true
Baliunas DO, Taylor BJ, Irving H, Roerecke M, Patra J, Mohapatra S, Rehm J; “Alcohol as a Risk Factor for Type 2 Diabetes” (2009) Diabetes Care 32(11): 2123-2132. http://care.diabetesjournals.org/content/32/11/2123.full-text.pdf
Bonnet F, Disse E, Laville M, Mari A, Hojlund K, Anderwald CH, Piatti P, Balkau B; “Moderate alcohol consumption is associated with improved insulin sensitivity, reduced basal insulin secretion rate and lower fasting glucagon concentration in healthy women” (2012) Diabetologia 55(12): 3228-3237. https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s00125-012-2701-3
Brien SE, Ronksley PE, Turner BJ, Mukamal KJ, Ghali WA; “Effect of alcohol consumption on biological markers associated with risk of coronary heart disease: systemic review and meta-analysis of interventional studies” BMJ 342: 636. https://www.bmj.com/content/342/bmj.d636+
Chiang JL, Kirkman MS, Laffel LMB, Peters AL; “Type 1 Diabetes Through the Life Span: A Position Statement of the American Diabetes Association” (2014) Diabetes Care 37:2034-2054. http://care.diabetesjournals.org/content/diacare/37/7/2034.full.pdf
Engler PA, Ramsey SE, Smith RJ; “Alcohol use of diabetes patients: the need for assessment and intervention” (2010) Acta Diabetologia 50(2): 93-99. https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s00592-010-0200-x
Huang Z and Sjoholm A; “Ethanol Acutely Stimulates Islet Blood Flow, Amplifies Insulin Secretion, and Induces Hypoglycemia via Nitric Oxide and Vagally Medicated Mechanisms” (2008) Endocrinology 149(1): 232-236. https://academic.oup.com/endo/article/149/1/232/2455002
Kerr D, Penfold S, Zouwail S, Thomas P, Bagley J’ “The influence of liberal alcohol consumption on glucose metabolism in patients with type 1 diabetes: a pilot study” (2008) QJM: An International Journal of Medicine 102(3): 169-174. https://academic.oup.com/qjmed/article/102/3/169/1608771
Pietraszek A, Gregersen S, Hermansen K; “Alcohol and type 2 diabetes, A review” (2010) Nutrition, Metabolism, and Cardiovascular Diseases 20(5): 266-275. https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0939475310001067
Rehm J; “The Risks Associated With Alcohol Use and Alcoholism” (2011) 34(2): 135-143. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3307043/
Richardson T, Weiss M, Thomas P, Kerr D; “Day after the Night Before: Influence of evening alcohol on risk of hypoglycemia in patients with type 1 diabetes” (2005) Diabetes Care 28(7): 1801-1802. http://care.diabetesjournals.org/content/28/7/1801.full
Schaller G, Kretschmer S, Gouya G, Haider DG, Mittermayer F, Riedl M, Wagner O, Pacini G, Woltz M, Ludvik B; “Alcohol Acutely Induces Vascular Reactivity together with Insulin Sensitivity in Type 2 Diabetic Men” (2010) Experimental and Clinical Endocrinology & Diabetes 118(1): 57-60. https://www.thieme-connect.com/products/ejournals/abstract/10.1055/s-0029-1233453
Schrieks IC, Heil ALJ, Hendriks HFJ, Mukamal KJ, Beulens JWJ; “The Effect of Alcohol Consumption of Insulin Sensitivity and Glycemic Status: A Systematic Review and Meta-analysis of Intervention Studies” (2015) Diabetes Care 38(4): 723-732. http://care.diabetesjournals.org/content/38/4/723.short
Turner BC, Jenkins E, Kerr D, Sherwin RS, Cavan DA; “The Effect of Evening Alcohol Consumption on Next-Morning Glucose Control in Type 1 Diabetes” (2001) Diabetes Care 24(11): 1888-1893. http://care.diabetesjournals.org/content/diacare/24/11/1888.full.pdf