Sunburnt Country: The History and Future of Climate Change in Australia
Melbourne University Press, $34.99
More than half a century ago, the French historian Ferdinand Braudel issued a challenge to historians, arguing the time had come to look past the business of nations and empires and their narratives of progress, and instead engage with what he termed the longue duree.
Likening the social time of traditional history to "a surface disturbance" or "waves stirred up by the powerful movement of tides", he argued the time had come to try to explore what he called geographical time, in the hope of divining the deeper currents that flow through human affairs, shaping them across generations, centuries, even millennia.
As the historian Tom Griffiths has observed, Braudel's formulation has taken on new urgency in recent years. As our impact on the planet has grown the division between geological time and human time has collapsed, demanding we recognise the radical interconnectedness of processes, phenomena, even ideas we would once have regarded as separate. As temperatures rise and icecaps melt, it is no longer possible to pretend the business of our everyday lives and their dependence upon cheap energy does not have planetary implications, or that the planet's changing climate will not affect us personally and collectively.
For Griffiths this realisation demands new kinds of history capable of connecting these different time scales, and of revealing the ways in which the planetary and the personal intermingle.
Joelle Gergis is a climate scientist rather than a historian, but I suspect her new book, Sunburnt Country, is precisely the sort of book Griffiths has in mind. Situated at the intersection of history and science, it explores the mechanisms that underpin the extreme variability of the Australian climate and the ways in which they have shaped our past and will affect our future.
Gergis is well-placed to provide this analysis. A researcher in the University of Melbourne's School of Earth Sciences, she has been intimately involved in the Australian contribution to the most recent Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, leading the Working Group charged with improving understanding of Australasian climate variability. More recently she led the landmark South-Eastern Australian Climate Reconstruction Project (SEARCH), for which she and her colleagues were awarded the 2014 Eureka Prize for Excellence in Interdisciplinary Scientific Research, and earlier this year she was selected as a lead author for the Sixth IPCC Report, due to be released in 2021.
Sunburnt Country draws heavily upon all these undertakings, but perhaps most particularly upon the SEARCH Project that sought to develop a detailed reconstruction of the Australian climate by drawing upon a range of historical and scientific sources.
The difficulties associated with such an undertaking are not difficult to divine. Systematic weather records are a relatively recent innovation. Although colonial newspapers often published records of temperature and rainfall and various private citizens maintained personal records, it was not until the establishment of the government observatories in Sydney and Melbourne that any official record-keeping really began, and not until the creation of the Bureau of Meteorology soon after Federation that this process began to take place at a national level.
In recent years researchers such as Linden Ashcroft have made huge strides in collating and calibrating these records, giving us access to detailed records of weather conditions that extend back to 1860. For information on conditions prior to that we are reliant upon other, less systematic sources.
Sometimes these sources are scientific: one of the book's best moments concerns Gergis' accidental rediscovery of the weather journal of First Fleet astronomer William Dawes, long thought lost, a typically meticulous document that provides a record of the conditions experienced by the colony from September 1788 until Dawes' unhappy departure in December 1791. Likewise many newspapers contain regular updates on the state of water supplies, crops and livestock capable of supplementing the measurements taken by early settlers.
This information is supplemented further by the accounts of those who were there, although as Gergis is careful to stress, such accounts of weather conditions are often highly problematic and imprecise. Memory is fallible, and people's impressions are subjective, tending to elide similar extremes in previous years and to exaggerate the severity of whatever is being experienced at present.
Used in combination these sources reveal a society that has been shaped by the extremes of its climate since its storm-buffeted inception. Over and over again severe droughts and floods have made farming difficult and unreliable, while bushfire and flood have exacted terrible tolls many times.
Sometimes it is the statistics that tell the story – the description of a 15.2-metre wall of water washing down the Stanley River Gorge during Queensland's Black February floods in 1893, or the 35 people killed when the railway bridge at Indooroopilly collapsed later that day. But more often it is the voices of those who were there – poor Watkin Tench complaining the north-westerly wind was "like the blast of a heated oven", on a brutally hot day in December 1790, or William Stanley Jevons describing the floods on the Hawkesbury in 1801:
"Five or six persons were drowned. Cries for help, and reports of muskets, the signals of distress, were heard both day and night, and added greatly to the confusion of a scene which was throughout strange and terrible … An immense expanse of which the eye cannot in many directions discover the limits, everywhere interspersed with growing timber and crowded with poultry, pigs, horses, cattle, stacks, and houses, having frequently men and women clinging to them for protection and shrieking out in agony or despair for assistance."
The vividness of these voices also points to one of Sunburnt Country's weaknesses, which is its lack of engagement with Aboriginal knowledge about climactic cycles. To an extent this is a function of the book's conception and its reliance upon documentary and scientific sources, but still, it is difficult not to wish for a more comprehensive discussion of Aboriginal demarcations of the seasons, the links between them and the cycles of Aboriginal society, or even the dizzying notion that the story traditions of many Aboriginal cultures stretch back more than 10,000 years, encoding information about the freezing conditions that prevailed during the last Ice Age, and the inundation of coastal regions that followed the ice's retreat.
In the end, though, it is not Sunburnt Country's portrait of the past that is most compelling, but its glimpse of our future, in which the climactic extremes that have shaped our past are set to intensify, bringing with them higher temperatures, longer and more frequent heatwaves, more severe flooding, increasingly catastrophic bushfires and hastening environmental breakdown of the sort already being experienced on the Great Barrier Reef and elsewhere.
It is no longer necessary to imagine what this future will be like: the record temperatures of the past few summers or the storms that struck the east coast in 2016, sweeping away beaches and houses in Sydney offer a taste of what is to come, while the heartbreaking bleaching events that wiped out half the coral on the Great Barrier Reef in 2016-2017 make the implications for other species inescapable.
Amitav Ghosh has written of what he calls the great derangement, his term for our culture's willed denial of the catastrophe that is overtaking us. The reasons for that denial are both complex and extremely simple: as Gergis declares at one point the real issue with climate science has never been its "data or methods but rather its implied threat to the status quo".
Yet there is no doubt at least part of the problem lies in our inability to connect the future we are making to our understanding of the world as it has always been. By unpicking the complexities of our past climate and showing us how they relate to our future Sunburnt Country does just that.
Joelle Geris is a guest at Sydney Writers' Festival, swf.org.au
James Bradley's novel about climate change, Clade, is published by Hamish Hamilton.