The Department of the Interior, the Environmental Protection Agency, and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration recently announced four collaborative landscape partnerships to make important lands and waters more resilient to climate change . Federal agencies will work with local, state, and tribal organizations in southwest Florida, Hawaiʻi, Washington, and the Great Lakes.
PostedDec 10, 2014
Water Resources, Ecosystems & Biodiversity, Adaptation
Climate.Data.gov has been expanded to include a new suite of Federal data and geospatial tools related to water and ecosystems. These freely available resources and a host of associated public, private, and philanthropic commitments are intended to spur innovation and help environmental planners, natural resource managers, and others make informed decisions under changing climate conditions.
PostedDec 4, 2014
A new Administration initiative aims to “lift America’s game” in climate education, literacy, and training. USGCRP agencies will play a central part in this effort to connect students and citizens with the best-available scientific information about climate change .
PostedNov 3, 2014
On Friday, Federal agencies released their annual plans for reducing their greenhouse gas emissions and preparing for the impacts of climate change . Agencies cited climate impacts like rising sea levels, increased storm intensity, and more extreme temperatures as threats to Federal facilities, operations, and resources.
PostedMar 19, 2014
Coasts, Extreme Events, Adaptation
Today, delivering on a commitment in the President's Climate Action Plan, the Administration launched the Climate Data Initiative. This new effort brings together open government data and design competitions with commitments from the private and philanthropic sectors to develop data-driven tools that communities across America need to plan for the impacts of climate change .
PostedFeb 6, 2014
Agriculture & Food, Extreme Events, Adaptation
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) has launched seven regionally-located Climate Hubs to act as data repositories and offer the practical, science-based tools and strategies that agricultural producers need to adapt to climate change.
PostedDec 13, 2013
Physical Climate, Modeling, Adaptation
What does the future of climate look like where you live? For the first time, maps and summaries of temperature and precipitation projections for the 21st century are accessible at a county-by-county level, thanks to a website developed by the U.S. Geological Survey (USGS) in collaboration with the College of Earth, Oceanic and Atmospheric Sciences at Oregon State University.
PostedNov 26, 2013
Adaptation, Agriculture & Food, Extreme Events, Modeling, Observations
As part of President Obama's Climate Action Plan, the Administration recently announced an interagency National Drought Resilience Partnership to help communities better prepare for future droughts and reduce the impact of drought events on livelihoods and the economy.
PostedOct 29, 2013
Scenarios, Coasts, Cities & Infrastructure, Extreme Events, Adaptation
Recognizing that large storms are expected to grow more frequent and more severe as a result of climate change , the Federal Government has partnered with states, cities, communities, and other stakeholders to make the Sandy-affected region -- and all of America -- more resilient. This goal is a guiding principle of President Obama’s Climate Action Plan.
PostedSep 20, 2013
Physical Climate, Scenarios, Modeling, Adaptation
Using previously published large-scale climate model projections, a team of scientists from NASA has recently released monthly climate projections for the United States at a scale of one half mile (800 meters), or approximately the size of a neighborhood.