October is Fire Safety Month, but it’s always a good time to remind our kids how to be safe. I have picked my favorite fire safety books books to teach rules, procedures and about firefighters. These books are loved by my students too!
My favorite way to revisit an important topic over and over is by gathering my favorite read alouds. It never gets repetitive because each book is unique, but we can have important conversations again and again.
Fire safety rules are super important. Rather than reminding my kids each day in October at morning meeting or another time in our day, I would choose one of these fire safety books to read.
After reading it, we review how the book matches up with what we know about fire safety rules. This allows the students to be the ones with the answers!
This post contains affiliate links. By purchasing through this link, we get a small commission. Rest assured – we only share links to products that we know and love!
Read Alouds to Teach Fire Safety Rules
While fire safety certainly is not a joke, it can be really helpful to talk to students about it in a playful way.
This sweet story is about a little girl who meets a very polite dragon and invites him for tea. When the dragon sneezes, a fire starts. Thankfully, the little girl knows just what to do!
Students will have fun listening to this silly story and pointing out the rules they recognize from other discussions. If you haven’t outlined the rules before, this book is an excellent introduction to them!See “No Dragons for Tea” on Amazon
This book features a class during a normal school day. They learn, they read, then they hear loud bells. The class goes through all of their fire drill procedures, helped by the teacher.
The text in this book is nice and simple. It is easy to breeze through this one but it is also great to take an extended time to look at the children in the book.
You can tell how they are feeling by their facial expressions and their body language. This is a good opportunity to address that it’s okay to feel nervous but there is no need to be scared.
This is a great book to read when you know about the “surprise” drill coming in the afternoon. 🚨See “Fire Drill” on Amazon
Jessica who is a worrier. When she hears about the fire safety rules, she gets more worried than ever. Fires sound very scary!
Jessica realizes that knowing what to do if there is a fire makes her less anxious. ? She does not need to be scared because she knows the fire safety rules.
This book does an excellent job of sharing all of the important things about fire safety while also addressing the fears that some kids may have about fires and fire drills.See “Stop, Drop and Roll” on Amazon
This book is a hit with superhero-loving kids. They get to follow Fireboy into a fire station and learn how to stop, drop and roll! They also will learn about famous fires that have happened in the past.
Fires can be dangerous and scary, but Fireboy is here to help! He shows kids what to do if there is a fire. He also explains how to prevent a fire from starting in the first place.
This book is excellent for introducing fire safety rules and/or reinforcing them.See “Fireboy to the Rescue!” on Amazon
This sing along picture book has a catchy tune that will really stick with your kids. They are supposed to get out, stay out and call for help.
It talks about a fire safety plan, what to do when you get out of your house and of course, about the firefighters who will come to help.
This book comes with a song that we listen to a lot during the month of October. I love that my kids sing along to the words. I know they remember the important fire safety rules!See “Get Out, Stay Out!” on Amazon
This book is filled with silly characters that my students love. Miss Mingo’s class is learning how to do a fire drill perfectly.
They get a little nervous thinking about fire safety. All of the animals react to the fire safety discussion differently.
They are scared of different things like big fire trucks, smoke alarms and fire alarms.
Miss Mingo reassures them that they can overcome their fears by learning how to be safe in a fire drill or if there is a real fire.
She teaches them the important fire safety rules and procedures. You can compare these with the ones you have in your class.See “Miss Mingo and the Fire Drill” on Amazon
Read Alouds about Fire Stations and Firefighters
I always add books about fire stations and firefighters to my shelf of fire safety books. I think it is really important that my students understand that it is someone’s job to put fires out and keep us safe.
This classic book teaches about the fire station and the firefighters who work there. We get to see what happens from the very start of a fire when the person calls 911 to the dispatcher calling the firefighters to action.
Whether there is a fire in an apartment, out in the country, or even in a forest, the firefighters are the ones to put it out. This book is perfect for reinforcing that it is someone’s job to take care of a fire. Your job is to get to safety!
There is a glossary in the back of the book that shares the names of equipment as well as what to do if there is a fire which is excellent for vocabulary development and to review rules.See “Fire! Fire!” on Amazon
This book is hands-down, my students’ favorite book about fire safety and firefighters. It has super vivid illustrations and the story is really engaging.
It starts with the letter “A” and goes through the alphabet to explain what firefighters do to battle a fire. The rhyming text is simple with a few words that may be new to them (like extinguished). It perfectly lends to vocabulary practice!
Every time I read this story to my class they are in absolute awe of what the firefighters do and can clearly see that they should not be trying to put fires out on their own. I also always have a few that decide they want to be firefighters right on the spot. 👩🚒👨🏾🚒See “Firefighters A to Z” on Amazon
In this book, Frank the firefighter shares about his job. You see him doing all of the important jobs that firefighters do like helping at accidents, fire safety training, fire inspections and of course, fighting fires.
Kids get to see how many important things firefighters do in this book (and how hard their jobs are). They learn that a shift lasts a whole 24 hours and that they clean, cook and rescue all in a days work!
I like to include this book on the shelf because I typically have a lot of students who are really interested in firefighters and the job that they do. It’s important to me that I give a full picture of all of their responsibilities.
There are also many opportunities to compare our own fire safety rules and procedures to what they do in the book.See “Big Frank’s Fire Truck” on Amazon
In this book, Pete gets to take a field trip with his class to the fire station. They learn about all of the areas of the station and the different things that firefighters get to do.
Pete gets to try his hand at being a firefighter when the alarm bells ring. My kids love to see him, cool as a cucumber, as he watches the firefighters do their thing.
We adore Pete the Cat in my classroom and will take absolutely any opportunity to read about him. This story is a fun one to compare to the other things we have learned about fire stations, firefighters and fire safety rules.See “Pete the Cat: Firefighter Pete” on Amazon
Shop all of these Fantastic Fire Safety Books on Amazon
How do you like to teach fire safety rules and procedures? Do you have any favorite fire safety books I missed? 🚒 Let me know below 👇
If you’re looking for more read alouds for your classroom, check out the ultimate list of my favorites read alouds! ?