Did you know that making a regular breakfast of eggs could help you lose weight?
Yep, it's true. According to new studies presented at Experimental Biology 2009, an annual meeting of scientists, having an egg breakfast has been shown to help to reduce calorie consumption the rest of the day.
In a study conducted at the University of Connecticut, a group of adults were both given breakfasts containing equal amounts of calories, but while one part of the group was given a bagel breakfast, the others were given an egg based breakfast. The group eating the egg-based breakfast felt less hungry several hours later, ate a smaller lunch and generally consumed about 400 calories less over the course of the day than those eating the bagel breakfast.
Personally, while I love to eat oatmeal for breakfast, especially during the colder months, I have always been a fan of eggs and I do find that I am less hungry when I have eggs for breakfast. When I eat eggs at lunch, I find myself pushing away from the dinner table with leftovers on the plate, because I am more full faster. A lower hunger level and the consumption of less calories overall, is a great bonus for those of us wanting to lose weight, and making a breakfast of eggs just might help to accelerate that weight loss!
This study supports previous research published in the International Journal of Obesity, which found that eating eggs for breakfast as part of a reduced-calorie diet helped overweight dieters lose 65 percent more weight and feel more energetic than dieters who ate a bagel breakfast of equal calories and volume. The study also found no significant difference in blood levels of LDL- and HDL-cholesterol and triglycerides between the individuals who ate the egg breakfast and those who ate the bagel breakfast.
And get some eggs into those pre-teen and teens too. Researchers at the University of Kansas Medical Center, assessed the impact of a protein-rich breakfast on appetite and overall calorie consumption among teens who traditionally skip breakfast. While each test breakfast contained 500 total calories, the researchers examined variables including the protein form (solid food or beverage) and the amount of protein versus carbohydrate in the breakfast. Their findings showed that teens consumed fewer calories at lunch when they ate a protein-rich breakfast of solid foods compared with a protein-rich beverage breakfast, and that post-meal hunger was significantly reduced when the teens ate the protein-rich breakfast of solid foods.
Eggs are all natural and a nutrient powerhouse, containing 13 essential vitamins and minerals and antioxidants. They are also an excellent source of choline, an essential nutrient for fetus and infant brain development, but one that may also assist in brain function in adults, possibly protecting us from age-related memory loss. And, eggs are packed with protein. A large, whole egg is around 75 calories, has 6 grams of protein, 3 grams of fat and less than 1 gram of carbohydrates, making it a protein-rich food. Proteins are what fuel our bodies, and keep us going, sort of like gasoline to a car. It is essential to grow, maintain and repair all of our body tissues and supports our muscle and bone structure. And protein helps you burn fat too!
Not all proteins are created equal however. Each type of protein is assigned a biovalue based on their protein utilization (BV/PU). Pork has a 60% biovalue, dairy is at 80%, beef, chicken and fish are in the 90% range, and eggs top the chart as being the number 1 source of protein found in nature! Eggs are rated at a 100% biovalue, meaning when you eat eggs, 100% of the protein can be used by the body in supporting those building blocks.
And that old adage about limiting the consumption of eggs? Scratch it. Science has proven that the cholesterol found in foods, such as eggs, has little to no effect on blood cholesterol. They are totally different animals. There is a place in a healthy diet for eggs, and there really is no need to strictly limit the number of eggs you consume, well, within reason anyway.
Additionally, research presented showed no increased risk of death from coronary heart disease with increased egg consumption, a reduced risk of mortality among men who consumed 1 to 6 eggs a week compared to less than 1 egg a week, and, a significant reduction in risk of stroke among women who consumed 1 to 6 eggs a week and 1 or more eggs a day.
Of course if you are trying to lose weight, you'll want pair that up by reducing or limiting the butter and oil you use when preparing them, or by substituting non-stick sprays. You can also combine a whole egg with 2-3 egg whites to get the nutrition, with less fat. Marry those eggs with whole grain bread or toast and add a glass of unsweetened orange juice, to best utilize the iron content of the eggs.
So have some eggs for breakfast. They really are nature's perfect food. And... you might just drop a few extra pounds in the process.
Think you don’t have time for eggs in the morning? Think again!
Easy Microwave Scrambled Eggs
Add one or two eggs to a microwave safe bowl. Add a tablespoon of milk, half and half, or water and some salt and pepper and beat. Microwave on high for 1 minute, stop and stir, microwave for another 30 seconds or until eggs puff up and liquid is absorbed. Let stand for about a minute and turn out onto a plate w/a slice of whole grain toast and some fruit or yogurt. Microwave times will depend on your microwave, so adjust times as needed.
Zippy Microwave Omelet
Add two or three eggs to a microwave safe bowl. Add a tablespoon of milk, half and half, or water and some salt and pepper. Stir in leftover ham, turkey, bacon, or other meat and any veggies you have & like – potatoes, broccoli, onion, mushrooms, etc. Microwave on high for 1 minute, stop and stir, microwave for another 30 seconds to 1 minute, or until eggs puff up and liquid is absorbed. Let stand for about a minute and turn out onto a plate w/a slice of whole grain toast and some fruit or yogurt. Microwave times will depend on your microwave, so adjust times as needed.
The statements made here have not been approved by the Food and Drug Administration. These statements are not intended to diagnose, treat or cure or prevent any disease. This notice is required by the Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act. Disclosure Policy.
All content, including but not limited to, recipe and health information provided in Deep South Dish/My New 30, is for educational purposes only. Such content is intended to supplement, not substitute for, the diagnosis, treatment and advice of a medical professional. Such content does not cover all possible side effects of any new or different health program. Consult your medical professional for guidance before changing or undertaking a new diet or exercise program. Advance consultation with your physician is particularly important if you are under eighteen (18) years old, pregnant, nursing, or have health problems. All information is intended for your general knowledge only and is not a substitute for health, nutrition or medical advice or treatment for specific medical conditions. You should seek prompt medical care for any specific health issues and consult your physician before starting a new fitness regime.