Dear community members,
This past Tuesday, I attended a fifth-grade Reaching Higher graduation at Twin Rivers Elementary. Reaching Higher is a program dedicated to helping young people live healthier, happier lives. This eight-week program uses character-building leadership training that inspires and prepares the student to succeed and reach their potential.
During nine sessions students learn skills to increase self-confidence and self-esteem, goal setting strategies, decision making techniques, enhance public speaking and interpersonal communication and effective stress and coping skills. The program runs for eight consecutive weeks, plus a ninth session for a graduation ceremony. The class meets once per week for two hours and can be scheduled to fill class periods.
Reaching Higher enlists the help of mentors from the community who attend the sessions and help the students navigate the course. Each mentor is paired with a group of students and sends each one weekly letters of encouragement. The results are impressive.
Part of the graduation includes a time for each student to read a letter outlining the lessons learned during the program. The mentors also talks about the positive changes they have witnessed while working with their students. After the student and mentor speak, parents are invited up to share their perspective, the changes they have seen in their child. It is truly a positive emotional and uplifting experience.
Positive reinforcement is a powerful tool for parents and everyone in leadership roles. Accordingly, I encourage you to take a few minutes and write a note of encouragement and compliments to a child. Children are inspired by the words heard from a loved one. Writing a letter is an excellent way to create an environment of understanding and caring with the very youth that holds the key to our future.
Simple words of encouragement and compassion can make a difference in a child’s life. Putting those words into a letter allows the recipient to keep and cherish those heartening words and return to them for inspiration and guidance for years to come. Write and tell them how incredible they are, drop it in the mail and wait to hear the sound of excitement when the child receives a special letter informing them how extraordinary they are.
Writing a letter is a simple gift and a powerful way to make a difference in the life of a child. To make writing letters easier, follow these tips:
Set aside 10 to 20 minutes in a place where you will be undisturbed.
Form a mental picture of the child and the things that you enjoy or appreciate about them.
Make a list of adjectives that describe the child: funny, honest, smart, skillful, helpful, caring, etc.
Be specific and descriptive. Use humor. Try “Do you know what I like about you? I like it when you…”
Remember fun times or special moments you and the child have shared. Refer to these events and tell the child what you enjoyed about that time.
Don’t worry about the length. A brief note can be cherished as much as a two-page letter.
Write it by hand. Feel free to make edits as you go.
You need not limit yourself to pen and paper. Send an encouraging email, postcard, or greeting card. Mail it, put in a lunch box, on a bed, or read it to the child.
Here are some sample sentences to get you started…
You always make me smile.
You are very special in your unique way.
I know that growing up today is sometimes really hard…
Spending time with you makes me so happy! I really enjoy it when we…
Has anyone ever told you that you can do anything you truly believe in? You can!
You can accomplish anything if you set your mind to it. The trick is believing in yourself enough to try.
Keep our children in mind during the hustle and bustle of the holiday season. Give a child the gift of a few kind words. Write them down so the youngster can cling to these memories for a lifetime.
— Ron Wilson is superintendent of Ionia Public Schools. The views expressed in this column do not necessarily represent the views of Ionia school elected officials, employees, or students. You may contact Ron by email at email@example.com.