The importance of a healthy digestive system has long been recognised by complementary health professionals including naturopaths and herbalists. This concept is not new however, with Hippocrates, regarded as the father of medicine, reportedly stating that “all disease begins in the gut” over 2000 years ago.
Childhood encompasses a period of immense growth, not just physically, but emotionally and mentally as well. The developing nervous system is highly sensitive to external influences, and while some children adapt to these influences or stressors, other children do not adapt so easily. Accordingly, anxiety, irritability, hyperactivity, sleep disturbances and changes to mood may develop in children.
Mention quercetin and the first thing that will spring to mind for practitioners will most likely be its efficacy in the treatment of allergies. Often referred to as ‘nature’s antihistamine’, quercetin reduces the allergic response by stabilising mast cells and basophils thus preventing the release of histamine.
Fewer herbs are held in higher esteem in traditional Chinese medicine (TCM) than astragalus, where it is considered a 'master immune herb'. So how does it exert this effect?
In today's high-paced society, L-theanine has a crucial role to play in the clinical management of stress, relaxation, cognition and sleep.
A recent clinical trial sought to investigate the effects of CoQ10 supplementation on serotonin levels and depressive symptoms in patients with fibromyalgia.
The thyroid gland is one of the unsung powerhouses of the body – its crucial roles involve controlling our metabolic rate, body temperature, energy levels, and growth and development.
S-adenosylmethionine (SAMe) is integral to cellular metabolism and as the major methyl donor in the body. SAMe is involved in the methylation of a diverse range of compounds including phospholipids, DNA, RNA, proteins and neurotransmitters. It is also involved in two other important pathways – transsulfuration which produces glutathione, and aminopropylation which synthesises polyamines.