Leading line composition technique is the easiest to understand and apply in Landscape photography.
In fact, we compose some of the photographs using leading line composition technique unknowingly!
You would have done that too…It comes to us naturally. Let me make you believe it using an example.
Imagine you are driving through a forest and you see beautiful line of trees on either side of the road. The autumn leaves are so breathtakingly colorful that you couldn’t help but to pull your car to a side.
You want to capture that beautiful moment in your camera.
Now…how would you photograph it?
Would you stand parallel to the road and just take trees on one side of the road or would you consider taking photograph with both side of the road?
Invariably, you would consider including both side of the road. Isn’t it?
Which means, the road is in the middle of the image frame running from a near foreground to the far background.
You know what composition technique you just used? I see a smile there 🙂
Leading line is a line that leads you from one point to the other point. Our eyes follow the line strictly from one point to the other point without our consciousness.
This very nature of ours is exploited in photography by composing a photograph to use leading lines. This way we can force the viewer to look at the image from one point (usually foreground) to another point (usually background).
It is one of the most simple and powerful composition technique that is used in landscape photography. Landscape photographers always look for leading lines in the nature to create a sense of depth in the image and also to lead the viewer to the main subject of interest.
Some of the important aspects of leading line composition technique are:
- Leads the viewer into the photograph
- Leads the viewer from one part of the photograph to the other
- Leads the viewer to the main subject of interest
- Brings depth in the photograph
You can make most compelling landscape photographs by combining leading line composition technique with Rule of Thirds.
Below are some of the examples which uses leading line photography technique combined with Rule of Thirds technique.
Using Board Walks as Leading Lines
Using Formations as Leading Lines
Using Roads as Leading Lines
Using Forest Paths as Leading Lines
Using Shorelines as Leading Lines
Leading line photographic composition is the most natural technique that is very powerful. If combined with Rule of Thirds, you can make some of the most compelling photographs.
It is by far the easiest method to create a 3-dimensional effect in a 2-dimensional photograph. This is especially useful in landscape photography since we want to force the viewer to scan the photograph from foreground till the background.
Embrace it now and enjoy your photography forever.
Don’t forget to tell me if you like learn-by-examples technique. I generally prefer to learn it by looking at photographs and studying those photographs as well.
Do let me know by putting few words in the comments.
PS: If you feel that it is an useful article, then share it with your beloved ones
Love grows by Sharing, so does this blog!
PPS: “I know what I have given you… I do not know what you have received.” ― Antonio Porchia