Sardonyx stone: general information, healing and magical characteristics
Sardonyx stone is one of the subtypes of onyx. It is a ribbon agate, which has characteristic brown, black and white thin stripes. Gem got its name from the Greek word «sarclolith», which translated means «stone from Sard.»
In ancient times, sardonyxes were delimited by female and male stones. The category of women attributed those gems, which had a delicate, lighter shade, and to men — minerals with darker and sharp tones.
By color in nature there are stones that are dark with white, pinkish, brownish and brown stripes. Possess silky, glass shine.
The most expensive sardonyx are mined in the Arabian Peninsula. In the United States of America, Uruguay, Brazil and India, deposits of this stone are also sufficient.
And in Russia already sardonyxes are not so common and their birthplaces can be found only in Chukotka and the Kolyma.
People began to use the described mineral from the times of distant antiquity — then it served as a material for the manufacture of carved artistic products (glyptics). Rich grandees used sardonyx as a seal, for this purpose a piece of a cylindrical shape was cut from a stone.
Sardonyx is a semi-precious stone, the varieties of which are actively used as decorative and ornamental material. Due to the wide range of modern methods of processing such minerals, they are used as mosaic or surface cladding.
Sardonyx has a fairly low price, due to which it is made of jewelry, available for people of different classes. In this case, all the jewelry is pleasantly pleased with its beauty and diversity.
What are the healing properties of crystals?
- Folk therapists are confident that sardonyx helps to grow bone fractures faster.
- Since ancient times, the stone was used to stop heavy bleeding.
- Modern lithotherapists claim that the amazing properties of the mineral will relieve of such pathologies: disorders of the digestive tract, fever, diseases of the spleen and the thyroid gland.
- As already indicated above, stones are of two “sexes” — “feminine” and “masculine”. In this case, you can use the «women’s» stones to eliminate infertility and other female reproductive diseases. And «male» will contribute to more active healing of wounds and ulcerative pathologies, even very serious ones.
- In lithotherapy, sardonyxes are also successfully used to eliminate the pathologies of the hearing aid: in this way the stones will relieve their wearer from various inflammatory phenomena and pain sensations. Upon completion of the stone therapy course, most people assure that their hearing has improved significantly.
The mineral helps to normalize the chakra of the solar plexus and all the organs it controls.
Sardonyx and magic
Esoterics strongly advise the use of jewelry from this mineral to those people who are afraid of their future, the gem will help them to become more confident in their own abilities, will give faith in their unlimited possibilities.
He will also show his favor to all those who have a passion for traveling or have to spend a lot of time on the road because of work. If you constantly carry a piece of mineral with you, you can be sure that your life will be long and beautiful, this miraculous mineral gives the fair sex a youth and increases the life expectancy.
Since ancient times, there are rumors and legends that sardonyx reliably protects its owners from witchcraft, as well as successfully cope with infidelity and betrayal of its owner.
People with supernatural abilities use the power of stone to make fascinating journeys through parallel worlds and begin to see prophetic dreams.
Sardonyx and zodiac signs
Its main patronage of the mineral will be representatives of the zodiacal constellation Leo. People-Lions with his help will be able to become successful, loved and indecently happy.
If you believe the ancient legends, then sardonyx crystals with a red tint are distinguished by a neutralizing effect on dark forces and will help get rid of melancholy, nightmares.
Those who use jewelry with this gem improve their memory, gain the ability to soberly evaluate what is happening, and also become very fearless.
For other signs of the zodiac stone will help protect themselves from the evil eye, witchcraft charms.
Virgin will also receive the patronage of this gem. Due to sardonyx, Virgo women will attract a soul mate into their lives and will be able to create happy and harmonious relationships.
And male Virgos, thanks to the gem, will become more successful in business and business.
Talismans with sardonyx
Talismans with sardonyx attract for their owners a happy life and good luck in all endeavors. Also thanks to them, all innermost dreams and desires begin to be embodied in life faster.
From ancient times, the stone was especially liked by travelers, as well as people who have a penchant for philosophy and those who are trying with all their might to achieve harmony with the surrounding reality.
In addition, amulets from sardonyx will render their feasible help for all who are interested in additional support from outside or in the opportunity to find their love and conclude a happy marriage union. Then the stone must be put on a metal stand — it will protect against the infidelity of a loved one and give financial well-being.
And people practicing magic, using the mineral sardonyx, will be able to create from it amulets and amulets that will heal the soul from unreasonable fear and anxiety. The magicians know all the secret sides of this amazing talisman, so they actively use it when they lack vital energy and will, and also so that everything in life can be shaped in the most harmonious way.
Shamans from India worship the mysterious gem for its ability to attract great luck and luck.
But in order for the mineral to reveal its amazing magical abilities to the full, it is necessary to select the most suitable metal for it — gold and silver will perform. And for greater efficiency, sardonyx products, as well as amulets and talismans with it, should be worn on the arms or on the neck.
It is important to ensure proper care for products with a gem — for this they are recommended to be stored in special separate bags and not to allow them to stay under the sun for a long time.
At the end of the theme we advise you to watch a fascinating themed video and this gem:
Guess today with the help of the tarot spread "Day map"!
For proper divination: focus on the subconscious and do not think about anything at least 1-2 minutes.