Track topics on Twitter Track topics that are important to you
The present study aimed to investigate whether the provision of prior information about digital alteration would enhance the effectiveness of disclaimer labels attached to fashion images in protecting against body dissatisfaction. Participants were 363 female undergraduate students who viewed fashion magazine advertisements with either no label or a digital alteration disclaimer label. Prior to viewing the advertisements, participants read one of three news stories containing digital alteration information that focused on either the unrealistic nature of the images or on social comparison, or a control news story (on magazine circulation figures). Irrespective of the preceding information, disclaimer labels offered no benefit for body satisfaction. However, reading the news articles containing information about digital alteration led to higher levels of body dissatisfaction than reading the control article. It was concluded that information in the form of news stories or disclaimer labels cannot be assumed to be useful or to offer positive benefit. Accordingly, more extensive and thorough evaluation is required and policy makers might better direct their attention to other forms of cost-effective universal intervention.
This article was published in the following journal.
Name: Body image
The present study used eye tracking technology to experimentally investigate the effect of different label formats on women's visual attention to fashion magazine advertisements, and its relationship ...
Absence labels promote the absence of a particular ingredient or production practice. Consumers usually perceive organic labels as an umbrella absence label for a variety of ingredients and production...
While the access to information through digital resources is widely available for physicians, concerns are posed about the use of digital devices for information retrieval at the point of care. This u...
Photobleaching is a major challenge in fluorescence microscopy, in particular if high excitation light intensities are used. Signal-to-noise and spatial resolution may be compromised, which limits the...
We propose Neural Image Compression (NIC), a two-step method to build convolutional neural networks for gigapixel image analysis solely using weak image-level labels. First, gigapixel images are compr...
Most studies on menu labels have been conducted in mostly non-Hispanic white individuals, and how menu labels affect calories and macronutrients ordered in Hispanics is not clearly underst...
The primary objective of this study is to determine to what degree sugary drink warning labels increase consumers' knowledge about the potential health harms of sugary drinks and reduce su...
The aim of this study is to compare different sugary drink labels to see which most influence knowledge, beliefs, purchase intentions and choices. Parents of children ages 6-11 will shop i...
The study is a single, cross-sectional cognitive interview of FuRST 2.0 ,functional rating scale, administered to Huntington's Disease Gene Expansion Carriers (HDGECs). The scale will be t...
NuVal® shelf nutrition labels rate the nutritional quality of foods on a scale of 1 (worst) to 100 (best). In 2014, NuVal updated their nutrient profiling system which changed the NuVal s...
Equipment that sends digital information over telephone lines. The term Modem is a short form of the phrase modulator-demodulator.
Biologically active molecules which are covalently bound to the enzymes or binding proteins normally acting on them. Binding occurs due to activation of the label by ultraviolet light. These labels are used primarily to identify binding sites on proteins.
The process of converting analog data such as continually measured voltage to discrete, digital form.
An effect usually, but not necessarily, beneficial that is attributable to an expectation that the regimen will have an effect, i.e., the effect is due to the power of suggestion.
Gap between individuals, households, businesses and geographic areas at different socioeconomic levels with regard to both their opportunities to access electronic information and communication technologies (ICTs). Their use of the Internet for a wide variety of activities, reflects various differences among and within countries.
Women's Health - key topics include breast cancer, pregnancy, menopause, stroke Follow and track Women's Health News on BioPortfolio: Women's Health News RSS Women'...