Resources, toolkits and links to help you disable bullying Bullying: Special Needs Resources AbilityPath.org provides a variety of resources for parents, teachers and professionals to help disable bullying. Do you have a resource to share? Contact us Pare..
Parents of a child with autism have a 24 hour a day; 7 day a week job that instead of paying them costs them astronomical amounts of money. According to the Autism Society of America, lifetime costs for caring for a child with autism can reach as high as ..
Good hearing is key to developing good speech and language skills. The foundation for these skills develops during the critical early years from birth to age three. Unfortunately, hearing loss continues to be one of the most common disorders present at bi..
There isn’t a kid in the world who hasn’t occasionally wanted to skip school. But children who struggle with learning can grow to dread school so much, that every day becomes a battle to get them there. Brandy Stephenson* has had days that her 10-year..
Daily tasks, demands and challenges continually test a parent’s patience, problem solving skills, and flexibility. Time to recharge, and relax is often in short supply as the responsibilities of parenthood pull for more of our energy. Stress can impact ..
Severe weather threats and other natural disasters can be terrifying experiences for any family. For families of children with special needs, as much advance notice and planning as is possible can help in gathering additional items, like important documen..
Stories ripped from the headlines from parents on their child’s experience with bullying. “My daughter is a wonderful, adorable, sweet child with Down syndrome. The bullying she encountered started in elementary school and has followed her to midd..
Individualized Education Programs offer opportunities to combat bullying Although they may be targets, children who are bullied do not have to remain victims. With the appropriate tools and support systems in place, a child can be a part of changing the s..
Employment or College? After Graduation Whether your child goes on to a postsecondary education or not, he or she will need to transition into the “real world.” Depending on the level of their abilities, this may mean finding employment, enrolling the..
Wandering for children with special needs can lead to children getting lost and parents needing to contact local police or fireman to help locate their child. Because of core behavioral and communication challenges associated with children with special ne..