It is a method to enable individuals with Autism/Autism Spectrum Disorder to function effectively.
Each skill to be learned is broken down into manageable units of behavior so that each part can be taught effectively. This is done through discrete trials, where each unit of behavior is taught to mastery. Then learned units are put together to form more complex behavior.
Behavior excesses (behaviors that need to be decreased eg. tantrums) or behavior deficits (behaviors that need to be increased eg. eye contact) are managed to enable the individual to function effectively. This is done through positive reinforcement.
How is ABA done?
A comprehensive assessment is first done to determine the child’s skill level and behavior deficits and excesses.
An individualized ABA program is created based on the assessment.
ABA sessions involve teaching each unit of behavior. Data from each trial is recorded and analyzed to determine progress.
As the child learns each skill, he/she then progresses through his/her individualized program to learn more complex behaviors.
ABC Center results are consistent with 50 years of extensive scientific clinical data.
All children make progress.
100% of children are effectively communicating their wants and needs within one year, either vocally and/or by PECS or sometimes ASL (American Sign Language).
90% are eventually transitioned to either a mainstream or special education school.
If ABA is started at an early age, a significant number is transitioned to regular school with same age peers.
Do all centers who provide ABA have equal effectiveness?
Not all ABA providers have the same level of expertise. Proper supervision of staff is integral.
The Behavior Analysts Certification Board (BACB) is the only certification board for Behavior Analysts globally.
In all of Southeast Asia, only four individuals have been appropriately certified as BCBAs, two of whom are with ABC Center.
Behavior Analysts need thorough expertise to create the right program, supervise technical staff and enable continuous improvement for each child.
ABC is globally committed to provide the most effective ABA program for each child in our care.