Confidence: Cornerstone of Self-Esteem
Posted: January 17, 2018
Self-Esteem begins with confidence. It is difficult to help a person grow in self-esteem if we do not first understand how to build that person's confidence in themselves. So, what is confidence? How do we help a person build this important life skill? More imortant than these questions is the question of why. Why is confidence so important to the development of self-esteem? Let's dig a bit deeper...
Confidence is believing in ourselves and our ability to succeed. As Martial Arts Instructors and Coaches we look to find the "little personal victories" that will help each of our students begin to believe in themselves. With each small victory, each technique learned and done correctly comes a boost in confidence. Students quickly become more confident in all aspects of life through the successful experiences they have on the mats. As their confidence grows they begin to feel the satisfaction in their own abilities.
Confidence and self-esteem do not grow over night. The development of strong confidence and lasting self-esteem takes time and repetition. To improve any of our skills we must practice that skill. It is in this repetition, the act of repeating the skill correctly over and over again that we ceate a habit. This includes believing in ourselves, one victory is not enough. Self-Esteem, and the cornerstone of confidence, require repeated reinforcement to become a natural habit of believing. Helping a person develop confidence and self-esteem starts by getting them involved in activities and situations that give them the opportunity to have those "little personal victories" repeatedly. Building strong confidence, like building strong muscles, is done through both repetition and slowly increasing the "weight" of the challenge.
This increasing challenge is where confidence becomes central to the creation of self-esteem. Confidence makes it easier for us to push past our "Comfort Zone" and grow. Growth, of any kind, takes place when a person has the confidence to take risks and try new things. When someone attempts a new skill, tries a new technique, or makes an effort to take waht they already know to a new level of execution they learn. They learn about themselves, their bodies, their tools, and their world. Learning sometihng new about any one of these aspects of who we are brings the most powerful form of confidence and creates the cornerstone for strong and lasting self-esteem.
Also, catch-up camp definitely helped Edison with his form and self-defense - I noticed a considerable difference, especially in his self-confidence! :)
- Sent by a parent of a young student after the student attended his very first martial arts day camp. A great example of the power of martial arts and a great learning environment on a child's confidence and self-esteem!