It may come across as a surprise for most people, but not all Native Americans wear the feather headdress we all know and love. Variations of this headdress may be part of the other tribes, but traditionally, only a few, albeit more well recognized tribes, use the native Indian headdress as part of their life.
The Indian feather headdress is one of the most important icons of these tribes. Not everybody gets to wear this revered headpiece. Each feather is acquired as a reward for an act of bravery and even if most of the people in the tribe are courageous and noble, not everybody gets the chance to perform daring feats. Hence, only the boldest and most fierce of the warriors and chiefs get to collect enough feathers for the headdress.
The feathers are usually from the specie of birds common to the region where they stay in. When enough feathers have been gathered, the warrior’s closest male relatives and tribes members create the headdress for him. Leather or deer skin straps with intricate tribal designs are used to hold the headdress together. Some of the headpieces hang just below the shoulder, some are so long that they graze the floor as the individuals walk.
Because of the significance of the Indian headdress, it is understandable why so many people want to own one because it is like sharing a part of the American history. It is important to note though, that not all groups share this sentiment. There are many people who get offended when individuals use the Indian headdress as a fashion statement or accessory because they feel it disrespects and devalues the importance of this Native American icon.
While some people may be ignorant of the value of the Indian headdress, it is fair to say that others do appreciate it and want to own one because of its deep spiritual and historical meaning. It might be difficult to obtain an authentic Native American headdress nowadays, but you can get a replica, deluxe Native American Indian headdress from specialty online stores and shops.
Not all stores selling Native American headdresses are made well. Some are obviously more poorly made than others because they do not use quality material and are mass produced. These are cheaper products, but do not be surprised if they get damaged easily because you are only getting what you paid for.
If you plan to keep the headdress for a long time, it is good to invest in one of excellent quality. Rooster or duck feather is often used, along with genuine leather for the band around the head. You can find amazing pieces like these made by artists from exotic locations, so expect to factor in the cost of shipping when you decide to purchase one of these one of a kind headdresses online.
Be sure to properly care for and maintain your native American Indian headdress so that you can preserve it and leave it’s beautiful legacy of strength and majesty.