A-Z Of Fabrics
An artificial fibre containing nitrile.
These contain basic amino group and their use is in natural cellulosic fibres in an alkaline dye bath.
It's a basic solution, where a chemical process is carried out.
It's also called matt weave.
It's a heavy fabric having a raised finish.
The term means mixing of different fibres in a specified proportion so as to get advantages in the end result accruing from the properties of the blended fabrics.
It's a chemical process undertaken for improving the whiteness of a fabric, yarn or a fibre (retaining the natural colour)
When a fabric looses its colour when in contact with a solvent it's called bleeding
Happens when you remove the lustre of textiles.
An invisible stitch on the fabric face or a garment.
Boucle (Booclay) yarn
A yarn which has tight loops formed across its length.
These are chemical constituents which when added to detergents increase the brightness of a fabric.
Used extensively for silk saris, this fabric has very exquisite effects by using satin weaves against a plain weave background.
The end result of this finishing process is a raised effect, it involves passing the fabric over two or more brushes.
It's a finishing process for promoting smoothness and shine to a fabric's texture.
Currently in vogue
Blue, Violet and Green are considered cool colours.
It's a plain weave cotton fabric having a medium cover factor.
It's a light weighing, closely woven fabric (cottons or linen).
A light net, plain weave of cotton. A blend of synthetic yarns.
A pattern made of squares.
A warp-faced fabric having double twill lines separated by grooves. It is a heavy weight fabric.
The property by virtue of which the dyed material has resistance against bleeding on washed or exposed to light, gas, rubbing.
The yarn whose slivers have been carded and combed.
This Yarn made of both staple and filament fibres.
A general term used for a) plied b) cabled yarns and structures made by braiding, knitting or weaving.
A cut pile having cords or ribs in the warp direction e.g. cut velveteen fabrics.
Natural vegetable fibre obtained from seed hair of plants of the gossipyum family.
It is the procedure of setting of resin or plastic.
It's a ratio of the yarn or a fibre's weight to its length.
Count of cloth
The number of picks per inch/cm and ends per inch/cm in the cloth.
Dyes made of vegetable fibres.
Dyes used only for synthetics e.g. polyester.
A twill weave, piece dyed fabric. It is usually made in 0.7m width.
It's a method employed in printing where by applying a chemical substance on the specific areas of a dyed fabric , the dye gets removed or discharged leaving behind a coloured or white pattern
Is a fabric woven from imitation silk (artificial fibre).
A fabric having extensible properties like Lycra
It's a method to get a raised feel or depressed feel of the fabric by passing it through heated rollers.
A method where a decorative patterns was sewn by handle through a needle or by a sewing machine but more latterly by computerised control of multi head embroidery stations.
Embroidery done on lace material.
Term used to address all materials whether they may be made of fibres, yarns, lace, etc
It is the resistance which a material provides to an agent.
An artificial lengthy and continuous fibre.
Treatment given to a fabric to improve its look and texture properties.
Forte of a garment
Means the strong point of the garment
When handling some fabrics, the threads which come out are called frey.
It's a Worsted fabric with a prominent twill face.
Crepe fine fabric with alternate twisted tarn.
Short term fashion (trends) are called fads.
A synonym for the length wise (weft yarn) or cross-wise (warp yarn) threads of the fabric.
Is the shades and degrees of colour.
Plain weave with small tufts or fibres which are joined by an adhesive.
Woven or non woven fabric layer between outer cloth wall and the inner to give it an insulation and shape.
It's a weaving machine which produces very intricate designs as it can control each warp yarn.
It's a Plain knit fabric
Open work fabric.
Light thin cotton fabric.
Gloss of textiles.
Fabric from a web of fibres held together by various methods other than felting, colouring, or intertwining.
Thin transparent stiff effect on cotton.
Polymerized product of alcohols and acids.
A plain weave fabric with ribbed effect.
Undesirable shinning lines on the right side of the garment due to incorrect ironing.
Is to draw up into folds or wrinkles.
Silk which comes directly from cocoon with a little twist in the thread.
A method of decoration where either water based or plastisol ink is forced through differing sizes of silk mesh to leave one or many colours either in (water based) or on (plastisol) the fabric of the garment.
The line which shows where the seam should be stitched.
It's an outline of a garment.
Silk yarn from short a short filament.
A finish which resembles chamois leather.
It is the average length of a fibre.
Ornamenting the surface of a fabric or garment (e.g. Embroidery etc.)
Plain closely woven filament fabric.
Yarn dyed figured fabrics in jacquard loom.
To decrease width gradually and bring it to an end point.
Is the number of warp and weft yarns in one square-inch of a fabric (warp yarn x weft yarn per sq. inch/cm)
Fashion is not static, they are constantly moving, their movement has a definite direction. The direction in which fashion moves is called fashion Trend.
To cut off the ragged edges below the seam line to prevent the garment from being bulky and to give the seam a neat finish.
British polyester fibre.
A rough fabric of wiry heavy wools invented by the English.
Weft interlaced with warp to form diagonal ridges in fabric.
A cut pile fabric heavier than velvet, longer piles with fine raised finish of cotton /wool.
Colours like Red, Orange, Yellow are classified as warm colours.
A fabric manufactured wholly from worsted yarns, the exception being presence of some decoration threads of other fibres.
A product of substantial length and relatively small cross- section consisting of fibres and /or filament (s).