Acid reflux symptoms: How to get rid of heartburn NATURALLY
ACID reflux, also know as heartburn is a common health complaint for many Brits, but hundreds find endless good food and drinks at Christmas make their symptoms worse.
Acid reflux is caused by stomach fluid, which contains strong digestive acids to break down food, ‘leaking out’ of the stomach and travelling up toward the oesophagus.
Here, the juices cause irritation resulting in symptoms such as indigestion or heartburn.
In some people, the acid can even ‘reflux’ back into the voice box causing irritation.
While medication can help ease symptoms, some people don’t have access to it over the festive period.
"Acid reflux is caused by stomach fluid, which contains strong digestive acids to break down food"
Luckily, the condition can be improved with a number of natural remedies.
Nat Hawes, author of Nature Cures said: “First thing after walking, drink a cup of warm water and fresh lemon juice. By drinking this on an empty stomach 15 to 20 minutes before eating anything else,the body can naturally balance out its acid levels. It is a good digestive aid and safe for all users.
“Drink two ounces of unprocessed aloe vera juice daily.
“Drink pure, unsweetened coconut water half an hour before meals and consume coconut flesh with meals.
“Take a tablespoon of bicarbonate of soda in a half cup of water to correct the body’s pH balance.”
To reduce the likelihood of acid reflux, people should include egg whites and organic live probiotic yoghurt in their diet.
Nat Hawes also advised people should eat apples, bananas, grapes, mango and fibre and wholegrains including oats, brown rices and rye and buckwheat.
The Journal of Dental Research conducted a study that showed people with symptoms of gastro oesophageal reflux disease (GORD), or chronic heartburn, experienced relief when they chewed a piece of sugar-free gum for 30 minutes after a meal.
Some people also suffer with heartburn during the night.
Helen Boardman, a pharmacist and lecturer in Pharmacy Practice at Nottingham University, has revealed the steps people can take to reduce the occurrence of night-time heartburn.
These include sleeping on your left side, sleeping with the upper body elevated to prevent the entry of acid into the oesophagus, wait for two to three hours after you eat before going to bed to give chance a good to move through the digestive system.
She added: “Eating too much, too quickly, can increase heartburn so take your time eating and enjoy mealtimes.
“Feeling stressed or rushed when you eat can also cause the stomach to produce more stomach acids.”
Helen added: “Taking regular exercise can often help (though certain abdominal exercises like stomach crunches can push acid out of the stomach, causing heartburn. It’s best to wait at least two hours after a meal before exercising.”
Courtesy of the Daily Express (25th December 2016) - https://www.express.co.uk/life-style/health/746429/heartburn-acid-reflux-remedies-natural