Eastern Gray Squirrel Facts
- The Eastern Gray Squirrel (Sciurus carolinensis), or the Grey Squirrel, depending on region, is a tree squirrel native to the eastern and midwestern United States and to the southerly portions of the eastern provinces of Canada.
- As the name suggests, the Eastern Gray Squirrel has predominantly gray fur but it can have a reddish color. It has a white underside and a large bushy tail. Particularly in urban situations where the risk of predation is reduced, both white- and black-colored individuals are quite often found. The melanistic form, which is almost entirely black, is predominant in certain populations and in certain geographic areas. The head and body length is from 23 to 30 cm, the tail from 19 to 25 cm and the adult weight varies between 400 and 600 grams.
Can Squirrels Cause Damage to Your House?
Like all wild animals, it is possible for squirrels to carry rabies. However, this is uncommon and the biggest concern relating to Eastern Gray squirrels is the damage they can do to your house if they attempt to take up residence there.
The attics of homes make the perfect place for squirrels to nest, especially mothers who are nearing the birth process. A squirrel may chew through a small opening in the outside of your home to make it big enough to fit through, and may nest in your attic or even inside the walls. If a squirrel has nested in your home, you will likely hear lots of scratching and scurrying noises, and you may smell the odor of urine or feces in areas where the squirrel has nested.
Squirrel urine and fecal matter is a biohazard and must be treated as such. It is not recommended that you come into contact with the urine or feces of a squirrel and it’s important to have the area sanitized once the squirrels are removed.
Got Squirrels? Call for a Professional Evaluation
If you suspect one or more Eastern Gray squirrels have found their way into your home, it’s critical that you don’t attempt to capture them yourself. Instead, contact an experienced pest control professional.
At Freedom Pest Control, we can safely and humanely remove the squirrels from your home, sanitize the nesting area to make it safe for your family, and help seal the outside of your home to prevent additional squirrels from finding their way in.