Battle of Pinkie Cleugh 1547 to be re-enacted for first time ever!
Pinkie 1547 Re-enactment Cycle September 2nd/ 17th
This is an advance notice, so an opportunity to get some/ all dates into the diary!
The Scottish Battlefields Trust has launched a triennial re-enactment cycle for East Lothian's major battles: Pinkie Cleugh 1547, Dunbar 1650 & Prestonpans 1745. They are all about Mary Queen of Scots, Oliver Cromwell and Bonnie Price Charlie respectively. They take place on the third weekend each September ... and this year it's Pinkie's turn. LOOK HERE
Pinkie has never been re-enacted before but it was one of the biggest battles ever fought on Scottish soil. The English, led by Duke of Somerset, won a pyrrhic victory over Scotland's then Regent Earl of Arran/ Duke of Hamilton, but Mary fled to France and married the Dauphin instead of Edward VI as Somerset had planned.
Climax is third weekend in September i.e. 16th/ 17th at Newhailes House ...
.... but Somerset had to march from England to reach Pinkie and some of the stages along his route will be remembered before the climax is reached. It's been dubbed the Road to Pinkie as follows:
Saturday 2nd September: Skirmishes and Living History @ HUME CASTLE LOOK HERE
Sunday 3rd September: More skirmishes and Living History @ EYEMOUTH FORT LOOK HERE
Thursday 7th September Marching to Pinkie: Eyemouth to Dunglass stage
Friday 8th September Marching to Pinkie: Dunglass to Linton stage
Saturday 9th September Marching to Pinkie: Linton to Longniddry stage
Sunday 10th September Final Stage March Longniddry to Pinkie Battlefield ..followed by PINKIE BATTLEFIELD commemoration service at the Memorial & Walk LOOK HERE
Saturday & Sunday September 16th & 17th MAIN RE-ENACTMENTS & ACTIVITIES APLENTY @ NEWHAILES HOUSE - for historians of course but families as well! LOOK HERE
Sponsors & Supporters
Campaigners for the conservation and interpretation of Pinkie Cleugh from the Old Musselburgh Club and the 1547 Heritage Group have provided momentum for more that a decade, and will be out in strength throughout. The Scottish Battlefields Trust's East Lothian County triennial cycle has been recognised and is financially supported and publicised by EventScotland as a National Partnership Event; East Lothian Council is splendidly in support as part of its Scotland's Festival County programmes; and National Trust for Scotland [NTS] is graciously providing access to the splendid setting at Newhailes House in Musselburgh. Finally the Battle of Prestonpans 1745 Trust, East Lothian Courier and the Barons' Courts are also giving the Scottish Battlefields Trust any and all support they wish to call upon.
N.B. Also happening from July 15th/ October 17th is a free exhibition at the John Gray Centre in Haddington on the Rough Wooing which of course was what Pinkie Cleugh was all about!
Details are linked
Published Date: June 29th 2017