June 7, 2019
Trooping the Colour
The Great British Summer! Strawberries and cream, Wimbledon, longer evenings and of course the Trooping the Colour. Some of us may ask, what exactly is it? Either way, it is a British institution.
Well, Trooping the colour dates to the 1700s. King George II started the tradition, by deciding that he wanted to combine both his birthday and the yearly military parade. King George’s birthday was in October, which he celebrated with his friends and family like the rest of us. Since George’s reign, whoever sits on the throne has had the option of having an official birthday in the summertime – weather permitting!
In the Queen’s case, this is the main reason why Trooping the Colour takes place every year. Plus, summer is the only time that you can have a grand parade!
Before all this, Trooping the Colour was used by each regiment in the army to display their regimental flag. This would help soldiers learn how to recognise their regimental colours in battle.
On this occasion, the Queen will travel around Horse Guards Parade and inspect her troops. In the past, she would have made the inspection on Horseback. But since the mid ’80s, she has opted to inspect the troops in a carriage. The event itself involves 1,500 army officers and 244 horses on the day.
The day will come to an end with the appearance of the royal family on the balcony of Buckingham Palace. Other members of the royal family often attend these events.
But for the more adventurous of us, you can join the ballot for tickets each year. Just get your application in by late February for your chance of bagging a seat.
Alternatively, you can make your way to The Mall in the early morning to grab a good vantage spot. You’ll be able to watch the parade passes through Buckingham Palace, down The Mall, Horse Guards, the Whitehall and then back again. So, there are loads of chances to catch a glimpse of the Queen.
If you are not in the mood to face the crowds and want to stay home. Then choose to catch all the pomp and ceremony live on television.