How is born the book "18+"
• How is born the book "18+"
Lesson "How is born the book" Modern students are in second grade. So we decided to go to the printer. And the material is not turned dull, chosen photo book "hotter".
Usually the second photo in the report should show a general view that the readers were able to provide a place where everything happens. It looks like a modern printing complex.
Any book begins with a roll of paper
This web offset printing press "Book 70"
It prints per hour 30,000 sheets, and from two sides
Half of the text on the sheet - upside down
Then the sheets are folded (folded) ...
In the notebook
Next machine forms of notebooks pack. Then it is pressed to the unit was not plump
In this form, they enter the bookbinding workshop on sewing ...
To cute stitcher Book sewer line "Multiplex"
30 listopodborki stations can collect a block of 30 notebooks in a single pass.
Each notebook has a number. This book consists of 18 notebooks. Why a black mark - you'll soon find out.
notebook laid out in a certain order numbers in the feeders ...
and automatically matched to the block
Matched blocks are sent to one of the sewing machines
The needles pierce holes in their notebooks and stitch them
If the book block is assembled correctly, the numbering goes "ladder."
At the end of the line blocks are automatically added to the pallet
Meanwhile, at the other end of the shop is the production of another important part of the book - cover.
Machine for cutting cardboard makes cutting of panel for cover
The cover of panel consists of two (front and rear) and counterfoil
We cover sheets cut corners ...
and loaded into the machine that forms the finished cover.
This bookends - the inner side of the cover.
In a special machine to the blocks glued and processed by hot melt bookend
Block with glued bookend. In this book, it's red
Taped units are natural drying on the conveyor
After the book bookend glued and processed spine, it should be dry. Two lines are built on the principle of the spiral (their length by 25 meters), which greatly saves space in the workshop
Three-knife cutting "Diamant" cuts the block on three sides
After that the blocks move to the insert in the lid
This book is no bookmark (bookmarks) and a device with multi-colored ribbons passes by
intercalary line. The first number on the screen - the performance of books per hour, the second - the amount made per shift
Filing covers. Through the second cover and the blocks meet.
Almost finished the book
Only root level
Another moment and it becomes a habitual form. Special unit compresses the spine and puts the book in the stack.
In this line, a pack of books can be packaged in shrink film, but ours - a different story
Books are transported to the next workshop
On this machine, they are packed ...
In indvividualnuyu shrink film and ...
According to the new law, a warning tag on the "18+". According to rumors, the book contains profanity and something quite Another Teen.
In this form, she goes to the store
All the shooting I was accompanied by two guards. When I approached the lens too tightly to the book, my back rested the muzzle of rifles. At some point I was able to divert their attention and hide a few defective pages. Asked to go to the toilet, I eagerly pounced on the text. Read random excerpt I was shocked ...
Cruel, sharp as a scalpel, painted black humor exposing today's society. Amazing, brilliant, incredibly exciting and extraordinary story. Thin and largely touching comedy with black humor. Big, ambitious, brilliant, cheeky, funny, stunning and masterfully written novel about modern Britain. Go to the next page, it was terrible, but to break away from reading, to the sound of a toilet door guards broke out, it is simply impossible ... :)