A BSc degree in biotechnology and food engineering is granted at the end of the four-year s. The curriculum combines the areas of engineering technology with life science and natural science areas, and includes practical laboratory studies, excursions to plants, and seminar lectures given by visit guest experts.
The curriculum is based on the following three areas:
1. Life Sciences and Biotechnology: microbiology, biology, biochemistry, biotechnology, biotechnology engineering, molecular biotechnology (genetic engineering).
2. Engineering: principles of biotechnology and food engineering, structure and properties of food and biological materials, thermodynamics, food plant standards, packaging, and nanotechnologies in biotechnology and food.
3. Food science: food chemistry, food analysis, nutrition, toxicology.
The first four semesters are devoted primarily to compulsory courses, which include basic science subjects such as mathematics, physics, chemistry, biology and computers. In addition, the student studies core engineering subjects in many areas, including molecular biotechnology, biochemistry and enzymology, food technology, microbiology, etc.
At the end of two years of studies, the students choose one of following two specialization study tracks:
1. Biotechnology: this track offers advanced courses in molecular biotechnology (genetic engineering), microbiology, fermentation processes, separation and recovery processes, molecular biology, immunology, etc.
2. Food engineering: the students gain expertise in this track in aspects relating to food engineering and technology, packaging, plant design, control processes, functional food, economics, marketing and management, quality control.
In addition to theoretical studies, the student gains practical laboratory experience in a wide variety of laboratories, and has the option of completing an experimental final project in which he is requested to implement the knowledge he has acquired in the different subjects.
Regardless of the specialization track chosen, the students receive a degree that combines both areas: biotechnology engineering and food engineering. Graduates of this study track can integrate into key positions in areas of research and development, standardization, production, packaging, planning, consultation, instruction and marketing in diverse industries including the biotechnology industry, the food industry, the pharmaceuticals industry, the cosmetics industry, standards institutes, government institutes, etc.
Combined Study Track Option
Students in the Faculty of Biotechnology and Food Engineering can choose to study in a combined study track that provides an additional bachelor’s degree in biology or chemistry. Students who comply with requirements of the Faculties of Chemistry or Biology at the Technion will be granted a “BSc in Biology/BSc in Chemistry.” Additional information may be found in the study catalog.
In addition to studies towards a bachelor’s degree in the Faculty, the students can study towards an additional degree (that provides a teaching certificate) in the Department for Education in Technology and Science.
Access to the sites of most courses is provided to registered students through Moodle – the Technion’s course website. Additional information may be found on the various course sites.
- Student request
- Exemption from studying a subject
- Follow-up for examining the completion of requirements for a bachelor’s degree
For additional information, contact the Undergraduate Studies secretary: Mrs. Einat Aviel, tel.: 04-8295608, e-mail: email@example.com