“Learning to let go should be learned before learning to get. Life should be touched, not strangled. You’ve got to relax, let it happen at times, and at others move forward with it.”
― Ray Bradbury
No surprises there. Stress has been and continues to be the primary reason for most physical and mental health problems. It’s everywhere. Its impact on wellbeing, career and relationships is all-encompassing. Stress affects people in different ways. And there’s no one-stop solution to beat stress. However, there are various ways in which we can manage stress and by managing our lives a little better.
Noun: “A Japanese school of Mahayana Buddhism emphasizing the value of meditation and intuition rather than ritual worship or study of scriptures.”
Although Zen cannot be taught, one has to find their own Zen, the samurai sought the tutelage of Buddhist monks who would take them and mentor them on their journey towards finding Zen. The students had to observe the master’s lifestyle and learn from the master’s wisdom, ideas and ideals.
The Samurai used the Zen principles to find peace, enlightenment and strength that they needed both on and off the battlefield. Discipline played a very important part in their lives. Years of discipline, practice and mentoring from the masters helped light their path towards Zen. They also used Zen meditation to confront the possibility of grave injuries.
And in their journey, there was a very simple act that helped them every step of the way. It was the act of drinking Matcha tea. Samurai warriors would prepare Matcha, following precisely a strict code of conduct that would later become the tea ceremony and drink it both before their meditation sessions and before they would go in to battle. The tea helped them focus completely and achieve a state of alert wakefulness.
Matcha has both meditative properties as well as restorative properties. It provided them the long-lasting energy boost and the increased physical endurance that they needed for their long, drawn-out combats. Matcha’s unique processing methods, excellent healthful properties, and unmatched versatility made it not only a great source of energy but also a great source to find calmness.
Matcha synchronises the brain waves to match those experienced during meditation. This yields a state of alert calmness which is a great aid for beating stress, focusing better, and finding your very own Zen.
The concentration and precision with which you have to prepare matcha help you think clearly and achieve a sense of peace. You would experience emancipation from the outside world, be one with nature and let the echo of doubt, lack of confidence and anything that might be an obstacle go away from your path towards Zen.
With matcha on your side, you can de-stress your life remarkably.
Comments will be approved before showing up.