Going shopping, planning a beach hangout or perhaps a lunch date with friends? Don’t forget to wear the sunscreen. Yes, even when it is cloudy, your skin can be affected by the dangerous UV rays. Remember, the UV rays not only tan the skin but they also cause the skin to age prematurely.
Using a sunscreen is one of the most crucial parts of the skincare routine. In fact, investing in a quality sunscreen can help prevent skin cancer and premature aging. They come in a variety of forms like sprays, lotion, sticks and there is a lot of SPF science to consider.
Selecting the best sunscreen can get confusing. So here are tips that’ll help you make the right decision.
Date of Manufacture
The more ‘recent’ the product, the better is the efficacy. The specific ingredients present in the sunscreen break down over time. Hence it is very important to make sure you buy the freshest stock you can get your hands on. Don’t buy too many at the same time. Get through one and then go buy a fresh one when needed instead of stocking them until they are about to expire.
It is wise to invest in a quality product you can trust. Make sure you choose products certified by the FDA. Regulatory authorities are very strict when certifying products that are effective.
Look For a Broad Spectrum Product
Apart from just looking at the range of the SPF make sure your sunscreen is effective against UVA and UVB rays. Ordinary products only protect skin from UVB rays and few people know that the UVA rays are responsible for causing brown spots and wrinkles.
Sunscreen Should Not Contain Dangerous Ingredients
Always check out the ingredients listed on the package to know if it contains ingredients that can cause allergic reactions. One such ingredient is oxybenzone.
A Sunscreen That Offers SPF 30 Protection Or Above
Look for the SPF range mentioned on the package, anything above 15 is decent protection but if you want ‘effective’ protection then go for the sunscreen that is SPF 30 or higher.
Does the Product Contain Titanium Dioxide Or Zinc Oxide?
When looking at the ingredients on the list, look out for zinc oxide and titanium oxide. These products form a protective layer on the skin, unlike chemical sunscreens that are absorbed. But beware, zinc oxide can make the face look very ghostly and pale. You can also find chemical sunscreens that offer superior protection. Visit your dermatologist or schedule an online appointment using a telehealth platform to know the sun protection type (chemical or physical) that would best suit you.
Water And Sweat Resistance
If you know you are going out for a walk that will make you sweat or perhaps for a swim then it is better to invest in a sunscreen resistant to both sweat and water. But be careful, FDA says the water resistant ones stay effective for as long as only 40 minutes in the water and you must reapply the product to remain protected.
The sunscreen should not sting the body or the face. If your sunscreen feels itchy and uncomfortable, stop using it. Ask your dermatologist for a new recommendation.
If you have acne prone skin, go for a water-based sunscreen. They do not cause breakouts like the oil based ones.
If you have sensitive skin or a chronic skin condition, you can benefit from sunscreens that are specifically designed for problematic skin. Such sunscreens do not contain too many chemicals, preservatives or fragrances.
A very important point to consider is to look at the expiration date on the package. A product past the expiration date can cause some serious harm to the skin as the ingredients present in the formula degrade over time.
Choose Creams over Sprays
While it is tempting to go a spray as it is easy to put on they can be harmful as they can enter the bloodstream and cause various health issues. It is better to avoid powder based and spray formulas. Stick to cream-based sunscreens instead.
Prevention is always better than cure and investing in a good sunscreen will keep your skin beautiful, young and healthy. Keep the above-mentioned points in mind before you go for sunscreen shopping next time!