Easter Island is one of the most isolated islands on Earth and most mystifying places (located 3,700 km (2,300 miles) off the west coast of Chile).
It lies far off in the Pacific Ocean, facing Tahiti. It is most famous for its mysterious statues made of stone, that were built centuries ago. These works of art possess a history that remains as unclear as it is evocative.
Some 2,300 miles from the coast of Chile, the island is one of the most isolated places on the planet. It is treeless, dotted with volcanoes and fringed with sandy beaches. High waves often lash its western shores.
History of Easter Island
Easter Island has an interesting history since it was discovered on Easter by Jacob Roggoeveen, a Dutch captain with approximately 3000 inhabitants with the presence of many statues that were all in the same position and shape with long unsmiling faces that appear as alienating creatures.
These stones are called moai, that consist of tall figures carved out of volcanic rock of the 11th and 14th centuries.
Rapa Nui National Park protects the majority of the important places. The Moai megaliths attract scientists and scholars from all over the world who try to discover the way the natives transported those sculptures, which were 250 – 300 tons each, from the reservoir to their final place on the coasts.
Sign-up to get the latest stories on the most amazing destinations and travel experiences from Quasar Expeditions.
These sites are known for their ancient ruins and ongoing mysteries as were the statues gods? How were they moved? Why are there no trees?
We highly recommend to visit this site. Your journey can begin with a tour in Santiago, Chile, the modern city surrounded by mountains. Then you can take a flight to Punta Arenas towards Puerto Natales. There you can visit Las Torres del Paine National Park where you will enjoy a breathtaking mountain range, crowned with glaciers surrounded by aquamarine lakes, flora and fauna.
You will spend dream days in the Chilean Patagonia, with its amazing glaciers, high mountains, lakes and unexplored lands. You can take a tour towards the mysterious and stunning, Easter Island, a volcanic island with turquoise waters, which predominates along, the famous Moais giant carved stone heads, with full of mysteries. Be prepared to be captivated by its history, unique culture and landscapes!