Trails have many benefits of health and economic basis. Here are studies and articles on the benefits of trails.
Refine by Subcateogry:
STEP 1: LIMIT results to these categories:
STEP 2: Return ONLY resources from:
Select multiple by holding down [control] or [command]
posted Mar 13, 2018
An examination of a new piece of infrastructure that represents an emerging urban form poised to potentially revitalize, reorganize and reshape American cities.
This fact sheet provides researched facts about trail development in Canada including trail use, the money spent by trail users, statistics on job creation related to trail development, adjacent land values and the economic impact of new money to a community when trails are developed.
The Ontario Trails Strategy is a long-term plan that establishes strategic directions for planning, managing, promoting and using trails in Ontario.
The primary purpose of this report is to heighten awareness of the regional, recreational, and economic asset and to bolster current efforts to extend and improve the facility.
Despite increased promotion of trails for health and recreation, critics of new trail development continue to raise questions about the suitability of trails in neighborhoods. Concerns often focus on the impact of trails on property values and public safety in different types of neighborhoods.
A brief study of two successful rural trails, one utilizing an active irrigation canal alignment (Calgary to Chestermere Lake) and the other converted from an abandoned rail line (The Iron Horse Trail-Elk Point to Heinsburg).
This casebook presents data and examples that can help leaders and concerned citizens make the economic case for parks and open space conservation.
A survey of residents acknowledged that there are disadvantages expressed by some adjacent homeowners, but most reported being satisfied with the trail as a neighbor and experiencing relatively low rates of trail-related problems.
The authors review is distinguished from other surveys of open space that have been done in recent years by its broad focus on non-use values for all types of open space, and because it reviews primarily, although not exclusively, studies of applications in North America.
The Shannon Region Trails Programme is a Shannon Development-led initiative which aims to establish the Shannon Region as a world-class destination for walking, cycling, water-based and other outdoor activity pursuits during the period 2007-2010.
Page 13 of 26
Oregon housing development along the Willamette River Greenway in Portland, Oregon
Homes are essentially right on the trail near downtown Portland, Oregon
The trail zigzags through development with both cyclists and walkers using the route near downtown Portland, Oregon
See more photo results