What is Adopt-a-Swallow-Box?
The Adopt-A-Swallow Box is part of a habitat enhancement and awareness program established by IBEC in partnership with the Bonavista North Chapter of Ducks Unlimited Canada. It was developed as migratory bird conservation initiative in Indian Bay.
Over 300 species of birds breed in the Canadian boreal; 150 of which breed in Newfoundland. Current monitoring programs show that a number of land birds and duck species are facing declines. Habitat loss for development purposes is one of the main threats to migratory birds and their breeding, staging and wintering habitat
What Can We Do?
Birds build open-cup shaped nests in trees or on the ground, or they nest in natural cavities (or holes) in trees. By constructing and placing nest boxes for migratory birds, we aim to supplement the declining availability of natural habitats.
What Will Live In The Boxes?
Tree swallows are songbirds. They are fast, agile fliers that catch insects in their mouths as they fly. They prefer to nest near or in wetlands, such as marshes, swamps, ponds, and wet meadows. Tree swallows in particular are known to readily accept these nest boxes, however other birds may also make their homes in them.
What to do With Your Swallow Box
Having your own Tree Swallow nest box gives you a great opportunity to see the nesting cycle of free-living songbirds up close.
In order for the birds to be attracted to and use the boxes, it is important that the boxes be placed in a proper location and maintained regularly in order to best meet the needs of the wildlife.
Here is a guide for placing your box:
- Place boxes on poles out in open fields.
- Space boxes about 100 feet apart.
- Keep boxes at least 100 meters away from buildings, roads and trails.
- Keep boxes away from trees, bushes, fences, water edges and ditches.
It is also important to clean and make repairs to the box after each nesting season. You may also want to consider installing predator guards to keep out nest invaders.