There are over 1.1 million doctors throughout the country who keep us well and healthy. However, they can’t do the job alone. Every doctor relies on a medical administrative assistant to work efficiently and help as many patients as possible each day.
What exactly is a medical administrative assistant, and what do they?
Keep reading our quick career guide to find out!
What Is a Medical Administrative Assistant?
There are two main types of medical assistants in the healthcare industry.
A medical administrative assistant is a vital member of the team. They work in office settings to perform clinical duties. They often don’t work to provide patient care.
It’s important not to confuse them with clinical medical assistants, who work in medical practices to provide patients with medical care. Clinical medical assistants help doctors and other health care providers during exams and treatments.
Working in medical administration, you’ll likely act as the first person patients see when they walk in. You’ll coordinate patients visits and make sure everything throughout the office runs smoothly.
It’s important to note that as a medical assistant, you’ll need to stay current on new policies and regulations. These regulations cover the collection, storage, and dissemination of sensitive patient data. Keeping current on these policies and regulations will ensure you can do your job to the best of your ability.
A medical administrative assistant job description usually entails performing day-to-day office tasks, such as:
Checking patients in at the front desk
Scheduling patient appointments
Compiling medical records and charts
Using computer software and office equipment to stay organized
Communicating with appropriate clinics for lab results
Keeping up with the appearance of the office
In some cases, you’ll also help with medical billing and coding. You may also need to work with the insurance companies to get approval for patient treatments. This process also involves processing patient insurance claims for payment.
However, your day-to-day responsibilities will depend on the size of the office team and where you work.
Jobs as a medical administrative assistant are available in a number of settings, including:
Urgent care centers
Medical research facilities