SNL is a long-standing sketch comedy television show run by Lorne Michaels. Over the past few years Lorne, the cast, and the show as a whole have been criticized as the audience dwindled. The drop in audience numbers can be explained by the economic downturn caused by the pandemic and changing demographics, but other factors include criticisms around their handling of the 2016 election and depictions of Donald Trump on the show, as well as criticism levied against them around racist, misogynist, and homophobic content written into sketches. Not only that but in the writer's room as well. In all of this, audiences have been turning to free and widely-available content. But what could possibly compare to the cultural monument that SNL has become?

In comparison, YouTube has also seen a shift in viewership over the course of the past few years. Large companies producing content have become fewer and fewer as channels run by single creators rose in popularity. Many creators signed under media management companies, or in the case of Ian Hecox and Anthony Padilla, sold their brands to produce content in a larger scope. In 2018, Defy Media shuttered its operations, sending several creators on the platform into a freefall of uncertainty. Smosh, the brainchild of Ian and Anthony, rose from the ashes as the company was acquired by Rhett and Link's company Mythical. Over the past few years, the cast and crew have been recreating the brand's identity. Arguably, Smosh may be catching up to SNL.

Smosh's improvisational segments and shows are bolstered by personalities such as Amanda Lehan-Canto, Chanse McCrary, Jackie Uweh, and Shayne Topp. Doubling as writers and producers, the creativity behind the content has changed over the years and given Smosh a new, hilarious identity. Smosh's main channel is still a home for written sketches, and their side channel Smosh Pit houses improv and talk segments.

SNL may be a dying light, but Smosh shows that promising comedic ventures aren't a dying breed yet.
