Iago lived in a small town tucked away on the outskirts of New Mexico. with his owner Derrick, who fed Iago every day. Derrick would also go shopping for new toys, try different parrot calls, read him the daily newspaper, and give massages. One particular morning, as Derrick was reading the morning newspaper articles for Iago, an article describing recent odd bird migration to Northern states was written on the front page. Iago only knew of warmth given that he lived in New Mexico for as long as he could remember. Iago never imagined life anywhere outside of this, nor life without Derrick. For as far as Iago was concerned, the love and life with Derrick were more than enough. However, Iago felt peculiar and strange when hearing about birds that were migrating North for mysterious reasons. Iago, for the first time in his life, was feeling instinctively adventurous.

Derrick and Iago could never directly talk with each other given the gap in species between the two, but they always had an indescribable way of somehow knowing what the other was feeling. When Iago was feeling adventurous for the first time, Derrick sensed it and dreaded the meaning of the impulse. For the next couple of days that followed, Derrick stopped giving Iago massages, bought no new parrot toys, and most importantly, stopped reading the daily newspaper to him. Iago felt betrayed and heartbroken. Something about their relationship had changed, and it didn't seem to be for the better.

One day, Derrick came home with a few bags of goods from an arts and crafts store. Iago, as curious as ever hopped into one of the bags and looked around. There were bags of thread everywhere and of multiple types: thread made of nylon, thick threads, skinny threads, and even multi-colored threads. Derrick then plopped down in their favorite chair and began knitting a small hat and scarf set for Iago. With tears in his eyes, Derrick put the recently-knitted hat and scarf on Iago and kissed him on the cheek. Iago, feeling overwhelmed with love, embraced Derrick and took off to head North.
