What in the world do you do with early finishers? This is a big question for teachers! I think it is important to teach your students to check their work when finished. Teaching students to improve their work when they think they are finished is a valuable lesson. But, after that, there are always going to be a handful of students who will finish their work sooner than the rest of the class. So, back to the question … What do you do? Sitting and waiting for the rest of the class to finish or doing busy work can be very boring and is not giving these students a chance to continue learning. Here are some of my favorite ideas for early finishers!
Set up a system for students so they can find out what to do without disrupting the class or asking you while you are helping other students. I love this display that can be set up at the front of the room. The signs can be switched out depending on what you want the students to do each day.
Make sure your students know your expectations so they are not off task or disruptive. This poster is a great example and it is free! You could also make an anchor chart.
Have a place to organize the materials and supplies the students need for the activities to minimize questions such as “where do I get paper for _____ …. ?”
Extension menus are great for independent work. I like this reading menu, but you could make a menu for any subject. For example, if you are working on place value you could have a menu with place value activities for students to choose from.
Bulletin boards such as Boggle or Noggle can be fun! You can change the numbers or letters out every week or two. You could even put some students in charge of updating the board and making the answer key!
Stem Bins are a great hands on activity. Lots of fun while building reasoning skills.
Partner games and centers are a way to let your students interact with others while practicing skills.
Computer games and websites can be great learning tools. Make sure you set procedures up for how to get online and which sites students will go. Here are some of my favorites!
For more great ideas check out my early finishers board on Pinterest!
While there may be times that you want to use a traditional whole group model for instruction, there are other times you need to work with small groups in order to differentiate for your individual student’s needs. Math workshop (or guided math) is a very successful way to work in small group instruction time and maximize student learning. To make the best use of your time, planning and preparation are key. I have rounded up some of my favorite tips and resources here:
1.) Plan how to use your time! I like to start my Math class with a quick warm up and skill review and then move onto a mini-lesson when needed. Some new concepts can be taught to the whole group quickly and then reinforced in centers / stations. Some need longer time. This is where you have to decide what is best for your classroom, but a few helpful blogs have great ideas for scheduling:
2.) Find or create a simple lesson plan template and/or small group template:
3.) Set up a binder to keep schedules, plans, templates, and notes.
4.) Pick and post your rotation system.
5.) Group students by ability or interest. Grouping should be flexible and change often based on student’s individual needs. For example, sometimes you may need to group students who need re-teaching on a specific skill and other days you may need to group students based on interests when planning projects. Another idea is to sometimes work with students you know will need extra help and pre-teach them a skill you will be teaching the whole class later in the week. This can save you time re-teaching later and will help boost their confidence and success when the class learns the skill.
6.) Teach your students the expectations for groups.
7.) Set up an organizational system and teach your students how the system works.
9.) Reflect and Plan for Next Time: When you get to the end of the schedule, take some time to reflect before setting up the next rotation. What worked? What was confusing? etc… This is also a time to look at your student groups and decide if you need to change anyone to a new group.
For more ideas, check out my Pinterest Board “Guided Math”.
December is a month full of celebrations! Students are focused on the upcoming Holidays and Traditions they celebrate in their communities and with their families! How does a teacher compete with that kind of excitement? Well, by joining in! Fill your classroom with Educational Holiday Activities to keep your students learning all month long!
For MATH you could graph responses to fun questions, play skill related card games or go on scavenger hunts.
For SCIENCE there are many different experiments and STEM activities you could incorporate into class time:
For LANGUAGE ARTS and SOCIAL STUDIES you can read and write about different winter holidays, compare and contrast elements from holidays and ad in some kindness lessons.
There are SO MANY fun educational activities! Check out my Pinterest Holiday Board for more ideas!
Looking for bulletin board ideas for back to school? Look no further, I have 15 terrific bulletin boards for you to see!
1. The bright colors on this design are awesome against the black background and the students will love to see their names! What a way to welcome the kids to class!
2. This bubble gum machine would be a fun way to welcome kids back! Put their names on the gumballs. Says first grade, but would work for any grade.
3. Have a sports theme? These jersey’s are super fun and cute just like this! You could also switch it up and give the students paper cut out like jerseys and have them design their own!
4. Another sports bulletin board! The students could decorate their own basketballs or you could prepare ahead of time with their names!
5. I love this interactive board! Such a great message for your students. You can have them write their dream on a cloud on the first day of school!
6. This Guess Who bulletin board is so clever!
7. I love this colorful back to school board! Take pictures at meet the teacher or first day of school and display!
8. Have a super hero theme? This super hero bulletin board rocks!
9. This clever display would take a little time to work out, but is SO terrific!
10. How about a movie star theme? Your students will have fun writing bios for their photos!
11. These tissue paper cupcakes are so sweet! I love the 3D effect from the tissue paper!
12. This burlap background with a welcome back banner is so cute and colorful!
13. So, technically this is a door display, but this owl theme would work great on a bulletin board as well!
14. I love this FAMILY bulletin board. What a great way to make students feel like they belong in the classroom!
15. This bulletin board is beautiful AND has a great message!
Want to see more bulletin boards? Check out my board on Pinterest: