Unhealthy Foods with Health Benefits
One of the unhealthy foods with health benefits that amazed me was something as simple as popcorn. Spokesman Jim White for the Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics said: “Many foods that have been scrutinized for being harmful can actually fit into a healthy diet.”
Beef, pork, lamb, duck, veal, goat, venison, and horse are all red meat. Too much red meat is not good for everyone but eating red meat in moderation might helps us in various ways.
Health Benefits: Rich in heme iron, zinc, and vitamin B12
Heme iron: Our body easily absorbs heme iron and red meat is great for anemic individuals.
Vitamin B12: B12 helps our body to make DNA and helps to keep our nerve and red blood cells healthy.
Zinc: Keeps our immune system working properly.
Protein: Protein helps to make our bones strong and build our muscles. The best health benefits come from lean meat which means every 1 ounce of meat should contain less than 3 grams of fat.
Is coffee healthy for you?
According to a study published in November 2015 in Circulation – Individuals who drink between 3 to 5 cups of coffee a day have a 15% lower risk of dying early than those who do not drink coffee.
Other research stated that coffee can help to decrease type 2 diabetes and the risk of having a stroke. Others mention that drinking one cup of coffee before exercising can help to boost your performance. This does not mean that we can go and drink loads of coffee, 5 cups should be the limit for the day for coffee lovers.
Help protect against type 2 diabetes
Decrease chance of having Parkinson’s disease
Helps to prevent liver disease
Help to prevent liver cancer
Helps to promote a healthy heart
Peanut butter has a lot of fats but it also contains healthy unsaturated fats, fiber, and protein which makes it healthy. Please read peanut butter labels and avoid buying peanut butter with sugar added. About 1 tablespoon of peanut butter contains about 100 calories.
A serving of peanut butter has:
3 mg of vitamin E which is a powerful antioxidant
49 mg of magnesium which helps to build your bone
208 mg of potassium which helps our muscle
0.17 mg of vitamin B6 which boost our immunity
Peanut butter can decrease your risk of heart disease, chronic health problems, and diabetes.
We can lower our risk of heart disease, high blood pressure, type 2 diabetes, and colon cancer by eating two to three servings of whole grains every day. Multigrain bread may contain processed grain which we do not want so please read labels and get whole grain bread or whole wheat bread.
Whole grain contains fiber
Whole grain contains tons of nutrients including protein
Whole grain contains vitamin B6
Whole grain contains antioxidants
Whole grain contains a small amount of iron, zinc, copper, and magnesium
Whole diets can potentially decrease your risk of heart disease, type 2 diabetes, obesity, and various cancer.
Researchers have concluded that eggs can be considered part of a healthy diet because high levels of saturated fats in our blood are mainly from meat and not eggs. Registered dietitian, Janal Funk told U.s. news that “While eggs’ protein is in the white of the egg, the yolk, which many people toss out, contains vitamin D and choline, two important nutrients that are not found in many foods.”
Rich sources of selenium,
Egg contains vitamin D
Egg contains B6
Egg contains B12
Egg contains choline
Egg contains zinc, iron, and copper-protein
We know that most sports drinks contain too much sugar which is unhealthy and could cause diabetes, high blood pressure, obesity, heart disease, and our teeth to decay.
Sports drinks help to replenish our fluids and electrolytes in our body. Research shows that young athletes drink more fluid during practice id their drink is flavored. Sports drinks are recommended for those who are physically active so it can replace nutrients and those who are not physically active to stick to water.
Sports drinks contain electrolytes which are minerals such as potassium, sodium, magnesium, chloride, phosphorous and calcium.
Butter has been mentioned in this article as a bad thing but it contains good fats and vitamins that can help you feel fuller longer. Butter is good for you but in moderation which means we should only consume about one to two tablespoon of butter a day.
Butter is rich in fat-soluble vitamins
Butter contains healthy saturated fats
Butter can lower your risk of heart attack compared to margarine
Butter can lower your risk of obesity
Butter is rich in Conjugated Linoleic Acid
Popcorn is a whole grain and can be healthy as long as you do not drench it in loads of butter and hydrogenated oil. Try to eat 100-calorie packs of popcorn or make your own.
Health Benefits: Health Benefits: Contains an impressive amount of magnesium, fiber, vitamin B complex, polyphenolic compounds, antioxidant, manganese. Popcorn helps to regulate our blood sugar
Popcorn helps prevent premature aging
Popcorn helps lower our cholesterol levels
Popcorn helps improve our digestive process
Popcorn helps protect against osteoporosis
Popcorn helps inhibit cognitive decline
Popcorn helps prevent cancer
Popcorn help you lose/manage weight
White potato is a good source of vitamin B6 which helps to develop our brain into a healthy brain and helps with brain function. Potatoes are healthy as long as you do not add on tons of butter, sour cream, bacon bits, and cheese.
White potato contains vitamin B6
White potato contains potassium
White potato contains copper
White potato contains vitamin C
White potato contains manganese
White potato contains phosphorus
White potato contains niacin
White potato contains dietary fiber
Red wine has an ingredient called Resveratrol which helps to prevent blood clots and helps to prevent our red blood vessels from becoming damaged. Resveratrol also helps to lower our bad cholesterol so drink in moderation because drinking too much wine can increase your chance of health problems, and getting injured.
Females should consume one glass of wine daily and males can consume two glass of wine daily. Everyone should drink a glass of water for every glass of wine he/she consumes because wine can dehydrate your body.
Wine contains antioxidants
Wine boosts the immune system
Wine increases bone density
Wine reduces the risk of stroke
Wine reduces the risk of heart disease
Wine can lower cholesterol
Wine reduces the risk of Type 2 Diabetes
Wine reduce the risk of cancer
Wine improves cognitive function
Wine promotes longevity
There are many types of chocolate and not all chocolate taste the same and has the same nutritious benefits. There are so many kinds that are drenched in sugar, marshmallow, caramel and other unhealthy items.
Dark chocolate containing at least 70% cacao contains antioxidants that are good for our hearts. Dark chocolate contains fiber and magnesium. Dark chocolate also has a lower amount of sugar than milk chocolate but that does not mean you can eat all the dark chocolate you want because we have to learn to eat everything in moderation.
Chocolate is an antioxidant-rich superfood
Chocolate aides with blood pressure and blood sugar
Chocolate protects disease-causing Free Radicals
Chocolate might help prevent cancer
Chocolate helps to improve your heart health
Chocolate helps to improve your Cognitive Function
I was amazed at all of these unhealthy foods with health benefits!!!