Motivate your swimmers using this simple tactic
Locked doors, headaches, and intellectual need | Affording Play http://flip.it/9Moov
Mathematics, and how to teach both old and new math, and how to program.
The concept of the “locked door, and the key.”
I have a door that is locked. How do I get through it? You use a key. How do you respond when you are presented with another locked door the next time? You search for the key.
We want to teach our swimmers to have the keys to their success 🙂
Introduce a “problem” and then offer a series of solutions to solve that “problem”
You can swim like an Olympian some day. We can get you there. Here is a video that shows you what it looks like.
Watch the video, then attempt to swim like this.
Can’t swim exactly like an Olympian? We can get you there:
Do these drills:
One arm only Free
Now swim Freestyle again and attempt to swim like Olympian
These drills should help you swim better.
Introduce your locked doors before you offer the solutions.
In swimming: define where you want to go, and then offer solutions to how you get there.
Position 11: 3 things that you need to focus on to do it well:
- Arms straight
- Stay at the surface
- Look down
Problem? How do you do position 11 well? You do those three things.
(we talk about position 11 in our first podcast: SIP 001)
Problem: Position 11 is really difficult!!! How can we make it easier?
- Breathe Quickly
- Kick faster when you breathe
- Keep your body straight.
** Why do we do position 11 at all during swimming? Every stroke moves through position 11. Freestyle, backstroke, breaststroke, butterfly. Each arm stroke of every competitive stroke at some point moves through position 11.
Layers of problems, and offering multiple actionable solutions to fix them.
How do we provide self directed motivated learning in swimming? One of the steps of How to be an effective swimming lesson instructor is to inspire and motivate our swimmers to want to get better themselves; to be internally motivated.