The word "torah" or "law" (Strong's #8451) refers to the Old Testament, and can specifically refer to the first five books written by Moses. One of the most enlightening events of a Christian's life is the moment he or she discovers that Jesus Christ is interwoven into the entire Old Testament. It is said that Jesus can be found on every page of the Old Testament. Well He can also be found before you even open the book!
The Hebrew word is translated "law" or "Torah" in the English language. Much is lost in the translation, as they say. To understand what is lost, we must first realize that each character of the Hebrew language has a meaning. The word "Torah" is split up by character (Hebrew is read right to left) as follows:
= (Tav) Literal Meaning: a sign, a cross Symbolic Meaning: a covenant, to seal
= (Vav) Literal Meaning: nail Symbolic Meaning: "and", to add, to secure
= (Reysh) Literal Meaning: head Symbolic Meaning: person, the head, the highest
= (Hey) Literal Meaning: window, fence Symbolic Meaning: "the", to reveal
If the meanings of each letter in the word "Torah" are combined to make a sentence, an amazing truth is revealed:
Tav + Vav + Reysh + Hey = a cross, nail, the head, window
"Head" means "the highest" as in "the head of the household." "Window" means "to see clearly" or "to reveal" as in "a window to your soul." So, the combined meaning of the letters of the Hebrew word "Torah" are:
[To] a cross, [is] nail[ed], the highest, is revealed [in the Torah].
The Torah reveals the King of Kings, nailed to a cross.
Or if you want to keep the literal "head" for Reysh, you get:
Nailed to a cross, at his head, it is revealed
"Above his head they placed the written charge against him: THIS IS JESUS, THE KING OF THE JEWS."
- Matthew 27:37
Nailed to a cross, the head [of the corner], is revealed
"Jesus looked directly at them and asked, 'then what is the meaning of that which is written: "The stone the builders rejected has become the capstone [the head of the corner]"?'"
- Luke 20:17
Nailed to a cross, the head [of the Church], is revealed
"Christ is the head of the church, his body, of which he is Savior."
- Eph 5:23b
As you can see, God has revealed His redemption plan in places many had not even thought to look. Imagine what further inquiry would reveal.
Paul tells us, "For since the creation of the world God's invisible qualities - his eternal power and divine nature - have been clearly seen, being understood from what has been made..." (Rom 1:20) All we have to do is truly look, and everywhere we look, we will see God, the Creator. What an honor!
Mark Harpt is the Senior Editor for the World Wide Christian Web
Presented by Trinity Consulting