An operating system is an application that works as an interface between the hardware and the software. Same as a desktop software, a mobile application also needs a platform to operate. Android and iOS are two of the major mobile operating systems within the market.Mobile developers have the opportunity to create different sorts of applications for various operating systems, whether they’re hybrid or local, Android or iOS. With all of the varieties, choosing which OS to learn first can be confusing for a developer who’s just starting out.
Mobile development is the fastest-growing domain within the software industry, full of opportunities and freelance job possibilities. Mobile development—and the work of the mobile developer—is changing all the time, with upgraded versions of operating systems (OS), new devices, and new technology.
A few of the factors to consider when choosing which OS to specialize in first are listed below. Be sure that the choice is subjective.
1.Market Share And Number Of Users
As we all know, there’s only one Manufacturer that make devices for iOS: its Apple. But there are thousands of small and huge companies that produces devices for Android. This competition brings down costs, leading to a market overflowed with cheap Android phones, tablets, and other gadgets. Low costs have given Android the huge share of the market.
Around the world approximately 75 percent of people use Android and only 19 percent people use iOS. Android is the undoubted champ.
2.Time It Takes To Learn
Android and iOS both have distinctive complexities and standards, which result in different learning times for both. iOS is a mature operating system compared to Android, and it contains a predefined set of standards and rules. iOS strictly follows the rules, which frequently makes App Store approval troublesome. iOS moreover has pretty great tools, just like the newer Swift programming language, which makes its learning time possibly shorter.
Android is very huge, with more than 5000 gadgets from different sellers running different Operating System versions, screen sizes, and densities, which means a developer has to account more for compatibility and testing in the development process. In Android, outputs from the code can be a bit complex, which makes it troublesome for a beginner to understand it without jumping into the depths of the code. Since Android is programmed in the Java language, developers with a foundation in Java programming may discover it simpler to move to Android than iOS.
3.Application Development Tools
There are numerous mobile app development tools and platforms available in the market. Android has its own open development platform which too supports numerous third-party apps and tools, which is a brilliant thing for developers as they can try out numerous features and add more functionality to their applications.
Apple too provides a development platform along side with a limited set of tools, but developers cannot use any external tool for development, which makes it harder for them to test new things.
A developer with a computer – in truth, almost any computer – can build an Android app. Linux, Windows, and even Mac devices will do the work. Developing an iOS application requires your designer to have a Mac. But, You can use Virtual machine on a windows machine to develop iOS application. its time consuming so I would not recommend you to do that.
The rules of publishing an application on the Google Play Store are not that strict. You merely have to pay $25 and wait for a short endorsement process. As if this is not sufficient, you'll have to spent with $100 yearly fee to keep your app on the Apple App Store.
Publishing an iOS application requires a few level of patience. It'll have to go through a thorough process before it is finally approved. Chances of it being rejected are high.
6.Understanding And Exposure To The Code You Type In.
For iOS development, a predefined set of measures and rules listed by Apple must be followed in order for an application to be approved and distributed in the App Store. In Android, a developer has more opportunity and can explore diverse solutions for the same issue. This isn’t limited in Android, but in iOS this kind of flexibility is restricted. While iOS development, screens are designed with a drag & drop interface. This can be done with a mouse and shortcut keys, generally in interface implementation. You’re only able to include tabs with the NavigationController which is a graphical interface, giving you less choices. If you attempted to alter the position of tabs in iOS, for example, the app would be rejected.
The Android UI graphical interface isn’t as helpful or convenient, requiring you to write your code in XML for optimal screen design. In the Android UI graphical interface, formats and views are written in XML. Paddings, weights, margins, and gravity of Views are coded in XML.
Now, Which One Of Them Is Right For You ?
After comparing a few leading features of iOS and Android advancement, on one hand iOS could appear like a better choice for a beginner without much prior development experience. But if you do have prior desktop or web improvement experience, I would recommend learning Android development.
Learning Android gives a deeper understanding of how things work in mobile development. It gives you more control compared with iOS, permitting you to programmatically add or remove and alter your screens, and write screens in XML from scratch, all of which give you a better a stronger understanding of a mobile operating system’s work. In iOS, you've got less control over adjusting default behaviors of views/applications, and screens are built with a graphical interface (drag and drop).
Android moreover gives developers more opportunity to solve issues, and permits the developer to use whatever custom or native approach he needs.
Android gives an open choice to new developers. It permits you to test and convey your application on the Google Play store or any other medium in the event that favored. Android development usually takes more time to learn in comparison to iOS, but its complicatedness can boost up your confidence to learn other mobile development platforms and tools like iOS or Xamarin.
In short, I would Recommend You to start learning Android development if you want make career in web development and it generally it will take 2-3 month to learn and understand.