Dental crowns or caps are a great way to protect and prolong the health of your teeth. While crowns are typically used to improve the look of teeth that have been damaged as a result of trauma, decay, or cracking, they can also be used to simply improve the esthetics of a smile.
They are used frequently to straighten and enhance teeth that didn’t form correctly during their development or for teeth that are in poor position or have been discolored through years of neglect or abuse.
A dental crown can be made from a number of different materials including metal, porcelain, composite or a combination of these materials.
Am I A Good Candidate for Dental Crowns?
We recommend crowns for the following reasons:
- Poor tooth remaining due to cavity formation
- Cracked teeth
- A previously filled tooth where more filling is visible than actual remaining tooth. This causes serious concerns that the remaining tooth structure will fail leading to more costly procedures or loss of tooth.
- As a part of a root canal therapy. In most instances, a tooth should have a crown placed after root canal treatment because in a majority of cases these teeth have already had large fillings, weakening the overall strength of the tooth structure. The addition of the root canal treatment can cause them to become more brittle, increasing the chances for even more problems down the road. A dental crown provides extra protection for this already fragile tooth.
When you visit our office, we will candidly discuss with you which teeth may benefit from a dental crown and which type of crown would be best for your situation.
“What Does A Typical Dental Crown Procedure Look Like?”
Your crown treatment procedure will typically require two separate appointments. During your first visit, we will create the correct tooth form and capture it in a dental tooth mold. During the second visit we’ll actually seat your dental crown.
After your first visit you will leave with a plastic temporary crown. It is important that you take care of it. You may brush and floss the area but we recommend that you do not chew on it. If that is unavoidable, DO NOT chew hard, sticky foods. Chances are your temporary crown will come off and need to be replaced or remade.
Without the temporary tooth, you may have severely increased sensitivity so it’s recommended that you do not chew on it. If you break the remaining tooth structure you may loose the tooth or incur more expense to repair the damage.
Once you have the final crown seated you may return to normal chewing activities.
Congratulations! You now have a greatly reinforced tooth that will provide you with many, many years of function. However, to ensure this is the case, be sure to schedule regular dental visits (every 6 months) at our office and maintain a healthy and balanced diet. Daily brushing and flossing are also essential to being able to provide your crown the longest life span.