Walking down the street that afternoon, John was in his own little world.  He had lost his job, his wife was close to leaving him, and his retirement account had crashed along with the stock market.  He wasn't sure what he would do next and was lost in thought as he bumped shoulders with another man on the sidewalk.  He turned around to apologize and was shocked by what he saw when the man also turned around.  The stranger looked just like him!  He had the same brown wavy hair, crooked nose, and piercing blue eyes.  He was also wearing a black suit, but his was notably more expensive than John's.  

The two men stared at each other for a minute.  "I, uh, excuse me," John stammered.   The man stretched out his hand "I'm James," he said.  John shook James' hand tentatively.  "I couldn't help but notice that looking at you is a bit like looking in a mirror," James said. "I was just headed to the bar.  Would you like to join me?"  John thought about it.  What did he have to lose? "Sure," he said, "I could use a drink." 

John followed James around the corner and into a posh little corner bar.  They took a seat at a booth off to the side of the bar, and James ordered a pitcher of beer.  "Where are you from?" James asked.  John swallowed his drink and answered, "Manhattan, now.  I grew up in Virginia, though."  "Interesting," said James. "Do you have any siblings?" "No, only child," answered John, "You?"

"Well, yes and no.  I don't have any known siblings, but I discovered my birth certificate recently and realized that I was a twin.  That twin was adopted out and never spoken of again.  I've been looking for them ever since.  When I saw you on the sidewalk, I just had this feeling that it was my lucky day." 

John stared at James. He thought about how his parents looked nothing like him.  He thought about how just 20 minutes ago, he was at rock bottom.  Nothing to lose and no one to turn to. Life could only get better from here.

"Where do we start?" he asked James.  James smiled and slid a business card across the table. "Family Ties DNA" it said.  "Let's go," John said with a smile.
