Growth for the Middle Class
Canadian families need to have money in their pockets to save, invest, and grow the economy. We want to build an economy that works for the middle class, because when our economy works for the middle class, our country works for everyone.Canadians with taxable income between $44,700 and $89,401 per year will see their income tax rate fall – from 22 percent to 20.5 percent. This tax relief is worth up to $670 per year, per person – or $1,340 per year for a two-income household. Canada Child Benefit gradually phases out to ensure that it is targeted to the middle class and those working hard to join it. All families, with children, that have annual household incomes below $150,000 will receive more in monthly child benefit payments
Education And Economic Oppurtunity For First Nations
First Nations receive less funding per student than students in the provincial systems. As a result, First Nations students are behind in reading, writing, and numeracy, and less than half of students on reserves graduate from high school. All children have a right to high-quality education, and our values as Canadians demand that we take real action, in full partnership with First Nations, to close this persistent and unacceptable gap. Indigenous Peoples make up the fastest-growing segment of the Canadian population, and we know that strengthening economic outcomes and opportunities for First Nations is critical to our shared economic future. Canada only succeeds when we all succeed together, and it is vital to the future of our economy that we improve economic outcomes for First Nations. First Nations communities, educators, and students should not have to wait one more day for the critical resources they need and deserve. It is time for real change.
Canada’s environment and economy
There is an enormous opportunity for countries that invest in new, clean technologies. Companies around the world, with the support of governments, are finding solutions to the world’s environmental problems by integrating economic development and job creation with environmental performance.Canada has many leading firms developing advanced technologies to overcome complex environmental challenges. These Canadian firms are leaders in innovation and productivity.Canada is well positioned to become a significant player in these increasingly important and rapidly growing sectors: clean energy, energy efficiency, and clean water. Canada’s private sector is ready to compete. The provinces are moving forward with a national energy strategy. Canada should offer real environmental and economic leadership, but it will take a government and Prime Minister that make this a priority