Managing up to senior leaders and executive is a skill that most mid-level employees take years to master. It can be difficult to manage the personalities and unspoken factors that influence these interactions. Here are a few tips that can be of assistance: 

∙ Be clear and concise: structure your communication logically. For example, you could start by stating the issue or goal you want to discuss, then explain why it's important, and finally present your solution or recommendation. It's also important to avoid using jargon or acronyms that might make sense to you but are unfamiliar to a leader who isn't as "in the weeds" of the work. 

∙ Be prepared with the information you need to communicate: Think through what information your listener might need to understand your point of view, and then make sure you have that information ready. This can help you avoid being put on the spot or having to wing it. 

∙ Know your audience: Try to do some advanced research on who you'll be talking with and get an understanding of their perspective on the topic. What are their priorities? What are they looking to hear or discuss? With senior leaders, it's often helpful to understand their management style and how they like to receive information. Some leaders might like data and stats, while others want a more descriptive presentation. 

∙ Be proactive rather than reactive: Try to take the initiative to communicate, rather than waiting for a problem to arise or a question to be asked. Being proactive can also mean anticipating potential issues and addressing them before they become a problem. Try to get ahead of the game.

These tips can make an immediate impact towards being a more effective communicator. One more thing to keep in mind though: always seek feedback. Just because you considered the checklist above doesn't mean there isn't room for you to improve. Asking for feedback from your senior leaders can help you understand what's working well and where you can make adjustments.
