I am a mum to a daughter with long hair. Because of the length of her hair, it can be challenging to find a hair stylist who will work on her. Our usual stylist is away on holiday, but my friend recommended someone new to try. So I called the salon to book a trim and an ombre colour. When I spoke to the receptionist, I specifically asked if the stylist could cut long hair. The receptionist assured me that this stylist was fine with long hair. 
My daughter and I went to the salon for our appointment with my daughter's hair tied up in a bun. I met the new stylist and thanked her for fitting my daughter in since, again, we weren't regular clients and my daughter has long hair. The stylist took my daughter to the chair, covered her with the gown, and then asked my daughter to take her hair down to be brushed out. My daughter did as she was asked and then everything went wrong. The stylist immediately waved me over while telling my daughter to remove the gown. When I asked what the problem was, the stylist told me that my daughter's hair was too long. 
I was upset as I had specifically said she had long hair when booking the appointment. The stylist explained that she assumed long hair meant waist length, not knee length as my daughter's hair is and that she couldn't physically cut it because she has knee problems that prevent her from kneeling to do so. This was never conveyed to me before the appointment, so I requested my £50 booking fee be refunded. This is when things got worse. The stylist refused to refund the booking fee and insisted that I was told it was non-refundable when I booked, but clearly they didn't communicate with me the requirements on hair length while I was booking either. I demanded to speak to the manager. 
The stylist brought the owner over who did agree to refund the £50. The stylist again tried to blame me for the ordeal by insisting I should have been more specific about the hair length, but neither the stylist nor receptionist ever asked me for more details so I didn't expect it to be a problem. I was angry at the behaviour and contempt shown to me and my daughter by the stylist so after we left, I went onto the salon's Facebook stage to leave a detailed review of my experience and warn everyone that this stylist doesn't actually cut long hair necessarily. I'm still upset at the way my daughter and I were treated.
