Cats can’t talk. Their aggressive or destructive behavior, vocalization, or house soiling can be their only way of communicating a problem. By being aware of what constitutes “normal” behavior and learning to watch for warning signs, you can work to correct bad behavior and recognize potential health problems such as diabetes, arthritis, and senility.
Nutrition and Exercise
Obesity has become a chronic problem in cats, one that can lead to other health problems such as loss of mobility, chronic arthritis, chronic constipation, and endocrine-related illnesses such as hypothyroidism, diabetes, and Cushing’s disease. Good nutrition is one way to fight obesity.
At Arroyo, we offer a range of pet foods for specific dietary needs, including weight loss, as well as ideas for healthy foods you can prepare yourself and for feeding schedules.
Regular exercise is equally important. To prevent injuries, parasites, life-threatening diseases, and other health threats, and to protect indigenous animals, we recommend keeping cats indoors. Exercise your indoor kitty with toys, especially wands, that get him or her chasing and dancing after tempting items.
When you come to Arroyo for your pet’s examination, be sure to find out his or her weight and how it measures up on our body scale system.
You can be a partner in fostering your cat’s health and well-being.Arroyo’s services include behavior consultation.
Spaying and neutering are common and highly recommended procedures, ones that can help protect the health and safety of your cat and control the animal population.
Arroyo offers spay and neuter programs that adhere to the highest medical standards and provide total pre- and post-operative care, all at a competitive, predetermined price.
Science can’t explain the phenomenon, but numerous studies have shown that animal companions—just by their presence—can help lower your blood pressure and cholesterol levels, increase your chances of survival after a heart attack, reduce loneliness and depression, and spread all-around good cheer. Your presence, affection, and attention have an equally powerful and positive effect on your pet’s well-being.
If your pet becomes extremely ill or severely injured, sometimes the kindest thing you can do is have your veterinarian induce his or her death quietly and humanely through euthanasia. This decision is always serious and seldom easy. At Arroyo, we understand the special relationship you have with your pet and can help you weigh what is best for the animal as well as for you and your family. If you choose euthanasia, we can guide you through the medical and grieving process with care and compassion.
Arroyo Veterinary Hospital offers wellness programs that cover all aspects of preventive health for kittens and for cats in their active and senior years. Learn more about our full range of services.
Arroyo Veterinary Hospital is proud to be accredited by the American Animal Hospital Association, a member of the Sonoma Valley Chamber of Commerce, The Better Business Bureau and a certified Green Business