Being an active athlete can come with a lot of responsibility, and many sports can take their toll on the body. It can be hard to maintain good habits while being an athlete. But no matter if you are involved in a high-intensity physical sport, or play solo and travel a lot for events, it is important to keep your health in mind.
Here at Dentrix Dental Care, our office has tended many athletes and helped them to maintain excellent oral and dental health. Here are our tips for looking after your teeth as a sports player.
Use a Mouthguard
If you are playing a contact sport the most important thing you can do to protect your teeth is to use a mouthguard. Often, the big hits in contact sports can lead to falling and hitting your face or head. It can also lead to intense collisions that impact your jaw. This can cause people to chip their teeth when they land or even knock them loose.
Mouthguards provide support for your whole jaw, and they also provide a layer of protection for the teeth. In addition to keeping them in place during a hit, which makes you are less likely to loosen your teeth, mouth guards also provide a physical layer between your teeth and any ball or surface with which they may come into contact.
When considering what mouth guard to get, it is important to understand that some guards are made for preventing people from grinding their teeth while others are made with athletes in mind. There are
many options for athletes to find mouth guards. Whether you opt for a one-size-fits-all option or a custom-fitted mouthguard, you’ll find they provide the support and protection you need.
Watch Out for Sports Drinks
A big part of being an athlete is hydration and using the right sports drinks to keep you in shape.
Although a lot of sports drinks are great for replenishing energy, the amount of sugar used in them can cause serious harm. The bacteria in your mouth can use sugar to produce an acid that can weaken your teeth and lead you to face a higher risk of cavities.
Although the best solution will always be to simply drink water instead of sugary energy drinks, there are alternatives. Coconut water and sports drinks with a coconut water base are a great way to stay hydrated and replenish vitamins. This is a great alternative to most drinks that are juice-based.
Although there are some specific things to keep in mind while maintaining your dental health as a sports player, the most important thing you can do to keep your teeth in good health is to just be consistent about your hygiene. Often athletes are traveling for events and can spend a lot of time on the road. It is important that even when busy and on the road, you maintain the same routine. Often having a travel kit can help keep you consistent when even at your busiest.
Another problem sports players may have is that they often have very long tiring days. Fatigue often
leads to people neglecting their responsibilities. It is important that even when you are exhausted, you
continue your dental care. Consistent brushing, flossing, and regular check-ups are the only way to ensure your teeth maintain peak condition.
With these main points, keeping your dental health at its highest potential is within any athlete’s grasp.
While remembering that the most anyone can do is be proactive and knowledgeable about your own dental hygiene, these tips can help keep any busy sports player on top of their dental game.