Every year some of Cornwall's rich architectural and industrial heritage disappears.
Adverse weather, rain and snow, high winds and an ever-encroaching nature are all responsible for sapping the work of our forefathers and threatening to return the county's rich past to the dirt.
Human activity is also responsible for the damage done to Cornwall's old buildings. New development replace old structures, new roads are built and others become obsolete.
Whether criminal or accidental, people also cause a lot of damage to structures through fire and vandalism. Many industrial and religious buildings have been left to decay, abandoned through lack of use, a change in habits and industrial processes.
But not all is lost.
There is a certain beauty in derelict buildings and exploring them when possible is always instructive and educational but, more than that, it is sometimes possible to preserve these old buildings for posterity or see them reused and reopened so they are given a new lease of life.
The Cornish Buildings Group is one such organisation fighting to ensure that Cornwall's past has a future.
The group lists a dozen of so buildings and structures deemed at risk of falling into extreme disrepair or disappearing altogether if nothing is done to save them.
The group said: "As part of fulfilling one of its core objectives which is to encourage the preservation of historical architecture in Cornwall, we need to draw attention to buildings that are at risk of loss or serious decay."
Paul Holden, the chairman of the 50-year-old campaign group which has 300 members, said the aim of the group was to fight for Cornwall's heritage.
He said: "It's difficult to earmark success as we are a non statutory group who nudge the big boys like Historic England, Cornwall Council, and statutory consultees. We have made significant noises about St Columb Rectory, Saltash Station and lots of others.
"Buildings are worth saving to safeguard our heritage."
According to the Cornish Buildings Group, a building should be defined as “at risk” if it is in poor state of repair and there is no realistic plan for repair and future use.
A building will be defined as in poor repair if it exhibits three or more of the following characteristics:
- The roof is not weather tight
- Windows are boarded up or broken
- Gutters and rainwater goods are not functioning properly
- There are significant outbreaks of dry or wet rot
- The building is unoccupied or out of use
- Inappropriate alterations are proposed to the building
- An inappropriate use is proposed for the building
The group said: "Judgement is needed in designating a building at risk, but the above criteria provide an objective basis for assessing a building’s status.
"Judgement is particularly required with regard to future plans for the building. So as to encourage the proper treatment of historical buildings, the CBG should recognise realistic plans of owners or others for repairing or restoring the building.
"A plan for repair or restoration of a building will only be considered to be realistic if it is rigorous, prepared with appropriate expert input, has realistic timescales and is properly costed and resourced.
"It will probably be necessary to contact the owners of the building or their agents to understand whether such a plan exists. If owners refuse to discuss plans with a representative of the CBG, then there will be deemed to be no plan."
The derelict buildings that Cornwall has (almost) forgotten about:
Polvellan Manor - West Looe
John Lemon MP and notable composer of chants and sacred music built a cottage-style house on this site in 1787 after his election as Member of Parliament West Looe borough in 1784.
The house was later leased to the Buller family of Morval. A regular visitor to Charles Buller at Polvellan was John Stuart Mill whose correspondence has been published.
Both families were notable in the rise of Looe as a commercial town during the 19th century. During the 20th century the building supported the town both as a maternity hospital and from 1938 a private hotel which tracked the rise of tourism in the area.
The house was enlarged and embellished, probably in the 1840s and 1850s, and a rear wing was added at the end of the 19th century. Plans were produced in 1881 to alter the house, it was eventually altered by Liskeard architect John Sansom in 1898.
Mr Holden said: "The property is significant for its setting and outlook as much as the building’s architectural qualities. The symmetrical frontage of the mansion is designed to face east taking in distant views across Mill Pool and the estuary.
"We have applied unsuccessfully to get the building listed, the rejection notice said that much of the historic interior had been lost. It remains in a perilous state.
"We are pushing Cornwall Council to implement enforcement for repairs or consider other uses for the buildings. The matter has also been discussed with the Neighbourhoods and Public Protection team and the Empty Homes team to assess whether any joint working may be appropriate in this instance."
The Old Ship Inn - Cawsand
Villagers are trying to buy and bring back to life one of Cornwall's oldest pubs after it was destroyed by fire nearly five years ago.
For newcomers in Cawsand, The Old Ship Inn in Garrett Street is nothing but a derelict building in a lovely narrow street. But for locals it is a popular pub that used to thrive and has an amazing history.
The Grade-II listed building was built in the 18th century and received visitors such as Admiral Lord Nelson and singer Gracie Fields, who purchased a property in the village in the 1930s.
But, on October 5, 2013, everything changed.
The Old Ship Inn had already been empty for years before an intense fire ripped through it.
Since then, offers have been made to rebuild it, but nothing has come to fruition.
War World Two Bunker - Pednavounder, near Coverack
The vast building, half above ground and half below, was once the front line in Britain’s defences against a possible Soviet nuclear attack.
Today, it stands largely forgotten on the Lizard peninsula, partially flooded and stripped of its former glory. Much of the cavernous building is empty and used for storage by a local farmer while a section is the unexpected but perfect home of brewery Lizard Ales.
The original nerve-centre of the base, the bustling operations room of which once housed the aircraft plotting tables and display board, is now used for storing hay bales.
The privately-owned site was once part of a larger complex called RAF Treleaver. At its height the radar station had a personnel of 85 men and women and could take a further 700 in the event of an emergency. In a field outside the bunker stand five incongruous concrete buildings that once housed huge rotating radar arrays.
It was one of 66 stations built around the country at huge expense in the 1950s in a project codenamed Rotor. These stations was designed to give early warning for the interception of Soviet bombers. Yet by 1958, the building had been rendered obsolete in the Cold War arms race by supersonic aircraft and more advanced, centralised radar systems.
Blacksmith's Workshop - Wheal Busy - Chacewater
Working mine sites were dominated by engine houses - some 300 survive to-date throughout Cornwall - and areas of ancillary buildings mostly of timber construction of which very few remain.
Near Chacewater a unique workshop, constructed in stone, has survived.
This Grade-II listed building is a single large workshop that housed both the mine’s carpenters and blacksmiths workshops on Great Wheal Busy.
Divided inside by a cross wall incorporating a substantial blacksmith’s chimney, a hipped roof of king-post trusses gives an otherwise clear space more than 40ft wide. Two double-doors have massive cast-iron lintels in the same form as those at Perran Foundry.
This building has even been described by Historic England, as 'being a remarkably well surviving example of this type building and is perhaps one of the largest blacksmith's workshops in the country'.
However it has been neglected for more than 50 years. Mr Holden said: "This building-type must be considered the most urgent priority in the Mining World Heritage Site.
"We have spoken to Historic England and the council's portfolio holder for planning about this case. We will be writing to the Tregothnan agent in due course."
Meledor Farmhouse - St Stephens
This listed building is now a farm house which was once part of a large manor house. The building is thought to have been completed in 1510.
It lies on the western side of the Fal Valley with buildings of the clay industry overpowering its western boundary. The old arched doorway is now blocked.
The farmhouse has been empty for a couple of years, it is secure however there are signs of entry. The house is owned by clay pits operators Imerys and is located on an island within very active clay workings and is accessed past the front of an occupied clay company building.
It is of asymmetrical hall house style plan, lateral stack and (possibly reused) mullioned windows. the chimney is an unusual feature.
In the fine cottage garden are several corn mushrooms and a corn measure. The corn was stacked around the mushrooms to enable it to dry. The measure surmounts a vertical stem and consists of a "bowl" with a tubular hole. The most distant walls of the cowsheds show evidence of having once been a chapel.
Fistral Bay Hotel - Newquay
Closed off to the public by a flimsy fence around its perimeter, one could be forgiven for thinking the decaying building was haunted.
The hotel, located at 1 Pentire Avenue, was built with just one floor in 1910, before the sinking of the Titanic and the outbreak of the Great War.
It was one of several major hotels built in Newquay around the turn of the 20th century, alongside the Victoria, the Atlantic and the Headland.
Saltash Railway Station - Saltash
The first Cornish building a railway visitor sees when crossing the Grade-I listed Royal Albert Bridge (1859).
A station was built for The Cornwall Railway during its brief period of existence (1859 – 1889). As the volume of passengers grew, and with a change of ownership to Great Western Railway (GWR), the original station was removed and a far larger building was built in its place.
By 1904 saw the start of a commuter service to the Royal Naval Base, Devonport and for many years Saltash station was the busiest in Cornwall.
Royal visitors to the station include Prince Albert, 1859; King George VI, Queen Elizabeth II and Princess Margaret, 1950 and Queen Elizabeth II, 1959 for the bridge’s centenary celebrations.
The station was also the driving force behind the development of the market garden industry in Saltash and the Tamar Valley from the late 19the century while during the World War II, a unit of the Home Guard was based at the station to protect the strategically important bridge.
It has been derelict for over a decade with no real signs of development.
Saltash Town Council has bought the building, which hasn’t been used in almost 50 years, and hopes to transform the site into a modern station, complete with a café, toilets and ticket office.
A crowdfunding was launched last year to raise £400,000 to help finance the preoject.
Penhale Camp - Newquay
Located high up on the Cornish clifftops, Penhale Camp was once a hub of military activity where up to 700 soldiers returning from war would go to train and recuperate from another gruelling tour.
Closed off to the public by a two-metre high metal security fence topped by razor wire, the 97 buildings on the 16 hectare site have stood derelict for seven years.
The camp, near Holywell Bay about six miles outside of Newquay, was originally developed by the Ministry of Defence (MoD) in 1939 as an emergency measure to train anti-aircraft gunners.
Evidence of the gun sites, searchlight batteries and defensive positions, such as pillboxes and trenches, still remain today.
The majority of the site is currently occupied by abandoned Nissen huts, simple pitched roof concrete block-built huts, workshops, ancillary buildings, a farmhouse and areas of hard-standing.
St Paul's Church - Truro
An abandoned church which would cost £4 million to repair will be demolished if no private buyers comes forwards, the Church of England has warned.
There currently is a campaign to stop the landmark Church of St Paul, on Tregolls Road in Truro from being pulled down.
However fears remain that the iconic grade-II listed building could make way for a 'monstrosity development' or 'another set of retirement homes' because it imply costs too much to fix.
St Paul's Church on Tregolls Road in Truro has been a fixture of the cityscape since 1848 when it was erected by banker William Mansell Tweedy who paid for the work as an overflow church for the parish of St Clements.
The church is located in a conservation area and campaigners who would like to see it preserved believe it sets the tone for Cornwall's capital city as visitors come down.
Church bosses have confirmed that if no private developer comes forward to take on the work, demolition will remain an option for St Paul's Church.
Redruth Old Fire Station - Redruth
Despite having planning permission (2010) to convert this listed Victorian fire station into housing nothing has been done since.
Today the building in Falmouth Road, Redruth, is declining rapidly, its condition being monitored by the Old Cornwall Society.
It is a remarkable survival. Built of killas rubble fill with granite dressings, sla.te roof and single stage corner turret the station once housed two fire engines.
Mr Holden said: "Our group will continue to raise the profile of this important building that faces a bleak future with Historic England."
Nuclear bunker - Penzance
A top secret nuclear bunker remained hidden beneath the Grade II-listed York House building for around 40 years. Just before it is handed over to developers, it finally revealed its secrets and Cornwall Live's photojournalist Greg Martin was allowed onside.
Known locally as ‘The Vatican’ in its early years, York House was built in around 1825 for a businessman named Henry Pope, who died before it was completed. He passed the property on to his nephew John Pope Vibert, who finished the project and lived there until 1865.
In 1929, the West Cornwall School for Girls moved into York House and were based there until it eventually closed in 1967. After the school’s closure, the site was acquired by Penwith District Council, which used it for offices until the district was abolished in 2009 and the buildings became surplus to Cornwall Council’s needs.
Despite the planned housing development at the St Clare site, it doesn’t look like the bunker, or the nuclear air filtration system, is going anywhere.
Cornwall councillor Jim McKenna, who represents the St Clare area of Penzance and has been heavily involved with the proposed development to ensure that 38 out of the 127 homes will be affordable for locals, said: "Legal agreement between the various parties is due to be finalised in the next few weeks. This will allow the site preparation and building work to start.
"Most of York House will be converted into eight apartments, but there are no plans to develop the nuclear bunker, so it should stay as it is."
Marlborough House - Falmouth
Marlborough House stands in grounds of 1.6 acres and dates back to the early 1800s when it was built by Captain John Bull of the Falmouth Packet Service, who named his new home after his ship The Duke of Marlborough.
Of late it has been neglected and in 2015 its owner was evicted. The house was that year sold at auction for more than £650,000 but repairs still need to be carried out at the property.
Mr Holden said: "We initially raised concerns to Cornwall Council about the declining condition of this building - our local authority refused to get involved. Since the building has changed hands we have made representations to Cornwall Council and Historic England to ensure that the new owner gets the support they need in meeting the terms of listed building consent.
"This way the historic features both inside and outside will survive the conversion to flats. We, along with the Falmouth Civic Society, will monitor any progress made on site. In March 2016 Cornwall Council advised us that 'The Council is still in communications with the landowner about works at this property.
"The new owner is engaging in discussions with our Conservation Officer and applications are in process to address some of the works. This matter is therefore ongoing.
"We supported an application in 2017 for repairs and upgrades to the property. Both Historic England and Cornwall Council assure us that they are watching this project very closely and continue to advise the owner. A site visit in October 2017 was encouraging in that the building has some scaffolding and work appears to be progressing."
Carclew House - Mylor
Carclew House was a large Palladian country house near Mylor near Falmouth. For some generations owned by the Bonython family. It was rebuilt in the 18th century and again in the early 19th century, but was destroyed by fire in 1934.
The picturesque remains remain under threat and were added to the Heritage at Risk register as a matter of priority by Historic England last autumn.
Carclew House, which is Grade-II listed has been transferred from the Registered Parks and Gardens at Risk category onto the main buildings register to gather public support as its private owners look to take care of the ruins.
The large front entrance portico survives as the iconic face of the large ruin that had been used as a local building stone resource since it was deserted after the fire in 1934.
However the building has developed dangerous structural faults, partly due to Cornish weather but also as a result of intrusive vegetation growth, and is currently marked as priority category A meaning it is at risk of immediate risk of further rapid deterioration.
Poldark Cottage - Bodmin
The building, called Canaglaze, has exactly the same view as Captain Ross' cottage: it is located in an isolated spot on Bodmin Moor.
The two-bedroom house, which comes with a detached stone barn, sounds like a dream for Poldark fans, although living in it will probably be quite challenging.
The cottage has no windows, no roof, and tall grass in some of the rooms. Luckily, you can get water... from a well.
Exeter-based estate agents Knight Frank said it is a "tranquil property" with "no close neighbours".
Planning permission was granted by Cornwall Council in April 2015 to renovate it and maintain the two car parking spaces available.
Tall Trees Hotel - Mevagissey
Surrounded by properties with an average price tag of £315,000 sits a derelict former hotel that has been empty for years.
Neighbours claim the neglected property on Church Lane in Mevagissey is an "eyesore" and has become infested with rats.
The 16-bedroom property, which has also previously acted as a care home, has smashed and boarded up windows, a gaping hole in the middle of the roof and an overgrown garden.
The site has deteriorated over recent years, which is of particular concern given that it overlooks the village's biggest car park and is one of the first things visitors to the area see.
Despite having been left to decay, in 2015 the owners of the property sought permission to transform the building. This is still pending.
Carlyon Bay - St Austell
A developer gained permission for a £250 million project at Carlyon Bay more than two years ago, but nothing has yet materialised.
In 2015 Commercial Estates Group (CEG) obtained planning consent for a new beachside resort and residential community with 511 homes, restaurants, bars, cafes and shops plus spa and leisure facilities.
But the work has yet to begin and a spokesman for CEG has now revealed that the construction will be delayed further.
“This year we’ve focused on providing a programme of events and pop-ups to make the most of the beach for the local community and holidaymakers,” said CEG site manager Jacky Swain.
“As far as any construction work is concerned, we have nothing new to announce at the moment. We understand there’s a lot of interest and support for the project plus all the benefits it will bring to the area and CEG remains committed to the development."
St Cohan’s church - Merther
Almost invisible on Google Earth, in a tiny hamlet at the bottom of a dead end, yet only a few miles as the crow flies from Truro city centre, lies one of Cornwall’s most remote churches.
If you’ve never heard of the St Cohan’s church in Merther, you are not alone, because it was the lack of visitors that ultimately sealed its fate.
Built around 1370, Merther Church enjoyed a loyal congregation right up until the end of the 19th century, even benefitting from an impressive restoration in 1844. But by the turn of the century it seems there was less money for church renovations and a wooden shed-like structure was built on top of the tower to house the bells and presumably save the cost of rebuilding.
It was soon deemed structurally unsafe to ring the bells and, as the population dwindled in Merther, it grew in nearby Tresillian, where a Chapel of Ease was rebuilt in 1904 to become the Holy Trinity Church, the successor to St Cohan’s church.
Two of the bells, the font, a Jacobean pulpit and a statue of St Anthony were removed from Merther Church and rehomed in the new parish church. With no graveyard at the Holy Trinity Church at that time, Merther Church had only one use left and became a mortuary chapel in the early 20th century.
With so little use and no money for upkeep, the church at Merther soon fell into disrepair and in 1928 historian Charles Henderson described it as ‘a ghost of a church’ in an article in the West Briton.
Church of St Peter - Mithians
Despite its serious structural failings, plans have been submitted to convert this redundant Victorian church into residential use.
The Church Building Council endorsed plans in September 2014 but had reservations about aspects of the conversion. Designed by William White in the Early English style.
The listed building is understood to have been sold and could be turned into residential flats.
Mr Holden said: "We have raised questions with the church Commissioners and with Cornwall Council over the safety of its bells and interiors. We will continue to monitor."
Loggans Mill - Hayle
A four storey mill, once water driven steam powered, this 1850 Grade-II listed mill in Hayle has been vacant for many years and is listed on the Heritage England Risk Register.
Various schemes have been put forward to convert to residential use. The Buildings Preservation Trust has been involved in discussions and feasibility studies over its future.
Despite interest and support given by Cornwall buildings Preservation Trust this mill has no long term future.
This building is also on the Save Heritage at Risk register. There are plans to transform the building into office space as part of the Gateway Development.
Carclaze Road primary school - St Austell
The building, on Carclaze Road in St Austell, is more than 100-years-old and was built by the local communities of Tregonissey and Carclaze.
Famous historian, poet and author A.L. Rowse was educated at the school. The building became a haven for anti-social behaviour as well as becoming littered with drug paraphernalia since it was closed eight years ago when the new state-of-the-art primary school opened in 2010.
Now there is a pre-application by Cornwall Rural Housing Association in place seeking advice to convert an existing old school building and grounds on Treverbyn Road and Carclaze Road in St Austell into 15 new affordable homes.
The application would see the former school building itself turned into 10 apartments, while the playground would house five additional buildings.
In its application to Cornwall Council Alan Leather Associates Architects said: "The submitted scheme intends to convert the former school into duplexes and apartments. There are a number of constraints that dictate how the design progresses, which have proved challenging, this in turn may lead to units being larger and more costly to develop than typical affordable schemes."
Charlestown Chapel - Charlestown
This former Wesleyan Chapel is another building that has been derelict for over a decade. It has long been on the Historic England Buildings at Risk Register.
Listed building consent was approved in 2013 for Laurence Associates to convert the rear of the building, the old Sunday School, into three residential flats and to built two new dwellings to the rear. Further permission was granted to stabilise the chapel itself. No work has taken place since. The chapel is in a Conservation Area.
Mr Holden said: "We have pursued this case over the past year and highlighted in the media. Cornwall Council have instructed their Enforcement Team to set up a new investigation as regards the state of the building which is no longer watertight.
"In March 2016 we were advised by Cornwall Council that In 2017 we have continued to challenge Cornwall council on this building and encouraged the local community to petition. This has been done with no effect on the continuing decline of the structure.
"In May 2017 all conditions were discharged which essentially means that the owner has three years to put an application forward. We fear the worse for the chapel and will raise it with historic England when we next meet."
Post office - St Austell
The boarded-up Royal Mail sorting office and post office has been closed since 2016 after 100 years of good and loyal services when a new post office opened within WH Smith.
The moves came after the Post Office announced in January that year that St Austell was one of nearly 100 post offices in line to be restructured.
Now a developer has lodged a notification for prior approval for a proposed change of use application with Cornwall Council to retain the existing building and transform it into residential dwellings.
The plans from developer Tempophase and Purl Design Architects propose to build seven one-bedroom flats and three two-bedroom apartments.
A determination deadline has been set for March 26.
Kennall Vale - Ponsanooth
Once the site of a thriving gunpowder manufacture that fed the mining industry, Kennall Vale has now been entirely reclaimed by nature.
At the peak of productivity in the mid-19th century Kennall Vale gunpowder works were producing 4,000 to 5,000 barrels of quality gunpowder a year.
Employing 50 men and supplying both the local and international mining industry meant the huge wheels and cogs in the mills rarely stopped turning.
Now, rather than the thrum and clangs of machinery you are more likely to heard bird songs and the sound of water cascading over rocks for used to be a place of heavy industry has become a nature reserve once more.
After more than two years of roadworks, a new stretch of dual carriageway on the A30 at Temple was officially opened in the summer of 2017.
It was the latest in a history of major improvements to the main route into Cornwall that have been ongoing since the seventies in a bid to ease congestion.
At Temple, the existing A30 was widened to create a dual carriageway, but previous improvements have seen completely new sections and bypasses built, consigning parts of the old A30 route to history.
Although most of the old A30 route that was replaced still exists as single carriageway roads that can be driven on, there are a few abandoned sections that became redundant overnight.
Slowly, over the last few decades, these roads to nowhere have quietly started to be reclaimed by nature.
We could have included here any of the 300 remaining derelict tin mines littering Cornwall's landscape for they are what is most associated with the county's industrial and architectural heritage.
Wheal houses are so iconic they have become the symbol for Cornwall in many ways and their imagery has been used to sell everything the Duchy has to offer from cheese to beer, gin to flowers, or tourism.
This is Wheal Uny but it could easily have been Wheal Coates near St Agnes or any other one.
Wheal Uny is on the northern outcrop of the Great Flat Lode near Redruth. According to historical records between 1826 and 1856 records show that Wheal Uny produced 755 tons of 4.5% copper ore and 7,660 tons of black tin.
Wheal Uny mine was opened at the end of the 19th century, but was only operational for a short period. It closed in 1893. The engine used at the mine had already been installed in two mines previously, and is typical how mine parts were reused.
The company that ran the group of mines east of Church Town (East Wheal Uny, Clijah, Wentworth, Wheal Buckets, Wheal Perseverance) was liquidated in 1837, and Wheal Uny itself was closed and put up for sale in 1839.
Now the site is overgrown and many open mines shafts litter the landscape. They have been fenced off but the area remains dangerous for those who wander off without due care or attention.