Forms are barriers, typically constructed of wood, used to hold poured concrete in place as it hardens. The main goals in form building for walls are creating strong, stable forms and exactness in layout. The building code and/or your architectural drawings provide clear guidelines to follow as you dig your trenches, plan and build your forms. Checking your work for accuracy before you pour will save headaches during building.
Tools and Materials
The tools and materials required for form work are fairly simple compared to many other aspects of construction. Strings help lay out the trenches and establish the form positions. Round metal stakes with predrilled holes are useful for assembling form boards. Many builders use the joist stock for their form boards, which are typically two-by-six or two-by-eight. One-by-twos can be used for the kickers -- the diagonal boards that hold the forms plumb. A circular saw is useful for cutting the form boards, and hammers are necessary to pound in the stakes. Use duplex nails, which have a double head that makes them easier to remove.
Proper layout prior to building forms is crucial. Use batter boards and string together with a plumb bob to establish where the trenches for the wall's footers are located. Batter boards are horizontal boards nailed to posts used to indicate the position of the wall being built. They ensure accurate form positions when laid out properly. Extra care should be taken during this step that the plans are being followed and all lines are being drawn in accordance with the plans.
Form boards may be chosen from the same stock as the floor joists. They are arranged in horizontal runs, which are fastened to round metal stakes. Round stakes are easier to pull out than flat ones. Nails may be used as spacers between the boards to allow a space for the form ties. Diagonal kickers must be installed as well to brace the forms and keep them plumb as the concrete is poured. The kickers can be pounded into the ground and then nailed into the top form board.
Checking for Accuracy
Your forms must be accurately placed. It is much easier to correct a problem in form layout than it is to change the position of a poured concrete wall. Make sure the top form board is level using a builder's level or transit. If a transit is not available, a carpenter's eight-foot level can be used, although it is not as accurate. Use a plumb bob or smaller level to check the forms are straight up and down. If the walls are for a square edged foundation, make sure the corners are at right angles. All plans should be rechecked multiple times before concrete is poured.
- Building Your Own House; Robert Ruskind.
- Hemera Technologies/AbleStock.com/Getty Images