[Editor note: The Climate Intelligence Foundation (CLINTEL), dedicated to “challenging governments and organisations to substantiate the conclusions in their publications on climate change and climate policies,” has sponsored the World Climate Declaration (below). This declaration will be formally disseminated on November 20th in Brussels.]
A group of more than 750 scientists and professionals has prepared this urgent message to the United Nations and the European Commission: Climate science should be less political, while climate policies should be more scientific.
Scientists should openly address uncertainties and exaggerations in their predictions of global warming, while politicians should dispassionately count the real costs as well as the imagined benefits of their policy measures.
The Declaration follows:
Natural as well as anthropogenic factors cause warming
The geological archive reveals that Earth’s climate has varied as long as the planet has existed, with natural cold and warm phases. The Little Ice Age ended as recently as 1850. Therefore, it is no surprise that we now are experiencing a period of warming.
Warming is far slower than predicted
The world has warmed at less than half the rate predicted by IPCC on the basis of modeled anthropogenic forcing and radiative imbalance. It tells us that we are far from understanding climate change.
Climate policy relies on inadequate models
Climate models have many shortcomings and are not remotely plausible as EU policy tools. They blow up the effect of greenhouse gases such as CO2. In addition, they ignore the fact that enriching the atmosphere with CO2 is beneficial.
CO2 is plant food, the basis of all life on Earth
CO2 is not a pollutant. It is essential to all life on Earth. Photosynthesis is a blessing. More CO2 is beneficial for nature, greening the Earth: additional CO2 in the air has promoted growth in global plant biomass. It is also good for agriculture, increasing the yields of crops worldwide.
Global warming has not increased natural disasters
There is no statistical evidence that global warming is intensifying hurricanes, floods, droughts and suchlike natural disasters, or making them more frequent. However, there is ample evidence that CO2-mitigation measures are as damaging as they are costly.
EU climate policy must respect scientific and economic realities
There is no climate emergency. Therefore, there is no cause for panic and alarm. We strongly oppose the harmful and unrealistic net-zero CO2 policy proposed for 2050. If better approaches emerge, and they certainly will, we have ample time to reflect and adapt. The aim of European policy should be to provide reliable and affordable energy at all times.
Our advice to the European leaders is that science should strive for a significantly better understanding of the climate system, while politics should focus on minimizing potential climate damage by prioritizing adaptation strategies based on proven and affordable technologies.
Press Release: “There is no climate emergency, say 700 experts“
A new, high-level global network of more than 700 prominent climate scientists and professionals has submitted a declaration that there is no “climate emergency”.
The group has recently sent the Declaration with a registered letter to António Guterres, Secretary-General of the United Nations. This action has received overwhelming response from all over the world.
Now the Group has sent the Declaration with a registered letter to Jean-Claude Juncker, the outgoing President of the European Commission, Ursula von der Leyen, the incoming President and Vice-President Frans Timmermans, responsible for the Europe’s Climate Policy.
The group’s letter warns European leaders that “the general-circulation models of climate on which international policy is at present founded are unfit for their purpose”.
The Declaration adds that the models, which have predicted far more warming than they should, “are not remotely plausible as policy tools”, in that “they … exaggerate the effect of greenhouse gases such as CO2” and “ignore the fact that enriching the atmosphere with CO2 is beneficial”.
On November 20 there will be a press meeting in the building of the European Parliament in Brussels at 15:00, starting with three short opening addresses:
After the opening addresses the Declaration with the list of experts will be presented to members of the European Commission and members of the European Parliament.
There will be ample time for press and invitees to ask questions. At around 17:00 we will continue the discussion in an informal setting.
If you wish to attend the press meeting in Brussels, please send a message to firstname.lastname@example.org Detailed address in Brussels: European Parliament, Spinelli entrance at Rue Wiertz, conference room ASP 1H1