This course of class 9th Science of HPBOSE is provided in bilingual (द्विभाषिक) medium. Bilingual medium means the explanation (व्याख्या) of the chapters is given in both languages English and Hindi. The whole course is mapped strictly to Himachal Pradesh Board which comprises online video lectures, MCQs (बहुविकल्पी प्रश्न), assignments, sample papers, model test papers, and previous years’ question papers.
Comprehensive and detailed video lectures-
Our online video lectures comprise explanation (व्याख्या) of chapters of the syllabus. These video lectures are exclusively (केवल) prepared by our experienced teachers like Amit Ajmani (20 years’ experience), Vrinda Khurana (15 years’ experience) and others. The teachers explain each chapter in detail and easy language so that the student could easily understand the concept. They teach the chapters with help of diagrams (चित्र) and descriptive images. Plus, the teachers explain the chapters in both of the languages Hindi and English.
MCQs and Assignments-
After understanding the chapter thoroughly with our video lectures, solve the multiple-choice questions and assignments given with every chapter. These MCQs (बहुविकल्पी प्रश्न) are given in solved and unsolved versions so that after solving the questions, you can check the answer with solved version. Solving this assessment will make you very confident. Moreover, you will get detailed knowledge of every chapter.
We provide an Exam- Preparation Kit wherein you will get solved (हल किया) and unsolved (न सुलझा हुआ) sample papers (नमूना पत्र), model test papers and question papers. When you complete the syllabus, solve these question papers daily. Solving the question papers will give you practical situation of appearing in exams. It will make you better with time management that how much time should be allocated to a particular question. Plus, when you solve the question papers regularly (नियमित तौर पर), you will be very confident on actual day of exam.
Live sessions are conducted to clear your doubts on our YouTube channel at free of cost. The teachers discuss a chapter and the students ask their doubts. Plus, the teachers also tell important questions and important writing tips to score better in the exams.
The starting price of our course is just Rs 30 of one day. Additionally, Bright Tutee provides the courses for different durations like 1 day, 1 week, 2 months, 6 months, 1 year, etc. Learn anytime and anywhere-
Bright Tutee is a self-paced study platform which means that you can study the whole course at the comfort of your home. You do not have to waste your valuable time in travelling to tuitions. You get the whole study material in this course which you can access by purchasing our course.
HPBOSE Class 9th Science course is a full course to learn Science in better way as well as to score the best marks in exams. It provides you the whole study material plus free live sessions for doubt clearance. If you study with this course sincerely, you can not only raise your percentile by 10 to 30 percent but also get full marks in Science.