This set of Highway Engineering Interview Questions and Answers focuses on “Development of Road Construction, Highway Development in India”.
1. The main features of the roman road do not include the following?
a) They were built straight
b) They were strong
c) They excavated soft soil till hard strata was obtained
d) The total thickness was 0.75m to 1.2m
Explanation: The romans built roads by excavating till the hard strata they were much stronger than required for animal drawn carts that time.
2. The tresaguet method of laying roads was developed in the year?
Explanation: The tresaguet method was developed in 1764 AD in France after the fall of Roman Empire, in later years better methods were developed.
3. The method of providing a definite cross slope by varying thickness of foundations under roads was proposed by?
Explanation: Telford insisted to provide a definitely varying cross slope by varying the thickness under the foundation of stones.
4. The cross slopes provided for drainage water under Macadam’s construction road is?
a) 1 in 10
b) 1 in 20
c) 1 in 36
d) 1 in 40
Explanation: The slope provided is 1 in 36, it was proposed by Macadam. He also completely changed the construction methods that were used earlier.
5. The broken stones that were used in the construction of roads in macadam’s construction were?
a) 10mm and 20mm
b) 20mm and 40mm
c) 30mm and 50mm
d) 50mm and 100mm
Explanation: The bigger stones that were passing through 100mm sieve were used at the bottom and compacted and the smaller stones that were passing through 50mm were used at the top of the pavement.
6. The Indian Roads Congress was formed in the year?
Explanation: The Indian Roads Congress was formed in the year 1934 after a recommendation from the jayakar committee after a meeting in year 1928 and CRF was formed in 1929.
7. A research organisation that was formed for the research and development organisation works related to roads was?
a) Indian Roads Congress
b) Central Research Institute
c) Central road found
Explanation: The jayakar committee recommended that a research board should be formed for all research and development works related to roads and it was formed in 1950.
8. The first 20 year development plan is also called as?
a) Nagpur road plan
b) Lucknow road plan
c) Bombay road plan
d) Delhi road plan
Explanation: The First 20 year development plan conference was held in Nagpur, hence it is also called a Nagpur road plan, second was held in Mumbai and third in Lucknow.
9. The east west corridor of National highway connects which of the following cities?
d) Porbandar- Silichar
Explanation: The Phase II of NHDP consists of linking the east west corridor from Porbandar in Gujarat to Silichar in Assam.
10. Primary system of roads consists of?
a) National highway
c) National highway and Expressway
d) State highway
Explanation: The Primary system consists of National Highway and expressway. The secondary system consists of State highway and other Major District Roads.
11. The 4th 20 year road development plan aims for vision in which year?
Explanation: The 4th 20 year development plans aims for vision 2021. But however it was well before 2000.
12. The National Highway network should be expanded so that no part of a country is more than 50km away from NH is policy of which twenty year road development plan?
a) 1st 20 year road development plan
b) 2nd 20 year road development plan
c) 3rd 20 year road development plan
d) 4th 20 year road development plan
Explanation: In the 3rd year road development plan it was proposed that the national highway should be expanded such that no part of the nation should be 50km away from a national highway.
Sanfoundry Global Education & Learning Series – Highway Engineering.
To practice all areas of Highway Engineering for Interviews, here is complete set of 1000+ Multiple Choice Questions and Answers.