According to Wikipedia
Fripp Island is a 6.546 sq mi (16.954 km²) barrier island located along the Atlantic coast of the lowcountry part of South Carolina. It is approximately 21 miles from Beaufort, 96 miles south of Charleston, and 65 miles north of Savannah, Georgia. Some of the neighboring islands include Hunting Island, St. Helena Island, and Lady’s Island. The island mostly serves as a residential vacation resort, but several hundred residents make it their permanent home. It is also the most seaward of the South Carolina Sea Islands.
According to the 2000 census, Fripp Island has a year-round primary population of 887 residents. The realistic figure is likely higher than reported because many homeowners consider Fripp Island property as second homes and may spend weeks or months on the island, but do not consider it their primary residence. In summer months the island’s population can rise to about 5,000 due to an increase in visitors.
Fripp Island is a private, gated community, run by the Fripp Island Property Owners Association (FIPOA) since the mid-1980s. It is not a municipality or a census designated place.
100 deer/mi2 , continuing their devastating ecological impacts.”
Culling reduces deer population as opponents push contraception program, Island Packet, Jan 30, 2016
Read more here: http://www.islandpacket.com/sports/recreation/outdoors/article57507133.html#storylink=cpy
Deer-culling programs seen as successful in Beaufort County communities, Island Packet, Dec 15, 2013
Doe were tranquilized and then injected annually with a hormone to control reproduction. The process can cost about $1,000 per deer annually.
The island’s deer population dropped to about half its size from when the program began, according to a 2011 progress report submitted to the DNR by the humane society. Birth rates were low compared to nearby Hunting Island, which was used as a control site, according to the report.
Currently, deer contraception is only allowed in university studies and in federal research since none of the chemical injections are government approved.
Fripp Island general manager Kate Hines hopes the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency will approve their use. “The program proved itself,” Hines said. “Numbers aren’t explosive but are beginning to creep up again as the contraceptive treatments wear off, and feel we’re a good site for it because we’re so isolated. The deer can’t wander off elsewhere, and we’re too crowded to allow hunting or to bring in sharpshooters.