02 May Answers to your questions!
Being ecological is popular and a lot easier than it once was. Today’s generation is increasingly aware of the importance of preserving the environment and protecting the nature that surrounds us. Small, simple measures can make a huge difference. In other words, our lifestyle can impact our planet.
If you’d like to embark on a more ecological lifestyle, composting is a good place to start, as you can get going in a flash, easily making it part of your daily routine. All organic materials you compost rather than throw in the garbage will be used to enrich the soil. To do it right, however, there are a number of things to be taken into account. Got questions on this subject? The answers to these most frequently asked questions will help you with your daily organic waste collections!
I AM ALREADY COMPOSTING. AM I STILL REQUIRED TO PARTICIPATE IN THE TOWN OF ROSEMÈRE’S ORGANIC WASTE PICK-UPS?
Of course, the Town encourages you to keep making your own compost, while disposing of organic materials not recovered in household composting (animal waste, fats, soiled fibres, etc.) in your brown bin. The brown bin then becomes a welcome complement to your composting efforts, helping you further reduce the amount of waste you produce! See the blog on this subject for the list of materials accepted in the brown bin.
HOW TO AVOID ODOURS, THE PROLIFERATION OF GRUBS AND THE PRESENCE OF ANIMALS?
To limit odours related to organic waste, the Town of Rosemère will conduct pick-ups every Monday, year-round. In addition, the Town has fitted the bins with a lock that will prevent small animals from opening them. Here are a few tips to help you avoid odours, the proliferation of grubs and the presence of animals:
– Have your bin emptied every week, even if it is not full, by putting it out by the side of the street.
– Wrap your moist food waste, meat and bones in a paper bag or newsprint.
– Line your brown bin with a paper bag designed for this purpose or put newsprint on the bottom of the bin.
– Place your bin in the shade, especially in summer.
– When your bin is empty, rinse it from time to time, using water and vinegar or baking soda.
WHO OWNS THE BROWN BIN AND KITCHEN MINI-BIN?
The brown bin belongs to the Town of Rosemère and is assigned to your address, its cost being amortized thanks to municipal taxes. If you move, clean the bin and leave it in your driveway. The kitchen minibin will not be replaced should it be broken or lost.
WHAT TO DO IF YOUR BROWN BIN IS BROKEN OR STOLEN?
If your brown bin is defective, broken or stolen, contact the Public Works and Environment Department at 450 621-3500, ext. 3300.
WHAT IS GREEN WASTE?
Green waste includes dead leaves, lawn clippings small branches and residue from flowerbeds. It will be picked up every Monday, i.e., the same time as the organic waste pick-up.
WHAT CONTAINERS CAN I USE FOR GREEN WASTE IF THE BROWN BIN IS INSUFFICIENT? AND AM I REQUIRED TO PROVIDE THEM?
Basically, you provide the containers used for the pick-up of green waste. You can use paper bags, cardboard boxes or reusable containers (except for the grey and blue bins) identified with a sticker provided by the Town of Rosemère. You ca obtain additional stickers from the Technical Services, Public Works and Environment Department at 450 621-3500, ext. 3300.