May 6, Died: He married again later in life. She participated in the Civil Disobedience Movement. May 27, An influential leader of the Indian freedom struggle, he became the first prime minister of independent India in and held the post until his death in
Nehru and Gandhiji Mahatma Gandhi and Jawaharlal Nehru were both stalwarts in Indian national struggle for independence. The first meeting was enough to impress Nehru regarding Gandhi and the charm of this relationship increased and flourished with passing time.
In Mahatma Gandhi, Jawaharlal Nehru had found the absolute leader who was capable of handling the entire nation. This quality he found missing in almost all the Indian political leaders of the time that included his father, Motilal Nehru.
The greatest quality that went in favor of Mahatma Gandhi was his image. General masses could identify themselves through Gandhiji.
In the initial stages of his political career, Jawaharlal Nehru found everything regarding Gandhiji amazing and great. The Satyagraha movement against the Rowlatt Act fascinated Jawaharlal Nehru greatly and he was keen to join the movement with great deal of enthusiasm.
But he was dissuaded by his father to join the movement then and there and asked him to follow the proceedings of the mass-movement. With satyagrahas becoming the common form of revolt against the various forms of British atrocities, Mahatma Gandhi gained an important place in the Indian freedom struggle.
There was also immense mass following that helped Gandhiji to attain that grand stature. He could no longer restrain himself from joining active politics and participate in the Indian independence struggle.
These were mainly aimed at improving and changing the economic scenario in the country. Jawaharlal Nehru joined the campaign with full fervor and enthusiasm. The Congress party was totally reformed and remodeled to reach to the people at the grass root level.
This called for involvement of the masses in all the action that was planned for attaining freedom from the shackles of the British rule. Nehru completely supported the idea as he knew that without this support, attaining independence would be a next to impossible job.
In the yearJawaharlal Nehru was first arrested and sent to prison. After this, he was sent to the prison several times and passed nine years of his life in prison for the freedom struggle. Mahatma Gandhi in the mean time became the supremo of the Indian National Congress.
The civil-disobedience movement was also called off by Gandhiji. There was also some political strife that was going on in the Indian National Congress at this time.
InJawaharlal Nehru was appointed the General Secretary of the Congress just for a period of two years. He again gained back the position in for two years.
This was declared at the annual Congress Session at Lahore.Jawaharlal Nehru (–), Motilal’s only son, emerged as Gandhi’s designated successor to the Congress Party’s leadership during the s.
A Fabian socialist and a barrister, the younger Nehru was educated at Harrow School, London, and at Trinity College, Cambridge, and .
Gandhi highlighted that over the years Congress governments have taken Nehru's idea forward and cited the examples of Panchayati Raj and the Right to Information Act. Watch video · His daughter, Indira Gandhi, and grandson, Rajiv Gandhi, later served as prime ministers.
Jawaharlal Nehru: Early Life and Family Jawaharlal Nehru . The Nehru–Gandhi family is an Indian political family that has occupied a prominent place in the politics of India.
|Mahatma Gandhi - HISTORY||Nehru' was variously influenced by Gandhiji. However, there were some differences between Gandhi and Nehru.|
|Jawaharlal Nehru | Biography, Significance, & Facts | feelthefish.com||Visit Website Infour years after his parents had made the suitable arrangement, Nehru married year-old Kamala Kaul.|
|Jawaharlal Nehru: Early Life and Family||An Indian would salute both leaders as Gandhi and Nehru are two great leaders that worked for the freedom of India from the British rule. They both had different personalities although they worked for the same goal.|
The involvement of the family has traditionally revolved around the Indian National Congress, as various members have traditionally led the feelthefish.comt region: New Delhi, India.
Jawaharlal Nehru (/ Indira Gandhi, Jawaharlal Nehru, Rajiv Gandhi and Sanjay Gandhi.
Nehru signing the Indian Constitution c Lord Mountbatten swears in Jawaharlal Nehru as the first Prime Minister of free India at the .
Gandhi vs Nehru. Difference between Gandhi and Nehru is not much considered since they are both accepted as heroes in the Indian history. An Indian would salute both leaders as Gandhi and Nehru are two great leaders that worked for the freedom of India from the British rule.