Winter is a wonderful time to reconnect with loved ones, but it can also be a time of loneliness, depression and stress. Metabolic stress due to poor diet, low physical activity and psychological stress is rising and is estimated to affect as much as one-third of modern populations. Tulsi, herb also called Holy Basil, not only helps protect and detoxify the body, it can also help to reduce stress by relaxing and comforting the mind through various mental benefits including anti-depressant activity, positive effects on memory and cognitive function. The psychotherapeutic properties of tulsi have been proved to be comparable effects to diazepam and other antidepressants drugs. Regular consumption of tulsi tea is an essential lifestyle practice recommended as a preventive measure to improve the ability to adapt to both psychological and physical stresses in order to prevent the development of stress-related diseases. The cognitive and memory-enhancing properties of tulsi produce a calming effect that leads to clarity of thought, along with a more relaxed and peaceful disposition differing from caffeinated beverages such as coffee and tea, which heighten arousal and may cause physical and mental agitation. Furthermore, tulsi does not create the same physical dependence as caffeine so it can be safely consumed on a regular basis without withdrawal effects.
Moreover, tulsi is recommended as a treatment for many conditions including anxiety, cough, asthma, diarrhea, fever, dysentery, arthritis, eye diseases, otalgia, indigestion, hiccups, vomiting, gastric, cardiac and genitourinary disorders, back pain, skin diseases, ringworm, insect, snake and scorpion bites and malaria. Tulsi can be natural health promoter and protector against the many pollutants, pesticides, pharmaceuticals, heavy metals, radiation and industrial toxins.
Take-Home Message: Tulsi is a powerful herb that can so wonders in keeping us healthy mentally as well as physically. Additionally, it can help treat various illnesses.
Tulsi - Ocimum sanctum: A herb for all reasons. (2014, October). Retrieved from https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4296439/