It depends on the camera and the situation, but as a rule of thumb, it's usually better not to -- at least toward a bright mid-day sun.
I think a possible reason for the caution about pointing the camera at the sun comes from early video sensors which would quickly get a burn on them which was difficult to get rid of. With today's 3 CCD chips, it is highly unlikely the same burn will occur but it is always wise to take caution and look after your gear in a normal manner and don't expose it to unneccessary risk.
Many videographers take exquisite video of sunrises and sunsets, and these do virtually no harm to the camera since the light is far less bright than mid-day sun. Others use extremely dark filters (such as those found in welding goggles) to photograph the sun during solar eclipses.
However, the biggest reason to be careful when pointing a video camera toward the sun is because the lens of the camera can actually act like a magnifying glass and focus the rays of the sun into a very small area on the lens. If left in place long enough, this can burn a hole. Remember doing this as a kid when you took a magnifying glass outside and burned holes in a leaf by focusing the sun on it? You're using the same principle when pointing a camera lens at a bright mid-day sun.
It's actually OK to point your camera toward the sun when you're shooting video (this means you're using the sun as a back light in your pictures, which can yield quite dramatic results). Just don't keep it in the same position for a long period of time.
Also, with electronic sensors, the direct sun can sometimes cause "blooming" problems where the sensor is overloaded and it won't record properly afterward. In newer cameras, this is only temporary. However, in some older cameras, it can cause permanent damage.
Filters to use
Neutral Density (ND) A colour-neutral filter which absorbs light evenly throughout the visible spectrum. Used to reduce the amount of light coming through the lens in strong lighting situations.
Ultra Violet (UV) Video cameras are sensitive to both visible light and ultra violet (UV) light. UV is invisible to humans but it can create a blue tinge and/or washed-out effect on video, especially outside. A UV filter removes UV light while leaving visible light intact. UV filters are also commonly used as a protective filter for the lens.
Polarizing A special type of lens which removes polarized light, reducing the washed-out effect sometimes created by reflected light. This results in more saturated, vibrant colours. Polarized filters are usually mounted with a rotational adjustment to align the polarization.
Last update: 01:21 PM Saturday, July 5, 2008