Edmunds stared at the screen in front of him.  The lunar surface was getting steadily closer, and the texture slowly came into focus.  Dust and rocks, just like the other moons. 
He looked to his right and saw Jacobs and Moretti watching their own screens, the light reflecting off the glass front panel of their helmets.  Jacobs and Moretti had two screens each to mind.  Fore and after, port and starboard. 
On his right, Pham attended to her screen, the one that pointed straight up.  He could see the ship they had just departed from floating directly above them.  Just as the ground had slowly filled his own screen, Arthur had started to recede in Pham's.  He could have reached out and covered it with his hand.  Arthur was over two hundred long, but from here it looked as though he could put it in his pocket.
This was always his least favorite part of any expedition.  The time between leaving Arthur and touching down.  Things could happen.   
Six years ago, when he was on the Clarke, they'd nearly lost the whole expeditionary team.  Some piece of rock that wasn't on any chart slammed the side of the lander and caused a fuel leak that sent it tumbling off course.  They had to wait more than two days for the craft to stabilize before they could even approach it without risk to the main ship.  Not a single member was lost, but none of them ever voluntarily got in a lander again.
Changes had been made, and everyone was assured that this type of accident was preventable.  Extra orbits of the planet or moon were now made to assess the risks associated with a landing, and the land craft was meant to be safer than ever.  They were told.
Edmunds got called up eighteen months after that and he didn't hesitate.  He wasn't out here to sit by while others walked on worlds so far from his own that the distance was beyond comprehension.
A green light next to his screen flashed, first slowly, then rapidly.  He flicked the switch beneath it and as the light went out a low rumble came from beneath them.  The landing rockets slowed their descent to a crawl. and after a moment. they all felt the lander's four rubberized feet make contact with the surface.
