Ayurveda Research Papers CCA Student papers The selected papers published on our website have been written by students of the California College of Ayurveda as a part of their required work toward graduation. As the pituitary gland secretes LH and FSH, these hormones act on the follicle in the ovary and stimulate its maturation.
Because so many of our normal body functions follow daily patterns of speeding up and slowing down, intensifying and diminishing, in alignment with circadian rhythm. Interestingly, so do the symptoms of a number of chronic disorders: In most patients, symptoms are more than times more likely to occur in the few hours prior to awakening than during the day.
Chest pain and electrocardiographic ECGEKG abnormalities are most common during the first 4 to 6 hours after awakening. ECG abnormalities are most common during sleep ; chest pain can occur even while at rest. Heart attack most commonly occurs in the early waking hours. Strokes most commonly occur in the early waking hours.
The highest blood pressure readings typically occur from late morning to middle afternoon; lowest occur during early sleep.
Therapy now exists that works with your body clock; consult your physician about this treatment. Clinical studies are underway to further this research.
RA symptoms are most intense upon awakening. Symptoms of osteoarthritis worsen in the afternoon and evening. The pain typically occurs after stomach emptying, following daytime meals, and in the very early morning, disrupting sleep.
Seizures often occur only at particular times of the day or night; individual patterns differ among patients. Insomnia, Sleep Apnea, and More Angina Angina is chest pain or pressure due to an insufficient supply of oxygenated blood to the heart muscle.
Oxygenated blood is normally delivered to the heart muscle by arteries to the heart coronary arteries. Inadequate oxygenation of heart muscle ischemia can occur because of either narrowing or spasm of the coronary arteries.
Narrowing of the coronary arteries coronary artery disease or CAD is usually caused byarteriosclerosis cholesterol deposits on the inner wall of the arteries. In patients with narrowed coronary arteries, factors that increase work demand and oxygen consumption of the heart such as exerciseexcitement, increased blood pressure and heart rate can precipitate heart muscle ischemia and angina.
Patients who develop angina only during stress or physical exertion have stable, exertional angina. When a coronary artery becomes critically narrowed, heart muscle ischemia or angina can occur with minimal or no exertion.
These patients have unstable angina, and are at imminent risk of heart attack myocardial infarction. A heart attack occurs when a diseased coronary artery becomes completely obstructed by a blood clotleading to irreversible death of heart muscle.
During the early hours of a heart attack, irregular heart rhythms can occur which commonly cause sudden cardiac death. Heart ischemia resulting in angina can be caused by spasm of the coronary arteries.
It has been known for some time that the symptoms of ischemic heart disease are more common in the morning hours than at any other time of day. Patients experience episodes of stable angina with lower levels of exertion in the morning than in the afternoon.
The occurrence of episodes of vasospastic angina is higher in the morning than in the afternoons. In patients with CAD, electrocardiogram ECG changes indicative of heart muscle ischemia are seen more frequently in the morning than in the afternoon.Ayurveda Research Papers (CCA Student papers) The selected papers published on our website have been written by students of the California College of Ayurveda as a part of their required work toward graduation.
Type or paste a DOI name into the text box.
Click Go. Your browser will take you to a Web page (URL) associated with that DOI name. Send questions or comments to doi. Congestive heart failure is a condition in which the heart can't pump enough blood and oxygen to the body's tissues.
Symptoms are cough, shortness of breath, and having problems breathing; especially when lying down. There's no cure, but there are medical therapies, diet plans, and lifestyle changes that can help relieve symptoms and slow the progression of the disease.
This session gives you a sneak peek at some of the top-scoring posters across a variety of topics through rapid-fire presentations. The featured abstracts were chosen by the Program Committee and are marked by a microphone in the online program.
Ventricular assist devices (VADs) require surgical implantation and are indicated for patients with severe HF after cardiac surgery, in patients who have intractable cardiogenic shock after acute MI, and in patients who deteriorate while awaiting cardiac . Type or paste a DOI name into the text box.
Click Go. Your browser will take you to a Web page (URL) associated with that DOI name. Send questions or comments to doi.