Physical therapy for autism consists of activities and exercises that build motor skills and improve strength, posture, and balance. With regard to example, this type of therapy aims to help a child build muscle control and strength to make sure that he or she can play more easily with other children.
Autism and Physical Therapy
People on the autism spectrum have delays, differences or disorders in many areas. Aside from developmental delays, most have low muscle tone and experience difficulty with gross motor coordination (running, kicking, throwing, etc.). These issues can disrupt basic day-to-day functioning, and they’re almost certain to interfere with social and physical development.
Physical therapists are trained to help with these issues. Through physical therapy for autism anyone can help your child to build muscle strength and coordination, but he can do so in the context of sports, recess, and/or gym. Hence, physical therapy for autism can improve functioning and social skills concurrently.
Special Needs Physical Therapy
Children with autism often develop typically for a short period of time and then present symptoms as toddlers. Physical symptoms that may be treated by a PT range from difficulty with coordination to lack of muscular strength. Equilibrium may be an issue for children on the autism spectrum. Children that are somewhere on the autism spectrum may locate it extremely hard to ride a bike or use skates, as a result of the fact that those activities require a degree regarding coordination and balance.
Meeting the Physical Therapy Needs of Children
Possibly most significantly, autistic children are likely to have difficulty with “motor planning.” In other words, they may have the skills to climb onto a swing and have the chance to grip, but they may have a very difficult time coordinating their bodies to “pump” and get the swing moving.
Physical therapists may work with very young children on basic motor skills such as sitting, rolling, standing, and running. They may also work with parents to teach them some techniques for helping their child build muscle strength, coordination, and gross motor skills.
Is There a Cure for Autism with Therapy
While there is no known cure for autism, there are treatment and education approaches that can address a couple of the challenges connected with the condition. Intervention can help to lessen disruptive behaviors, and education can teach self-help skills for greater independence.
The Major Benefit of Physical Therapy for Autism Spectrum Disorder
The great thing with physical therapy for autism, is actually that exercise and structured play groups both are evidence-based practices for children with autism that work. Inevitably, physical therapy for autism includes activities and exercises that construct motor skills and improve strength, posture, and balance. We’ve experienced that the benefits of physical therapy are augmented when we integrate it with other forms of therapy for autism. Physical therapy environment and exercises are developed to build strength, mobility, balance, coordination, endurance and most of all, confidence.