Species Description: Koehler J, Glaw F, Vences M 2008 Two additional treefrogs of the Boophis ulftunni species group (Anura: Mantellidae) discovered in rainforests of northern and south-eastern Madagascar. Zootaxa 1814:37-48
© 2015 Miguel Vences (1 of 2)
In preservative, Boophis lilianae exhibits creamy yellow coloration on dorsal and ventral surfaces. A pink canthal stripe runs from snout tip to upper eyelid, and a thin brown line encircles the nostril. Upper eyelid is covered by brown blotches, bordered by pink spots. Two fine longitudinal parallel stripes appear on mid-dorsum that are formed by rows of pink spots. There is also a small pink fleck on the knee (Kohler et al. 2008).
In life this species shows translucent yellowish green coloration on the dorsum that appears transparent in the groin. A reddish canthal stripe runs from snout tip to upper eyelid. The thin reddish supratympanic line fades at level of urostyle. Upper eyelid is covered by reddish brown blotch, and between the eyes there is a weak brownish triangular fleck. Two fine longitudinal stripes appear on mid-dorsum that extendsfrom behind scapular region to urostyle. Between the stripes there are some irregular pink marbling spots. Reddish brown spots also appear on heel and knee. Dorsal surfaces of fingers, toes, and terminal discs look yellowish green. Ventral surfaces of limbs, chest and throat are colored a green shade of turquoise. Belly is white and bones are green. The inner iris looks silvery grey, with a fine brownish circular line. Outer iris is golden yellow, with a black triangular fleck above and below pupil. Posterior iris has black on the periphery, adjoined by light blue (Kohler et al. 2008).
A diagnosis of Boophis lilianae with other species of the genus Boophis shows that this treefrog is so far the smallest known species in the genus. It is distinguished from members of the B. rappiodes and B. mandraka species groups by a pigmented ventral side and from members of the B. albipunctatus and B. luteus species groups by lack of lateral dermal fringes along lower arm and tarsus. Moreover, it differs from B. baetkei in smaller adult male size (18.3mm SVL in B. lilianae vs. 30.8mm for B. baetkei) and mucronate male snout shape (vs. rounded in B. baetkei) and a relatively smaller tympanum, as well as lacking vomerine odontophores (Kohler et al. 2008; Wollenberg et al. 2008).
Distribution and Habitat
Country distribution from AmphibiaWeb's database: Madagascar
Life History, Abundance, Activity, and Special Behaviors
Trends and Threats
Andreone, F., Randrianirina, J.E., Jenkins, P.D., and Aprea, G. (2000). ''Species diversity of Amphibia, Reptilia and Lipotyphla (Mammalia) at Amolokopatrika, a rainforest between the Anjanaharibe-Sud and Mrojejy Massifs, NE Madagascar.'' Biodiversity and Conservation, 9, 1587-1622.
Kohler, J., Glaw, F., and Vences, M. (2008). ''Two additional treefrogs of the Boophis ulftunni species group (Anura: Mantellidae) discovered in rainforests of northern and south-eastern Madagascar.'' Zootaxa, 1814, 37-48.
Wollenberg, K. C., Andreone, F., Glaw, F., and Vences, M. (2008). ''Pretty in pink: A new treefrog species of the genus Boophis from north-eastern Madagascar.'' Zootaxa, 1684, 58-68.
Written by Henry Zhu (babydragon AT berkeley.edu), UC Berkeley Museum of Vertebrate Zoology
First submitted 2008-10-17
Edited by Kellie Whittaker (2008-11-14)
Species Account Citation: AmphibiaWeb 2008 Boophis lilianae <http://amphibiaweb.org/species/7147> University of California, Berkeley, CA, USA. Accessed Jan 26, 2020.
Feedback or comments about this page.
Citation: AmphibiaWeb. 2020. <http://amphibiaweb.org> University of California, Berkeley, CA, USA. Accessed 26 Jan 2020.
AmphibiaWeb's policy on data use.