Logan enjoyed the dino tracks activity so much last week that I decided to do a similiar activity this week, homemade glitter play dough style! Logan helped me measure out the play dough ingredients and pour them into a large pot before I cooked them up. After our play dough was made, Logan used his miniature dinosaur toys to make dinosaur tracks in it as we counted the dinosaurs and tracks. Logan had hours of fun with this activity and the best part is that as long as you store it in an air tight container, you can play with it again and again.
Activity: Homemade Play Dough & Dino Tracks
(learning objective: counting, measuring, fine motor skills, language development)
3 Cups Flour
1 1/2 Cups Salt
6 Teaspoons Creams of Tartar
3 Tablespoons Vegetable Oil
3 Cups Water
Glitter (the amount is up to your sparkle preference)
Miniature Dinosaur Toys
Allow your child to measure and pour all of the ingredients into a large pot. The adult will continuously mix the ingredients over medium heat on the stove. When a large ball starts to form, remove from heat and allow to semi cool. Knead until you get the consistency of play dough. You can help your child make “patches” of play dough and have him make dinosaur tracks in the patches, counting the tracks and dinosaurs as he plays. Allow some open ended play time and your child’s imagination to take over the activity!
Tot School Tuesday Co-host: Kara of Mine for the Making (visit her blog for preschool aged activities)
Link up your Tot School Tuesday activities here! Tot School Tuesday is all about teaching your child something in a fun and playful way. Blog along with me every Tuesday and link up your ideas here. They can be original ideas or something you saw online (just make sure to give credit to the person who came up with the idea).
“Tot School Tuesday” rules:
- Tot School related blog post links only please. Links to shops, giveaways and products will be deleted.
- Link directly to your Tot School post, not just your blog.
- Please link to See Vanessa Craft somewhere on your post or grab a “Tot School Tuesday” button and link it back to www.seevanessacraft.com.