The components of the automotive cabin control system make up one of the more innovative aspects of your vehicle. This is the combination of the heating, ventilation, and air conditioning system. Over the years, the functionality and technology of this combined system have changed to meet environmental standards, consumer expectations, and industry needs. The automotive cabin control system has evolved into something more than just passenger comfort. The technology must be both eco-friendly and fuel efficient.
What does this system consist of?
The automotive cabin control system or automotive climate control system consists of five components. They are the evaporator, compressor, condenser, receiver, and expansion device.
To understand the synchronized operation of this system, we will do a brief overview, so you understand how this system operates and why its function is important to the overall care of your car.
Many would consider the evaporator to be the most important component in the function of your car’s air conditioning system. Liquid refrigerant goes into the evaporator and warm air inside your car passes through the evaporator via the blower fan. The refrigerant absorbs heat from this warm air. Simultaneously, humidity in the air condenses on the evaporator’s surface. Note the water dripping beneath your car whenever your air conditioner is on. Once the refrigerant is processed through the evaporator, it then moves onto the compressor.
The air compressor inside your car is activated by pressing the A/C button. This sends the refrigerant through the condenser where hot gases are removed from the humid air. After pressure is stripped from the refrigerant it processes through an expansion valve. Cool air is a result of the motor’s blower fan sending air through the dash via the evaporator.
A condenser can be found in all modern vehicles and is key to a properly functioning air conditioning system. If cool air from your car decreases significantly whenever you turn on your air conditioning, most likely there are leaks from the A/C system and the condenser needs to be replaced. Since the refrigerant goes through the condenser, any issues will cause the entire unit to fail. You can identify a bad condenser by looking for leaks, the air from the air conditioning isn’t as cool, or produces no cool air at all.
There are three important functions of the receiver or drier. First, it stores oil and refrigerant that the A/C system doesn’t need. Second, it is a filter that prevents debris from entering the A/C system. Third, it contains a material called desiccant, used to absorb moisture.
Quic Transmission & Automotive Services has taken time to carefully go through this process because we are dedicated to offering the highest quality of automotive services in Albuquerque, New Mexico. We steadfastly believe that an informed consumer makes better decisions, and we want lasting relationships with our community and customers.
If you are experiencing issues with your automotive cabin control system or you’re not sure, contact us. Our highly trained and licensed technicians come with the experience to fix all of your automotive needs. (505) 271-8000 or visit https://quictrans.com/ for more information.