How to be safer when roads are wet:
Wet roads can be dangerous for drivers.
Slow down and allow extra braking distance.
Use dipped headlights.
Watch for flooded roads and aquaplaning.
Give cyclists and foot traffic extra space.
Don’t Make a Slip-Up When the Roads are Slick.
Winter may be over, but a New York spring can often mean it’s wet with a chance of monsoon. As well as washing out the BBQ, the rain makes driving for a living even more challenging. As more cars hit the road to get people from A to B in the dry, so the professional driver needs to be at the top of his game. Follow INSHUR’s favorite tips for driving in the rain and avoid slip-ups when the tarmac’s slick:
These are the only thing that keeps you in contact with the road. Keep them at the right inflation pressure, with good tread depth. Remove stones and debris that get caught in the grooves.
Even with good tires and brakes, it takes longer to stop in the wet. Leave at least double your usual separation distance from the car in front.
Go easy on the gas pedal. Slower is safer. Your wipers may not cope with very heavy rain so visibility could be poor. Driving slower gives you more time to react to danger.
Put your dipped headlights on so that others can easily see you.
If it starts coming down in sheets, pull over until the deluge ends. Don’t park where you’ll cause a hazard.
Often, very heavy rain will overwhelm the road drainage, creating large pools of water. Sometimes these can be very deep. If you can’t judge the water depth, don’t risk driving on, find another route.
This is what happens when a thin sheet of water forms between your tire and the road. It usually occurs on smooth roads with lots of water and it can cause a dangerous loss of grip and steering. If you sense this is happening to your car, slow down or stop if necessary.
Foot Traffic and Cyclists:
Give them plenty of space. You could face a fine if you splash them by driving too close or too fast.
Fogged up windows are a danger to you, your passengers and other road users. Put the demisters on high. Lower the side windows a little to increase ventilation. Don’t drive on until the glass is all clear.