Feelings and emotions are a huge part of all of us! Everybody has different feelings, and it’s very common for a person to experience different emotions throughout the day as things happen and situations develop. Feelings are different from emotions, even though both are related.
It’s fundamental for young children to learn about feelings. By learning how to identify their emotions and feelings, and also how to process them, children can experience a positive change in their behavior. If they are able to correctly recognise their emotions and what’s causing them, it will be easier for them to manage difficult situations.
The development of emotional intelligence can start from an early age. According to scientific studies it’s common in 2 year-old children to know about the basic feelings such as happiness, anger, fear, surprise and sadness. The first step is to learn vocabulary about feelings, so the little ones can acknowledge them and then can act accordingly, like knowing to keep calm in stressful situations or how to react when they feel anger. All of these emotional skills will help children as they grow up, paving the way to a happy and healthy life!
Here you’ll find vocabulary related to feelings and emotions as well as games and activities to teach your children this very important topic.
Feelings are long-lasting responses and they are associated to an emotion, for example, a person can feel happy after the excitement of winning an award.
happy – happiness
sad – sadness
angry – anger
scared – fear
surprised – surprise
List of Emotions
Emotions are brief, intense responses to outside stimuli, like that rushed sensation when being surprised by family members on your birthday, or being content after successfully finishing an important task.
Phrases to Express Emotions
How are you feeling today?
I feel great!
I don’t feel well.
Are you tired?
Are you happy?
Going to the park makes me happy!
My sister biggest fear is spiders.
I like my teacher. She’s very kind.
My big brother is feeling blue. He can’t find his favorite shirt.
I always feel calm after swimming in the pool.
I feel over the moon about our next family trip!
Feelings and Emotions Printable Flashcards