It’s not so surprising that your dental health is closely connected to your nutritional intake, but what you might not know is that it goes beyond the obvious recommendations and can help alleviate many dental health issues including periodontal disease.
We have always been told to stay away from sugar, hard candy and gummy substances that can stick to our teeth and cause bacterial growth. Foods high in carbohydrates, sugars and starches can lead to plaque acids that are known to break down tooth enamel, forming a cavity.
However, did you know that as important as the foods we should avoid, are the foods we should consider introducing more of into our diets.
Foods That Support Good Dental Health
Almonds: Over the last decade we’ve heard a lot about the overall health benefits of nuts, but did you know they are also a great choice for your dental health? Almonds provide your body with much-needed calcium and protein while being low in sugar. Snack away!
Carrots, Celery: Think Crunch! Crunchy fruits and vegetables increase the flow of saliva, cleansing bacteria out of your mouth and away from your teeth. Beware… choose fruits and vegetables that aren’t high in acid as these choices, although they get you to your 5 to 10 servings a day, can damage your tooth enamel.
Cheese: Dairy products have been found to reduce the amount of acid in your mouth. The act of chewing cheese, especially hard cheeses, creates additional saliva in your mouth, critical to reducing acid build up. Plus, cheese contains calcium and protein… two nutrients proven to strengthen your tooth enamel.
Green Tea: While it may be an acquired taste for some, green tea has beneficial health properties for your dental health. Green tea is known to slow down the production of harmful bacteria in your mouth and also contains many antioxidants that promote overall well-being. Cheers!
Leafy Greens: A variety of leafy greens is just plain good for you (you can tell because it appears on every What to Eat list). Their combination of healthy vitamins and minerals, combined with their calcium content, make this a great choice for your oral health.
Water: Water is just a key element to overall health and sadly not many people drink the recommended 8-cups a day. Water is key to good dental health because it rinses away the food particles from your teeth – especially after eating something you shouldn’t have! It also dilutes any acid in your mouth, helping to protect your teeth from its harmful effects.
There are a few more foods we could have added to the list, such as milk, sweet potatoes, yogurt, etc… but these are our faves!
If you suspect you might be at risk for periodontal disease, don’t delay… talk to your dentist or the experts at Periodontal Associates today about what you can do to care for your gums. They are the only gums that you have.
Contact us today if you have any questions about your Periodontal health and how diet can help keep your mouth, teeth and gums in optimal condition.
I have gone to this periodontal clinic for over 10 years. The dental specialists and hygienists have all shown an exceptional level of not only the highest technical standards, but true caring about their patients needs and comfort. If you are afraid of getting dental treatment, this is a place where you can park your anxiety at the door. The consideration of your dental care needs starts when you make that first call and continues all the way. In addition, expert preventive care knowlege to help you care for your mouth is provided. Preventative care helps to reduce future costs and really works, just as it does in every other facet of your life. If you already practice this level of care for your family, your vehicle and home, why wouldn't care even more about your own dental health? Finally, if you are concerned about costs, they can help with payment plans, as many others won't. In this office, they always have a doctor on call. S. Williams, Mississauga, ON
Excellent customer service and friendly atmosphere. You can have confidence in their services. I had 8 gum grafts done which was an overwhelming concept for me. They made the procedure feel much simpler that it was and I felt completely comfortable.
I had gum grafting surgery yesterday. Dr. Su and her team were amazing. They made sure I was comfortable throughout and after the surgery. I had 8 gum grafts done so it was a big job, but they made it seem easy. They also offer payment plans for people who do not have insurance. I would recommend this place.
I was very impressed with the professionalism of the staff at Periodontal Associates. Inasmuch as the surgery I had done was minor, they explained the procedure in detail and made me feel extremely at ease. all in all, it wasn't as bad as I had thought and would definitely recommend them for any dental needs.
Dr. Su was absolutely amazing. I have a terrible fear of any kind of dental work due to a few very bad experiences. Everyone in the office was so helpful and patient. What I assumed was going to be a very unpleasant experience was exactly the opposite.
The staff was very friendly and welcoming when I used the service, in particular my hygienist and dentist were super nice and accommodating. The office was clean, rooms were well lit and private. Appointment times were convenient. The service was appropriate for my needs and the experience not as scary as I had envisioned. Would I use this service again? Yes in a heartbeat as I truly appreciate the experience and I am quite satisfied with my outcome.
As a dental hygienist who has worked with many periodontists, I made sure to have my graft procedure done by only the best!Dr. Mohamed is a straight up communicator with fabulous chair side manner. His skills as a trustworthy periodontist are by far superior in the profession. I will travel near and far to have Dr.Mohamed perform my perio procedures! :)
Fabulous experience! The location is easy to find. The office is spacious & comfortable. All the staff are very friendly. They are very professional in all they do and the results were exactly what I needed. I highly recommend Dr. Su - she is the best! Thank you for a very positive experience! ?
I would highly recommend Dr. Su and the supporting staff. I was apprehensive about my procedure but Dr. Su put me at ease. The procedure left me with no swelling and I did not use any painkillers. I have the utmost respect and confidence in Dr. Su and the supporting staff, who are extremely professional, at Periodontal Associates.
Went for a consultation this morning after avoiding this for years. I was so pleasantly surprised! Dr Gangbar and his staff are all friendly and the atmosphere is relaxed and inviting. dr Gangbar explained the procedure in detail and answered every question thoroughly. He is very personable and was able to address the concerns that kept me from coming in sooner. So far, this has exceeded my expectations greatly. I’m booked for my surgery and I’m feeling totally at ease with it. Stay tuned... :)
I have my regular maintenance and treatments at this office for over 40 years. Doctors are diligent, skillful and professional. This office has strong, stable and friendly staffs. They always make me feel comfortable.
I have been a patient at Periodontal Associates for several years, from the moment you are greeted by the front desk staff to when you leave you receive excellent care. The Doctors and their assistants are professional, knowledgeable and considerate of their patients needs. The hygiene staff are thorough and comprehensive in their treatments. Overall an office I would recommend to anyone seeking periodontal treatment.
A warm thank you the team of Dr. Mohamed and assistant Lori for providing all the ingredients for a successful, long-term patient-medical staff relationship: high professionalism, great talent and dedication, compassion and a fun relaxing atmosphere, and many more. PA must be very fortunate to have them, and patients should be assured they are in excellent hands. Congratulations to Sue as well (the office manager) for always ensuring the office is run at highest standards and making sure patients feel welcome and taken care of.
A truly unique experience that is worth going back to. The hygienist will give you more education and tips on your first visit than you will ever get at a regular dental. The cleanings are phenomenal, and the doctors look after the details.
A welcoming professional environment. All of my visits have been a great experience. I am always greeted by name and never have I had to wait longer than my scheduled appointment time. I never hesitate to recommend Periodontal Associates.