The Georgia equine industry is a healthy and growing segment of the state's economy. There are more than 74,000 horses in Georgia today, and the breeding and care of these horses has an economic impact of more than $750 million dollars each year. UGA Extension provides resources to help further Georgia's growing reputation in horse production.
While Georgia isn't one of the top ten horse producing states in terms of sheer numbers, the quality of Georgia's horses and horse facilities has received national recognition. Over the years, many well-established trainers have moved their operations to Georgia, taking advantage of the temperate climate.
The most common breeds include Quarter Horses, Tennessee Walkers, Paints, American Saddles and Appaloosas.
- Evaluating Horse Conformation (B 1400) When examining horses for conformation, either when considering a purchase or competing in horse judging contests, it is important to break things down into key principles to avoid becoming overwhelme…
- How to Feed a Horse: Understanding the Basic Principles of Horse Nutrition (B 1355) With so many feed, supplement and hay choices available, many people find themselves wondering exactly what their horse needs for good health and nutrition. Many horse-feeding opinions and myths make …
- Common Terms Used in Animal Feeding and Nutrition (B 1367) The purpose of this publication is to serve as an educational reference and resource to those who are interested in animal feeding and nutrition. Our primary objective is to list the common terms used…
- Bits 101 (B 1379) Bit selection is a critical area of consideration for riders of all disciplines and levels. Bit selection is often regulated by various breed and/or horse show associations. For many horse enthusiasts…
Equine Program at UGA Information on instruction and research in equine science and management, state youth horse programs, and continuing education opportunities.
Commodity Teams at CAES Teams made up of research scientists and extension specialists work together to provide the latest technology and information for efficient, profitable production of some of Georgia's most valuable commodities.
Impact Statements: Equine Descriptions of Extension efforts to improve knowledge and practices in this area.
UGA Animal and Dairy Science Horses Programs Provides information pertaining to equine education and breeding and sales, as well as horse-related newsletter articles and contact information.
UGA Department of Animal and Dairy Science Learn more about the animal and dairy science department at the UGA College of Agricultural and Environmental Sciences.
Equine Commodity Commission State advisory commission for equine-related issues.
Georgia Equine Rescue League GERL was founded out of concern for the growing number of starved, abused, and neglected equine in Georgia. This site provides program information, upcoming events, newsletters, links, contact information, and membership information.
Georgia Horse Council Features news, membership information, upcoming events, Drill Team information, boarding information, and contacts.
Georgia International Horse Park Information about facilities, upcoming events, tours, and event planning.
GrassMasters New knowledge, new techniques offered to Georgia forage producers at UGA Extension GrassMasters.
High Quality Hay After a record-breaking 2015 contest, Southeastern Hay Contest looks to attract more forage producers to the competition.
Farmgate Value Report UGA's annual county-by-county survey allows the public and policy makers to get a clear picture of Georgia's agricultural value.
Displaying farm gate values for 2018. Values are tallied in October for the previous year.