A crown is recommended to entirely cover a damaged tooth that is beyond repair with a
filling, inlay or onlay. Crowns are usually placed over damaged, fractured, discoloured, and root canal treated teeth. A crown restores the strenght and stability of a tooth.
Crowns are also used to improve the appearance of teeth. However, more conservative
techniques in cosmetic dentistry, such as veneers, inlays, onlays, bonding, and bleachirf 7 have replaced some of the instances when crowns were used in the past to achieve esthetic goals.
Crowns are bonded onto the tooth with dental cement.
When the top of a tooth is lost due to decay there may be very little for the crown to
actually hold onto. To gain retention a post is placed inside the tooth which forms a peg on top of the tooth and acts as a seat for the crown. Usually a post crown is a better option than having the tooth extracted with a. subsequent denture or bridge, but post crowns last shorter than normal crowns.
When a tooth is heavily decayed it is more likely to fracture and lose considerable tooth substance. The greater risk is that a fracture line may go below the margin of the gum which makes restoration more difficult or near impossible. It is very important to see your dentist regularly to avoid this situation.
Crowns can be made from many materials, which are usually fabricated using indirect
Most common types:
2. Porcelain fused to metal
3. Metal free
Metal restorations are usually only used when a tooth is not visible.
Porcelain fused to metal (PFM) crowns are the most common types and are
esthetically more pleasing than metal crowns. For those not wanting metal there are
metal free or all porcelain crowns. They have the most natural look, but they are
slightly less strong and are a bit more expensive than the latter two.
If a tooth needs to be extracted or is already missing a bridge may be the solution. A
bridge makes it possible to replace a lost tooth without the use of a denture or dental
implant. However teeth, ﬂanking the bridge must be reduced in order to accept the
bridge structure. If these teeth already have crowns or restorations then this is not a problem, but when these teeth are healthy and whole these alterations must be deliberated.
The procedure for a crown or a bridge is very similar. Your dentist removes some of yor
tooth structure. An impression is made and the laboratory fabricates a custom made
restoration. You will immediately get a temporary crown that protect your preapred
tooth. In case the temporary crown loses, which occurs quite often, immediately contact
With birdges or crowns, recovery is quick. It is not unusual for teeth to be sensitive for several days but if you feel uncomfortable please contact your dentist as further
adjustments might be necessary. With care, crowns and bridges last 5-to 15 years or
some significant longer. With crowns or bridges you need to avoid chewing things such
as popcorn kernels, nutshells, ice etc to avoidrisk of breakage.
Like crowns, bridges are also being used less often, as dental implants are becoming
more and more popular.