In fashion, the midriff is the human abdomen. The midriff is exposed when wearing a crop top or . The midriff area must not be seen while bending over, while standing, raising arms, and stretching. Most secondary schools ban the wearing of. The center of your body's front side, generally the area under your ribcage and above your waist or hips, can be called the midriff. This noun is sometimes used. Noun, 1. midriff - the middle area of the human torso (usually in front) midriff - the middle area of the human torso (usually in front); young American women.
Midriff definition is - the mid-region of the human torso: midsection. How to use midriff in a sentence. Did You Know?. midriff (area) definition: the middle area of the human torso (usually in front). Synonyms: middle, midsection, mid. [abbreviation]. Topic: general. She was also snapped exposing her toned midriff while taking a telephone call. The Sun ()I had my midriff over her chest area. The Sun ()Turn up in a.
The midriff area must not be seen while bending over, while standing, raising arms, and stretching. Most secondary schools ban the wearing of navel jewelry, . It is used as a genteel avoidance of synonymous belly; as a synonym for waist; and as a name for the area around the diaphragm. The midriff is exposed when. The midriff is composed of a number of muscles, including the abdominals, obliques and those of the lower back. Targeting the midriff not only promotes a more.
Your midriff is your belly. The center of your body's front side, generally the area under your ribcage and above your waist or hips, can be called the midriff. If it was so easy to get great abs, everyone would have a stomach flat as an ironing board. But for most people a six-pack is as elusive as it is. The inner and outer obliques allow the trunk to twist from side to side and are found on each side of the body. Try some easy exercises that will target your midriff. midriff definition: 1. diaphragm (sense) 2. 3. the middle part of the torso, between the abdomen and the chest 4. that part of a woman's garment that covers this. Although men are prone to gain weight around the middle, women can also gain belly fat, especially when genes, hormones and aging are. Okay so I'm gonna be as honest as I can here. To start with, I rarely ever wear sarees. I've only worn them on a handful of occasions, like my. But many young women are horribly mean to their midriffs. In , one of the first fashion pages showing the belly-button area appeared. It is mainly concentrated in the upper abdomen, although a person may also have pain in other areas. Approximately 25 percent of people worldwide experience. noting or pertaining to the middle part of the human body, the part of a garment that covers it, or a garment that exposes it. From midriff peepholes and sheer panels to crop tops and full-on Reward: With its tiny surface area, there's no reason anyone has to know.