Natural resources are the gold of our generation. No matter where we look at it, oil and gas are necessities of human life, and their contribution to modern day living make them paramount to our existence. Even if there are other renewable sources of energy that are being used today, it is a fact that oil and gas are indeed irreplaceable. However, being in this industry is not as simple as it sounds. They may be considered one of the basic necessities, but the competition for these resources is getting stiffer and stiffer day by day and this is one thing we cannot run away from.
Oil is Bigger than Big
Okay, let’s start our countdown with the importance of oil in the world’s economy. A lot of people may not realize this, but oil does not only provide convenience in our everyday life, but it also greatly contributes to the global economy. The Gross Domestic Product per capita, as most of you may already know, indicates a society’s living standards and for over a century now, oil contributes to up to 2.5% of the global GDP. Sounds big, right? This is evidence of how big the impact of oil is to our way of life.
Furthermore, the modern society will not exist without oil and gas products. Firstly, oil is widely used by the transportation industry which is also one of the leading contributors of the global GDP. Even though there are e-bikes and other electronic device that are not run by oil, it is still a fact that without oil, the transportation industry will not survive. Additionally, oil and gas products are necessities for the agricultural sector to operate smoothly. Other fields are also highly reliant on oil and without this very important commodity; businesses in all parts of the world will weaken. Therefore, oil is definitely bigger than how big you may think it is.
Safety is a Priority in the Oil Industry
I know that it is quite horrifying for some people to even think of working in the oil industry. However, safety precautions are well implemented to ensure that workers are within a safe drilling environment. Whether the company chooses to buy new or drilling equipment for sale, safety standards are given optimum importance in any drilling site and casualty rates have really dropped in the past few years.
The Oil and Gas Industry is Unstoppable
I am quite sure that you are aware about the efforts that have been made in the past few years to look for alternative energy sources that could replace oil. However, even if we could generate power from wind and solar energy, it could never match oil production and its main use to human life. I do not want to cite figures here, but oil is approximately 2 to 3 orders of magnitude higher than wind and solar power. In the like manner, there is a big difference between the amount of power generated from oil and solar energy. If you need an analogy here, I’d say that power generation from solar energy is like riding a bike while oil power generation is your Lamborghini ride.
Oil, as we all know, is the new golden mine. Whether you like it or not, oil basically makes the world go technologically spinning round.
Why is Investing in Healthcare is the Best Option for Medical Professionals?
Healthcare industry is considered as one of India’s largest sectors, both regarding employment and revenue generation. It is expected to...
The need and use of the Vial Box
There are a lot of healthcare professionals and caregivers that have to assist the living facilities and there are a...
How To Buy an Abstract Rug Online and Avoid the Mistakes Involved
We are currently living in the golden age of nesting. Especially as part of the millennial generation, we gravitate towards...
Begin Your Love Story With Disabled Dating
We want you to know – you aren’t DISABLED, you are just differently-abled because the only disability in life is...
Are You Selling at Least The Basics To A Beach Vacationer
In winter, a lot of people travel to major attractions such as warm beaches. These travelers often have to pack...
What You Need to Know Before Starting a Business
Congratulations, you did it. You decided to quit your day job and start a business. Being your own boss is...
.Net 3.1 Latest Features Released By Microsoft
.Net 3.1 Latest Features Released By Microsoft The latest version of .net core 3.1 has been released by Microsoft that...
BEST SPORTS FOR KIDS TO ENGAGE IN THIS YEAR
We are in a generation where our children are living an inactive lifestyle with very minimal or no sort of...
Buying a Strata Property – Is it a Good Investment for You
Buying a strata property is a scenario where you purchase a small portion of the complex and get access to...
What You Should Know About Google’s New VR/AR Features for the Web and Mobile Applications
Virtual reality (VR) and augmented reality (AR) are emerging technologies that provide users with a wide range of unique and...
Get the Kitchen of Your Dreams with the Best Remodeling Tips
Get the Kitchen of Your Dreams Among all the rooms of the house, the kitchen is the most versatile. It...
What does a Cyber Security Specialist do?
In our current reality, where a Security Guard ensures resources and a Bodyguard ensures individuals, a Cyber Security Specialist shields...
Why Would You Hire A Holiday Lights Service? Why Not?
The holidays bring us the tradition of baking, shopping, wrapping, parties, Christmas pageants and parades, tree decorating, and hanging lights....
Keep in Mind the Important Things Before Planning an Event
When thinking of the hire of a screen, don’t forget to look at how it is going to be presented....
Cheap Business Chauffeur Service
At the corporate level in the UK, business people are engaged in life whether they run a small or a...
- Tech5 years ago
Creating An e-Commerce Website
- Tech5 years ago
Design Template Guidelines For Mobile Apps
- Business4 years ago
The Key Types Of Brochure Printing Services
- Travel8 years ago
Who Else Wants Also Nfl Hat
- General5 years ago
Kobe Bryant With His Unique Nba Jerseys
- Tech5 years ago
Climb Google Using These Checklists
- Tech6 years ago
Why Small Businesses Can't Ignore Mobile Technology
- Health6 years ago
Health Supplements For Sports Activities Nutrition