- Ma Yuan (painter)
:"For other uses, see
Ma Yuan".Ma Yuan (Chinese: ; Pinyin: Mǎ Yuǎn (1160–1165 to 1225) was an influential Chinese landscape painter whose work, together with that of Xia Gui, formed the basis of the Ma-Xiaschool of painting.
Ma Yuan was born in Qiantang (now
Hangzhou, Zhejiang). He occasionally painted flowers, but is best known for landscape painting, his lyrical and romantic interpretation becoming the model for later painters. He was a master of “one-corner” composition, to the extent that he was nicknamed "One-Corner Ma." This type of landscaping style is defined as being an asymmetrical compositions that are split on the diagonal. His most famous painting is On a Mountain Path in Spring. Ma Yuan was one of the Ma family of painters.
history of science and technology in China, Ma Yuan is remembered as being the first to depict a fishing reelin artwork (i.e. in his painting ).
Ronald Ossory Dunlop" Landscape Painting: Ma Yuan to Picasso" (London 1954)
* [http://www.theartwolf.com/masterworks/ma_yuan.htm Ma Yuan: “Walking on a mountain path in spring”]
Wikimedia Foundation. 2010.
Look at other dictionaries:
Wang Yuan (painter) — Wang Yuan (Wang Yüan, traditional: 王淵, simplified: 王渊); was a Chinese landscape painter during the Yuan Dynasty (1271 ndash;1368). His specific dates of birth and death are not known.Wang was born in Hangzhou in the Zhejiang provincecite… … Wikipedia
Yang Chih-yuan (painter) — Yang Chih yuan (楊智淵) created a diplomatic incident in 2004 when his painting won a contest to be featured on United Nations stamps to be issued to celebrate the International Day of Peace. Yang, 13 years old at the time, entered the contest… … Wikipedia
Yuan Jiang — (Yüan Chiang, traditional: 袁江, simplified: 袁江); was a Chinese landscape painter during the Qing Dynasty (1644 ndash;1912). His specific years of birth and death are not known.Yuan was born in Yangzhou in the Jiangsu provincecite… … Wikipedia
Yuan Yao (painter) — Yuan Yao (Yüan Yao, traditional: 袁耀, simplified: 袁耀); was a Chinese landscape painter during the Qing Dynasty (1644 ndash;1912). His specific years of birth and death are not known.Yuan was born in Yangzhou in the Jiangsu provincecite… … Wikipedia
Ma Yuan — may refer to:* Ma Yuan (Han Dynasty), Chinese general of Han Dynasty * Ma Yuan (painter), Chinese painter of Song Dynasty * Ma Yuan (judge), a former Vice President of the Supreme People s Court of China … Wikipedia
Wang Yuan — may refer to:*Wang Yuan (mathematician) (born 1930), Chinese mathematician, academician of the Chinese Academy of Science *Wang Yuan (painter), Chinese landscape painter during the Yuan Dynasty … Wikipedia
Ma Yuan — or Ma Yüan born с 1160/65, Qiantang, Zhejiang province died 1225 Chinese landscape painter. Born into a family of court painters, Ma Yuan began his career under the emperor Xiaozong, became daizhao ( painter in attendance ) under Emperor… … Universalium
Zhao Yuan — (Chinese: 赵原) is a noted Chinese painter in late Yuan and early Ming Dynasty. His birth and death years are unknown. [cite web |url=http://www.china on site.com/pages/painter/1031.php |title= Zhao Yuan accessdate=2008 05 29 |publisher= china on… … Wikipedia
Dong Yuan — Detail from Xiao and Xiang Rivers, permanent collection at the Palace Museum. This is often considered to be one of Dong Yuan s greatest masterpieces, and it illustrates the revolutionary impressionism he had achieved by means of broken ink… … Wikipedia
Li Yuan-chia — (李元佳, born near Lushan, China 1929 died Carlisle 1994) was an artist, poet and curator. He was educated in Taiwan from 1949.LifeLi Yuan chia is credited with establishing modern abstract art in Chinese circles. After time spent in Italy, in… … Wikipedia