Money tree plants (Pachira aquatica) are native to South America. Tradition states that a poor man became wealthy when he discovered and started selling the seeds of the tree. Also called the Malabar or Guiana chestnut, they are often grown in pots or as bonsai trees. Although money trees need some sunlight, they don't necessarily need continuous exposure to direct sunlight.
Climate and Light
Money trees are warm-climate plants, which is one reason they are often grown indoors. Outdoors, the trees grow best in U.S. Department of Agriculture plant hardiness zones 10 and 11. Money trees thrive in both full sun and partial shade, according to the California Rare Fruit Growers Association, so outdoor plants do not need direct sunlight. Plants grown indoors, however, do best in full, bright light.
Water and Soil
Proper exposure to sunlight is an important consideration when cultivating these plants, but proper watering is even more important. In the wild, money trees are freshwater wetland plants. They are found lining the banks of rivers, in marshes and in warm, humid swamps. They need moisture -- and plenty of it. Outdoor plants grow best in low-lying areas that flood frequently, although the trees will grow faster if the waters recede occasionally. This allows the stilt-like roots to get some oxygen. Upland trees need to be watered frequently enough that the soil is continually moist. Indoor plants also need consistent moisture, according to the Missouri Botanical Garden, but only in moderate amounts. Potted soil that is very soggy or flooded may develop fungal diseases.
Pests and Problems
These hardy trees do not suffer from serious insect pests or diseases, according to the Missouri Botanical Garden. Indoors, money trees may suffer from mealybug infestations. These soft, tiny gray insects cluster along the leaf petioles. The safest way to get rid of mealybugs is to take your money tree outdoors on a warm day and knock the bugs off the plant with a strong stream of water. This will also clean any dust off the leaves.
Although this plant is an excellent, attractive landscape tree for frost-free areas, it needs to be protected from hot, drying winds, which can dry out the foliage. Wilting leaves are also an indication of too-dry soil. This holds true for both indoor and outdoor plants. Indoor money trees should be planted in pots that have drainage holes. This allows the wet soil to drain well and reduces the chances of fungal diseases developing.