Circular Economy Expert
As part of the pioneering Circular Economy team at Zero Waste Scotland – the Sector Manager, Textiles (2013-16) Lynn Wilson implemented a national circular economy textiles strategy.
The Circular Economy is an economic system aimed at minimising waste and making the most of resources. In a circular system resource input and waste, emission, and energy leakage are minimised by slowing, closing, and narrowing energy and material loops; this can be achieved through long-lasting design, maintenance, repair, reuse, remanufacturing, refurbishing, and recycling. This regenerative approach is in contrast to the traditional linear economy, which has a ‘take, make, dispose’ model of production.
As proponents of the circular economy we are suggesting that a sustainable world does not mean a drop in the quality of life for consumers, and can be achieved without loss of revenue or extra costs for manufacturers. The argument is that circular business models can be as profitable as linear models, allowing us to keep enjoying similar products and services.
Consulting for and working with the owners of well known high street brands, Lynn Wilson is well placed to profer advice strategy and apply templates for a shift in business culture. The primary reason here is to stay on top of customer demand and those ethical consumers, whilst being mindful of cost implication and knock-on business implications.
Circular Economy Wardrobe
“Circular Economy Wardrobe aims to support the transition to the circular economy where we have less stuff in our homes but more experiences with our products. We can still enjoy the creative expression of our clothes, furniture and homes without the rest of the world paying the price. The move to a circular economy is about doing design better and differently. It is about economy and growth and how we do that whilst reducing the impact on rapidly depleting global resources. It is complex and at the same time simple – there is no alternative, we only have one planet for life.”
Lynn Wilson: Circular Economy Wardrobe