Large Quantity of Stem Cells Produced From Small Number of Blood Stem Cells
A team from the Institute for Research in Immunology and Cancer at the Universite de Montréal has succeeded in producing a large quantity of laboratory stem cells from a small number of blood stem cells obtained from bone marrow.
Platelet Derived Growth Factor Protection of Cardiac Mycardium
Investigators at the Weill Medical College of Cornell University have described a platelet-derived growth factor-AB-mediated communication between cardiac microvascular endothelial cells and neighboring cardiac myocytes.
Scientists Discover Way to Jumpstart Bone’s Healing Process
Astute observations led a team of clinicians and researchers to uncover how teriparatide, or Forteo can also boost our bodies’ bone stem cell production to the point that adults’ bones appear to have the ability to heal at a rate typically seen when they were young kids.
Creating Ideal Neural Cells for Clinical Use
Investigators at the Burnham Institute for Medical Research have developed a protocol to rapidly differentiate human embryonic stem cells into neural progenitor cells that may be ideal for transplantation.
Emory Study Yields Clue to How Stem Cells Form
An Emory University study shows some of the first direct evidence of a process required for epigenetic reprogramming between generations.
Penn Scientists Use RNA to Reprogram One Cell Type into Another
By simply flooding one cell type, a nerve cell, with an abundance of a specific type of messenger RNA from another cell type, the investigators changed a neuron into an astrocyte-like cell.
Embryonic Stem Cells Used to Regenerate Hair on Mice
A university lecturer has succeeded in regenerating hair on mice using embryonic stem cells, an achievement that could pave the way for the development of treatments for conditions including hair loss, it has been learned.
Device Protects Transplanted Pancreatic Cells from the Immune System
Scientists at Burnham Institute for Medical Research and the University of California San Diego School of Medicine have demonstrated in mice that transplanted pancreatic precursor cells are protected from the immune system when encapsulated in polytetrafluorethylene.
Gene Therapy for Muscular Dystrophy Shows Promise Beyond Safety
Researchers have cleared a safety hurdle in efforts to develop a gene therapy for a form of muscular dystrophy that disables patients by gradually weakening muscles near the hips and shoulders.
University of Texas Houston Enrolls First Patient in Stem Cell Study for Stroke
For the first time in the United States, a stroke patient has been intravenously injected with his own bone marrow stem cells as part of a research trial at The University of Texas Medical School at Houston.
Equine Stem Cell Technique to be Trialed in Human Medicine
A pioneering equine stem cell technique, which is used to successfully return injured horses to top levels of performance, is to be trialed in human medicine.
ABSTRACTS, REVIEWS AND SPECIAL REPORTS
C-Peptide Levels and Insulin Independence Following Autologous Nonmyeloablative Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation in Newly Diagnosed Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus
Patients that underwent autologous nonmyeloablative hematopoietic stem cell transplantation who became insulin free with normal levels of glycated hemoglobin A1c was investigated.
Human Oligodendrocytes from Embryonic Stem Cells: Conserved SHH Signaling Networks and Divergent FGF Effects
Using oligodendrocyte differentiation as a model system, the researchers show that sonic hedgehog (SHH)-dependent sequential activation of the transcription factors OLIG2, NKX2.2 and SOX10 is required for sequential specification of ventral spinal OLIG2-expressing progenitors, pre-oligodendrocyte precursor cells and OPCs from hESC-derived neuroepithelia.
Visit our events page to stay up to date with the latest events in the cell, gene and immunotherapy community.
TriMark Point of Care Testing Conference 2009
May 11, 2009 | San Diego, California
Enter “CONNEXON” at checkout and receive 10% off registration.
Visit here to register today.
Recruit Top Talent
Reach more than 11,000 potential candidates by posting your organization’s career opportunities with Cell Therapy News.
Visit here to post your career opportunities.