Health Benefits of Milk
Milk is called a balanced diet. Because it contains different ingredients that are required for maintaining good health.
Milk is a pale liquid produced by the mammary glands of mammals. It is the primary source of nutrition for infant mammals (including humans who breastfeed) before they are able to digest other types of food. Early-lactation milk contains colostrum, which carries the mother’s antibodies to its young and can reduce the risk of many diseases. It contains many other nutrients including protein and lactose.
As an agricultural product, milk is extracted from non-human mammals during or soon after pregnancy. Dairy farms produce millions of ton milk around the world and supply to different areas to meet up the requirement of fat and lactose as well as production of different types of delicious foods, Chocolate, biscuit and recipes. A large volume of milk powder are exported to different countries around the world from New Zealand, Holland, Australia etc. , The ever increasing rise in domestic demand for dairy products and a large demand-supply gap could lead to India being a net importer of dairy products in the future. The United States, India, China and Brazil are the world’s largest exporters of milk and milk products.China and Russia were the world’s largest importers of milk and milk products until 2016 when both countries became self-sufficient, contributing to a worldwide glut of milk. Throughout the world, there are more than six billion consumers of milk and milk products. Over 750 million people live in dairy farming households.
Characteristics of Milk.
Composition – proteins, lipids, lactose, minerals, vitamins, enzymes, etc.
solids-not-fat (SNF): proteins, lactose,minerals, acids, enzymes, vitamins. It is the total solids content minus the fat
- The biological function of milk is to supply nutrition and immunological protection to the young mammal. In some species, milk is the only food consumed for weeks or months. Therefore, it must furnish all nutritive requirements for maintenance and growth, such as energy, amino acids, minerals, and vitamins. It is also called a balanced diet which contains each ingredient required for a man to be alive.
Calcium: Calcium functions in the mineralization of bones and teeth, muscle contraction and relaxation, nerve functioning, and blood clotting.
Iron: Iron carries oxygen as a part of hemoglobin in blood or myoglobin in muscles, and it is requiredl for cellular energy metabolism.
Magnesium: Magnesium is a factor involved in bone mineralization, the building of protein, enzymel action, normal muscular function, transmission of nerve impulses, proper immune function and maintenance of teeth.
Phosphorus: Phosphorus is involved with mineralization of bones and teeth, it is important in geneticl material, in cell membranes as phospholipids, in energy transfer, and in buffering systems.
Potassium: Potassium facilitates reactions, including the making of protein. It is involved in thel maintenance of fluid and electrolyte balance, the support of cell integrity, the transmission of nerve impulses, and the contraction of muscles, including the heart.
Sodium: Sodium, sodium chloride, and potassium (the electrolytes) maintain normal fluid balance inl the body. Sodium is critical to nerve impulse transmission.
Zinc: Zinc is associated with hormones, it is needed for many enzymes, it is involved in makingl genetic material and proteins, immune cell activation, transport of vitamin A.
- Vitamins A, D, E, C, B1, B2, B6, B12, pantothenic acid, niacin, biotin, and folic acid are all found in milk. •The concentrations of fat soluble vitamins in milk (A, D, and E) are dependent on the diet and the breed of the cow. •All of the vitamins in milk are affected by processing. Vitamins C, B2, and A are deteriorated by light. The fat soluble vitamins are stable to heat, but the water soluble vitamins, B1, B6, B12, and folic acid, are less stable to heat. UHT sterilization leads to a 20-30% loss leads to 50% loss of vitamin activity.
Functions of Vitamins in Milk
Vitamin A: Vitamin A prevents eye problems, promotes a healthy immune system, is essential for the growth andlFunctions of Vitamins in Milk development of cells, mucous membranes, skin, bone and tooth health, reproduction, and immunity.
Vitamin D: Vitamin D strengthens bones because it helps the body absorb bone-building calcium.l
Vitamin E: Vitamin E is an antioxidant and helps protect cells from damage. It functions in stabilization of cell membranes,l support of immune function, protection of polyunsaturated fatty acids, and normal nerve development.
Vitamin C (also called ascorbic acid): Vitamin C is needed to form collagen, a tissue that helps to hold cells together. It is anl antioxidant, is restores vitamin E to its active form, it helps to synthesize hormones, it supports immune cell function, and helps in absorption of iron.
Thiamin (also called vitamin B1): Thiamin is part of a coenzyme needed in energy metabolism. It also supports a normall appetite and nervous system function.
Riboflavin (also called vitamin B2): Riboflavin is part of a coenzyme needed in energy metabolism. It also supports normall vision and skin health.
Vitamin B6 (also called pyridoxine): Vitamin B6 is part of a coenzyme needed in amino acid and fatty acid metabolism. Itl helps to convert tryptophan to niacin and to serotonin, and it helps make red blood cells.
Vitamin B12: Vitamin B12 is part of coenzymes needed to make red blood cells, and it is important for nerve cell function.l
Folate (also known as vitamin B9, folic acid, or folacin): Folate is part of a coenzyme needed for synthesis of red blood cells.l It is also needed to make DNA.
Niacin (also called vitamin B3): Part of coenzymes needed in energy metabolism. It helps maintain healthy skin and isl important for nerve function.
Pantothenic Acid: Part of a coenzyme needed in energy metabolism.l
Biotin: A cofactor for several enzymes needed in energy metabolism, fat synthesis etc.
Nutrition of milk.
One cup of milk is considered one serving. The nutritional breakdown depends on the fat content.
One cup of whole milk, with 3.25 percent fat contains:
- 146 calories
- 8 grams of fat
- 13 grams of carbohydrates
- 8 grams of protein
One cup of nonfat or skim milk contains:
- 86 calories
- 0 grams of fat
- 12 grams of carbohydrates
- 8 grams of protein
Source : http://www.medicalnewstoday.com