1. Do not mix heat with plastic. “Plastics are more likely to leach out of containers when heated,” says Gore. “Experts suggest avoiding putting plastic containers in the microwave or dishwashers with very hot water, for instance.” (Note from me: replace your plastic with glass and ditch the microwave altogether).
2. Ditch the plastic water bottle. When you’re on the go, Gore advises to sip water from either a reusable metal or glass water bottle. “Not only will you decrease leaching of chemicals (that can be obtained in a plastic bottle), you’ll also reduce your contribution to environmental plastic waste that is filling landfills and polluting our oceans.” However, if a plastic bottle of water is your only option, keep it out of the sun or a heated environment (like a hot yoga class) to avoid leaching. (Note from me: I LOVE Lifefactory glass water bottles. They also make baby bottles and glass "tupperware." lifefactory.com).
3. Scrub your produce. “Many pesticides are known EDCs,” she says. “Rinsing fruits and vegetables — tap water is fine — before eating can help to minimize exposure to these chemicals.” (Note from me: I use table salt and warm water to scrub my produce - works well and non-toxic).
4. Eat fresh over processed foods. “Processed foods may have additives, and the food may come into contact with containers or machinery that might result in some leaching. And if possible, avoid meats that come from animals treated with hormones or antibiotics.”
5. Store food in BPA-free glass or stainless steel bowls and containers. “Although some manufacturers have removed BPA from food and beverage storage containers, we do not always know what has replaced the BPA or whether it has been tested as an EDC."
5. Tidy up your home. “Keep your house clean. Also, plug holes under sinks and in the kitchen to minimize pests in order to avoid a need for chemical pesticides.” (Note from me: to make your own at-home sanitizer, use distilled water mixed with lavender or tea tree essential oils).
6. Take action. “Chemicals can be added into food storage containers without any required testing for safety,” explains Gore. “Therefore, contact your elected representatives to ask for improved testing of chemicals that are used in the food industry, before they are introduced.”