Tides refer to a season, more than just a day of celebration
Allhallowtide: Hallow means Saints
Christmastide: Christmas means Christ's Mass
Shrovetide: Shrove means to Confess
Passiontide: Passion means Death
Paschaltide: Paschal means Passover & Easter means Resurrection
Trinitytide: Trinity means Three (the Father, the son, & the Holy Spirit)
Celebrate the seasons in 3 ways:
Spread Cheer: Make cards and gifts, no matter how small, an annual tradition to honor the seasons.
Decorate Your Home: Fill your house with the lovely fragrance and freshly cut flowers.
Increase Your Devotion: Beautiful & simple prayers are a great way to foster a devotion specifically to the Holy Spirit for the season.
Mardi Gras and Lent
Lent to Easter
Easter to Pentecost
Mas = Mass of
In Latin Mass or Missa means “Go, it has been sent.”
“The Mass is ended, go in peace”. (Go spread god's words)
Mathew 28:19, Mark 16:15, proclaim the good news to others.
The Mass is an act of thanksgiving to God – the best we can give! The greek word which Eucharist comes from means “thanksgiving.”
Liturgical Feasts: feast of a saint. The word "feast" refers to "an annual religious celebration, a day dedicated to a particular saint."
Solstice & Equinox
Solstice: The word solstice is derived from the Latin sol ("sun") and sistere ("to stand still"), because at the solstices, the Sun's declination appears to "stand still"; that is, the seasonal movement of the Sun's daily path (as seen from Earth) stops at a northern or southern limit before reversing direction.
Equinox: the "edge" between night and day, the northern and southern hemispheres are equally illuminated. The word comes from Latin Aequus, meaning "equal", and Nox, meaning "night".
Are the Stars Important to the Church?
There are many stories in the bible about the heavens and now these stories have become traditions. Today in our daily lives we celebrate these traditions some religious and some seasonal which are based on Astronomy. The stars guide us just like the wisemen in the Christmas story. There is so much knowledge to be gained from Astronomy, History, Math & Science. Knowledge is power.
The Vatican Observatory is a scientific research institute and is one of the oldest astronomical institutes in the world. Papal interest in astronomy can be traced to Pope Gregory XIII who had the Tower of the Winds built in the Vatican in 1578 and later called on Jesuit astronomers and mathematicians to study the scientific data and implications involved in the reform of the calendar which occurred in 1582. From that time and with some degree of continuity the Holy See has manifested an interest in and support for astronomical research.