As many young adults enter a new stage of life adventuring off on their own to university or entering a new career path it can be a very exciting time, a fresh new start. This time of year also comes with some challenges especially when it comes to dental health.
These planning tips may help you stay on track keeping your teeth healthy.
5 Tips to Maintain Dental Health – While Starting University
Set a specific time to brush
Creating a weekly routine is a great thing to help keep you organized. If you have a fixed schedule like most students and employees you should know ahead of time when you will and won’t be home. Figure out exactly when you plan to brush your teeth each day, incorporate brushing your teeth as part of preparing to leave for school and work. Develop a weekly planner, record a scheduled time for brushing twice a day. Think of it as an appointment…you wouldn’t miss a doctor appointment would you? If needed try multitasking and brushing while in the shower!
Don’t forget to floss!
Some will neglect to floss their teeth because they focus on brushing or don’t make time. Yes, flossing takes time and it certainly can take some practice, but it’s very important if you want to maintain optimal oral health. If you’re not flossing you’re missing 35% of the tooth surface. If you haven’t flossed much in the past or don’t floss at all, your gums may bleed a little when you start flossing regularly; this should pass within a few days or weeks of regular flossing. Schedule some time to incorporate flossing into your nightly routine when you may have more time. Keep some floss on hand and floss while studying, listening to music or watching TV!!
Clean your tongue too!!
Clean the surface of your tongue daily only takes few seconds but makes a big difference. By using a professional tongue cleaner you remove countless bacteria that otherwise live, particularly on the rougher top surface of your tongue. These can contribute to bad breath (halitosis) and negatively affect your dental health.
Schedule regular dental appointments
In addition to forming good daily brushing habits, it is also important to have your teeth professionally cleaned. Professional cleanings are done at your dentist’s office by a dental professional. This type of cleaning can help remove hard deposits on your teeth that daily brushing cannot remove. It also helps prevent gum disease. You should have your teeth professionally cleaned twice each year if your teeth are healthy, and more often if you have specific health concerns that effect your oral health.
During your dental visit the dentist will perform an examination looking for any dental concerns, underling problems that may be occurring. The key is prevention, having a sudden tooth ache can come at the worst of times when approaching exams or deadlines causing a stressful time.
Eat nutritious foods
Preparing a healthy lunch in advance with meats, fresh fruit, vegetables and water can prevent the last minute stops for fast food on the run. Instead of chips or crackers, try nuts. Salty snacks may seem healthy because they don’t contain sugar, but simple starches can be just as bad. These snacks break down into a sticky goo, coating teeth and promoting decay. Avoid candies and granola bars. Crisp fruits and raw vegetables, like apples, carrots and celery, help clean plaque from teeth and freshen breath. Bring a refillable water bottle with you and you’ll always have a healthy drink! This will also help save on spending extra money.
Creating new habits will take some time, planning and organizing will help get you on track to a good start. Once you can do it for 30days chances are you’ll stick with it.
Keep smiling and stay focused. See you at your next check-up!
No matter your age, dental condition, and if you have a million questions, Dr. Sims can assist you or your young children in a professional manner and loves answering any of your questions or concerns.
Dr. Sims grew up in Grimsby playing basketball, so he’s always up for talking about the Raptors! He’s also a football fan - go Buffalo Bills! In his free time, if he’s not watching a basketball game or football game, you’ll likely find him working out, cooking (got any new recipe ideas?), and of course, spending time with his amazing family.