The Western Asian nation of Oman is located on the Arabian Peninsula’s southeastern coast. The country has an area of 309,500 square km and shares its land borders with the United Aram Emirates (UAE), Saudi Arabia, and Yemen to the northwest, west, and southwest, respectively. The country has coastlines on the Gulf of Oman and the Arabian Sea to the northeast and southeast, respectively. The capital of Oman is Muscat.
What Is the Capital of Oman?
Muscat is the capital of Oman. The metropolitan area of Oman has an area of 3,797 square km and is divided into six provinces called wilayahs. Muscat has a population of 1,560,330, making it the country's most populous city. The population density of Muscat is 450 persons per square km.
Where Is Muscat Located?
Muscat is located in the northeastern part of Oman. The city is partly surrounded by plains, and the Gulf of Oman borders Muscat’s western and northern periphery. Two natural harbors are located in the region, and Muscat’s northern coastline features the Western Al Hajar Mountains.
History of Muscat
Muscat was an important trading post along ancient trade routes dating as far back back as at least the 1st century CE. Its strategic coastal location attracted merchants and settlers from afar. As a result, the city has been ruled by numerous indigenous tribes, as well as major foreign political powers throughout its history. The Portuguese Empire, the Persian Empire, and the Ottoman Empire are among those who have ruled Muscat at various points in the city's long history. Oman has been ruled by the Al Bu Sa‘id dynasty since the mid-18th century, and Muscat has served as its capital since that time.
As the capital of Oman, Muscat is home to important royal residences and buildings from which the Sultan governs the country. The city is also home to the Sultan Qaboos Grand Mosque, the main mosque of the Sultanate of Oman. Other important cultural, social, and economic institutions of Oman are also based in Muscat.
About the Author
Oishimaya is an Indian native, currently residing in Kolkata. She has earned her Ph.D. degree and is presently engaged in full-time freelance writing and editing. She is an avid reader and travel enthusiast and is sensitively aware of her surroundings, both locally and globally. She loves mingling with people of eclectic cultures and also participates in activities concerning wildlife conservation.
Your MLA Citation
Your APA Citation
Your Chicago Citation
Your Harvard CitationRemember to italicize the title of this article in your Harvard citation.