To publish your K-12 engineering lessons, hands-on activities and/or curricular units, submit them for inclusion in the TeachEngineering online digital library collection.
Steps to Publish Your Curricula
Step 1: Create and Test
Create and test with students your original curricula—lessons and activities that teach K-12 engineering or science and/or math concepts with application or context to engineering. Download a TE template (step 2) to draft and polish your curriculum. For guidance, review the following resources:
- Suggestions & Tips
- Engineering Content Review Rubric
- K-12 Content Review Rubric
- TE Engineering Categories Description
- Author Tips for Effective Engineering Messaging
- What’s the difference between lessons, activities, units, sprinkles and maker challenges?
Note: Your original curriculum must be classroom-tested with your K-12 students, or K-12 students in a program you're partnering with, and will be checked for originality via TurnItIn.
Step 2: Use TE Templates
Prepare your curriculum using the various TeachEngineering templates. Notice the required and optional components that give you flexibility while resulting in a familiar presentation format for TeachEngineering users.
Lesson Template blank
Activity Template blank
Unit Template blank
Maker Challenge Template blank
Step 3: Email TE for Credentials
Request a username and password for the TeachEngineering submission portal by emailing us. Tell us your name, the supporting organization or educational institution you worked with, and the titles of the activities, lessons and units you are ready to submit. (Do not attach your files.) If you already have access to the submission portal, skip to the next step.
Step 4: Upload Your Files
Using your username and password for the TeachEngineering submission portal, upload your curricular materials (your Word template files and associated image and attachment files) in a zip file, following the instructions at the submission portal. At this website, you can track your submission's progress through the review and publication process.
Step 5: Initial Editor Review
Your submission is first reviewed by a TeachEngineering editor to make sure the required components are included.
Step 6: External Editor Review
Your submission is reviewed by a volunteer K-12 classroom teacher and a volunteer engineer, using the TE review rubrics (see step 1).
Step 7: Copyedit
Work with TE editors to implement reviewers' suggested changes and resolve any issues discovered during a final TE edit.
Step 8: Contributor Agreement
Complete and sign a contributor agreement with the TeachEngineering Alliance, managed by the University of Colorado, Boulder. Since the collection is composed of contributions from many sources, it must be able to operate as one entity for purposes of quality control, functional management and ensuring its desired use.
Step 9: Layout Editing
TE converts the final templates and associated files to web format for publication.
Step 10: Publication
You will be informed when your document is published online and given the opportunity to request any final changes.
Note: Once you submit your curriculum and it is sent out for external review (step 6), the publication process typically takes about three months. To speed up this process, please volunteer to review curricula contributed by others!
If you have any question about the TeachEngineering submission, review and publication process, please email us.