Level 4Level 6
75 words 0 ignored
Ready to learn Ready to review
Check the boxes below to ignore/unignore words, then click save at the bottom. Ignored words will never appear in any learning session.
adj. unpleasantly and excessively suave
"v. waver, hesitate"
truth of a statement
"n. change, variation"
adj. having a loud voice
adj. charmingly sweet
"peak, highest point (z...)"
"n. behavior that is unreasonably impatient and angry, like a child"
"adj. calm, casual"
"adj. arrogant, condescending"
"joining of parts, coming together"
"adj. nimble, possessing quick reflexes"
"n. reduction, decrease"
adj. clearly visible
"adj. extremely bad, hateful"
"agreement, concurrence, consent or acquiescence; to agree, consent to or concur"
n. particular strength of character or skill
n. noise or music growing louder
"adj. relevant, well-timed, suitable"
n. widespread praise
"v. support, add to, or uphold"
adj. very poor
"adj. definite, fully and clearly expressed or demonstrated"
"n. mockery, ridicule"
n. the act of yielding or conforming
"n. inconsequentiality, lack of seriousness"
n. a conjecture or assumption
n. a deviation from a central theme
v. injure the reputation of
"adj. unrefined, coarse or thick in nature"
n. something to be grateful for
"reconcile, placate, obtain the friendship of"
adj. boding well for the future
"adj. ineffective, pointless, useless"
shortness of duration
"adj. pleasant in sound, agreeable to the ear"
"adj. irregular, wandering"
"n. absence of government, disorder"
n. self denial
n. a standard by which to determine the correctness of a judgment or conclusion
adj. fitted to serve as a model or example worthy of imitation
adj. thorough and complete in execution
v. take a different course
"v. change continually, shift back and forth"
n. provision against future harm or need
"n. joyous, carefree, merry"
adj. easily broken
"n. a riddle, mystery"
adj. exhibiting moral skepticism and contempt
"something that prevents a desired action, such as through fear"
"n. carefulness, the opposite of negligence"
ardor or intensity of feeling
n. bad feeling
"hardship, misfortune or affliction"
n. the use of force to obtain compliance
v. cause to turn away
v. display arrogance by patronizing those considered inferior
"adj. pastime, or distraction, detour"
"v. make more easy, assist"
adj. capable of various forms