Interactive Dynamic Environment
An Interactive Dynamic Environment is any environment, virtual or physical, in which the environment itself is highly volatile, and constantly changing, whilst the users can add to that change at any time, causing ripples that can spread out throughout the whole environment.
Below, we offer a selection of links from our resource databases which may match this term.
Related Dictionary Entries for Interactive Dynamic Environment:
Resources in our database matching the Term Interactive Dynamic Environment:
A coder?s article about creating realistic, dynamic soft shadow in real-time interactive, and complex scenes.
Stanford's Junior AI, on handbrake skid parking, without a human influence on the system, in dynamic environments, with only a two foot variance in position at 25mph. Or, the first baby steps towards dynamic switching between open and closed loop systems.
H.D.R., or high dynamic range photography is a relatively new technique used by photographers to take high-quality full lighting range photos that are near-indistinguishable from paintings, for their ability to correctly replicate the lighting of a given scene, exactly how the human eye would see it.
In early January 2008, a Rice University study published in the Journal of Neuroscience found that socioemotional meanings, including sexual ones, are conveyed in human sweat. This raises the question for immersive spaces, if such dynamic scents need to be synthetically reproduced to provide a firmer social environment in tele-mediation.
A second, deeper look at creating interactive stories, branching dialogue, and trying to create a feel of player participation whilst guiding them to specific destinations.
This book is designed for 3-D artists and Web designers who are able to produce interactive 3-D content on their desktop without any prior knowledge of programming. The book uses LifeForms, Virtools and Deep Paint 3-D. It comes with a CD, with most of these tools on it, to aid the reader.
British Sky Broadcasting (Sky) is the operator of the UK's largest digital pay television platform. On weeknights they operate Sky Vegas. In September 2007 this service changed to become interactive, computer generated horseracing.
The LIREC project (Living with Robots and Interactive Companions) is an attempt to help create interactive, emotionally intelligent, synthetic companions which are capable of long-term relationships with human users, and able to move between robot-based interaction and virtual avatar form.
A new virtual environment, unveiled by researchers at the Southern Methodist University, is an interactive-real-time simulation of the human cell's 'sump pump', intended to allow researchers to interact with it in real-time, and determine how to bypass it for cancer cells.
Non-interactive, yet dramatic virtual flyovers of NASA's two Mars rover landing sites have been created, using the Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter's camera, and the principle behind stereoscopic 3D. Might the technology behind them, actually finally be hinting at planetary exploration in VR?
Industry News containing the Term Interactive Dynamic Environment:
Results by page
(Press Release) EON Reality, Inc., maker of interactive visual content management software today announced that EON Raptor(TM) 5.5 is now a free software for serious games.
EON Raptor(TM) is a free 3ds Max plug-in that enabl...
Converge 05 provides an interactive environment to allow for creativity and innovation in business. It brings together different elements of art and science to create fresh ideas and ways of thinking.
It is the introduction o...
A new technique for creating structures and scenery objects by dynamic algorithm could radically speed up the task of creating landscapes within a world....
September 14th - 16th, 2009
Intelligent virtual agents (IVAs) are interactive characters that exhibit human-like qualities and communicate with humans or with each other using natural human moda...
April 15-18, 2007
University of Perugia, Umbria, Italy
Twelfth in the series, the Web3D 2007 International Symposium will address a wide range of topics about 3D and Multimedia on the Web Topics include languages, too...