At the time of your school days, you were bound to follow certain rules while writing sentences in English. The rule has a common name which is known as ‘Grammar'. You used to follow each and every step of your grammar textbook to get good scores in exams! Do you remember been taught in school that you cannot begin a sentence with a conjunction? Or you cannot end up with a preposition! And you, as a student had to follow those so-called rules blindly. But sometimes these guidelines are not accurate. These particular ‘inventions' have their own style and form which might break their format! That is why; you find grammar as a tough one.
You can't start a sentence with a conjunction -
There is a common myth regarding a rule in English grammar that you cannot start a sentence with a conjunction! Conjunctions are certain words those are used to connect clauses, words or even sentences. Like and, but, so, and if. A grammatical false notion takes place from the consideration that these words cannot be used to start a sentence. As they are used to connect separate clauses, they suggest the incidence of a portion when used at the beginning of a sentence! It tells that by starting a sentence with and Or but, it will provide with an incomplete thought or fragment. Therefore, it is considered incorrect. But, it can be used as a stylish preference rather than a grammatical rule!
To make your writing more descriptive, use more adjectives -
The words that describe things are known as objectives. It is terrific ways to make you’re writing a lot more interesting. But it does not mean that adjectives are meant to use to write a descriptive. Rather play with the sentence structure to make it more descriptive. The best education consultancy can only provide you with a different perspective to use adjectives in sentences.
‘She claimed that she would turn her head off as she walked down the hilly region but she lied.' – a sentence without an adjective! Basically, as per the mood of a sentence, it can make a descriptive one. Adjectives do not require every time.
You can't end a sentence with a preposition -
Hardly you will find anyone those who used to end up a sentence with a preposition in school days. But since the 17th century, legend writers had tried to codify English to fit more in order with Latin grammar. There were days when grammarians used to find a sentence simply poor or over formal while ending up with a preposition. But there exist typical situations those are considered as natural.
For instance, a passive structure like ‘The match was rained off.' Or an imperative sentence like ‘Which class she is in?' etc are few examples where the proposition is sitting at the end.
Put a comma when you need to take a breath -
A break in reading is not always a dependable reason to use a comma in a sentence. There is no such rule about using a comma while taking a breath! The comma is punctuation and it is used to stop a word from being overuse! It is used to avoid confusion. It's set off phrases that express contrast. It is on the writer whether he thinks a reader should briefly pause, he uses a comma.
Adverbs are the words that end in ‘ly' -
Adverbs adjust a verb, an adjective, another adverb, or an entire clause or sentence. Adverbs end in -ly is quite a natural thing. But there are so many cases where adverbs do not end in –ly! For instance, even, fast, almost, already, best, quick, rather and so on. ‘EMI for Education is the best part for all the individuals to achieve with higher studies!' – a perfect example of a sentence where –ly adverbs is not in use.
These are few of the misconceptions that you were taught wrong in school. That is the reason students should evaluate their teachers while organizing the sentences you might find that English is not following the basic rules of grammar. In order to communicate with different people uses English in a different way. And this is not a wrong procedure. Time and language do not stand still for any of us!
Top 5 Things You Were Taught At School Level But its Wrong!
4/ 5Oleh kaushik