Percy Hedley School caters for pupils with cerebral palsy and other motor disorders. The school’s approach follows the principles of Conductive Education as developed in the Peto Institute, Budapest. This holistic approach works on the development of the whole child, integrating education, therapy and care. The main aim of the approach is to develop the whole personality of the child and focuses on a “can do” attitude, striving for independence at every level.
From Early Years to Key Stage 2, pupils complete task series motor programmes on a daily basis, working on the development of normal motor patterns through task led activities in different places and positions. Throughout the daily routine, opportunities are provided to enable pupils to develop their independence through all activities. Specialist teachers, conductor/teachers, physiotherapists, occupational therapists, speech and language therapists and special support assistants create the trans-disciplinary team working with the child. Pupils work on the Early Years Foundation Stage curriculum and our specialist Key Stage one or two curriculum as appropriate. Therapy is integrated into the classroom in addition to pupils receiving individual or small group therapy.
From Key Stage 3 upwards, pupils continue to follow the principles of Conductive Education; however, the frequency of task series is reduced as the demands of the curriculum increase. Pupils follow the specialist Key Stage 3, 4 and Post 16 curriculum, accessing accreditation as appropriate.
Percy Hedley School has a number of pupils with more complex needs operating at levels that mean they are unable to access a formalised curriculum or assessment model. These pupils are in classes throughout the school.
The curriculum we offer for these pupils focusses on developing and assessing their engagement rather than assessing attainment. We recognise that these learners are not yet ready to learn. Our work in school must focus on preparing them to access learning opportunities to enable them to learn to the best of their ability. If learners are unable to engage with learning opportunities, then they will never be able to make concrete attainments. Due to the complex nature of these pupils, this process can be prolonged.