Teachers & Librarians
Find curriculum activities for
If you have an activity or activities to share, please email these along with your name and school or library name.
Pat explains why she decided to write a book about gratitude for children. Video provided by WETV's ¡Colorín Colorado!.
There are so many things to be thankful for.
"From the sun waking him up in the morning to a cricket chirping him to sleep at night, a young boy gives thanks for the many things and people who enrich his life. These blessings are remarkable for their childlike imagination and fresh imagery: 'Por mis piyamas viejos, tan suaves que me siento como si me estuviera poniendo aire, gracias. / For my old pajamas, so soft they feel like I'm putting on air, thanks.' … Books of thanks can run toward clichés, but the originality and liveliness of language and art in this one will inspire children to consider their own blessings."—Booklist, starred review
"A boy recounts the many things he is thankful for, like his time at the beach and the bees that don't sting him when he is outside playing. The poetic writing flows in both Spanish and English and carries a sense of happiness brought by the simple things in life. … his delightful bilingual book has universal appeal and would be a wonderful choice for library storytimes or classroom read-alouds as the "giving thanks" theme lends itself to holidays and social topics."—School Library Journal
"Often poetic (the ladybug is "a little red flying surprise"), often funny (the boy is thankful for his mother, who found his lost homework), Mora's text is presented in Spanish first, then English, a respectful nod to Spanish-speaking readers. Parra's folk-art-style acrylic illustrations look as though they're painted on wood; the lines and imperfections give the pictures a worn, homey appearance that matches the sweetness of the text and the old-fashioned feel of the setting."—Horn Book
"From bees that don't sting and secret dollars from Abuelita to Papa's thick chocolate "mud" and airy soft pajamas, the boy's expressions of gratitude will ring true with children from all cultural backgrounds. However, it is the subdued folk-art illustrations, imbued with elements of magical realism that will have parents, teachers, and educators waxing nostalgic for their own simple childhood joys. A delightful alternative to traditional "thanksgiving" books, this simplistic offering is wonderful for both public and school library collections."—REFORMA NewsRead more reviews
Enjoy this video of Gracias~Thanks read by Rosi Amador with original music composed and performed by guitarist Brian Amador of Latin band Sol y Canto: