What is Occupational Medicine?
Occupational medicine is the practice of dealing with health conditions caused by the workplace environment. The focus is on preventing, evaluating, treating and resolving workplace health issues. Specialists in occupational medicine are trained to access worker injury and illness. Work conditions, both internal and external, along with the worker's own medical history, are taken into consideration when evaluating a patient and their ability to safely return to work.
Signs and Symptoms
Due to the wide range of work environments and types of jobs, there are many types of injuries, signs or symptoms that could mean an employee needs to seek occupational medicine. Additionally, it will depend on if the injury or incident occurs while the employee is working, or as a result of prior work.
Who is at the Occupational Medicine Clinic?
Board-certified providers, nurses, nurse practitioners and physician's assistants comprise the care team at an occupational medicine clinic. In addition, blood work and drug and alcohol screenings are done in the clinic so lab technicians are available to assist with any lab work you may require.
What Does an Occupational Medicine Specialist Do?
Occupational medicine specialists evaluate, treat and monitor the health of workers. This includes promoting safe work practices and educating employees, analyzing potential workplace hazards, and ensuring compliance with laws and regulated safety standards. Occupational Medicine specialists receive formal training in areas such as public health, preventive medicine, population medicine, epidemiology, toxicology and research. Additionally, they study potential workplace exposures and risks, with an emphasis on employee health.
When to Seek Occupational Medicine
If you have been injured or hurt while at your job and have filed a work's compensation claim with your company, you will be referred to an occupational medicine clinic. Here you will be properly evaluated and treated by a provider. In addition, occupational medicine clinics are used for other work-related issues, such as:
- Drug and alcohol screening for new or continued employment
- Lab work including blood testing
- Injury care
- Employee health screening
Benefits of UnityPoint Clinic Occupational Medicine
UnityPoint Clinic Occupational Medicine services are committed to helping you in the event you experience work-related injury. Your care team will work with your place of employment to make sure you receive the care and evaluation needed to safely return to work and help you reach your personal health goals.