This is a collaborative post and does not necessarily reflect the views and opinions of this blog or its author.
People don’t realize that there are things they do every day that directly affect their mental health, either in a positive or negative way. Mental health still isn’t taken seriously by some, although many people will experience things like depression, anxiety, and other issues at some point in their lives. It can happen to anybody at any time, so raising awareness and breaking the taboo surrounding the subject is a must.
If you want to make sure you’re caring for your mental health, the best thing you can do is pay attention to the factors that directly affect it. Take a look at the list below:
The Food You Eat
The food you eat plays a bigger part in your mental health than you probably know. Sure, it’s important for your physical health, but it goes hand in hand with your mental health too. Think about how you feel when you eat a good square meal filled with vegetables and micronutrients. You feel full of energy. You feel fit and healthy. You likely feel more alert for the day and get more done. How about when you go to Mcdonalds or another takeaway? It might satisfy a quick craving, but you probably find that you feel sluggish and a little rubbish afterward. Eating good food means better mental health, period.
How You Move During The Day
How do you move during the day? Do you start your day off doing something you loathe? Do you roll out of bed with minutes to spare and feel rushed for the rest of the day? Do you sit down most of the day, mentally exhausted from work and refusing to work out? You’re not alone, but you must break these habits for better mental health. Try to get up earlier so you have some time to yourself to enjoy a coffee or another hot drink, maybe read a chapter of a book. Get some exercise and you’ll feel great for the rest of the day too. Exercise increases happy hormones, both in the short term and the long term. It’ll make you feel strong, capable, empowered, and so much more. Get into a consistent routine and it’ll be one of the best things you do.
Drugs And Other Medications
Drugs and other medications can affect your mental health, so if you’ve been feeling a bit out of sorts lately, make sure you visit your general practitioner. If you purchase yours from a place like ePharmacies make sure you know what you’re buying first and the risks so you can be sure it’s right for you. Many people turn to medication, when eating well and exercising would have worked even better.
The Environments You Spend Time In
The environments you spend the most time in can make a huge difference to your mental health, as can the people in those environments. If you’re putting yourself into situations that give you anxiety, and you’re always around negative people, then you’re going to suffer.
Make sure you take care of your mental health from now on. You matter!