Do we get Benefits Of Vegan Diet by not eating red meat, fish, poultry, milk, dairy products, and eggs? It Depends on the choice of the diet that gets consumed.
There are some Benefits Of Vegan Diet, but we also need to consider the lack of vitamin, amino acid, High Phytic Acid, and Excessive Carbohydrate Consumption.
Let start us first with the Benefits Of Vegan Diet.
- WHAT IS A JAPANESE DIET? WHY AND HOW TO LOSE WEIGHT WITH IT?
- WHY IS YOUR DIET ISN’T WORKING? 10 REASONS WHEN A DIET WON’T WORK
- FOODS WITH IODINE AND THE HEALTH BENEFITS
- VITAMIN B12 RICH FRUITS AND VEGETABLES – WHAT FOODS DO CONTAIN B12?
Positive Effects And Health Benefits Of Vegan Diet
- It is a fiber-rich diet; it also positively affects digestive system health.
- It’s rich in antioxidants.
- Vitamin and mineral intake is provided at a high level because it is a diet that is predominantly vegetable and fruit.
- It protects heart health because it does not have saturated fat and cholesterol.
- Kidney and gallstones are less likely to occur.
- It helps to lose weight.
- It is protective against some types of cancer.
- Reduces insulin resistance.
A Vegan Diet Is Rich With Antioxidants And Vitamins
Almost all plant-based foods contain a high level of antioxidants and also have anti-inflammatory effects.
So, by dealing with oxidative stress, they prevent the progression of diseases.
In a diet rich in vegetables, fruits, and other vegetable foods, nutrition, antioxidant levels, essential vitamins, significant benefits are available in terms of minerals.
This nutrient-rich diet is also suitable for bowel health, strengthens immunity, reduces the effects of aging, cancer, and supports to protect heart disease.
Vegetarian Diet Promotes Heart Health
Plant products reduce inflammation, and this leads to the elimination of the fundamental factor of heart disease.
There is an excellent relationship between the fiber-rich diet and prevention of high cholesterol, heart disease, and diabetes.
Vegan Diet Can Help To Lose Weight
It’s known that those consuming high amounts of fruits and vegetables are more resistant to weight gain as they age.
Because vegetables and fruits are weak in terms of calories, but because they occupy a volume, they fill your stomach and prevent you from overeating.
Therefore, plant-based diets have a lower impact on the risk of obesity.
Vegetarian Diet Provide More Digestive Enzymes
If you include enough and correct raw foods in your diet, you can get more useful enzymes that serve many purposes.
Because when food gets cooked over a certain degree, the enzymes in it are going to weaken.
The main task of these enzymes is to separate nutrients into small amounts that the body can handle.
Some foods, such as vitamins, minerals, and amino acids, deteriorate when exposed to heat for a long time.
Vegan Diet Is Sustainable and Good For The Environment
Many people leave meat, fish, and other animal foods to reduce their carbon footprint.
Plants are at the start point of the food chain, which allows less natural resources to get used for their production.
In the production of animal foods, water, soil, fossil fuels, and the energy consumption is much more than plants.
Side Effects Of Vegan Diet
- Due to a deficiency of B12: pernicious anemia, growth retardation, depression, and memory problems may get experienced.
- Due to inadequate protein intake, amino acids may be deficient, and muscle loss may occur.
- Phytic acid, found in cereals, legumes, and other vegetable products, can inhibit the absorption of calcium, magnesium, iron, and zinc.
- In the long run, bone pain in the muscles due to the decrease of these minerals, anemia can be observed.
Vegan Diet Recommendations
Don’t Forget To Consume Fatty Acids
For vegetarians, fatty acids such as EPA, DHA, and alpha-linolenic acid are essential.
These acids, which are not synthesized by the body, play an essential role in the development of nervous tissue, brain, eye health, and in fulfilling the functions of the heart vessel.
Omega-3 fatty acids in the brain, due to the decrease in the amount of DHA leads to vision and learning disorders.
Besides, some skin diseases such as skin dryness, asthma, arthritis, a decline in growth, diabetes, and some types of cancer as well as much other psychological illnesses may also occur.
EPA and DHA are primarily in animal-derived foods such as cold water fish.
Omega-3 fatty acids are in vegetable sources that are the precursors of omega-3 fatty acids, alpha linoleic acid gets converted into EPA and DHA fatty acids, even in low amounts in the liver.
For vegetarians, foods such as walnuts, canola oil, soy, flaxseed, sea vegetables, algae, and derivatives get recommended as sources of omega 3 fatty acids.
Some vegetarians can take this source from fish.
Lack Of Iodine
Vegans can eliminate iodine deficiencies by using seaweed, iodized salt, or iodine supplements.
Vegetables commonly eaten by vegans such as sweet potatoes, soy, broccoli, and Brussels sprouts, reduce the absorption of iodine.
Due to low iodine intake-iodine supplementation of 150 mg daily, a vegan pregnant and childbearing age in the risk group gets recommended.
During pregnancy, if the mother’s candidate gets fed with insufficient amounts of iodine, the child’s mental and physical development can be prevented.
Attention should be considered the frequency of use.
Find Sources For Iron and Calcium
For vegetarians, fortified breakfast cereals, dried fruit, beans, lentils, Green leafy vegetables, sesame seeds, nuts, whole wheat bread, can be used as a source of iron.
Calcium and tannin reduce the absorption of iron.
Tea, coffee, and calcium supplements should intake a few hours before a high meal of iron content.
Consume foods containing vitamin C to increase the absorption of iron as well.
Dairy products are a natural source of calcium for vegetarians and non-vegetarians.
Vegans can eat fortified soy formulas, calcium-rich green leafy vegetables, soy milk, soy yogurt, and various calcium supplements.
B12 Supplement Needs To Be Consume
Soy milk, breakfast cereals, milk and dairy products, eggs, foods fortified with B12 should consume as a source of B12 for vegetarians.
Especially for pregnant, lactating vegans and their babies, vitamin B12 supplementation gets recommended.
Amino Acid And Protein
To meet the need for essential amino acids, the intake of grain, crustacean foods, and seeds or dried legumes such as rice, lentils in the same meal supports the need for protein.
Always ask your doctor if you’re going to start a vegetarian diet because you need to know, is it good for your health and your body.