When it comes to talking to your kids about consent, it’s important to have not just one but multiple conversations. During a time of danger, it’s quite natural for children to panic and forget what was told to them. We, as adults, are guilty of it. Having multiple conversations will not just keep what you told them fresh in their minds but also help them remember it whenever they feel uncomfortable. In this big bad world, no one is safe. Boys are in as much danger as girls, and we can’t always be around to protect them. In an event where they are vulnerable, a conversation like this could help prevent and protect, and if not, at least they will feel comfortable when talking to you. Apart from a conversation, here are a few pointers to keep in mind to ensure your child is comfortable.
Never Force Your Kids:
We as parents must never put manners before the comfort of our kids. Kids can be surprisingly extremely intuitive. Sometimes they may pick up on a vibe. When this happens, they may be hesitant to make physical contact with a person. If your child does not want to hug or shake hands with a person, then never force them to do so. Teach them to be respectful and polite but, in turn, also respect your kid’s comfort. When you force them to greet people even when they are uncomfortable just so the other person’s sentiments are protected, you are indirectly teaching them that the other person’s sentiments are more important than their comfort.
Give Them Their Privacy:
If your kids are old enough to change themselves and use the bathroom alone, then allow them to do so. Shut the door and wait outside while they do. This teaches them that their privacy is of prime importance, and it is not okay for anyone to watch them while they change or use the bathroom.
Teach Them The Swimsuit Rule:
Teaching young children which parts of their body should not be touched could be tricky. Have them put on a swimsuit and explain to them that the parts of their body covered by a swimsuit are private and out of bounds. It should not be touched by anyone. This will make it easier for them to remember which parts of their bodies are private. Tell them that in the case they are touched in those areas by anyone, then they should come and tell it to you immediately.
Communicate With Them:
Closing off communication with your children can be extremely harmful in the long run. As they grow up, this is going to lead them to shut in and not tell you what’s bothering them. If they ever feel violated, then you don’t want them not telling you because they don’t feel comfortable enough with you. When it comes to people and situations, encourage them to speak up and listen patiently. Don’t let your own sentiments and emotions come in the way when they talk to you about a person, even if the person is someone important to you.
Discourage People-Pleasing Behaviour:
Never encourage your kids to do something because they feel the pressure to please someone else. People-pleasing behavior is dangerous and is something that will slowly become a habit. This will lead to them agreeing to situations they are not comfortable in. Teach your kids to stand up for themselves and repeatedly let them know that their comfort and peace of mind is most important. It’s okay if a relative’s sentiments are hurt in the process of protecting your kids.
Remember that your kid’s comfort and peace of mind is most important. As a parent, it is our duty to ensure they are as comfortable as possible. Be kind and loving to your kids even when they make mistakes. This will set the benchmark for your kids. When someone is violent towards them, they will know that it is not normal and will try their best to leave the situation or inform you about it.