1. HELPS TO LOOSE WEIGHT:
All types of exercises are good, but when it comes to shedding some kilos, it’s hard to beat running. Running encourages the body to burn more calories, with the cells seeking more energy to function, which subsequently causes the body to lose weight. High intensity exercises like running, aerobics, etc. stimulates more “after-burn” of calories as compared to low intensity exercises. Research studies acknowledge running results in greater and faster weight loss than walking. By aiding in digestion, it helps faster and better absorption of the nutrients from the food you have eaten. It also improves metabolism, therefore improving the health of your digestive system. With improved metabolism, running makes your cells seek more energy and this results in burning more calories which ultimately leads to weight loss.
2. IMPROVE YOUR CARDIO-RESPIRATORY HEALTH (AKA, FITNESS)
When you exercise, your heart pumps more quickly, strengthening all of your cardiac muscles. Similarly, your lungs expand and contract at faster rates during exercise, which forces your respiratory system to become more powerful.
Good cardio-respiratory health can prevent heart disease, lower your cholesterol, prevent type 2 diabetes, increase lung capacity, and boost your overall immune system. The better your cardio-respiratory health, the more fit and in shape you’ll be. Running a mile every day is an excellent way to keep your heart and lungs working at full capacity. Good motivation, right?
3. KICK DEPRESSION
Ever heard of a runner’s high? Exercising releases hormones in your brain called endorphins, which are the “feel good” chemicals proven to increase your mood and lower your perception of pain. When you run, you’re flooded with endorphins that can drastically improve your levels of happiness. If you’ve ever experienced overwhelming elation at the end of a glorious run, you know what we mean.
Numerous studies have shown that people suffering from depression, severe anxiety, and other mental health problems can reap the rewards of running. In fact, regular aerobic exercise (AKA running) can be just as effective as antidepressant medication! While it isn’t a cure for everyone, it most certainly can benefit anyone. Running just one mile each day or 20-30mins on a Treadmill is a fantastic natural mood enhancer and can help depression patients see the light on the other side.
4. RUNNING BUILDS STRONG BONES
As you run, the stress you put on your bones makes them stronger over time by increasing your bone density. This helps decrease your risk for osteoporosis—a condition that makes your bones weak and prone to breaking.
For a long time, researchers and doctors thought that resistance training, such as lifting weights, was the best way to beef up your bone density. But recent insight shows that high-impact exercise like running can be just as good, if not better!
5. GET BETTER SLEEP (FINALLY)
Tired of being tired? Believe it or not, running a mile every day can help you get a good night’s sleep. While you might think that tiring yourself out automatically leads to better sleep, it’s much more complicated than that. Because running releases endorphins, all those anxious thoughts that keep you up at night just start floating to the background. Over time, your over-stimulated brain learns to relax and push away those wide-awake worries through the magical effects of running.
Not to mention, body temperature can have an effect on how easily you slip into Dreamland. Exercising increases your body temperature, and as you cool off after running, that change relaxes your body and preps it for rest. Voila, an easy path toward a restful sleep was in your hands—err, legs—all along!
6. BECOME SMARTER
Fun fact: running encourages the growth of new grey matter in your brain. That’s right, you can literally expand your mind by lacing up a pair of sneakers and going for a jog. The more brain cells your body produces, the more opportunities you have to learn new things and remember important information. Plus, the rate of your learning speeds up, too. That means cramming to study for a test the night before might become a little bit easier!
While we can’t promise that running a mile every day will turn you into a Nobel Prize winner, we can say with confidence that you’ll be more alert and ready to learn than ever before. Aerobic activity increases the levels of cortisol in your body, which boosts information retention and memorization capabilities. No matter if you’re a student or a working professional, this is great news for athletes of any age!
7. RELIEVE STRESS WITHOUT BREAKING THINGS
Smashing plates might sound like fun, but the clean-up is always a pain. Similar to how running can decrease depression, stretching your legs on a regular basis can relieve stress in a healthy way. On top of all those delicious endorphins, running basically acts as meditation in motion. The repeated motion of placing one foot in front of the other focuses your mind and helps shed any stressors you’ve experienced throughout the day.
Remember when you cried as a kid and your mom told you to take deep breaths? That technique helped calm you down during a tantrum—and the same logic applies when you run. Your elevated heart rate forces you to breathe deeply, which in turn helps calm an angry or upset mind. The next time you’re feeling overwhelmed with stress, avoid the urge to break something and take it out on the pavement with a therapy session on-the-go.
8. TAKE A STAND AGAINST CANCER
Even if you don’t consider yourself a numbers person, there’s no way you can ignore the stats on daily running and reduced cancer risk. According to medical science, if you run a mile every day, you have: 42% lower risk of esophageal cancer, 27% lower risk of liver cancer, 26% lower risk of lung cancer, 23% lower risk of kidney cancer, 16% lower risk of colon cancer, and 10% lower risk of breast cancer. Amazing, right?
And those are only a few types of cancer where risk is significantly reduced by daily exercise! Even though running isn’t a sure-fire prevention technique, it never hurts to do everything you can to stay healthy. Perhaps your training will even get you ready to run a race that benefits cancer research!
9. HELPS MOOD SWINGS
You may be astonished to know that running not only improves your overall health, but also helps de-stress and fight depression. Running boosts the health of the body, mind and spirit making you feel more energized, even short runs are very impactful. It’s a tonic for the upset mood, low spirits. A few minutes of running every morning can do wonders to lift your spirit and keep a positive state of mind, a great way to start the day. Running helps treat depression faster than other methods of treatment, because running releases endorphins in your body and thus elevates your mood.
10. BOOST’S BRAIN PERFORMANCE
Aerobic exercise like running is able to increase heart rate and up the flow of oxygen-rich blood in the body, including the brain. Neuroscience discovered that short-term aerobic exercises such as running improves brain and cardiovascular fitness and cognitive ability, in aging adults who are healthy. Sedentary adults who exercise regularly can lead to an increase in brain blood
See below five (5) ways Running Improves the brain:
1. Running helps your brain grow.
Don’t worry — we’re not talking bursting-through-your-skull growth. Running stimulates the creation of new nerve cells and blood vessels within the brain, an organ that tends to shrink as a person ages. Also, studies have shown that running may help increase the volume of the mid-brain (which controls vision and hearing) and the hippo-campus (which is linked to memory and learning).
2. Running helps your brain age better.
In addition to preventing or reversing age-related shrinkage, running affects brain chemicals in a way that sets runners up to have healthier-than-average brains later in life. A study last year measured neural markers and cognitive function in middle-aged athletes and non-athletes, and while the cognitive function scores were the same, researchers found the athletes’ brains showed greater metabolic efficiency and neural plasticity.
3. Running boosts your ability to learn and recall information.
Another 2012 study found that at least moderately fit people did better on memory tests than those who were less fit (or not fit at all). This adds to earlier research that links running to a better ability to focus, to juggle multiple tasks, and to make distinctions.
4. Running conditions your brain to store more fuel.
You already knew that training conditions your muscles to store more fuel, but a recent study suggests that your brain adapts in the same way. Researchers believe these larger glycogen stores in the brain may be one of the reasons running boosts cognitive function.
5. Running, especially in nature, helps keep your brain full of feel-good chemicals.
Exercise promotes the release of the feel-good chemicals called endorphins. Additionally, like many antidepressant medications, running helps your brain hold on to mood-boosting neurotransmitters serotonin and norepinephrine. For best results, run in quiet, green spaces instead of on crowded streets — a study last year found people in parks experienced brain activity similar to that seen during meditation, while people on streets experienced frustration.
Is it ok to run everyday, for some yes, do you want to run everyday. If you find it enjoyable, it makes you feel good and it’s a hobby for you then go for it. If you feel absolutely exhausted and it’s getting you down then don’t do it. You can become addicted to many things and exercise is one of them. Just make sure it accompanies your life and doesn’t take it over.
Ensure you stay at a healthy weight and know that if you exercise everyday then you may need to take in more food to remain at that good weight. Some extra protein may be needed as it helps repair your muscles which is what you’ll need. If you’re running on a treadmill at home remember to regularly maintain it to ensure it lasts and finally as with everything you do, make sure you enjoy it.
At Gategold Nigeria Limited https://gategoldfitnessproducts.com/, we have several Home and Commercial Treadmills to meet all your running needs. See varieties here https://gategoldfitnessproducts.com/12-treadmills