Just in time for major scientific meetings at the end of the year—namely the SFN (Society for Neuroscience) meeting, which is a highlight for neuroscientists, and the ASHG (American Society for Human Genetics) meeting, which is a key meeting for geneticists—this month's editor picks highlight articles that address century-old questions while providing new answers.
The selected articles showcase exceptional Trends review articles that distill the ever-expanding existing literature on a specific topic into a cohesive story that translates to the latest research questions. This month, Trends in Genetics and Trends in Neurosciences highlight specific aspects of a broad and long-standing field that have only recently gained more attention. The authors of this month's picks from Trends in Cognitive Sciences and Trends in Biotechnology review the timeliest developments in their respective fields that trigger even more new, exciting questions.
Ribosomal DNA and the Nucleolus as Keystones of Nuclear Architecture, Organization, and Function
Amanda V. Cerqueira and Bernardo Lemos
Ribosomal DNA (rDNA) is evolutionarily ultra-conserved, which implies it has undergone a strong purifying selection for 300–400 million years. rDNA is the basis for nucleolus biogenesis, organization, and function. This article highlights the multifaceted nature of the nucleolus, pointing to its role as an organizer hub that coordinates seemingly unrelated cellular functions. When asked why she chose this article by Amanda V. Cerqueira and Bernardo Lemos, editor Caryn Navarro said, "In addition to highlighting the biological significance of the nucleolus, this article is well written, thoughtful, and full of high-quality figures."
Where Does Value Come From?
Keno Juechems and Christopher Summerfield
A question as old as civilization is "why do we do what we do?" One simple answer is that we pursue certain behaviors as they provide certain values such as maximizing our chances of survival and reproduction. Reinforcement learning theory has been successful in explaining how humans and other animals make value-guided choices. However, a limitation of reinforcement learning is that it doesn't address where reward functions come from in the first place. This paper discusses this computationally challenging question in a deep yet accessible way. Editor Lindsey Drayton choose to highlight this Opinion paper because she finds the Open Questions posed in the paper particularly exciting.
Even though they were documented over 150 years ago, astrocytes have rarely made headlines in central nervous system research. As the terms "nervous system" and "neuroscience" suggest, focus is placed on research about neurons. However, these cells could not properly function without their peers—the glial cells that include astrocytes. While the physiological functions of astrocytes within neural circuits of the different brain areas remain incompletely understood, the striatum—a brain area heavily affected in multiple neurological and psychiatric diseases—has gained interest lately. In the words of editor Moran Furman: "This article provides an informative and well-rounded picture of a research area that has seen exciting progress in recent years: understanding the physiological functions of astrocytes in the striatum, and how these cells regulate striatal neurons, circuits, and behavior."
CRISPR/Cas-Mediated Base Editing: Technical Considerations and Practical Applications
Kutubuddin A. Molla and Yinong Yang
CRISPR as a tool and technology has rapidly transformed research practices that had been established across many different disciplines and has the potential for broad applications in basic biology, medicine, and agriculture. Recent work on CRISPR systems has focused on both characterizing newly discovered nucleases and engineering existing nucleases for expanded function. When asked why he chose this particular review, editor Matt Pavlovich said, "I've joked before that Trends in Biotechnology could change its name to Trends in CRISPR and not miss a beat. Here, Molla and Yang review one of the timeliest developments in genome-editing technology at the moment: base editing, which uses a modified version of the Cas protein to introduce point mutations in RNA or DNA and is considered one of the most efficient and precise ways to edit genomes."