Introduction to Theory of Literature
Yale,, Spring 2009 , Prof. Paul H. Fry
Added to favorite list
Updated On 02 Feb, 19
Introduction - Ways In and Out of the Hermeneutic Circle - Configurative Reading - The Idea of the Autonomous Artwork - The New Criticism and Other Western Formalisms - Russian Formalism - Semiotics and Structuralism - Linguistics and Literature - Deconstruction - Freud and Fiction - Jacques Lacan in Theory - Influence - The Postmodern Psyche - The Social Permeability of Reader and Text - The Frankfurt School of Critical Theory - The Political Unconscious - The New Historicism - The Classical Feminist Tradition - African-American Criticism - Post-Colonial Criticism - Queer Theory and Gender Performativity - The Institutional Construction of Literary Study - The End of Theory?; Neo-Pragmatism - Reflections; Who Doesn't Hate Theory Now?
4.1 ( 11 )
Introduction to Theory of Literature (ENGL 300)
In this second lecture on deconstruction, Professor Paul Fry concludes his consideration of Derrida and begins to explore the work of Paul de Man. Derridas affinity for and departure from Levi-Strausss distinction between nature and culture are outlined. De Mans relationship with Derrida, their similarities and differences--particularly de Mans insistence on "self-deconstruction" and his reliance on Jakobson--are discussed. The difference between rhetoric and grammar, particularly the rhetoricization of grammar and the grammaticization of rhetoric, is elucidated through de Mans own examples taken from "All in the Family," Yeats "Among School Children," and the novels of Proust.
0000 - Chapter 1. Derrida and Levi-Strauss
1037 - Chapter 2. Writing and Speech
1606 - Chapter 3. Paul de Man and Nazism
2437 - Chapter 4. Similarities Between De Man and Derrida
3335 - Chapter 5. De Man and Derrida Differences
3924 - Chapter 6. Examples "All in the Family," Yeats, and Proust
Complete course materials are available at the Open Yale Courses website httpopen.yale.educourses
This course was recorded in Spring 2009.
Sep 12, 2018
Excellent course helped me understand topic that i couldn't while attendinfg my college.
March 29, 2019
Great course. Thank you very much.