Unit Theme: Make THIS Year Better than Last Year (This Explanation is Good for all three Weeks of Unit 1)
|photo credit: katieslusarski via photopin cc|
Unit 1 Verse: 2 Corinthians 5:17 (ESV)
Unit 1 Warm up Before Class
|photo credit: World Bank Photo Collection via photopin cc|
God Rocks Lesson Plan Unit 1 Week 2
Order of Class:
(1-3 are always the same, and totally optional)
|Key Scriptures for Recovery - Awesome blog on Fiery Dart|
a) Piece of Cardboard to use as a shield, or anything they can deflect paper wads with as a shield. You Might want to cut out some shield shaped cardboard, and have them decorate the shields as part of class, before the game and after offering. How to make a cardboard shield.
b) You will need a group of up to 10 children, no less than 5, and a large supply, more than 20, paper wads made of wadded up paper. (Same as in Unit 1 Week 2 if you did that unit.)
How to Play: Place one child on a dot or sitting in a hula hoop or chair, and put another child about 10 feet away. Place at least 1 shield about 5 feet from the child in the chair making NO COMMENT about the shield.
Have the person sit in the chair, and tell them they are the target; their job is to not be touched by a paper wad but they CAN NOT GET OUT OF THE CHAIR OR MOVE THE CHAIR. Have the other child throw the paper wads at the one in the chair. If the child in the chair asks something like "May I Use the Shield, say "I have already told you the rules."
If someone goes for the shield, ask them "how did you get that shield without getting out of the Chair?" Make them put it back, unless they asked someone to get it for them.
YOU must make sure that someone asks for the shield to protect themselves from the paper wads.
a) Ask them how hard it was to win without the shield? We are trying to get them to understand that somethings are bigger than we are.
b) Ask them how the game was won. Obviously the answer is the shield, but getting them to verbalize that is the key.
c) Ask them how they got the shield. We are trying to get them to admit they needed help, because the problem was too big for them.
d) Then read Ephesians 6:10 (ESV) - Finally, be strong in the Lord and in the strength of his might. 11 Put on the whole armor of God, that you may be able to stand against the schemes of the devil.
Now teach them that we have arrived at the point of the class. Once we have accepted Jesus as our Lord and Savior, we are no longer who we were, like in game, weak, unable to provide for ourselves, but we are protected from the devil by the armor of God. More, we are helped in our daily actions not just protected. More, we join a family of brothers and sisters. This is what it means to be "a new creation." We are remade, just because, like in the game, we asked.
If you have time, read them the rest of the armor of God: This might also be a good place to have them find this verse in the bible, and if you have a student who reads well, or a teen helper, have them read it for you.
Now read part A of the Unit Verse only: "Therefore, if anyone is in Christ, he is a new creation. Ask How to be a new creation? (be in Christ) Ask how they might "Be In Christ." This is an evangelical opportunity, if you feel it is appropriate at this time.