Prague History, Czech Republic
Human habitation in Prague dates back around 6000 BC. Stable farming was established by the Germanic and Celtic tribes about 4000 BC. The Slavs came by the change of the new millennium and settled both sides of the lovely stretch of Vltava River by 600 BC. They effectively safeguarded the land known as Bohemia for quite some time.
The temporary domain established Christianity to the locals. It was Good King Wenceslas who declared it as Bohemia’s state religion in 930s. The king continued to be the patron saint of Czech Republic. Under Charles IV’s rule, Prague became one of the leading and highly affluent cities, getting the Gothic face and landmark edifices such as Charles University, St Vitus Cathedral and Charles Bridge.
A rebellion channeled the Thirty Years War that destroyed big parts of Europe - part of Bohemia perished. This deviated to the independence of Czech for nearly three centuries. Yet the Czech spirit was not destroyed. Czech Republic’s journey to independence drawn below:
· By 19th century, Prague became the hub of the Czech National Revival. Literature, journalism and architecture were renowned. The nationalist outlook was increasing as pro-democracy rallies brushed the continent.
· The 1848 revolution was instantly squelched.
· Yet in 1861, the Czechs crushed the German aspirants for the council of Prague.
· Prague’s 20th century unified the country’s nationalist movement. The Czechs took no interest in battling for its Austrian leaders in WWI. Next-door Slovakia was also hesitant. The heads of both movements come to US President Wilson to ask for help in attaining the dream.
· Through Allied support, Czech became independent in 1918 and Prague was the capital.
The country windswept the horrible Great Depression but was conquered by Nazi Germany. Prague's 120,000 Jews were all wiped out. Some were starved while others were killed at the concentration camps. In 1945, Prague’s population fought the German forces. Majority of Prague was freed prior to the arrival of Soviets. During the 1946 national elections, the communists turn out to be the republic's leading party. After years of plodding liberalization, full democracy and socialism became the objectives of the famous movement.
The strict communist headship upheld control until 1989. Diplomatic demonstrations became challenging, although the fundamentally peaceful nature of the revolution got the name Velvet Revolutions. There were free elections held during 1990. The Slovakian and Czech separatists encouraged the even split into the Slovak Republics and the Czech in 1993, referred to as the Velvet Divorce. Thus, Prague became a top tourist destination of the world in the 1990s. The sound of cash records mixed with a firm business base left the populace in good, if not better economy rather than those who are in the other parts of Czech. Much has been invested for the city, thus providing destinations that are more pleasurable.
Now, the Czech Republic is a member of EU with Prague gracefully finding a better place in this modern world. Prague experienced horrible floods for nearly two centuries. More than ten people perished and thousands were forced to leave their homes and trades. The city hub was closed and the centuries-old Charles Bridge was carried by the flood. The ultimate damage was estimates in billions of US dollar. Prague’s Jewish Quarter also suffered extensive harm - Troja and Karlin districts, various cultural and sightseer attractions and the metro structure. But despite all that, Prague was able to surface, showing the city’s soaring spirit.
Things about Prague you may be interested in
Browse Prague Travel Deals
Read our members' reviews about Prague
- Prague for every taste
review by Wazling posted more then 30 days ago
The city itself isn't very nice, besides the city center, what is pretty beautiful. There you have the place of Wenzel, where a lot of historic buildings are located. There you can also go shopping or just enjoy one of the restaurants or bars. In the night it's very interesting walking around in...
- Trip to Prague
review by Wazling posted more then 30 days ago
That trip was really long ago, but interesting. We have rent a whole loft for just nothing. So we could enjoy the trip by spending money only for going out at night. The city offered us great views and she still doing that. The Wenzels place and the bars and retaurants around it was the place we...
Read our members' travel tips about Prague
- Strahov Monastery and Library
travel tip by welt-raiser posted more then 30 days ago
In 1143 Vladislav II founded Strahov Monastery, the second oldest of its kind in Prague. It is the home of Premonstratensian monks and a wonderful library with an exceptional collection of theological and philosophical works.The quarters...
- Franz Kafka Museum
travel tip by stef posted more then 30 days ago
As Prague is the birthplace of Kafka, this genius of literature, Franz Kafka Museum is a must see if you're in the city. The museum was moved here from Barcelona in 1999, and let's admit, Prague is a much better place for it as...
- Prague Castle
travel tip by luci posted more then 30 days ago
There is so much to see and do in Prague Castle that you will have to give it at least one afternoon. But then, it's perfectly worth every second. The Castle is actually a whole town of wonderful sights: the Royal Palace, galleries,...
Prague City Ratings
Members Who Have Been to Prague
Community Galleries About Prague
Recent Prague flights found by Travelgrove users
- $744 Aeroflot
faregeek.com check price
From To Departure Time Los Angeles, CA (LAX) Prague, CZ (PRG) 11/06/2013 03:45 pm Prague, CZ (PRG) Los Angeles, CA (LAX) 11/27/2013 11:30 pm
- $929 Thy Turkish Airlines
cheapoair.com check price
From To Departure Time Chicago, IL (ORD) Prague, CZ (PRG) 11/12/2013 10:00 pm Prague, CZ (PRG) Chicago, IL (ORD) 11/26/2013 06:45 pm
- $1065 Multiple Airlines
flighthub.com check price
From To Departure Time Toronto, ON (YYZ) Prague, CZ (PRG) 06/22/2013 06:20 pm Prague, CZ (PRG) Toronto, ON (YYZ) 07/22/2013 06:10 pm