Egyptian, Classical, Ancient Near Eastern Art
The goddess Isis wears a crown consisting of ostrich feathers, a sun disk with a cobra, cow horns, and cow ears above a vulture that rests flat on her head. Multiple animal symbols like these helped an Egyptian viewer identify the goddess.
In her role as “she who is great of magic,” Isis holds a cobra at arm’s length, a dangerous reptile tamed for her purpose of performing supernatural acts.
1st century C.E. (probably)
14 3/4 x 3 x 4 1/2 in. (37.5 x 7.6 x 11.4 cm) (show scale)
This item is not on view
Charles Edwin Wilbour Fund
You may download and use Brooklyn Museum images of this three-dimensional work in accordance with a Creative Commons license
. Fair use, as understood under the United States Copyright Act, may also apply.
Please include caption information from this page and credit the Brooklyn Museum. If you need a high resolution file, please fill out our online application form
For further information about copyright, we recommend resources at the United States Library of Congress
, Cornell University
, Copyright and Cultural Institutions: Guidelines for U.S. Libraries, Archives, and Museums
, and Copyright Watch
For more information about the Museum's rights project, including how rights types are assigned, please see our blog posts on copyright
If you have any information regarding this work and rights to it, please contact firstname.lastname@example.org
Isis, 1st century C.E. (probably). Bronze, 14 3/4 x 3 x 4 1/2 in. (37.5 x 7.6 x 11.4 cm). Brooklyn Museum, Charles Edwin Wilbour Fund, 05.395. Creative Commons-BY (Photo: Brooklyn Museum, 05.395_threequarter_left_PS2.jpg)
threequarter front left, 05.395_threequarter_left_PS2.jpg. Brooklyn Museum photograph, 2006
"CUR" at the beginning of an image file name means that the image was created by a curatorial staff member. These study images may be digital point-and-shoot photographs, when we don\'t yet have high-quality studio photography, or they may be scans of older negatives, slides, or photographic prints, providing historical documentation of the object.
Not every record you will find here is complete. More information is available for some works than for others, and some entries have been updated more recently. Records are frequently reviewed and revised, and we welcome
any additional information you might have.