Real Chemistry Experiments: 40 Exciting STEAM Activities for Kids
View all Prices by Retailer
Details about Real Chemistry Experiments: 40 Exciting STEAM Activities for Kids:
Full STEAM ahead!―21st-century chemistry for kids
Chemistry for kids can be so much fun! Real Chemistry Experiments has 40 exciting and engaging experiments with a real-life STEAM (Science, Technology, Engineering, Art, Math) connection for kids.
Become a better problem-solver, inventor, and innovator with these fascinating chemistry experiments. Each one has a clear purpose or question that’s being asked, step-by-step instructions, a list of materials you’ll need, questions to help you record your observations, and more. By the time you’re through, you’ll have chemistry for kids down to a science!
This book of chemistry for kids includes:
- Easy-to-find materials―From tap water and paper towels, to popsicle sticks and dish soap, the materials needed for these experiments are quick and easy to find.
- Real-life science―Learn the real chemistry behind how and why each experiment works, like why water and oil don’t mix in Oily Oceans, how geodes form in Eggshell Geodes, and more.
- Chemistry basics―Get tons of info about chemistry and what it is, from the scientific method and the Periodic Table, to atoms and the five main areas of study.
Imagine all the things you can learn, create, and discover in this colorful book about chemistry for kids―the sky’s the limit!
Major: By email, by telephone, or in person!
My degree is in Biology, but I primarily tutor math because that, understandably, is where there is most demand. I've been doing so since 1987. I've tutored young and old, individuals and groups, rich and poor, those in need of remedial work and those wanting to get an "A". I've been available via Wyzant since 2015, and had one steady customer here all that time. Now that it is summer again, I am looking for more students. I believe that comprehension and performance are equally importan... Read more