SSL (Secure Socket Layer) is a cryptographic protocol whose primary objective is to keep the communication safe on the internet. The certificate is digitally signed file issued for a particular domain name. The certificate contains the issuer signature, serial number, expiration date. The certificate has to be first installed on the server, and once the installation is complete, you can access services via HTTPS or any other SSL protocols like FTPs, etc. Here are some major benefits of using an SSL certificate:
Protects Sensitive Information
SSL certificate protects sensitive information like login, passwords, account details and cardholder’s information. With SSL all the information is encrypted before being submitted, and only the web server and the website visitor have personal keys to decode it and recognize it. It protects the information from eavesdropping and tampering of information from hackers and thieves.
An SSL certificate guarantees the trustworthiness of the website. Trusted SSL certificates are issued by the certificate authorities only when the applicant passes the verification procedures. Most of the modern browsers trust the SSL certificates issued by the authorities. The verification depth and trust level depend on the type of the certificate. Domain validation, organization validation and extended validation are three basic kinds of certificates.
Here only the domain ownership is required to be validated by the certificate authority (CA). It is an entry level certificate for the smaller organizations.
It is a medium level certificate that is intended for medium level organizations. In these, the domain ownership, as well as business, has to be validated by the certificate authority.
It brings the highest level of encryption and trust. These kinds of certificates are mainly used by large organizations, e-commerce business, social networks and government sector organizations.
Boosts Search Rankings
From August 2014, Google announced that having an SSL certificate installed on your website will increase the ranking position and this is another significant reason to use SSL.
Increases Visitor Loyalty
If your site has user accounts with personal data, then you may need the SSL certificate in any way. When the visitors know that their information is protected, they are more likely to keep coming back.
More Shopper Visits
If you are running an online store, you can expect you, shoppers, to see whether you have SSL or not. In the absence of an SSL certificate, the shoppers might not be interested in your website let alone the products offered on it.
How Can Insight Help?
Insight can arrange and install an SSL certificate on your website and inform google to list your website with HTTPS (secure socket layer address). Typical business SSL certs cost in or around €150 per year including installation and setup. With the new GDPR regulations coming into place in March 2018, it is advisable that all business install and display an SSL cert on their website. With an SSL certificate, your business will be viewed as more professional, and your website becomes more trustworthy.
You can call us on +353 (0)21 432 8060 or alternatively get in touch using our contact form below.