Here are some useful tips that will help you improve your resume so it will be noticed by hiring managers. 

1. Plan Ahead - When rewriting or updating your resume, you need to focus on the key sections, which are your experience, objections, special skills, and education. The more organized you are when preparing to write your resume, the more it will show in the outcome. Get started by writing an outline so that you will know what you are going to include and what you will leave out. 

2. Use Action Words and Bullet Points - Action verbs are incisive and can showcase to the reader what your skills are. Use words such as managed, planned, presented, supervised, coordinated, increased, or engaged to show off your accomplishments. And be sure to use plenty of bullet points to help make your content easy to scan and read. Doing so will also make it easier for you to make clear and concise statements. 

3. Always Be Specific - When writing about all you have accomplished, be sure to make your statements clear and specific. Something like "Grew department revenue by 30 percent each year" will have more power than a statement that simply says "increased department revenue for the company". Be sure to use specific numbers, percentages, or dollar amounts whenever possible. It will help you get your point across. 

4. Focus on the Positive - Always make sure you accentuate the positive thing and leave out anything negative when writing your resume. Share any special or unique accomplishments you have made, as well as any unique skills, awards, or winning work. And while it is a good idea to place your contact details at the top of the resume, you shouldn't add any personal details beyond that. 

5. Make Use of Key Words - Keywords are excellent tools to use when you want to get your resume noticed. Some companies will use scanners to seek out words that are relevant to the jobs they posted. Additionally, the keywords you use can show that you have the right amount of industry knowledge for the job you are applying for. For instance, a market research professional may mention having experience in the voice of customer work, developing actionable customer insights, or analyzing high-level data and research. 

By following these useful tips, you will be able to improve your resume and gain the attention of the hiring managers you want to impress.
