By means of an Internet-survey among 536 parent-child dyads, we researched which mediation strategies parents use for their children’s (8-18 years) video gaming. As in previous research on television mediation, principle factor analyses show that the same types of strategies are used: ‘restrictive mediation’, ‘evaluative mediation’, and ‘consicous co-playing’. Mediation is most strongly predicted by the age of the child and by parents’ gaming. Furthermore, parents are more restrictive and evaluative when they fear negative media-effects on behaviors and attitudes. They somewhat more often play together with the child when they suppose positive social-emotional effects of gaming.
This paper examines the relation between eye-hand coordination and computer games, specifically Super Monkey Ball. The study is exploratory and focuses on theoretical background and method problems. At the end of the paper the results from the pilot study is briefly presented. The results from the study are inconclusive in regard to the two main questions: Is there a connection between good skills in playing computer games and eyehand coordination? Do avid computer game players have better eye-hand coordination than others?
The primary aim of this paper is to look into the game related practices and significances of games. This perspective is applied to examining the pleasures derived from different games and to analyse the different strategies developed by children and their families to situate and control game playing. Research was conducted among 10–12-year-old children in Finland during spring and summer 2003. Sample of 284 survey questionnaires filled out by children and their parents provides an overview on the subject and the basis for 15 thematic interviews. It is hard to point towards any single element in games as the most powerfully engaging one, but the imaginary worlds provided by games seem to have an important role in offering children possibilities for experiencing things otherwise impossible. In terms of control, there does not seem to be any severe conflicts or serious troubles currently surrounding games in homes.