CCG supports National Obesity Awareness Week 2015
NHS Wandsworth Clinical Commissioning Group is supporting National Obesity Awareness Week. This annual event is taking place between 12 and 18 January 2015.
GPs in Wandsworth are encouraging
people in the borough to consider looking at the small lifestyle changes they
can make to either prevent or address obesity.
People and families in Wandsworth are
being invited to join others across the UK to make a national New Year’s
resolution to improve the nation’s health and take small steps to live a
Local GP and Chair of NHS Wandsworth
CCG Dr Nicola Jones warns
that obesity is estimated to affect around one in every four adults and around
one in every five children aged 10 to 11 in the UK.
“Obesity can lead
to a number of serious and potentially life-threating conditions including type
2 diabetes, coronary heart disease, stroke and cancer. However, small lifestyle changes such
as being more physically active, following a healthy, balanced diet and cutting
down on sugary snacks can make a difference. Making these small changes can have a
huge impact on your health and wellbeing and National Obesity Awareness Week is
a great opportunity to look at how we can live healthier lifestyles.”
In Wandsworth, 52% of adults were
classified as obese or overweight in 2012, compared to a London average of 57%
of adults and an England average of 64%.
Anyone who is concerned about their
weight could speak to their practice nurse or GP in the first instance for
advice about losing weight safely. They can advise you on the type of diet you
should be following and how much exercise you should do.
The best way to treat obesity is to
eat a healthy, reduced-calorie diet and to exercise regularly.
Being more physically active could
involve walking to work or school, or taking up activities such as
gardening, fast walking, jogging, swimming or tennis for two and a
half to five hours a week.
It is important to avoid situations
where you know you could be tempted to overeat while setting realistic goals and
involving your friends and family with your attempts to lose weight can also
Wandsworth Council offers a range of
free services to help residents get more healthy, fit and active.