Richard was the star runner for the Baskerville Hurricanes' high school cross-country team; he was constantly intrigued by the news headlines he saw about the rival team from the nearby high school, The Riverdale Harriers. The Harriers were winning every meet they participated in and got a perfect score, which meant that their top five runners took the top five positions. Richard knew that a showdown with them would be taking place next week in Thetford, so Richard proclaimed: "I will be the one to break their pattern, even if I have to use every breath I take." Richard carbo-loaded every night before the race by polishing off a big plate of spaghetti and meatballs and made sure that he slept at least eight hours each night.

The race came, and Richard managed to keep Riverdale's #5 guy in his sights. After cresting a hill on a long dirt road in the woods, they ran around a circle that masqueraded as a picnic area with several open pit BBQ areas. Richard then looked ahead and saw the other half of the dirt road with a very long downhill! Richard's eyes got wide and he immediately thought to himself: "Yes, a downhill!" "I'm feeling great!" "I knew all of that spaghetti would help!" "This is my time to shine!" "I'm going to take Christopher Cross' advice and ride like the wind!" Richard then took off like a gazelle and passed Riverdale's #5 guy halfway down the hill. Richard then entered an open field with half a mile to go, sprinted with all of his might, and never looked back. The pattern was finally broken!

The next day, Richard was delighted to see the sports section of his local newspaper with an article headlined: "Riverdale Experiences The Eye Of The Hurricanes." A reporter at the race was very impressed with Richard's performance and said the following in the article: "Riverdale won the meet with a score of 16 points. Richard, Baskerville's lone foreign intruder, became the first runner this year to break up Riverdale's elite pack by nailing down fifth place." Riverdale still ended up winning the state meet at the end of the season, but for that "sole" moment, Richard felt like he was on top of the world.
