Mary Rodwell is the founder and principal of Australian Close Encounter Resource Network (ACERN). Born in the United Kingdom (UK) and eventually migrating to Western Australia in 1991, she currently resides in Queensland.
Mary Rodwell is the founder and principal of Australian Close Encounter Resource Network (ACERN). Born in the United Kingdom (UK) and eventually migrating to Western Australia in 1991, she currently resides in Queensland.
On July 20th we will be celebrating the 50th Anniversary Apollo 11 Moon Landing. This is an epic event in human history when the first humans landed on the moon in 1969, of these were: Commander Neil Armstrong, and Buzz Aldrin both from the USA. Being the first to land on the moon, the pilots must of seen many great things, but did they see any UFO’s?
As Buzz Aldrin quoted:
“On Apollo 11 in route to the Moon, I observed a light out the window that appeared to be moving alongside us. There were many explanations of what that could be, other than another spacecraft from another country or another world – it was either the rocket we had separated from, or the 4 panels that moved away when we extracted the lander from the rocket and we were nose to nose with the two spacecraft. So in the close vicinity, moving away, were 4 panels. And i feel absolutely convinced that we were looking at the sun reflected off of one of these panels. Which one? I don’t know. So technically, the definition could be “unidentified.””
And Neil Armstrong quoted:
“It was incredible, of course we had always known there was a possibility, the fact is, we were warned off! (by the Aliens). There was never any question then of a space station or a moon city. I can’t go into details, except to say that their ships were far superior to ours both in size and technology – Boy, were they big! and menacing! No, there is no question of a space station.”
I will let you decide what went on with the Apollo 11 moon landing. But from what the space pilots said, there is no doubt that there was, and still is something strange happening up there.
Let us remember the 50th Anniversary Apollo 11 pilots.
On May 28th, 1996, a package of odd artifacts was received by popular radio talkshow host Art Bell. It contained what might turn out to be a piece of an alien spacecraft. The anonymous sender claims that his grandfather was on the crash recovery team at Roswell, and kept these samples of debris for himself. Since 1947, when the Roswell UFO crash occurred, the pieces had “sat for years inside a closet.” Of particular interest are the small broken pieces of what is purported to be from the shell or skin of the Roswell UFO.
Concerning these pieces, the anonymous sender told Mr. Bell, in a letter:
|"I now include the enclosed, and can only say that these scrapings came from the exterior underside of the Disc itself. It literally was a "shell-like" shielding of the Disc. Brittle and layered, almost with a prefabricated design and placing."|
The man who sent the material also mentioned that his grandfather ‘s diary, from which he is gathering the facts, mentions that the crashed craft was a “wedge shaped disc.”
Roswell UFO ©1994 William McDonald
|These are interesting statements because Roswell UFO crash researchers had previously interviewed crash site witnesses, such as military personnel who were at the scene, and found that the underside of the craft was described as being covered with an unusual “tile,” possibly for heat protection, or some other purpose. The pieces of “shell-like shielding” sent to Art Bell might very well be what the Roswell UFO crash witnesses were describing. Note also the “wedge shaped disc” form, just as described in the diary.|
“They are made up of dozens of many microscopic layers of Bismuth, with thicker layers of Magnesium separating them – layers thinner than a sheet of paper”
“Bismuth, with a strong positive electrostatic charge applied to it, has also been shown to actually loose weight or mass, right down to ZERO.”
|Interestingly, the initial report on the analysis of the “shielding” pieces indicates that they are made of dozens of microscopic (3-4 micron) layers of Bismuth, with thicker (20 micron) layers of Magnesium separating them – layers thinner than a sheet of paper. Bismuth is an interesting element, not ordinarily used in thin layers. No lab or technician has been able to explain how these pieces were made or what purpose they might have. They had never seen anything like them. Since the Bismuth is very dense (like lead) it makes sense to use thick layers of Magnesium (very light) to separate the Bismuth layers, and build a thick panel of material.Bismuth is also mentioned in the literature as being electrogravitic. Spinning discs of Bismuth (patented by GE Engineer Henry Wallace: Pat.#3626605, 3626606, & 3823570) have apparently been shown to DEFY GRAVITY. Bismuth, with a strong positive electrostatic charge applied to it, has also been shown to actually loose weight or mass, right down to ZERO. Spheres of Bismuth, when dropped, have reportedly fallen faster than they are supposed to (according to Newton’s “Laws”).
It is strange stuff, and this “UFO crash debris” not only contains ultra thin layers (3 microns – much thinner than paper) of Bismuth, but it is absolutely PURE – no Oxygen, nothing (according to the reports coming in from researcher Linda Moulten Howe)
Perhaps even more significantly, Linda Howe has been speaking with a man called “Dan” who has verified that he worked at the Aeronautical Systems Division at Edwards AFB and also at Wright Patterson AFB, back in the 70’s. He became very disturbed when he heard of this “shell” objects that Art Bell had been sent. Dan was worried because during his employment as a research physicist, working on Top Secret back engineering projects, he says he was handed some pieces of material to analyze, and found, at the time, that they were made of about 30 ultra thin layers of PURE BISMUTH, separated by thicker layers of Magnesium! In other words, the strange piece of material that the Air Force wanted him to study and identify was nearly identical to the pieces which Art Bell now has. Dan never did identify the purpose of the Air Force piece, but now thinks that the purpose might indeed be the levitation of a craft.
| Click the image to view the full Table of Elements
| Adding to the mystery, the portion of the Period Table of the Elements at right shows how Bismuth (Bi) and the mysterious “element 115” lie right on top of each other. (click the image to view the full table of Elements) When elements appear in the same column (series), they tend to share characteristics (such as the inertness of the noble gases). Element 115 has yet to be discovered or created (by humans), but it is of interest because of the story that Robert Lazar and others tell, namely that alien spacecraft make use of it in their propulsion systems!Is it just a coincidence? Could it be that element 115 has even more potent “antigravity” properties than the far easier to obtain Bismuth? Come back to this site for further details, later.
Roswell Crash Anonymous Letters
April 10th, 1996
Dear Mr. Bell,
I’ve followed your broadcasts over the last year or so, and have been considering whether or not to share with you and your listeners, some information related to the Roswell UFO crash.
My grandfather was a member of the Retrieval Team, sent to the crash site, just after the incident was reported. He died in 1974, but not before he had sat down with some of us, and talked about the incident.
I am currently serving in the military, and hold a Security Clearance, and do NOT wish to “go public”, and risk losing my career and commission.
Nonetheless, I would like to briefly tell you what my own grandfather told me about Roswell. In fact, I enclose for your safekeeping “samples” that were in the possession of my grandfather until he died, and which I have had since his own estate was settled. As I understand it, they came from the UFO debris, and were among a large batch subsequently sent to Wright-Patterson AFB in Ohio from New Mexico.
My grandfather was able to “appropriate” them, and stated that the metallic samples, are “pure extract aluminum”. You will note that they appear old & tempered, and they have been placed in tissue-paper, and in baggies for posterity.
I have had them since 1974, and after considerable thought and reflection, give them to you. Feel free to share them with any of your friends in the UFO Research Community.
I have listened to many people over the years discuss Roswell and the crash events, as reported by many who were either there or who heard about it from eyewitnesses.
The recent Roswell movie, was similar to my grandfather’s own account, but a critical element was left out, and it is that element which I would like to share.
As my grandad stated, the Team arrived at the crash site just after the AAF/USAF reported the ground zero location. They found two dead occupants, hurled free of the Disc.
A lone surviving occupant, was found within the Disc, and it was apparant, it’s left leg was broken. There was a minimal radiation contamination, and it was quicky dispersed with a water/solvent wash, and soon the occupant was dispatched for medical assistance and isolation. The bodies were sent to the Wright-Patterson AFB, for dispersal. The debris was also loaded onto three trucks which finished the on-load just before the sunset.
Grandad was part of the Team that went with the surviving occupant. The occupant communicated via telepathic means. It spoke perfect english, and communicated the following:
The Disc was a “probeship” dispatched from a “launchship” that was stationed at the dimensional gateway to the Terran Solar System, 32 light years from Terra. They had been conducting operations on Terra for over 100 years.
Another group were exploring Mars, and Io.
Each “probeship” carried a crew of three. A “launchship” had a crew of (100) one-hundred.
The Disc that crashed, had collided with a meteor in orbit of Terra, and was attempting to compensate it’s flight vector, but because of the collision, the inter-atmospheric propulsion system malfunctioned, and the occupants sent out a distress signal to their companions on Mars. The “launchship” commander made the decision to authorize an attempted soft-landing on the New Mexican desert. At the same time, the inter-atmospheric propulsion system had a massive electrical burn-out, and the Disc was soon virtually helpless.
There was another option available to the occupants, but it involved activating the Dimensional powerplant for deep space travel. However, it opens an energy vortex around the Disc for 1,500 miles in all directions. Activating the Dimensional powerplant, would have resulted in the annihilation of the states of New Mexico, Arizona, California and portions of Mexico. Possibly even further states would have been affected.
Thus, the occupants, chose to ride the ship down, and hope for the best. They literally sacrificed their lives, rather than destroy the populations within their proximity.
The Dimensional powerplant was self-destructed, and the inter-atmospheric propulsion system was also deactivated, to prevent the technology from falling into the hands of the Terrans. This was done in accordance with their standing orders in regards to any compromise with contact experiences.
Grandad spent a total of 26 weeks in the Team that examined and debriefed the lone survivor of the Roswell crash. Grandad’s affiliation with the “project” ended, when the occupant was to be transported to a long-term facility. He was placed on-board a USAF Transport aircraft, that was to be sent to Washington, D.C.
The aircraft and all aboard disappeared under mysterious and disturbing circumstances, enroute to Washington, D.C.
It may interest you that three Fighter aircraft, dispatched to investigate a distress call from the Transport experienced many electrical malfunctioning systems failures, as they entered the airspace of the transports last reported location. No crash or debris of the Transport was ever found. The Team was disbanded.
Well, I realize I have likely shocked you with this bizzare and incredible account, and seeking to remain “unknown” likely doesn’t do anything for my credibility …eh? And the metal “samples” only will likely add to the controversy.
But, I know you will take this with a “grain of salt”, and I don’t blame you, Mr. Bell.
I just hope that you can understand, my reasons and my own desire to maintain my career and commission.
I am passing through South Carolina with an Operational Readiness Mobility Exercise, and will mail this just prior to this Exercise, possibly from the Charleston area.
I will listen to your broadcast, to receive any acknowledging or confirmation, that you have received this package.
This letter and the contents of the package are given to you, with the hope that it helps contribute to discussion on the subject of UFO Phenomena.
I agree with Neil Armstrong, a good friend of mine, who dared to say, at the WHITE HOUSE no less, that there are things “out there”, which boggle the mind and are far beyond our ability to comprehend.
April 22, 1996
At great risk, I am writing you in regards to the package sent your way. I had opportunity to listen to a tape recording of the radio broadcasts, when I returned home after having participated in the Mobility Readiness Exercises.
My son, a Senior in college recorded them for me.
I must say that I was somewhat surprised by the negative and closed-minded responses directed your way, by some of your own listeners.
You seemed to indicate that receiving the package has vastly upset your life, and in this I would like to say that wasn’t my intention, and I offer my apologies.
Further information regarding the Roswell Crash, and my own grandfathers affiliation would likely be potentially beneficial in your efforts at correlation & verification.
In this regards, I can only say, based on past conversations on the subject with Grandad, that the Retrieval Team, consisted of three segments. The On-site Team, the In-House Team, and the Security Team. The credentials of the team members weren’t only military related. There were individuals with backgrounds from The University of Colorado,Office of Naval Research, AAF/USAF & US Army, UCLA and Atomic Energy Commision & National Advisory Committee on Aeronautics & Office of Scientific Research and Developement. Additionally, there were Consultants from England, France and Russia involved.
Grandad stated their own analysis of the samples indicated it as pure extract aluminum, as a conductor for the electromagnetic fields created in the propulsion systems. However, critically-needed data was “eliminated” by the self-destruct mechanisms on the disc vehicle itself. Furthermore, the occupant-survivor of the crash, refused to disclose technical information, despite a series of interrogative attempts to extract technological data. No means could be found to secure the information.
There were always two Security Team members present at every face-to-face meeting with the survivor. The survivor had the ability to deduce thoughts and questions, prior to them being asked. Sometimes it became frustrating.
The Disc itself was literally dissected, and it was discovered that the propupsion system had actually fused together the many interior components. There were control-type devises forged in the shape of the alien hand, which were assumed as controls and activation surfaces.
What is today fiber-optic technology, was part and parcel of the alien technology within the control panels, albeit fused and melted when the self-destruct mechanism was activated.
There were Westinghouse-affiliated persons on the Team, and Grandad always thought, some of them had gone back, with the knowledge and incorporated it into the future research with the phone systems.
Of course the Military was concerned as to the ability of the Aliens to enter our atmosphere at will, undetected, and thusly they recommended to the President that a Space Program be set into motion, and that a system of satellites be placed into orbit by 1957, and this satellite system be patched into the then DEW Line early warning system…which became later NORAD.
Grandad stated that it was his opinion, that NORAD was formed not only to track possible ICBM’s from hostile nations, but as a established Detection System for UFO craft. That is why the NASA Space Agency has been “incorporated” by and large with our Armed Forces, and there are so many “classified” missions.
This is my oponion, but Grandad prophesied such occuring as far back as 1971.
Well, I am scheduled to travel back to Charleston AFB and then Pope AFB. I’ll mail this from somewhere in SC.
I’ll not likely communicate again. My wife is concerned, as am I that the Intelligence agencies will put two & two together, so it is inadvisable to further communicate this information. I hope you understand my position.
I could likely face a courts martial or sedition charges, for stating some of this information, and opinions.
You would be surprised at the extent of internal policies on this subject, and the consequences for current commissioned officers talking about UFO Phenomena.
I was surprised by Edgar Mitchell’s statements of recent date and I imagine there are many involved with Roswell, who are a bit upset at events underway.
However, he is a man of outstanding character & integrity, and knows whereof he speaks, as do quite a few other astronauts.
I wish you all the best, and will be listening.
I commend your courage and integrity.
I hope your listeners understand, that the subject of Roswell has great potential at extrapolating the truth on UFO’s, and what has come to be known as a cosmic watergate, is only the tip of an iceberg.
Grandad said that when the truth does come out, humanity will be changed beyond comprehension. He also said many on the In-House Team lobbied to release the information to the public. Not all of them were paranoid in trusting the public with the truth.
On May 19th, Linda Howe provided a followup report on Art’s Parts. Here is Real Audio file of the report.
No Date (arrived May 28, 1996)
I have listened with interests, to the ongoing reports on the samples I sent your way.
I noted that the Researcher discussing the testing of the samples noted that basically, it is merely Aluminum.
Slight variations on the testing, but indistinguishable from “normal” Aluminum.
Actually, this is precisely the same initial findings of Grandad’s Team. However, I neglected to include metallic samples of the exterior of the crashed Roswell disc.
I now include the enclosed, and can only say that these scrapings came from the exterior underside of the Disc itself. It literally was a “shell-like” sheilding of the Disc. Brittle and layered, almost with a prefabricated design and placing.
Keep in mind Mr Bell, that these are the last of Grandad’s samples. They have sat for years inside a closet, with his personal effects.
Because of certain concerns, I will not be contacting you on this matter. Perhaps, I am a bit paranoid, but I do have a family & career to think about. I hope you understand.
Hope these last samples are helpful.
Of course, I will be listening.
On May 31th, Linda Howe provided a further extensive report on Art’s Parts. This program is captured in our Real-Audio Archives.
Letter to Linda Howe
Another letter appeared, this time sent to Linda Howe.
May 25, 1996
Dear Ms Howe,
I’m not certain if this is how your last name is spelled. Nonetheless, I wanted to “touch base” with you, personally. So I have taken this opportunity to do so.
I’m the individual who has dispatched the “artifacts” of Roswell Disc debris, to talk show Art Bell.
While I was on a flight to Hungary, with Joint Endeavor; my wife acquired your address on a “Dreamland” Broadcast. I’ve been able until this deployment to listen with interests to your comments & opinions, as to the “artifacts”, and noted some apprehension as to the materials, itself. This is fully understandable.
When I decided over 6 months ago, to turn these “artifacts” over to the UFO Research Community, I decided that it would be accomplished by allowing Art Bell to be the mediator/trustee of the “artifacts”. Partly because of his record of complete neutrality on these matters, but moreso, because I thought the “artifacts” safety would be insured completely. I regret the undue & unwarranted turmoil, caused to the Bell household, but still feel justified in my initial decision. I’ve been looking over Grandad’s journal, and wanted to share a few brief extractions with you and Mr Bell.
Firstly, I note that the intent of your own efforts as to the exams of the “artifacts” is to confirm some sort of other-world extraterrestial, source of the metals.
This was the initial aspect of the original exams. But, what came to light was that the metal was virtually indiscernable to Earth metals. According to Grandad’s notations: “this was to insure that in the event of crash or capture, that no verification as to the alien network or the homeworld confederation could be proven, and a compromise of the Alien directives transpired”. Apparantly, “the probeships were constructed with metallic base metals, indistinguishable from Terran metals, as a protective measure & security safeguard”.
There was a drawback to this, “a negative consequence was that the probeships would be vulnerable to radar interferance. The Aliens remedy to this was to insure the probeships maintained high velocity trajectories, and activated these velocities upon entering the Terran atmosphere”.
Most of the interatmosphere operations, occured in the Western Hemisphere, and in the areas of Europe & Asia, with populations consisting of “network selectees”. This was a term that the Aliens used to identify persons destined for contact. These contacts were “conceived & predestined prior to birth” and was “scheduled to be accelerated & increased throughout the three decades prior to 2000 A.C.E., when the network would initiate the “transition”.
“Transition” was a term that meant full-contact, occuring around the Terran year 2025.
All this information was acquired from the sole surviving Alien occupant, and was correlated with information retrieved from the databanks of the command console panels within the Disc command center. It took a full year and a half to decipher the Alien language, which resembled ancient Babylonian script. But, with the help of World War II cryptologists who worked with the War Department, the code texts were broken, and deciphered. All the results were shared with the Offices of those overseeing The “Project” as it was known, among them General Curtis Lemay, Secretary of State George Marshall, and President Truman, and the Intelligence operatives, who oversaw Security for the Roswell “Project”.
Most of these activities transpired at Wright-Patterson, and would result “in an extensive reformatting of the entire policy developments, regarding potentiol Alien Contact. Upon advice of the “Project” directors, the decision was made to incorporate a discredation campaign on those claiming Alien Contact, and those who advocated Alien existance.”
Furthermore, the “Project” directors, recommended that the U.N. be granted overall command authority over the “Project”. Both Secretary of Satate Marshall and his successor Dean Acheson argued against this recommendation. President Truman personally visited Wright-Patterson on a number of occasions.
So, you see Ms Howe, that there is alot more to this Roswell “Project” and “incident”, then many can even begin to discern or comprehend.
Try to imagine as Grandad, used to say; that it is 1947, and the USA has just survived a global struggle, millions had been killed or injured, and suddenly, even as the dawn of the Atomic age came to being, that the existance of Alien Life has been accidently discovered. Many facets of inquiry were taken into account, and some of the most brilliant & accomplished minds in Government would do anything to ascertain the exact extent and perspective purpose of these Aliens.
What was once considered fiction, was proven reality. Absolutely every attempt was made to exhaust the efforts at understanding & comprehending this extraordinary event. It was decided to keep the information secret, classified and beyond retrieval.
It has been almost 50 years, and the secret has been steadily maintained, protected, and insured. WHY?
Grandad was one who lobbied for full-disclosure. He understood that release of the information could result in chaos, of a sort in civilization. Because of his concern for the safety of his family, he complied with the secrecy oath.
It wasn’t until the mid 1960’s that he talked with anyone on the “Project”. He spoke with one particular person, who had promised confidentiality, and was faithful to that promise. You may have known that person: Dr J. Allen Hynek.
Other than that brief discourse with Dr Hynek, Grandad was silent.
The year 2000 approaches. It is time that the Roswell secret is disclosed. The weight of the evidence will demand a verdict. That verdict will be rendered by the people. Millions have witnessed the UFO Phenomena in the last 50 years.
Virtually thousands have claimed contact with Aliens. What happened at Roswell was a beginning. Not a beginning of the end of civilization, as some feared if the information was disclosed. But, actually a beginning of beginnings.
One can argue the impact of an accidental discovery of this magnitude.
50 years of UFO Phenomena have occurred for a purpose. A stellar purpose predetermined since that first A-Bomb was detonated in New Mexico.
Humanity has survived in spite of itself. Because of itself.
I believe that the “Transition” Grandad wrote of is underway. What I’ve shared with Art Bell, you, and the entire world was done in Honor of a quiet and courageous gentleman who was a witness to the wonders of this Universe.
Our world is changing.
Nothing can stop that. Nothing.
This concludes my own part in what lies ahead. I now go back to my career & responsibilities, to my family and my own life. I have dared to risk, and no matter the consequenced, I am confident Grandad would support this action.
You have the “evidence”, some have sought for and demanded.
Of course, for some it will not be enough. Discount it, discredit it, so be it. It matters little in the final analysis…sound & fury signifying nothing.
The Truth will come out about Roswell.
Indeeed, it has come out. Was it not a Honorable man who once stated: “Ye shall know the Truth, and it shall set you free”?
I wish you and Art Bell, all the Best!
Dreamland Audio Report
On the 6/23/96 Dreamland, Linda reports on the Hardness Testing of the Aluminum Pieces and some Telephone Research regarding the Skin Pieces. These are Real-Audio files. Get a Real-Audio Player from Progressive Networks web site.
Dreamland Audio Report
On the 9/15/96 Dreamland, Linda reports on the Testing of the Skin pieces by Travis. This is a Real-Audio file approx 3 and a half minutes. Here is Linda and Art discussing Reactions to the Video of Testing, shown at a recent UFO conference and some discussion on the Finnish anti-gravity experiment. This runs 8 minutes.
Voltage Test Video Clips and Report
After the discovery of the Planet Pluto in 1930CE, astronomers soon noted that earlier theories regarding the hypothetical influences of such a planet on the orbits of Planets Uranus and Neptune were not validated by the existence of only Pluto. So eventually in the 1970s after computers were becoming commonplace, a computer-generated model of this “Planet X,” as it was called, was created. It was determined that Planet X would have to be at least five times bigger than the Planet Earth. They also calculated the length and shape of its orbit around the Sun as well as the number of years necessary to complete such an orbit.
In 1983 with NASA’s cooperation a group of astronomers began a comprehensive survey of the sky with the Infrared Astronomical Satellite (IRAS). In the fall of that year the IRAS discovered several moving objects in the vicinity of this solar system, including 5 previously unknown comets, a few “lost” comets, 4 new asteroids and “an enigmatic comet-like object.” Headlines read “Giant Object Mystifies Astronomers” and “Mystery Body Found in Space.” In The Washington Post was the headline and story “At Solar System’s Edge Giant Object is a Mystery — A heavenly body possibly as large as the giant planet Jupiter and possibly so close to Earth that it would be part of this solar system has been found in the direction of the Constellation Orion by an orbiting telescope called the IRAS. So mysterious is the object that astronomers do not know if it is a planet, a giant comet, a ‘protostar’ that never got hot enough to become a star, a distant galaxy so young that it is still in the process of forming its first stars, or a galaxy so shrouded in dust that none of the light cast by its stars ever gets through. ‘All I can tell you is that we con’t know what it is,’ said Gerry Neugebauer, chief IRAS scientist.”
The United States Government squashed the story immediately! For some arcane top-secret reason the government doesn’t want to alarm or panic the general public by disclosure of this discovery. Why? Because a race of super-beings inhabits that planet, and common knowledge of this fact would have people screaming in the streets. Listen to this story. . . .
Long, long ago, approximately 500,000 years back into the past, our Planet Earth/Tiamat was a quite different place than it is today. To clarify a point, this planet’s original name is Tiamat. The nickname “Earth,” from the Greek “Gaia,” is only a recent innovation. Here in these WebPages, this planet will always be referred to as Planet Tiamat.
A half a million years ago, Tiamat was not located in Space where it is today. It orbited farther out from the Sun, in between the orbits of Mars and Jupiter. Mars was orbiting at a distance much closer to the Sun than now and was quite habitable, with a temperate climate and liquid water. This fact has been verified numerous times by NASA and other scientific groups. What those groups do not acknowledge is the fact that Mars had a different orbital pattern than today. Establishment groups do not accept a cataclysmic evolution of this solar system, at least not publicly.
Then, too, Tiamat’s system was closer to the Star Sirius (or Sothis, as the ancient Egyptians called it). This solar system and the Sirian planetary system are part of a unit. The two systems are gravitationally connected to one another, a new fact that is now beginning to gain widespread consensus from the scientific community. Our “Sirian Regional System” as a unit revolves around the Central Sun Alcyone in the Pleiades Cluster, which might be termed “the Pleiades Quadrant.” This greater sector revolves around the Galactic Center, in the direction of the Stars of Sagittarius, once every 200,000,000 years or so. What is so significant about our present-day epoch is that certain great cycles relating to orbital alignments within the Pleiades Quadrant and between this Quadrant and the Galactic Center are starting to repeat themselves, and there’s nothing that we can do about it. It’s happening, folks! Prepare for the unexpected! This Great Cycle should be in full swing by 21 December 2012CE. Mark your calendars!
But returning to the history of Nibiru and Tiamat, our planet had a much colder environment than today. The humanoid population, which our paleontolgists and the like, call “Neanderthals,” were hardier and hairier than we are. They lived in caves to take advantage of the natural internal warmth of Tiamat. These early Tiamatians were directly descended from ancestors in the Pleiades, a fact that can be amply verified by the history and mythology of the Mayans and the Polynesians, to name a couple. However, the Pleiadian origins of Tiamat in the first place will not be discussed in this brief history. That is for another time and space.
This solar system was internally stable 500,000 years ago. But an unanticipated, strange event occurred. One of the larger planets from the Sirian System strayed off course and drifted our way. This planet was unwittingly captured by our Sun and thrown into an extremely elongated comet-like orbit, lasting 3,600 of our current years, with its aphelion at the Oort Cloud, the very boundary of the Sun’s gravitational field. It is approximately the size of our Planet Neptune. It is populated with a reptilian super-race governed by an elite aristocracy known as “the Nefilim.” The general population is known as “Anunnaki” or “Anakim.” At the time of this event, the Planet Nibiru was being ruled by Emperor Alalu and Empress Lilitu.
After its capture by our Sun, the Planet Nibiru slowly began to suffer atmospheric deterioration. The governing “Council of Twelve” headed by Emperor Alalu met in emergency session and concluded that in order for their planet to survive, a heat-shield of gold dust would have to be constructed to protect their atmosphere and prevent a cooling off of the planet, which would have been disastrous for a reptilian-based existence constantly dependent upon external heat sources for bodily warmth. They began an immediate exploration of their new solar system. A fleet of spacecraft was dispatched to Tiamat and other planets in an attempt to search for gold.
Commander and Crown-Prince Anu, along with his two sons Enki and Enlil and daughter Ninkhursag, landed in what is now the Persian Gulf and first went ashore in what is now modern-day Kuwait. Eventually they established a spaceport in Mesopotamia at a place known in our mythology and religion as E-din or Eden. Guided by those early Tiamatians, they found abundant sources of gold on Tiamat and successfully created their Nibiruan heat-shield. They soon found out, however, that this heat-shield required periodic maintenance, in turn forcing them to always have a contingent of Anunnaki gold-miners stationed here on Tiamat, constantly shipping more gold home to Planet Nibiru.
After the passage of several Nibiruan orbits around their new Sun, perhaps 26,000 Tiamatian Years, as their planet’s orbit stabilized, Nibiru passed perilously close to Tiamat. One of its host of moons and moonlets crashed into Tiamat in what is now the Pacific Ocean, blowing the lost continent of Lemuria to smithereens, leaving its remnants floating about in Space in what we now so casually refer to as the “Asteroid Belt,” and knocking Tiamat out of it old orbit and into a newer one closer to the Sun. In the process, Tiamat captured one of Nibiru’s moons named “Kingu,” which is the correct term for our present Moon. Tiamat and Kingu finally settled down into their current positions, and in all of this chaos the Planet Mars got displaced to a new orbit farther out from the Sun, eventually causing that planet’s surface to freeze and die. On the up-side of all of this was the fact that this cosmic catastrophe made Nibiru’s orbit finally stabilize, so that no events of this awful magnitude have subsequently occurred.
In connection with this upheaval, Crown-Prince Anu and his consort Crown-Princess Antu became distressed with Emperor Alalu’s actions and decisions, so the next time Emperor Alalu and Empress Lilitu visited Tiamat to check for gold-mine damage that might have resulted from the collision, they staged a coup d’etat and proclaimed themselves Emperor Anu and Empress Antu. They banished deposed Emperor Alalu and Empress Lilitu to Tiamat and forbade them from ever returning to Nibiru. Alalu and Lilitu, believe it or not, are still alive and living in a palatial underground spaceport in the Grand Teton Mountains near Yellowstone National Park. They are surrounded by massive hordes of gold and precious gems, and they operate an enormous transmitter device (the source of the Taos Hum?) that allows them to stay in communication with Nibiru and its space patrols. It should be emphasized now that the Nibiruans are not the typical big-eyed “Greys” that we hear about so often in the media.
To digress for a moment at this point, the reptilian inhabitants of the Planet Nibiru are anywhere from 10-20 feet (3-6 meters) tall. They have elaborate cranial hair, often multi-colored, but very little, if any, body hair, although some of the males do have mustaches and beards. Many of the males have goat-like horns on their heads, and many of the females are winged. They do not sweat and have no body odors, which was one reason they didn’t let the Tiamatians do their gold-mining for them. They thought the hairy Tiamatian mammals stank, and they didn’t like to be around them. They stayed to themselves. They can have up to seven pupils in each eye, seven fingers on each hand, and seven toes on each foot. They regularly wear clothing made of pure goldleaf, and their diet mainly consists of liquids which provide them with their necessary nutrients without their having to consume many solid foods. They seeded Tiamat with many of our current fruits and vegetables, however, and they deserve credit for that.
Time passed. The Anunnaki gold-miners got restless, despising their drudgery in the mines, which were primarily located in what is now South Africa, under the command of Nefilim Duke Nergal and Duchess Ereskigal. Eventually they revolted and refused to do anymore mining. Alarmed, Emperor Anu summoned Queen Ninkhursag to the throne room. Queen Ninkhursag is Nibiru’s Chief Medical Officer and Geneticist. Emperor Anu implored Queen Ninkhursag to come up with a cloned hybrid Nibiruan-Tiamatian to act as a slave gold-miner. She accepted the challenge and eventually created a hybrid male from the egg of Tiamatian female and the sperm of her brother Prince Enki. She referred to this hybrid as the “Adamu.” At first, only males were produced, cloned one just like the other. A group of Nibiruan females was ordered to serve as incubation vessels for the Adamu clones. These female Anunnaki were known as the “Birth Goddesses.”
Life just went merrily along. Nibiru had its gold, the Anunnaki males were freed from the mines, the Adamu clones went into fullscale production and became excellent gold-mining slaves. But as always happens both here and on Nibiru, a hitch developed. The Birth Goddesses got fed up with sitting around pregnant all the time with little Adamu clones, so they revolted and refused to continue with the incubation process. Emperor Anu immediately had Queen Ninkhursag brought back to the throne room and this time ordered her to create a “female Adamu” that could mate with the males and produce their own clones. By now, for Queen Ninkhursag, this was a piece of cake. She created the female “Eva” prototype along with an absolutely perfect Adamu clone. These two were allowed to romp around naked on the palace grounds at Eden, in hopes that they would produce a child, a little-bitty-baby-slave gold-miner…, the PERFECT ROBOT!
But alas – they were infertile. Just as two mules cannot produce another mule, requiring instead that a horse mate with a donkey, these two hybrid clones could not reproduce. At this point Emperor Anu was beside himself. He had to have gold! So he ordered Queen Ninkhursag to undo the hybridization! She had her brother Prince Enki travel to the Eden Palace to do the job for her. Prince Enki had the hybrid Adamu and Eva ingest a chemical substance of some sort that caused them to revert back to more of a Tiamatian than a Nibiruan creation. They immediately shed their reptilian outer-skins and began to mate. Realizing that he’d been dealt a major blow, in that as a result of the dehybridzation he’d lost power over these new creatures, Emperor Anu banished the Adamu and Eva from forever re-entering the Eden Palace grounds.
Cro-Magnon Man was born. It was 20,000 years ago. Neanderthal Man was slowly but inexorably going extinct as a result of Tiamat’s closer proximity to the Sun and its warmer climate. By 10,000BCE, they really no longer existed, leaving Cro-Magnon Man to dominate Tiamat. Certain pockets of these early Tiamatians are still around in parts of Melanesia and Amazonia, but they are few and far between.
(August 1996 Update Insert: In his book The Rainbow Conspiracy, Brad Steiger writes in connection with the Philadelphia Experiment that U.S. President Franklin Delano Roosevelt met with some “nearly human aliens” in the 1930s. These aliens had a greenish tint to their skin. In order to mingle unnoticed here on Tiamat, they use a bleaching solution to lighten their skin-tone. And then there are all those old drawings of “gods” from India, nearly human-looking “gods” who have a bluish skin-tone. Did you ever look closely at the skin color and quality of anole lizards (faux chameleons)? Their skin is so, so smooth and silky! And green! According to a report on TV in August, medical researchers, looking into better ways to develop medicine-delivery skin-patches for sick people, have discovered that snakeskin is extremely similar to human skin. They are developing new medicine-delivery skin-patches from plain old snakeskin! Why is this important? Well, R. A. Boulay in his book Flying Serpents and Dragons writes in connection with our Nibiruan ancestors that the snake was a correlative creation that occurred during the dehybridization process of the Adamu and Eva! What unnecessary or useless reptilian characteristics that had to be “shed” during dehybridization rematerialized as a “serpent.” Thus, one might contemplate the following: if an anole or a chameleon can change colors, can a Nibiruan do the same? Isn’t it amazing how modern scientific discoveries such as this verify our “mysticism” and mythology? . . . )
What happened next is our recorded history. Nibiru once again came too close to Tiamat, unleashing a worldwide catastrophe of floods and earthquakes. This time the Eden Palace and Spaceport themselves were inundated and destroyed. Nefilim Prince Utu was ordered to rebuild the Spaceport in what is now the Sinai Peninsula. Life on Tiamat eventually got back to normal, but then the “Pyramid Wars” broke out.
One of Emperor Anu’s favorites was a Princess-Royal Inanna, whom he appointed as ruler of what is now known as India and Nepal. Her Hindi/Sanskrit title was Lakshmi. She is still worshipped there today. Her lover and consort was the most handsome man on Nibiru, the Duke Dumuzi. Duke Dumuzi became involved in a quarrel with Baron Marduk, resulting in the outbreak of the “Pyramid Wars.” Princess-Royal Inanna and Duke Dumuzi began a protracted power struggle with Baron Marduk and Baroness Sarpanit. In the process Duke Dumuzi was murdered by Baron Marduk; and Prince Utu in cahoots with Princess-Royal Inanna blew up the Sinai Spaceport along with the satellite R&R cities of Sodom and Gommorah. The South African goldmines fell into disarray when Duke Nergal and Duchess Ereskigal allied themselves with Baron Marduk and Baroness Sarpanit. Once again there was chaos among the Nefilim Ruling Council.
Emperor Anu was forced to rebuild the Nibiruan Spaceport, this time putting it under the command of his son Prince Enki. Prince Enki and his consort Princess Ninki were sent to what is now the area around Lake Titicaca, Peru, where they rebuilt the complex on the Nazca Plain. Massive new sources of gold were found in the surrounding Andes Mountains, so the South African mining operation was moved to Lake Titicaca.
And that brings us up to about 3,000 years ago. At that point it seems that the Nibiruans began to abandon Tiamat. Perhaps their atmospheric heat-shield had “crystallized” by then, and they no longer had need of so much gold from Tiamat. This is unclear. The last time their planet passed by Tiamat was in 687BCE when they once again headed out for their long winter hibernation at the Oort Cloud. But they have always continued to maintain some sort of presence here. In addition to the underground installation in the Grand Teton Mountains, they have other underground facilities in South America, in the Saudi Arabian Empty Quarter and in the Himalaya Mountains, to name a few. There’s another underground chamber just southwest of the Great Pyramid of Egypt, which the Nefilim built in connection with the Sinai Spaceport; but there is a debate of sorts about which extraterrestial race controls access to that most sacred, ancient chamber. The answer to that question, as well as many others, will undoubtedly be forthcoming in the very near future. One has only to read the works of Drunvalo Melchizedek, Valdamar Valerian, Michael Topper and John Baines to realize that point. Galaxy37 will continue to keep you updated.
Where is Planet Nibiru today? Well, it’s still out there. Occasionally some astronomer will spot it and name it some enigmatic cosmic object, like an “Object Kowal” or a “mini-galaxy.” Our governments know it’s there but are keeping this knowledge secret from the general population. Ancient skywatchers in the Middle East are said to have looked for Nibiru’s grand arrival in the Constellation of Cancer. When it periodically returns to this part of the solar system, it apparently sort of appears out of nowhere. Suddenly it’s just up there, like a golden miniature sun with a long and fearsome cometary tail trailing along behind it and its host of satellites, hovering, dangling like a jewel over the Tiamatian North Pole for a “millenium of the gods.” The World Mountain. Mount Olympus. Mount Meru. Hyperborea, the North Country, the nation beyond the land where the North Wind rises, the land of eternal springtime, the nation beyond the mountains of the God of the North Wind! Hyperborea!
The material presented here in only the tip of the iceberg of our available knowledge of the Planet Nibiru and her stormy interaction with Planet Tiamat. If you would wish to obtain additional information, you are referred to the following books, including all of the Sitchin material in seven volumes consisting of more than 2,500 pages total.
Genesis Revisited by Zecharia Sitchin
Divine Encounters by Zecharia Sitchin
The Earth Chronicles by Zecharia Sitchin
1 - The Twelfth Planet
2 - The Stairway to Heaven
3 - The Wars of Gods and Men
4 - The Lost Realms
5 - When Time Began
The Gods of Eden by William Bramley
Flying Serpents and Dragons by R.A. Boulay <very hard to find!>
Matrix IV: The Equivideum by Val Valerian, Drunvalo Melchizedek & Michael Topper
The Secret Science by John Baines
The Stellar Man by John Baines
The Rainbow Conspiracy by Brad Steiger <hard to find - pulled from shelves!>
The Hidden History of the Human Race by Michael A. Cremo & Richard L. Thompson
1967 Picacho Peak, New Mexico, USA: At about 2:00pm on March 12th, 1967, a New Mexico State University student was hiking in a desert area near Picacho Peak, New Mexico, when he spotted a big round silvery object hovering in the air just above a rocky hill about 500 yards away. He prepared his 4″ X 5″ Press Camera, set it at F8 and 1/100 shutter speed, and snapped one good black and white picture of the object. It appeared stationary or was moving very little at the time of the photograph. He looked down to change the plates of his camera, needing only 3 seconds, but when he looked back to take another shot, the object was gone. He recalled smelling an electrical odor in the air too!
1968 Sicuani, Peru: December 6, Sr. Pedro Chavez, a photographer for La Prensa, on assignment in Sicuani, Peru, was in the cathedral square near the big church where he took this picture before they disapeared.
1973 Morelos Cocoyoc, Mexico: November 3, at 6:45 PM, with its arms splayed out evenly around it, an object descended and landed in a grass scrub area beside a road. It landed on the arms projected downward.
1977 Centeno, Argentina: Shaped like a giant sombrero, this UFO hovered outside of Centeno for an unknown period of time, and was photographed by an anonymous source. A similar object was witnessed in Ontario, Canada two years earlier.
1977 Floradad, Uruguay: A reporter from one of the larger Uruguayan cities while on assignment, photographed this strange object as it circled numerous times around him.
1978 Rio de Janeiro, Brazil: At 5:10pm on June 20, 1978, Sr. Saul Janusas was able to snap two photographs of a dark metallic looking Saturn-shaped UFO. He could see it clearly in the reddish dusk haze peculiar to the Winter sunset.
1978 Kagawa, Miki-cho, Japan: At 3:00pm on February 4, 1978, Mr. Hirobumi Matsushita was taking snapshots with a friend when they noticed a shiny golden metallic colored object flying high above them in the clear blue sky. There were no clouds and a slight breeze was blowing, but not enough to raise debris that high in the air. The object seemed to be moving purposefully, obviously under intelligent control. Mr. Matsushita adjusted his camera and took several pictures of the strange object before it disappeared.
1980 Charleston, South Carolina, USA: At 5:30pm on April 4, 1980, William J. Herrmann, a local auto mechanic, saw and photographed a silvery disc-shaped object flying erratic maneuvers near Charleston Air Force Base.
1963 Peralta, New Mexico, USA: Paul Villa was in an area south of Albuquerque near the town of Peralta when he found a landed silver circular craft about 70ft in diameter. Nine human-like beings came out of the ship through a sealed door. They spoke to Villa in English and Spanish and could communicate telepathically. The visitors told Villa they had several discs that could pick up pictures and sounds from any place and relay their data back to the ship instantly. After a long conversation the ship took off, taking care not to harm the small creatures on the ground below, per Villa’s request.
1965 Tulsa, Oklahoma, USA: At 1:45am on August 2, 1965, young Alan Smith, then 14 years old, snapped two color photographs of a blinking, colored, luminous, discoid flying object that passed directly over his house there in Tulsa. It had alternating blue, orange, and white lights shining from its underside.
1965 Bernalillo, New Mexico, USA: On Easter Sunday Apolinar Villa was guided telepathically to this spot near where he spotted this craft hovering silently in the air and photographed it.
1965 Santa Ana, California, USA: While racing home to Santa Ana, Mr. Rex Heflin took several photographs of this hat-shaped saucer. Because of the presence of the telephone poles in the background, it has been estimated that this craft is more than 30ft in diameter. Mr. Heflin has donated these photographs to independent UFO researchers for no monetary compensation. Seven years and 7000 miles away, in Cluj, Romania, Mr. Amiel Barnea photographed a similar (or possibly the same) hat-shaped UFO. Six years after that occurrence, Belotie, Yugoslavia was the sight of another similar witnessing.
1966 Lake Tiorati, New York: The west side of the Hudson River, three fishermen noticed an unusual circular metallic flying object. One of the men grabbed a box camera and managed to snap four pictures before it flew away over Stockbridge Mountain.
1967 Baton Rouge, Louisiana, USA: January 12, a fisherman sitting in his boat on the west side of Old River saw this object and only had time to take one picture before it shot off at a 45 degree angle at a great rate of speed. No sound was heard during the experience.
1967 Cumberland, Rhode Island, USA: At 7:15pm on July 3, Joseph L. Ferriere went to east Woonsocket to investigate reports of a strange object flying around in the area, he spotted a large cigar-shaped object hovering in the sky. After taking four pictures of the object he noticed a smaller disc-shaped object coming out from the larger object and took a picture of the disc-shaped object also.
1910 France A rare first ufo sighting photograph of entry number 5 in the Catalan Cup Race at a track in France. This picture also included a strange unidentified flying object seen over the tree tops beyond the line of spectators watching this race. There is no indication whether the photographer saw this object and intended to get it in the picture.
1932 St. Paris, Ohio, USA: The unidentified flying object in this picture could not have been a street lamp, simply because there were no street lamps there at that time. There are no power poles or power lines visible anywhere in this picture. Summer 1932, Mid-day, St. Paris, Ohio. This picture of George Sutton of St. Paris, Ohio, taken near mid-day (as may be seen from the shadows on the ground) shows a vintage automobile with a 1932 license plate on the front bumper. Nobody has been able to account for the dark object seen over Sutton’s left shoulder in this photograph.
1942 Sea of Japan: An Imperial Japanese Sally bomber aircraft, on a mission over the Sea of Japan, was approached by a small dark spherical object which flew around and between the aircraft in the formation. An alert gun-cameraman snapped one photograph.
1950 Red Bud, Illinois, USA: 4:00pm on April 23, Mr. Dean Morgan, a part-time photographer, was coming down the south side of a wooded hill from Red Bud, when he saw this object and got one photograph of it.
1952 Puerto Maldonado, Peru: 4:30pm on July 19, the attention of Customs Inspector Sr. Domingo Troncoso, then with the Peruvian Customs Office at Puerto Maldonado on the jungle frontier with Bolivia, was called to a very strange cigar-shaped flying object over the river area. The big dirigible-shaped craft was flying horizontally and fairly low in the sky, passing from right to left from the observers position. It was leaving a dense trail of thick smoke, vapor, or substance on its wake. This object was a real, structured, physical machine and may be seen from its reflection in the waters of the Madre de Dios river underneath it. The object was estimated to be over a hundred feet long.
1952 Passiac, New Jersy, USA: Mr. George J. Stock, in the yard working on his lawn-mower, around 4:30pm, took this picture with his box reflex camera. It was coming directly over his house from the IT&T; tower, and was estimated to be 20 to 25ft above the ground. This sighting lasted only a couple of minutes.
1958 Trindade, Brazil: Off the Brazilian coast near Trindade many of the ship’s vcrew as well as a Mr. Barania, photographer for the Brazilian Navy witnessed this saucer shaped object that shadowed the movements of the ship. No warfare exercises were practiced. Instead, the Brazilian vessel was participating in the International Geophysical Year of 1958. Computer enhancement reveals that the craft is composed of a globe circled by a large, metallic ring much like the planet Saturn.
A Corona, New Mexico-area rancher named W.W. “Mac” Brazel heard a mighty explosion during a thunderstorm sometime between July 2nd and 4th, 1947. Thinking it was different than a normal clasp of thunder, he ventured out the next day to check on the ranch and his sheep. While moving the sheep to a different location on the ranch, he came upon a roswell alien crash, metallic debris scattered within a 200 to 300 yard area across a pasture about 75 miles northwest of Roswell. The sheep refused to walk through the debris and he was forced to lead them around it.
After consulting his neighbors the Proctors about the material that was found on the ranch, Mac Brazel went into town and met with Sheriff George A. Wilcox who told him to contact the (RAAF) Roswell Army Airforce Base. Marcel and a member of the Counter Intelligence Corps (CIC) from the base, responded to the call and accompanied Brazel back to his ranch. After spending a somewhat uncomfortable night in a small ranch shack with no facilities, Marcel and the CIC agent accompanied Mac to the crash site and collected as much of the material as their two vehicles could carry. They tested the material they found back at the ranch house and noted that although it was very thin, and light, they were unable to bend, tear or burn it.
On the way back to the RAAF, Marcel stopped at his home late at night, woke his wife and son and showed the material he had gathered to them. His son Jesse Jr, kept some of the debris which was later collected by military officials. The base commander “Col. (William) Blanchard (commander of the 509th) after his experts had researched the debris, took the story public on the morning of July 8th, 1947. 1st Lt. Walter Haut was the RAAF’s public information officer, and he wrote the press release announcing the discovery even though he never saw the debris. That afternoon, the Roswell Daily Record carried a banner headline announcing: “RAAF Captures Flying Saucer On Ranch in Roswell Region.” (Click Headline To Read Actual Article)
Also during all this excitement, a crashed UFO along with a number of alien bodies, 4 dead and one alive, had been discovered some distance away from the Brazel ranch. Came up-upon by rock hunters, a heel shaped craft was embedded into a dried stream bank, with rips in the side and bodies laying around it exposed to the hot dry temperatures. Before the new on-lookers could assess the crash site and damage, a military convoy approached the site and forced silence among the civilians using death threats against them and their families. It had seemed an explosion had occurred aboard the craft or it and another spacecraft had collided in midair, causing the debris to pour down on the Brazel pasture before the other damaged craft or same craft, crashed a few miles further. Air Corps personnel quickly sealed the second site having tracked it on radar the night before from the White Sands missile base.
After the newspaper release of the Brazel discovery was made public, Marcel was ordered to load the material he’d collected aboard one of the 509th’s B-29 Superfortress bombers and take it to Wright Field (now Wright Patterson Airforce Base in Ohio), with a stop first at 8th Air Force headquarters in Fort Worth Texas. It was at the Fort Worth Army Air Field that General Ramey constructed the weather balloon story which the Airforce in 1997, admitted it was Project Mogaul, a top secret balloon which monitors nuclear explosions from other countries, preferably, Russia. (Click Picture To See Another Version)
At Ramey’s office, the general, a couple of his aides, Marcel and about three local newspaper reporters started taking pictures of this alleged crash debris and creating the new story about the weather balloon. San Antonian, Irving “Newt” Newton, was the only meteorologist working at the base’s busy flight operations office the afternoon of July 8 and was suddenly ordered through the Warrant Officer, by an assistant to Gen. Roger Ramey, to come to his office and confirm the weather balloon story. What Newton saw he confirmed as a Rawin attached weather balloon which was what Ramey needed him to tell the press. Was the debris switched?
Later in years, Marcel still claimed the material displayed in Ramey’s office wasn’t what he’d actually brought from Roswell but was switched at one point. One of Marcel’s positions in the military was to identify top secret crashed aircraft, and he was quite aware of what a weather balloon looked like, he had retrieved many in his career since that July. What he found obviously was amazing enough that he had to wake his wife and son in the middle of the night and show them.
As for the bodies at the second crash site, they were air-lifted along with the damaged craft to Wright Air Base, and stored in the famed, Hanger 18 there. At that time Wright base was where the Foreign Technology Department was located, and their job was to reverse engineer new technology from other countries and see how they functioned. All the labs were already set-up there and it was a perfect place to analyze the new material. Later, researchers have speculated, the main body of the craft and the surviving being, nick-named, “EBE” for Exstraterrestrial Biological Entity”, was transferred to Groom Lake, Nevada, Area 51 for further analysis.
And so the saga continues. New evidence about the famed pictures from Fort Worth are starting to shed light on whether or not the debris were switched. Digital photo analysis taken from the original pictures at Fort Worth are focusing on hieroglyphics on part of the debris and a memo that was in the General’s hand. More and more witnesses are coming forward about the 1947 incident which is making this grand-daddy of all ufo incidents harder and harder to debunk. I personally met with a gentlemen in Sedona Arizona, a couple of years ago, which told me his story of years before in 1947 when him and his new wife were being re-located on board a military aircraft. A soldier confide in him about a crash site he just left in New Mexico, in which he had to pick up debris from a crashed area. He said it was a craft like no type he had ever seen, which doesn’t sound like a weather balloon story to me.. Do your own research, there are plenty of books on the subject, start with the ones referenced at the end of this site. This particular event is too important to get shoved under the carpet, and frankly ufo researchers are having good laughs listening to the Airforce’s lame excuses. Remember the parachuting dummies the Airforce claims eye witnesses were mistaken for little 4 foot tall aliens? The dummies are on display in a museum near White Sands, they stand 6 feet tall and weren’t in use until the mid 50s. The Airforces explanation for that was, “Well some of the witnesses must have their dates wrong”. Ask your grandparents when they were born, ask them about important dates in their lives, then tell them too their face, that they’re just too old to remember the right dates.. Well that’s what the Airforce said..
Last weekend on Sunday the 31/3 around 12:00AM 2019 I had the craziest experience at Karekare beach. I am here looking for answers, but to also see if anyone else has seen these strange lights in the sky.
We were on the beach, my boyfriend and I, and saw two bright orange/red lights far on the other end of the beach. I pointed them out and said that they might be helicopters looking for someone. In a matter of seconds, one of the lights started moving at full speed, in a straight line, no more that 200m above the water until directly infront of us. The UFO had changed from having a red light to a bright white light, somewhat like a torch, shining directly at us.
We presumed that it was a helicopter with a spotlight, but there was no sound at all coming from it, and it was so steady and barely moving. It stayed like that and followed us every so slightly as we paced a few meters forward and back to see if it would follow. After about 2 minutes (or what I think, we could not tell time at this point) it moved away very quickly, flying incredibly fast and with perfect precision, until disappearing behind a mountain.
The same thing happend with the next red light which was on the other side of the beach. It moved as the other UFO had until directly infront of us again with this bright light, and soon followed in the same direction as the first.
In total we experienced this happen with three others before they all disappeared for a while. We were lying down looking at the stars for a while and then stood up to leave, before realizing there were 5 surrounding us in different areas of the beach. One of them was flying up and down and another from side to side. The others were just still switching between red and white spotlights. No sound.
This was when we decided to leave, scared shitless. We drove back to Titirangi, about 30 mins from the beach and up to a look up spot with a great view of the city. At the top I noticed a red light, completely still in the sky. I remember saying to my boyfriend that it couldn’t be one of those things. We got out of the car and the light again shifted from being red to a white spotlight sort of light, this time so bright it was like looking directily at the lights from a car in front of you, but much brighter, we could barely look at it. No sound coming from it. It then flew off, this time like a plane, very fast in the sky and shaped like a triangle with three lights. One white, red and the other white or maybe blue.