Jharkhand is a state in eastern India. It's known for its waterfalls, the elegant Jain temples of Parasnath Hill and the elephants and tigers of Betla National Park. It features the 17th-century Jagannath Temple, a Hindu shrine and the Jharkhand War Memorial. Tagore Hill is a monument honoring Nobel Prize-winning author Rabindranath Tagore.
The state shares its border with the states of Bihar to the north, Uttar Pradesh to the northwest, Chhattisgarh to the west, Odisha to the south, and West Bengal to the east.The city of Ranchi is its capital and Dumka its sub capital.
Jharkhand accounts for 40% of the mineral resources of India, but it suffers widespread poverty as 39.1 per cent of the population is below the poverty line and 19.6 per cent of the children under five years of age are malnourished. The State is primarily a rural state as only 24 percent of the population resides in cities.
The Shah Deo's were the erstwhile rulers of Jharkhand, along with the royal house of palamau,kunda and kothi.Historically, Shah Deo's they came to power in the 2nd century after the Munda kings handed over the throne. Their palace still exists at Ratu, 11 km from the current Capital of Ranchi. Their first capital was at Sutiyambe near Ranchi. Remains of the period are still there for all to see. The first Ruler was Maharaja Phanimukut Rai. His descendents ruled over Jharkhand for around 2000 years till India's independence from the British rule. The good tribal rulers continued to thrive and were known as the Munda Rajas, and exist to this day.
Later, during the Mughal period, the Jharkhand area was known as Kukara. After the year 1765, it came under the control of the British Empire and became formally known under its present title, "Jharkhand" - the Land of "Jungles" (forests) and "Jharis" (bushes). Located on Chhota Nagpur Plateau and Santhal Parganas, has evergreen forests, rolling hills and rocky plateaus with many places of keen beauty like Lodh Falls.
The subjugation and colonisation of Jharkhand region by the British East India Company resulted in spontaneous resistance from the local people. Almost one hundred years before India?s First War of Independence (1857), Adivasis of Jharkhand were already beginning what would become a series of repeated revolts against the British colonial rule.
After the last Assembly election in the state threw up a hung Assembly, RJD's dependence on the Congress extended support on the precondition that RJD will not pose a hurdle to the passage of the Bihar reorganization Bill (Jharkhand Bill). Finally, with the support from both RJD and Congress, the ruling coalition at the Centre led by the BJP which has made statehood its mail poll plank in the region in successive polls earlier, cleared the Jharkhand Bill in the monsoon session of the Parliament this year, thus paving the way for the creation of a separate Jharkhand state.
Language And Culture
Hindi and English are the two major languages in Jharkhand. Hindi is the official language of the state. Most of the languages spoken in Jharkhand have a strong connection with the Indo-Aryan languages. Bhojpuri, Khortha, Oriya, Urdu, Sadri, Bengali and Angika are some of the other languages spoken in Jharkhand. These languages are simple to understand and speak.
Jharkhand people, culture, festivals includes various facets like the tribes, music, musical instruments, archaeology, sports and youth affairs, crafts, fairs and festivals and food of Jharkhand. The different types of music practiced in the state are Dohari, Domkach, Janani, Jhumar, Mardana, Daidhara, Pahilsanjha, Adhratiya and Vinsariya. The musical instruments that form a major segment of the people, culture and festivals in Jharkhand are Kadri, Gupijantra, Sarangi and Tuila, Vyang, Anandlahri and Bansuri. The varieties of dance forms that are popular in Jharkhand include Paika, Chaw, Jadur and Karma.
Asian elephant (Elephas maximus)
Asian koel (Eudynamys scolopaceus)
Palash (Butea monosperma)
Sal (Shorea robusta)
5.Tata Steel Zoological Park
4.Bokaro Steel City
How to Reach
Delhi, Mumbai, Kolkata and Patna have regular flights to Jharkhand?s capital city, Ranchi. The steel township of Jamshedpur also has an airport but it is not used for commercial flights yet.
Most of the major cities of India are connected by regular passenger and express trains to the cities of Ranchi, Jamshedpur, Bokaro, Dhanbad and Giridih.
There are good road links from the rest of India to Ranchi and the other important cities of Jharkhand state. Government and privately operated buses link many states such as Bihar, Chhattisgarh, West Bengal and Orissa.