Growing Schools has been re-launched as Countryside Classroom, the largest ever partnership of organisations who are committed to helping children learn about food, farming and/or the natural environment.
It is the vision of Countryside Classroom that schools and teachers across the UK will embrace food, farming and the natural environment as essential components of a broad and balanced curriculum, incorporating them into day-to-day learning. As a result of this, every child will have the opportunity to learn about and experience these topics in diverse ways that are increasingly supported by experiences outside the classroom.
The Met Office has a range of activities and materials based around the requirements of the national curriculum to help teachers and students understand weather and climate. Resources include the opportunity for video conferencing with a weather or climate expert.Read more
NAEE is run by teachers for teachers. It promotes the teaching and learning of environmental education for sustainable living in all places of formal education in the UK.Read more
NAFSO represents professionals employed in teaching, developing and promoting field studies. Its members may work at field study centres, multi-activity centres, nature reserves, farm visit sites or schools, and have expertise in a wide range of fieldwork activities.Read more
NFAN is a cooperative group established to provide professional assitance and support to farm and rural diversification enterprises. It has a searchable list of farms to visit.Read more
The National Farmers' Union represents the farmers and growers of England and Wales. Its central objective is to promote successful and socially responsible agriculture and horticulture, while ensuring the long term viability of rural communities. Produces the Why Farming Matters ... Read more
The society aims to help everyone enjoy the recreation of gardening, and to protect, promote and preserve allotment gardens.Read more
Natural England is the public body charged with conserving and enhancing the natural environment for its intrinsic value, the wellbeing and enjoyment of people and the economic prosperity that it brings. The website has a wide range of resources, notably ... Read more
The Teachers Resource on the website enables you to search the museum's galleries, events, online videos and activities for support materials. A wide range of educational activities are organised at the museum itself, which includes a wildlife garden.Read more
Plantlife strives to ensure the conservation of wild plants and their habitats across the UK through practical conservation work, managing nature reserves and carrying out surveys. Above all, Plantlife aims to get the message across that plants are enchanting, fascinating ... Read more
The RBST works to restore Britain's native livestock breeds to the countryside and to secure the continued existence and viability of the UK's native farm animal genetic resources. The website has a list of approved farm parks to visit.Read more