The Grade 5/6s are doing an artwork that requires each student to use a small box. If you have any boxes that are about the size of a large box of teabags, like the picture below, could you please donate it to the art room? Large cereal boxes and shoes boxes are too big and small teabag boxes are too small. Somewhere in between would be ideal. Myself and the 5/6s thank you kindly!
This term Preps will be learning about how artists repurpose materials to make new artworks. We will be starting with fabric owl collages inspired by the textile works of Mandy Pattullo. Students will learn how to draw, paint and collage owls. This process will culminate in each student using the knowledge they acquired through the developmental stages of the work to create an owl collage made from fabric and recycled paper scraps. Preps will learn about texture and incorporate these techniques and knowledge into their artworks.
Grade 1 and 2
Grade 1 and 2 students will be looking at the work of American artist Yumi Okita and will create relief artworks inspired by Okita’s textile moth sculptures. Students will learn about symmetry and colour throughout the developmental stages of their artworks and will experience the tactile nature of working with fabric and fibers. Through guided and independent drawing, students will develop an understanding of the anatomy of moths and how to draw them. Students will also have the opportunity to explore pattern and repetition when designing their moth’s wings. This term is about repurposing old materials into new artworks. Students will achieve this by using fabric scraps and old pieces of cardboard to create their artworks.
Grade 3 and 4
This term is all about repurposing old materials into new artworks. Students will be discovering the art of the indigenous people of the Pacific Northwest of America and Canada, with a particular focus on Totem Poles and their cultural significance. Using paper scraps and recycled paper, students will create a piece of a totem pole using collaging techniques. Each student’s work will be connected to other students’ work and form a Totem Pole. Throughout this work, students will learn about symmetry, balance and repetition and how these elements are integral to Totem Pole art.
Grade 5 and 6
This term Grade 5 and 6 students will turn old gift boxes into whimsical shadow boxes as part of our recycled art unit this term. The project aims to repurpose old materials into new artworks. Over a series of weeks students will develop a very personal design for their shadow box, which aims to express and idea or theme they would like to convey to their audience. Students will use self-reflection tools, class discussions and feedback sessions, mind-maps and developmental sketches to create a finished work, which deals with their idea or theme and shows an understanding of depth and perspective.