Discover 52 Journal Prompts
Designed to Build
Christian Faith in Kids!
Bible-Based Worksheets for Kids Ages 5 & Up
But Here’s the Secret to
Effective Journaling: PROMPTS.
Journaling is a wonderful way to open up childrens’ hearts and minds to their Christian faith.
It can be therapeutic.
It can be eye-opening.
And most importantly- it can be a FUN!
A blank page can be intimidating for adults, and downright scary to a child.
Rather than a "dear diary" type journal where children are asked to write about anything, the right prompt ignites a childs’ imagination.
Instead of kids groaning about how they “don’t know what to write about”, they are excited to get their ideas on paper right away.
Here’s a few examples of our Bible-based prompts:
- Adam and Eve invited me to Eden and here's what I saw...
- God made me my favorite animal for a day. I was______ and here's what my day was like:
Today, I’m thrilled to share with you 52 journal prompts for kids. Our prompts are designed with two goals in mind:
- To be FUN for kids (nothing like a standard homework assignment)
- To deepen a child’s relationship with God.
Here's a Look Inside:
Here are Just Some of the Ways We
Use These Journal Prompts:
Early Bird Activities
Keep kids busy (and out of trouble) while the rest of their class trickles in.
Late Pick Up Activities
Let kids continue their learning & fun while they wait for their parents.
5-15 Minute Time Fillers
Sometimes a lesson doesn’t take quite as long as we thought it would, these can help fill in the gap before parents arrive.
Keep each child’s weekly journal entry in a folder to present at the end of the year as a “Journal Portfolio” to families (a wonderful keepsake collection!).
Bulletin Board Displays
Display the chidlren’s journals on a church bulletin board outside your Sunday School classroom.
Sunday School Homework
Send students home with a fun journal prompt that echoes the days lesson (a great discussion starter for parents!)
Homeschool Writing Assignments
Share as a turn-key writing assignment for your homeschooling families.
Mid Week Recharge
Use the prompts on Wednesday nights if your church has a mid-week kids program.
Are you heading out on a long trip by air, train, or car? Print out journal prompts to keep the kids busy (& thinking) during your travels.
Every classroom has a “flu folder” loaded with these journal prompts that we can whip out if a teacher (or student) suddenly falls ill.
Imagination is Necessary for Faith
Some great teachers say that imagination is a necessary component for strong faith.
The basis of Christian journal writing and drawing is using imagination to bring us into a closer walk with Christ.
These prompts will do what no other teaching tool will do for the young: They allow a child’s imagination to be a major component in the learning process.
We are not “teaching” all the input and expecting a child to simply respond to it with output.
We are allowing children’s perception and understanding to feed off itself and grow as they complete more prompts.
Use the prompts as would suit you and your church families - and watch kids expand their hearts, souls and minds!
Our Promise to You:
That’s right, we are so sure that you will love Draw & Write Journal Prompts for Kids that we are offering an unconditional 100% money-back guarantee.
If you are not completely satisfied with the material, all you have to do is notify us within 60 days of your date of purchase and we will refund your money, in full, with absolutely no questions asked!
That’s TWO FULL MONTHS to put these fun, Bible-based journal prompts to the test!
Plus, when you order "Draw & Write Journal Prompts for Kids" you can take advantage of the immediate download feature to get all the printable prompts in just minutes or even seconds from now … that means you could be using it in class on Sunday – even if you are ordering on Saturday night!
And the best part: