Radiation Detection and Environmental Monitoring instruments determine radioactivity in the environment by gamma ray measurement. ANTECH Radiation Detection and Environmental Monitoring systems include:
- Contamination vehicle and pedestrian portal monitors
- The RadSearch gamma camera
- Mobile environmental laboratories
- Technology for in-field soil measurements
The ANTECH Model G3410-200 LRDGS is a transportable Low Resolution Gamma Scanner for the characterisation and measurement of 200 L drums of waste.
Environmental Monitoring, Exempt waste & VLLW, Gamma, Gamma ray Waste Assay, LLW & greater than Class C waste, Mobile In-Situ Measurement Laboratories, Radiation Detection, Radioactive Waste Measurement, Radioactive Waste Measurement
The ANTECH excavator mounted bucket assay system (EMBASSY) model G3102-4216 is a system designed to measure the radioactive contents of an excavator bucket.
The ANTECH model G3010 Automated Gamma Spectroscopy System (AGSS) or automated sample changer is an effective solution for performing automated, unattended, high-resolution gamma spectroscopy (HRGS) measurements and analysis of bulk samples in a variety of sizes and types of Marinelli beakers.
CHARMS is a mobile assay and measuring system for making laboratory quality measurements of drums, waste bags and other waste objects in the field.
Environmental Monitoring, Gamma, Gamma ray Waste Assay, Integrated Measurement, Materials Inventory, Mobile In-Situ Measurement Laboratories, Radiation Detection, Radioactive Sample Counting & Measurement, Radioactive Waste Measurement, Radioactive Waste Measurement
ANTCart is a rugged, mobile detector platform designed to position and mount High Purity Germanium (HPGe) and other detectors for measurements of drums, boxes and large containers.
The ANTECH G5321-400 Baggage and Air Freight Contamination Portal Monitor is designed to detect gamma-ray emitting radioactive materials in and surface contamination on baggage and air freight containers.
The ANTECH Model G3620-340 Far Field Gamma Monitor is the basic assay system for drums and small objects using far field gamma ray measurement geometry.
The ANTECH G5332-400 Contamination Pedestrian Portal Monitor is designed to detect gamma ray emitting substances, including materials contaminated with fission and activation products such as Cs-137 and Co-60.
Environmental Monitoring, Gamma, Gamma ray Waste Assay, Homeland Security, ILW & high activity waste, LLW & greater than Class C waste, Plutonium & Uranium waste, Radiation Detection, Remote handled waste, Special Measurement Applications, TRU waste & ILW
RadSearch is a device for measuring and quantifying radiation in the environment. It is particularly applicable to decommissioning and nuclear cleanup activities.
The ANTECH G3301 Series Segregated Waste Clearance Monitor quantifies and segregates gamma-ray emitting radioactive waste. The system detects gamma radiation in lightweight and low density bags and boxes.
This highly portable system consists of two wheel mounted sample trays that can inserted into a portable measurement (docking) station for the measurement of potentially contaminated soil.
The ANTECH Model G3107-1000 Soil Measuring and Segregation System measures and segregates soil with radiological contamination from uncontaminated soil.
The B3001-600 Universal Multi-Detector Counting System (UMDCS) is a self-contained electronic module designed to be used with various radioactive analysis systems employing both gamma ray and neutron detectors. It can accommodate pulse outputs from plastic scintillators, sodium iodide detectors or ³He neutron detectors.
The ANTECH G5340 Series Contamination Vehicle Portal Monitors are designed to detect gamma-ray emitting radioactive substances in a range of applications which includes recycled materials and general cargo contained in moving vehicles.