The textural quality of this eastern native's stems and foliage is superb.
During winter, a circle of the thorn-covered stems is as magical as an outdoor sculpture. Dark blue-green compound leaves offer a tropical effect before turning yellow and purple in autumn. One-foot-wide flower clusters sit atop the foliage in summer and transform into purple-black fruits that attract birds. Aralia spinosa grows to 9 m tall and spreads indefinitely.
Provide full sun to part shade and moist, but well drained-soil. Plant in an area where contact with the thorns is unlikely.
Information source: http://www.finegardening.com
Genus - Aralia
Species - Spinosa
Common name - American Angelica Tree
Pre-Treatment - Required
Hardiness zones - 4 - 8
Height - 10'-30' / 3 - 9 m
Spread - 15'-20' / 4 - 6 m
Plant type - Large shrub / small tree
Vegetation type - Decidious
Exposure - Full Sun, Partial Shade
Growth rate - Medium
Soil PH - Acidic, Neutral, Alkaline
Soil type - Clay, Loam, Sand, Well Drained
Water requirements - Drought Tolerant, Average Water
Landscape uses - Feature Plant, Foundation, Mixed Border
Bloom season - Summer
Leaf / Flower color - Green / White
1. Soak in a warm clean water for 24 hours. Fill a seeding tray with damp seed starter potting medium. Plant aralia seeds just under the surface of the medium. Place the seed tray in a clear, plastic, sealable bag, or place a plastic dome on top of the tray.
2. Cold-stratify the seeds for 60-90 days. Stratification is putting seeds into a cool, dim environment to induce germination. Stratify seeds by sowing them in the late fall or winter and placing the tray in the garage or on the porch. If it is not fall or winter, place the seed tray in the refrigerator. Periodically mist the soil with water to keep the medium damp.
3. Remove any seeds that start to sprout during cold stratification. Transplant the sprouted seeds into individual, small pots, using high-phosphorous soil to promote root establishment. Place the pots in a warm environment with indirect light. After six to eight weeks of cold stratification, remove the tray and place it in the warm area with indirect light. Continue to transplant seeds as more sprouts form.
4. Transplant indoor aralias into larger pots, as needed. Plant aralias in humus-rich soil and keep the soil lightly dampened. Move aralias intended for the outdoors in spring, when the plant is well established. Aclimate plants to the outdoors gradually before leaving outside overnight.
5. Begin a fertilization regimen after the aralias are established. Fertilize aralias with full-strength liquid organic shrub fertilizer monthly during spring and summer. Fertilize aralias with half-strength fertilizer in fall and winter.
Your shopping cart is empty!