I recently watched the Horizon programme which is a quality UK documentary show. In it they looked at fat and sugar and carried out an interesting experiment on identical twins who are both doctors one living in the US and the other in the UK.
The brother in the US eat an all sugar diet for 30 days and his identical brother eat a fat diet for the same 30 days. Their body composition was measured before and after the 30 days and it was an interesting outcome for both. The brother who eat the sugar only diet actually had a better control of his blood sugar levels when tested at the end. The brother who eat the fat only diet had poorer control of his blood sugars and was not far from being pre diabetic (type II). Both weight but largely from muscle mass, which is not good.
The brothers spoke to a scientist who works with mice. He had tested mice on an all fat diet and also an all sugar diet with interesting conclusions. When the mice eat all fat they compensated their intake and didn’t eat much more than their bodies actually needed. Equally with the all sugar diet the mice stopped eating when they felt they had had enough. The same mice then were given cheese cake to eat. The mice ate the cheesecake with one startling result, they didn’t stop when they normally would have done, with the fat or the sugar. The mice actually over eat and put on weight – which they didn’t, eating solely the fat or the sugar.
What the guy concluded was that mice and to the same extent human brains have a shut off switch for food groups they can identify, giving us the ability to manage our weight innately. However, when faced with food that has a these food groups combined – cheesecake being the perfect example of a 50:50 mix of fat and sugar we struggle to find the off switch as we don’t recognise this as a food group and our brains are fooled into eating more than we need.
If you want to manage, and that includes lose, body fat (not weight) fat, you need to avoid the man made processed foods. These often combine food groups and set us up for failure in our healthy diets. Our brains are not equipped to stop eating these foods. We need to avoid them or exert extreme control over what we eat. Good luck!
If you need help with this Fit 4 Life has just released a new look 12 Week Challenge designed specifically with fat loss in mind. To find out more or just get started contact Rich by email at: rich@F4L.co.nz or call/text him on 021777417.