Avoiding mosquitoes becomes increasingly more important as we continue getting closer to the summer months. Shorts and t-shirts become more acceptable as temperatures keep steadily rising and people are beginning to pack away unnecessary coats and jackets. Everyone starts spending more time outside, enjoying parks, recreational sports, barbecues, and parties. One thing that also increases with the summer season is mosquito activity.
Luckily for the average Chicagoan, science is constantly attempting to meet the expectations of our creativity and needs. Over the past few years, scientists and mosquito experts have made enormous discoveries about the mosquito and how to defend against them. Perhaps the most major discovery to be made about mosquitoes concerns how they gravitate to some people more than others. Unfortunately, 85% of how tasty you appear to the little buggers is determined solely by your genetics. Mosquitoes are especially attracted to people with O-type blood, even to the point of being able to detect such people from up to 50 meters away. So if you always seem to be the life of the mosquito party, you can thank your parents for that. However, that other 15% can still make a huge difference in your enjoyment of the outdoors and avoidance of mosquito bites. Here are the primary ways you can make mosquitoes less interested in yourself even if you are a prime target.
Avoid Their Business Hours
Mosquitoes are known to be most active during sunrise and sunset. We aren’t saying that you should always sleep in, but there are definite advantages to not rising with the crack of dawn.
Dress to Impress
Scientists are still trying to figure out why exactly different colors attract mosquitoes more than others, but have posited that mosquitoes are attracted to colors most similar to plants and animals that they would normally prey upon. Red, navy blue, & black are the three worst colors when it comes to trying to avoid mosquitoes, but anything dark will attract them considerable more than lighter shades. Scientists have also discovered that flowery smelling perfumes can also attract mosquitoes.
With an array of mosquito sprays and repellents available, it can be hard to find one that will actually be the most effective. The most proven bug sprays tend to use some concentration of DEET, a pesticide geared towards protecting you from all sorts of bugs. For safety purposes, the Center for Disease Control recommends that if using a DEET based spray you should use concentrations of 50% or less, avoid spraying skin that will be covered by clothing, and wash after coming back inside.
Mosquitoes possess an uncanny ability to be able to detect humans from as many as 50 meters away. They do this by sensing the carbon dioxide that we exhale from breathing and can also smell your sweat. As a result, when you go for a run outside, enjoy some pickup sports, or work out in the yard, you are essentially a beacon for mosquitoes that is broadcasting your location like a gps.
Enjoy A Cold One, But Indoors
One of the most recent discoveries, mosquitoes prefer people who drink beer. Scientist are still trying to determine the exact cause of this phenomenon, but are positing that it could be due to people’s rise in temperature after drinking beer.
At this point you may be starting to wonder, “But, that’s basically all the best things to do outdoors”, and you aren’t completely wrong. When you plan a backyard barbecue with volleyball, drinks, salty food, and lots of people, you may actually be putting together the perfect party for the little mosquitoes, that’s why we’ve got one more suggestion on how to avoid mosquitoes this season
Call the Squad
At Mosquito Squad Chicago, we offer one time sprays that are guaranteed to keep mosquitoes from crashing your backyard party as well as season long barrier spray packages so you don’t have to worry about them for the whole summer. Contact us to find out which option is best for you.
Mosquito Squad Chicago is a mosquito control services company that provides professional mosquito extermination in the Chicagoland area. Give us a call at 800-856-9303 to find out how we can help you with your mosquito problem.