Enjamin was an orphan goblin kid that lived homeless on the streets of Seattle. He didn’t get along with humans very well, but he was very talented at watching them and spent many days inventing stories in his mind about the passers-by. While his people-watching and story-making brought him joy, he was very lonely and desperately wished he had someone to share his stories with. 

One day Enjamin came across a poster advertising a story-writing competition, and he thought that if he could prove himself in that competition he could meet the sort of friend he was looking for. Enjamin sought out a new subject for his people-watching and began to follow a particular boy around the city to observe for inspiration. The boy, Leo, eventually realized he was being followed and confronted Enjamin, but despite Enjamin's awkward social ineptitude Leo came to find the goblin fun to talk with. While Enjamin never exactly came clean about why he was following Leo, he nevertheless continued to spend time together with him as Leo enjoyed listening to his stories and people-watching with him.

Leo and Enjamin enjoyed their time together for several weeks, but eventually, Leo stumbled across Enjamin's writing and discovered that Enjamin had been writing about him. After confronting Enjamin with this and learning about the writing contest, Leo felt hurt and used and told Enjamin that he didn't want to hang out anymore. The goblin begged Leo to change his mind, but he refused. After Leo left him that day, Enjamin tossed his story away into the gutter and decided that he would not enter the contest as he didn't feel he could be happy winning it at the expense of having hurt Leo's feelings. 

The next day, Leo passed by the cast-away story while walking to school, and realized what must have transpired. While he was still upset with Enjamin, he didn't want to see the goblin hurt, so he gathered the scattered pages and entered them into the competition just before the entry deadline. The goblin's story ended up placing fourth in the contest, and Leo hunted down Enjamin to share the news.  And even though he didn't win the contest, that is when Enjamin realized he had won something far more important than that. He had won a friend.
