WHAT IS A JLUS?
A Joint Land Use Study (JLUS) is a collaborative study conducted by the city, county, federal officials, residents, and the military installation itself to identify compatible land uses and growth management guidelines near the installation. The process encourages the local community and installation to act as a team in order to prevent or limit any encroachment issues caused by future mission expansion or local growth.
CAMP LEJEUNE AND NEW RIVER AIR STATION'S ROLE
Since September 1941, Camp Lejeune has been the home of “Expeditionary Forces in Readiness”, and throughout the years, it has become the home base for the II Marine Expeditionary Force, 2nd Marine Division, 2nd Marine Logistics Group and other combat units and support commands. It plays an important role in the local economy, with a population of over 100,500 and a total economic impact of $3.5 billion (2015).
NEED FOR JLUS
Onslow County completed the last JLUS in 2003. Since that time, growth on base of more than 8,000 marines has also led to community growth. Besides land development, there are several other encroachment areas that may impact the militaries ability to train and operate. The primary objective of the JLUS will be to identify timelines and trends that might create an encroachment challenge for Camp Lejeune and MCAS New River.
HOW IT IS CONDUCTED
In its simplest version, the JLUS team will gather and analyze data; conduct a compatibility analysis; propose recommendations; and provide a detailed implementation plan. The compatibility analysis will include an analysis of twenty-four points organized based on development factors, people factors, and natural resource factors. The analysis is aimed at finding a balance or compromise between military and community needs so that both can grow successfully.
The community plays a crucial role in the drafting of the study. Community input provides varying perspectives and differing opinions to ensure that the plan is well rounded and encompassing of the community. In order to effectively gather input, a variety of public engagement opportunities will be provided throughout the process. Engagement opportunities could include the following:
Project Website and Facebook Page
RESULT OF THE JLUS
A set of recommendations and guidelines for both the military and community stakeholders to promote compatible development and build relationships between Onslow County, City of Jacksonville, and the Townships of Holly Ridge, Swansboro, North Topsail Beach, and Richlands and Marine Corps Base Camp Lejeune and Marine Corps Air Station New River. The proposed recommendations and guidelines will reduce potential conflicts between military installations and surrounding areas while accommodating new growth and economic development, sustaining economic vitality, protecting public health and safety, and protecting the operational missions of the installation.
Lastly, the JLUS will utilize the recommendations to create an implementation plan. The implementation plan will provide a strategy to implement the recommendations, identify the key parties responsible, and the time frame. The implementation is the key to the process that promotes compatibility and defends against encroachment.