International Music & Wellness Council (IMWC) is a non- profit which helps children and adults with special needs through music therapy treatments. We also provide professional trainings to existing therapists in order to help them develop their expertise and skills in the field of Music Therapy so that they may effectively treat those with special needs.
What is Music Therapy?
Music Therapy is a powerful instrument used to improve the overall quality of life, from helping people cope with stress (developing resilience ) to helping manage daily reactions to everyday problems. More specifically, Music Therapy is a psychological and clinical intervention prescribed to those deeply affected by a range of physical, psychological, emotional, cognitive, and social conditions.
Music Therapy has two primary modalities:
1. Active Therapy (based on musical improvisation with conventional and non-conventional instruments),
2. Receptive Therapy (based on listening and on the personal “musical history” of the patient).
During the clinical sessions these 2 techniques can be combined, but very often they are used separately, because their use depends on the conditions and the need of the patients.
Prof. Angelo Molino was Invited by CCTV (China Center TV, the predominant state TV broadcaster in mainland China.) in Nov. 2016, to share live on air about his music therapy method and philosophy, as an European music therapy expert
Music Composed for Therapy by Professor Angelo Molino
How We Help
We are able to provide music therapy to those who will greatly benefit from treatment in senior care homes, hospital rehabilitation centers, wellness centers, schools and child facilities, and for those receiving care at home and many other locations.
Frequently Asked Questions
How does music therapy help children and teens with Autism ?
Clinical studies have shown that music therapy for children and teens with autism and social communication disorders can improve social behaviors, increase focus and attention, increase communication attempts, reduce anxiety and improve body awareness and coordination.
What will the music therapist work on with the child?
Goal areas differ for each child, and one goal may be focused on and achieved first in order to succeed at a future goal.
What is a music therapy session like?
Interacting with a new therapist may be hard form some children. Therapists from our council are sensitive to a wide variety of preferences and personalities and can adapt to any particular challenge. A problematic situation often turns into a goal during music therapy sessions can take place 1:1, with parents or siblings, or in a group setting with other children, depending on the goal area and the personal needs of every child.
How does music therapy help Adults?
Adults of all ages can benefit from music therapy services. Our therapists use music therapy techniques in order that our clients would experience success outside of therapy with skills learned or relearned in the sessions. Discharge of Stress Music therapy Session.
The Council’s professionals prepare specific personalized receptive or mixed music therapy sessions, which allow the user with short / medium term therapeutic goals to regenerate his emotional balance and to be able to face situations of his daily life or in any environment ( for example working) with the maximum of resilience and without suffering a load of excessive stress that can be managed.
How does music therapy help Senior Citizens?
The Music therapy methods of the Council’s professors take the residual potential of a mind to develop it at the highest levels of operation. We guide the human being behind the disease and work to bring the abilities and life of that person to the surface
Often the elder people afflicted by the suffering of dementia, may not be able to communicate as they did in their past normal life but through the stimulation of music therapy and the direction of our professional therapists, they can have an “awakening”, even listening for example their favorite songs when they were younger and repeating some words of them. This is one of the basic effects on which the music therapist will build his work sessions.