Maraviroc is the generic name given to a family of drugs known as antiviral medications that prevent certain viral cells from multiplying in your body and is used with other drugs to treat CCR5-tropic immunodeficiency virus (HIV) type 1. It is not a cure for HIV or AIDS.
It is suggested no alcohol not even moderate drinking while using this drug as the drug’s effectiveness may be decreased and the side effects may be increased.
At this time the medical community defines moderate consumption of alcohol as no more than two drinks per day and no more than 14 drinks per week. If anything more than that it is considered an unhealthy dependency on alcohol that may have adverse social, family and health consequences.
If a person drinks only once or twice a week but drinks on the same days each week and more than two drinks this is considered as an alcohol dependency.
If a person binge drinks at any time during the week this is also considered as alcoholism.
Some consider alcoholism as a disease while others consider it an addiction which is the result of personal choice and character fault. This school of thought blames the alcoholism on life style choices.
Personally I consider alcoholism a genetic tendency as I have seen families of alcoholics even when they live far apart. These unfortunate people are probably dependent on alcohol from the first drink.
When alcohol interacts with prescription over the counter drugs it usually results in negative health effects most especially liver damage as the main organ affected.
Before using Maraviroc advise your doctor if you are allergic to any other drug or substance, if you are using dietary or herbal supplements, are pregnant, plan to be or are breastfeeding, kidney disease, liver disease, hepatitis B or C, heart disease, low blood pressure, any type of allergy, circulation problems or a history of stroke.
Less serious side effects are cold symptoms such as stuffy nose, sneezing, cough, sore throat, diarrhea, constipation, insomnia, swelling, problems urinating, muscle or joint pain, dizzy or mild skin rash. If these occur call your physician for advice.
Serious side effects are severe allergic reactions such as hives difficult breathing, tight chest, swelling of the mouth, face, lips or tongue, low fever, itching, nausea, upper stomach pain, loss of appetite, dark urine, clay coloured stools, jaundice, skin rash, bruisibg, severe tingling, numb, pain, muscle weakness, tingling, weakness, chest pain, heavy feeling, pain spreading to arm or shoulder, nausea, sweating, ill feeling, cold sores, sores on genitals or anal area, white patches or sores inside your mouth or on your lips, signs of a new infection such as fever, chills, cough or flu symptoms.If these occur get emergency medical help.
This site serves as an information source only and does not dispense medical advice or any other kind of advice. If you are seeking medical advice you are advised to consult your own physician.
Maraviroc Alcohol Maraviroc Alcohol
Return from Maraviroc Alcohol to home page