Growing Schools has been re-launched as Countryside Classroom, the largest ever partnership of organisations who are committed to helping children learn about food, farming and/or the natural environment.
It is the vision of Countryside Classroom that schools and teachers across the UK will embrace food, farming and the natural environment as essential components of a broad and balanced curriculum, incorporating them into day-to-day learning. As a result of this, every child will have the opportunity to learn about and experience these topics in diverse ways that are increasingly supported by experiences outside the classroom.
Rothamsted is the largest agricultural research centre in the UK and almost certainly the oldest agricultural research station in the world. Its scientific research ranges from studies of genetics, biochemistry, cell biology and soil processes to investigations at the ecosystem ... Read more
Most educational opportunities at RBGE are focussed on their four sites in Scotland, but they also publish a number of teaching and learning resources.Read more
Kew produces a range of online resources, and organises many educational activities on site. They also offer a huge range of specialist advice services such as plant identification.Read more
The RHS is dedicated to advancing horticulture and promoting good gardening.Their main website has a huge range of gardening advice and information, and there is a dedicated schools website www.rhs.org.uk/schoolgardeningRead more
SAPS aim is to improve teaching and learning in plant science and molecular biology. The website offer primary & secondary school teaching resources, plus much more science information.Read more
Science Learning Centres are a joint initiative between the DfE and the Wellcome Trust. They provide continuing professional development for everyone involved in science education, at all levels, through their network of ten centres across the country, plus an ... Read more
The Sensory Trust promotes and implements an inclusive approach to the design and management of outdoor space, richer connections between people and place, and equality of access for all people regardless of age, disability or background.Read more
The Soil Association is a campaigning and certification organisation that promotes sustainable organic farming. It can organise farm visits and has a range of teaching resources on the website.Read more
SSAT believe that teachers make students’ lives. Their mission is now to help teachers carry out this vital job even better, more confidently and more professionally than before. The website provides many resources for teachers to achieve SSAT mission.Read more
Sustain, the alliance for better food and farming, runs the Childrens' Food Campaign which aims to improve young people's health and well-being through better food and food teaching.Read more