lathbridge History, Family Crest & Coats of Arms
- Origins Available:
The roots of the Anglo-Saxon name lathbridge come from when the family resided in the village of Lethbridge located in the county of Devon.
Early Origins of the lathbridge family
The surname lathbridge was first found in Devon where they held a family seat from very ancient times, some say well before the Norman Conquest and the arrival of Duke William at Hastings in 1066 A.D.
Important Dates for the lathbridge family
This web page shows only a small excerpt of our lathbridge research. Another 69 words (5 lines of text) are included under the topic Early lathbridge History in all our PDF Extended History products and printed products wherever possible.
lathbridge Spelling Variations
The English language only became standardized in the last few centuries; therefore, spelling variations are common among early Anglo-Saxon names. As the form of the English language changed, even the spelling of literate people's names evolved. lathbridge has been recorded under many different variations, including Lethbridge, Lethbrige, Letbridge, Letteridge and others.
Early Notables of the lathbridge family (pre 1700)
More information is included under the topic Early lathbridge Notables in all our PDF Extended History products and printed products wherever possible.
Migration of the lathbridge family
For many English families, the political and religious disarray that shrouded England made the far away New World an attractive prospect. On cramped disease-ridden ships, thousands migrated to those British colonies that would eventually become Canada and the United States. Those hardy settlers that survived the journey often went on to make important contributions to the emerging nations in which they landed. Analysis of immigration records indicates that some of the first North American immigrants bore the name lathbridge or a variant listed above: Samuel Letteridge, who settled in Virginia in 1767; George Lethbridge settled in Philadelphia in 1820.