About the IAEA
Purpose and Objectives
IAEA Board of Trustees
Join the IAEA
Apply for membership
41st Annual Conference (2015)
41st Annual Conference (2015)
41st annual conference (2015)
The Three Most Important Considerations in Testing: Validity, Validity, Validity
A Preoperative Index for Construct Validity
Judgmental procedures fall short of restoring the desirable attributes of the test...
An evaluation of information and communication technology in improving validity of assessment items in test development
It is no exaggeration to use the word “,revolution”, when talking about...
An evaluation of the awareness of the need to ensure validity in the continuous assessment component of examination by some Lecturers of Kaduna Polytechnic
Marks emanating from continuous assessment (CA) being forty (40) of each subject ,or...
Analytical report as a tool in ensuring the validity of examinations
It is crucial for educational organization, especially those which main focus is...
Application of Technology in Validation of Examination in Developing Economies: Kenya’s Context
The validity of examinations has continued to attract attention only among researchers...
Ascertaining the Credibility of Assessment Instruments through the Application of Item
Item Response Theory (IRT) is a paradigm for the design, analysis, scoring of test...
Assessing ICT literacy via computer
ICT literacy is about using computer technology to access, manage, evaluate and create ,information,...
Assessment of valid science practical skills for Nigerian secondary schools: Teachers’ practices and militating factors
The teaching of science in Nigerian secondary schools has always assumed an important...
Best Practice in Handling Cases of Missing or Incomplete Values in Data Analysis: A Guide against Eliminating Other Important Data
A common issue encountered in data analysis is the presence of missing values in...
Conceptualization and Implementation of Continuous Assessment in Tanzania: Fit for the purpose?
Continuous assessment in Tanzania aims at ensuring that students’, learning...
Content validation and rubric development of language tools tested in multi-state multi-language project: Challenges Faced
Validity of tools is a key issue in large scale assessments. For any assessment to...
Differential item functioning of 2010 junior secondary school certificate mathematics examination in Southern Educational zone of Cross River State, Nigeria
The research is aimed at finding out whether the 2010 junior secondary certificate...
Dismantling Face Validity - Why the Concept Must Live On, But the Term Must Finally Die
Empirical analysis of item difficulty and discrimination indices of senior school certificate multiple choice biology tests in Nigeria
This study aimed at obtaining empirical data on the item difficulty and discrimination...
Evaluation of Validity of Computer Based Test Items in National Open University of Nigeria
Multiple Choice Items (MCI) are one of the most commonly used Computer Based Assessment...
Factorial Validation of an Academic Environment Scale for Undergraduate Education Students in Jos, Nigeria
This study developed and validated an academic environment assessment scale for undergraduate...
Factors influencing Validity of Classroom Test Construction and Challenges experienced by trainers in Early Childhood Development and Education Programmes, Nairobi County, Kenya
The study sought to examine the factors influencing the validity of classroom test...
How do you use technology to improve flexibility in assessment and maintain high standards of validity?
Improving validity of test items through credible and robust trial testing exercise: Neco approach
The underlying concept of whether an item, is testing what is supposed to test and...
Improving Validity of Tests through Improved Test Development Procedures
Psychometricians over the world are of the view that validity and reliability of...
[ Placeholder content for popup link ]
WordPress Download Manager - Best Download Management Plugin