How to Avoid Katsaridaphobia in Children in North Carolina
Perhaps, most of you might have heard the term “phobia.” It is commonly discussed in psychology subjects and is referred to as the irrational and excessive fear of an object, animal, person, situation, and many others. This should not be interchanged with mere fear because a phobia is on another level. Its symptoms include panic attacks, pain, and tightness in the chest, choking sensation, shortness of breath that can lead to fainting, trembling, chills, and sweating.
To say you have a phobia, you need to be clinically diagnosed to say so. Phobia is a very difficult disorder to cope up with. It can impede a person from living his life to the fullest. It can push a person to do irrational things just to satiate his extreme fear over a certain object.
Did you know that there are also phobias that relate to pests?
One of the most common pest phobias is known as the Katsaridaphobia, or the fear of cockroaches. When a person has this disorder, he will do anything to avoid any sign of cockroach to enter his home even when it means implementing rash, irrational, and harmful decisions. The only way to cure a person of a phobia is through psychological intervention. The reason why a person develops katsaridaphobia are the instances when they are stuck in a situation where they feel like their safety is compromised by cockroaches.
One common example is being locked in a closet filled with cockroaches. Another is when a cockroach crawls unwantedly over a child’s body or hand. If you can imagine, there are various ways in which a cockroach can inflict extreme fear over a person. But before any of us or our children develop such illness, we need to learn how to prevent cockroaches in our home. As for local cockroach expert in Mooresville NC, there are much more reasons to prevent their existence in our home.
The Need for Cockroach Extermination
Apart from the fact that the existence of cockroaches can lead to psychological disorders, there are other various reasons why we need to exterminate these creatures for good from our home. Cockroaches are one of the most disgusting creatures on Earth. It is also one of the most dangerous pests of all time. They have no regard for hygiene and personal space. They infest wherever and whenever they want. Can you imagine, there are times when we host social events, they invite themselves over and scare our guests away!
Although some families think that cockroaches are fragile and harmless to humans, they’re completely wrong. Cockroaches can bring various diseases to humankind. We all know that these creatures establish their habitat in the dirtiest places such as sewers and drainage pipes. They feed on the most disgusting things, including the carcasses of their fellow insects and other animals. Cockroaches can bring Salmonella Typhi that causes Typhoid fever. They can also bring Poliomyelitis and Dysentery among many others. With this said, cockroaches can bring thousands of bacteria in our home. With their fast speed, who knows how much they can spread indoors?
To think that cockroaches crawl over our accessories and gadgets, even our utensils, it is hard to imagine how much bacteria they can acquire from touching our own belongings. What’s worse, it can be very detrimental to the health of our children who have a sensitive stomach and immune system. Cockroaches are very annoying creatures. They have no regard for personal space. They infest anytime and anywhere they want as long as they get what they aim.
Cockroaches are very Durable Creatures
Exterminating cockroaches can be really hard work. You will need skill, knowledge, and cunning. Getting rid of cockroaches is not an easy task. As we have said earlier, they are very durable creatures. I am sure that most of you think that they can cockroach’s head off will take care of it for good. But actually, poses harm to our family. Without its head cockroach can still live for days. Imagine how much more bacteria it can spread in that timeframe. And without its sense of sight or smell, he is unguided in his actions and activities. Who knows what it can do without its head? There are also some people who prefer flushing them down the drain or the toilet. But they don’t know that cockroaches can hold their breath for at least 30 minutes under water. You will not be killing the cockroach. Rather, you will only send it home, ready to infest your house once again.
DIY Tips against Cockroaches
To get rid of cockroaches for good, you will need a regular cleanup in your home.
Consistent vacuuming is essential especially after eating to get rid of crumbs that attract cockroaches. Although this might not get rid of existing roaches in your home, it will help prevent others from getting inside. Plus, when we clean, we often leave out the unused spaces of our home. For all we know, these might be where cockroaches brood to infest our homes.
You can also seek help from stores and buy insecticides or chemicals that can help kill cockroaches inside your home. But remember, using these DIY tools for extermination requires ample knowledge and skill. Sure, you will be killing the cockroaches. But do you have any idea what damage it can bring to your family and to your home in general? Say, you did a good job in placing traps and spraying insect repellants, how sure are you that you have targeted them where it hurts? How sure are you that they are not inclined to go back?
See, you need somebody to assist you and ensure the effectiveness of the chemicals – someone who knows exactly what they are dealing with to get rid of cockroaches for good. But to do that, you are going to need a competent pest control provider in your area.
The Search for the Best Pest Control Service
If you are in North Carolina, there are various pest control companies to choose from. But you need to consider several factors to determine which one is the best.
First of all, you need to consider the knowledge of an exterminator. They must have state-of-the-art information about termite activity to know exactly what they are dealing with and how to deal with. Without the knowledge in their line of work, they might cause more damage to your home. Knowledge gives the exterminators the power to assess pest activity and analyze which procedures are fit for the case. A pest control service must also uphold their public and scientific duty by updating their data and intel about the changing and evolving activity of pest life. This is essential to match the necessary procedures to the various cases of pest infestation.
Skill is one of the most vital tools for an effective pest control service. Do they have sufficient training and information about their line of work? What about their expertise in the use of chemicals and treatments? Are they skillful in using the different methods for extermination? An exterminator must be highly-trained to carry over procedures as effectively as they can to make sure that they eradicate all pest activity for good. Without skill, and cunning in their methods of pest extermination, you will be wasting time, effort, and money to a company’s service.
In addition, remember that the exterminators will be dealing with wooden floorings and walls. Feel free to ask if the chemicals and treatments are safe for your home. What if it ever chooses your property? Better yet, what if it causes illness to your family and pets? Especially when you have children, it is best to inquire whether the residues will be safe for human contact or not. Or if you have a garden, how sure that it will not compromise the health of the plants? To the methods and chemicals used is very important to assess especially when you do not want to deal and maintenance and repairs to your property.
We all have financial obligations in the community. As responsible parents and homeowners, we must avoid budget constraints for the sake of our family. But this should not be a reason to have the pest-free life you deserve. Which is why you are going to need a pest control provider who provides competent service at a very affordable price. As much as possible, avoid those companies that provide vague descriptions of their services and prices. You would not want to be charged with an expensive lump of money after every treatment has been done.
Lastly, you need to consider the professionalism of the staff and exterminators. They must be willing to treat you in a nice and professional manner in the sense that they are willing to listen avidly to your concerns and queries and provide information without any form of treachery or deceit. To prove their statements about the quality and reliability of their service, you can check the reviews of people who have encountered their provisions and amenities. From there you can check if the pest control company in Mooresville NC is right for you.
Lake Norman Pest Control is at your Service
If you’re looking for the best-reviewed cockroach exterminator in North Carolina, you have come to the right place. We are proud to present Lake Norman pest control, providing service for more than 50 years. This company has been founded by Sam and Fran Newman and has dedicated itself to satisfaction and excellence ever since. Lake Norman Pest Control has been saving lives and giving smiles to its customers, leaving them amazed of love the exterminators can do.
At Lake Norman Pest Control, they ensure that every worker has state-of-the-art training and updating of methods. The exterminators are dedicated to using botanical and human-friendly means of pest control. So even if you have children, pets, or plants, you won’t have to worry about a thing. Leave it all to the exterminators: explain to you everything you need to know without any hint of deceit.
At Lake Norman Pest Control, we provide the best service by offering a basic plan for only $30.00 per month. This plan covers the interior and exterior of your home, exterminating most kinds of pests, especially cockroaches. Literally, kill multiple pests with one stone. In our humble company, we are willing to provide all the necessary treatments without any additional charges. All you needed to you sit back, relax, and watch as the exterminators ward off any threat regarding pests.