Have you ever heard someone saying that they’re going for a comprehensive physical exam, and you wondered what it meant? In simple terms, this is an exam aimed at evaluating your overall health condition. This assessment has two main objectives: determining whether you have any health conditions such as diabetes or cancer before they become unmanageable and preventing future health problems due to things such as stress, lifestyle, and heredity.
What Does a Comprehensive Physical Exam Involve?
When you go for this evaluation, several things go into it. One of these things is checking your health history. During this part of the process, the assessment professional seeks to know whether you’ve had any changes or new developments in your health history.
Some of the things he/she may ask are things regarding your relationships and job, medications, supplements, allergies, and whether you’ve had a recent surgery. The other thing which happens during phisical exams miami is checking vital signs. This step involves checking your respiratory rate, heart rate, and blood pressure.
From there, the next step is conducting a visual exam. The medical professional checks and reviews your body parts for any visual signs of health issues.
The body parts checked are the abdomen, chest, eyes, head, musculoskeletal system (wrists and hands), and the nervous system. He/she will proceed to a physical examination which involves things such as testing reflexes, touching body parts to detect abnormalities, examining your genitalia, and other processes. From there, lab tests may be conducted to determine whether you have issues with your blood, liver, and kidney. These lab tests may include thyroid screening, diabetes screening, cholesterol tests, and many others.
Examples of Possible Screening Procedures During a Comprehensive Physical Exam
There are different types of screening procedures designed for men and women. In other cases, these procedures are the same. The processed which apply to women only are mammograms and breast exams to detect breast cancer and other issues, pap smear to detect cervical cancer, a pelvic exam, cholesterol test, and osteoporosis screening.
For men, they may go through things such as prostate cancer screening, testicular exams, and cholesterol tests. Screening evaluations for both men and women include HIV, STIs, hepatitis C, diabetes, lung cancer, colon cancer, depression, etc.
These are some of the things you need to know about comprehensive physical exams. To ensure you’re well-prepared for this assessment, be sure to note down your allergies, your current medications, recent symptoms, lab results of tests done recently, devices you’re using such as pacemakers, and contact information of your current doctor. Don’t forget to ask the examining professional any relevant questions you may have.