JIS: Jamaica will join other countries in celebrating this year’s 51st commemoration of International Literacy Day on Friday, September 8 under the theme ‘Literacy in a Digital World’.
The United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) promotes the day to underline the significance of literacy in the development and advancement of all nations globally.
In keeping with the Ministry of Education, Youth and Information’s mantra – ‘Every Child Can Learn, Every Child Must Learn’, schools are encouraged to use the day as a national initiative to promote reading and literacy across Jamaica.
In a bulletin issued by the Ministry, it was noted that all six education regions will be hosting activities to celebrate the day.
Regions one and six will jointly host an event with a national focus. This will be held at the Pembroke Hall Primary School auditorium in St. Andrew and will involve the participation of institutions from both regions.
The keynote speaker will be Literacy Programme Coordinator in the School of Education, University of the West Indies, Mona, Dr. Clement Lambert. Other activities by the Ministry include exercises for which students are being encouraged to ‘wear-a-word’ and explore their meanings, synonyms, antonyms, and use them in sentences; students sharing stories and poems with each other from a book, tablet or any other technological device; and youngsters designing posters to raise awareness of literacy and its link to sustaining societies, and displaying these around the school or in their community.
Meanwhile, parents, past students and community members are encouraged to visit schools to read to students from their favourite books.
Additionally, teachers are urged to assist students in developing an appreciation for the the role of literacy and reading in personal, national and global development.
CAPTION: Minister of Education, Youth and Information, Senator the Hon. Ruel Reid (left), skillfully manages to keep the attention of students of Fundaciones El Centro, as he engages them in a reading session at the school’s location in Kingston, on Tuesday, May 9. (File)