Karelian Bear Dog
Navigate through the tabs
Navigate through the tabs below to view the breed's info of your interest.
The breed's info is divided in four sections; namely:
the breed's history ,
the breed's main stats ,
the dog's potential health issues
and finally, how the breed scored in 26 different categories.
All the above information should give you a respectively good overview for the dog of your interest.
Dog Breed's Main Info
The Breed's History:
The area once known as Karelia in northern Europe has always been populated by tough, big-game hunting canines. For a long time, similar dogs had been bred in Karelia for hunting large game. These dogs were known to have followed the first settlers to Finland thousands of years ago. These early tribes of people survived on what they could hunt, which is why dogs that were hardy, brave and tough enough to tackle bear, wolf and lynx were so important.
The Karelian Bear Dog closely resembles the Russo-European Laika. It evolved in the part of Finland claimed by the Soviet Union in the early part of the 20th century. The Karelian Bear Dog, which is more numerous outside its own country than any of the Russian Laikas, is used by elk hunters throughout Finland, Sweden and Norway. It was first exhibited at a dog show in Helsinki in 1936, but after World War II the breed almost became extinct.
All modern Karelians are traced back to forty dogs found and saved after the war. The Karelian Bear Dog was very popular toward the turn of the century when it could be found in vast numbers. Its numbers declined in the 1960s, but its popularity has been on the rise and it is now being bred in North America and many European countries. Among this avid hunter's game are the buck, wild boar, hare and moose.
He is also fearless enough to fight the wolf and bear and therefore functioned as a protector by hunting these large wild animals. In his homeland of Finland, the dog is used mostly for elk and is the favored dog of native big-game hunters.
Country of Origin:
1 foot, 8 inch. to 2 feet (50,8 to 60,96 cm)
44 to 65 pounds (19,95 to 29,49 Kg)
10 to 12 years
Potential Health Issues:
First Time Owners:
Affection With Family:
Health and Grooming
Easy To Groom:
Weight Gain Potential:
Barking or Howling:
Need For Exercise
Our Mobile Application
Check out Our Mobile Application "Dog Breeds Central"