The Beardsley Zoo, in Bridgeport, Connecticut, is the only zoo in the state of Connecticut. The beauty of the entire complex, both the park and zoo, is one of the reasons Bridgeport has earned the nickname "The Park City."
In 1884, the city contracted Frederick Law Olmsted, famous for creating New York City's Central Park, to create a design for Beardsley Park. Mr. Olmsted's plan was to create a simple, rural park for the residents to enjoy.
The City of Bridgeport was also home of Mr. Phineas T. Barnum and his world famous circus. At the time of the Park's creation, Mr. Barnum usually exercised his animals through the streets of Bridgeport, and it was common to see zebras and camels walking up and down the city's Main Street. After Beardsley Park was created, Mr. Barnum and the circus company began exercising the animals there.
In 1920, Bridgeport Parks Commissioner, Mr. Wesley Hayes, began a campaign to create a City Zoo within the Park. He requested that the citizens of Bridgeport contribute animals to start the zoo. In the first year there were eighteen exotic birds donated. Barnum and Bailey Circus also donated some of their retired animals to the zoo.
In 1997, the Connecticut Zoological Society, a nonprofit support group for the zoo, purchased the zoo from the city and continues to run the zoo as a private, nonprofit institution with assistance from the State of Connecticut and the City of Bridgeport.
CONNECTICUT DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY AND ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AND BEARDSLEY ZOO SPONSORING AMNESTY DAY FOR PROHIBITED EXOTIC ANIMALS
Mar 25, 2012; HARTFORD, Conn., March 21 -- The Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection issued the following news release: The...
Thursday: Gov. Malloy Keynotes Public-Private Partnership Workshop; Keynotes Northeast Energy Efficiency Summit; Speaks at Breast Cancer Fundraiser; Tours Beardsley Zoo
Jun 13, 2012; HARTFORD, Conn. -- The following information was released by the office of the governor of Connecticut: On Thursday morning,...