An IDS (Intrusion Detection System) is an automated system that detects unauthorized access to a network information system. Unauthorized access provides information about the confidentiality, integrity or information of information. This can range from hits by specialized hackers to script kiddies that are automated - and not used. This in combination with a Intrusion Prevention System (IPS) is an Intrusion Detection Prevention System (IDP).
What is an Intrusion Prevention System (IPS) ?
An Intrusion Prevention System is a security device that can monitor network and / or system activities for undesirable behavior. An Intrusion Prevention system can react to this in real time by blocking or preventing such activities. Network-based IPS systems operate 'in-line' so that all network traffic can be monitored for malicious codes and attacks. If an attack is detected, the IPS can stop (suspect) the "suspicious" packets, while the remaining network traffic can continue.
Role of an IDP
The role of an IDP system in the network is often confused with access control and application layer firewalls. Although there are similarities in the way that IDP and firewalls approach a network or system, there are fundamental differences regarding the security functionalities. An IDP is in most cases designed to operate completely invisibly on the network. An IDP does not have an IP address for the segments that are monitored and do not respond directly to the network traffic, but monitor the network traffic silently as it passes. Important advantages are that the IDP technology gives a better insight with regard to various operations that take place on the network such as overactive hosts, bad logons, unauthorized content and other network and application layer functionalities.
Infradata: Experts in IDS, IDP and IPS (Intrusion Prevention and Intrusion Detection)
Infradata has years of experience and a surplus of expertise with the integration of IDP solutions within large and complex networks. With high partner statuses at both Juniper Networks and TippingPoint, Infradata can create the best conditions for creating the most efficient solution for your network.
Would you like more information about IDS, IDP and IPS?
Contact us. We are happy to help you.
Talk with an Expert
Speak with an industry expert. Give us a call or leave a message. Our team is ready for your business.