The demand for qualified professionals in STEAM has grown in recent years. At an international level, there is a growing implementation of these competencies in schools, thus adapting education to the new needs of the 21st century.
It is a new model of learning based on the teaching of these five disciplines not as separate areas of knowledge, but in an integrated manner, with an interdisciplinary and applied approach.
STEAM Education allows students to develop skills and competences related to innovation, whether or not they are going to work in a scientific-technical profession.
Greenpower Inspiring Engineers is a project currently underway in many schools in the UK.
Greenpower helps students to work as a team and develop STEAM skills through the construction of electric and ecological cars with which they will later compete, so the motivation is even greater. In this way, the positive perception of science, technology, innovation and the environment is promoted among students.
The Greenpower project also aims to promote connections between education and the business world. In order to do this, students must seek the necessary sponsorship and resources to achieve their project, so they also work on communication and sales skills, as well as developing a business plan, which they have to prepare and explain to the sponsors.
This innovative methodology based on real challenges and other activities complements the learning of scientific and technological content with the development of divergent thinking and the increase of student creativity.
The course combines disciplines such as mechanics, electronics, computer science and artificial intelligence. Students learn from diodes, resistors, plate modules, motors, sensors... and are even able to program small robots.
Our teenagers acquire certain skills and abilities. On the one hand, they learn the necessary computer programming skills for the robot to work and, on the other, they develop logical thinking. In this subject, students are faced with challenges that include physical, mathematical and technological concepts. In this way, students work on concepts that they have studied in other subjects in a practical way. This motivates students to learn these subjects, as they can experience the practical applications of what they have studied theoretically.
In addition, within the framework of this course, several groups of students compete in the prestigious international FIRST LEGO League (FLL).
Bee Bots are fun and friendly robotic bees with which our children learn different skills. They are part of the classroom and are a new and motivating resource for children.
Different dynamics are favoured in the classroom, enabling children to overcome daily challenges by putting into practice different concepts and cognitive skills, to learn programming languages in a natural and playful way, to reflect, anticipate, rehearse, fail, test, give free rein to their creativity and imagination to design and create solutions... All this by encouraging students to develop talent, communication, entrepreneurial spirit and their curiosity to discover and learn.
FIRST LEGO LEAGUE
Students participate each year in the international FIRST LEGO League (FLL) competition, using thematic challenges to engage students in research, problem solving and science.
"STEAM skills guarantee future employability"
Luciano Azpiazu, Dean of the Official College of Industrial Engineers of Bizkaia (COIIB)