National Programme for Culture 2007-2012
Activities have been developed for recording and cataloging of cultural expressions especially those areas considered to be mostly expressed by tourist resorts with high population growth rate.
Some Regional Units have been identified and proposed projects for the preservation and safeguarding of cultural manifestations, such as:
- The Preservation for butterfly four mirrors, Sonora, in order to protect the cocoon which are made with the tenábaris used by dancers pajkola (Pascola).
- Programs of qualification for craftspeople in Queretaro, in coordination with the CDI.
- The traditional “milpa” and the use of backyard: Source of life and health. Diffusion or no knowledge on the production of food basic to consumption in the cornfield and into the backyard, as to as its use for the power supply or and preservation for family health.
- Workshops to ethnobotanic Kumiai child. For the year the use, knowledge and beliefs associated with the plant world has been passed from generation to generation. Today these have been lost to ancestral practices so that older people who still dominate the world of plants can be our to show us the path to recover the wisdom on these important resources that make up the heritage and ecologic reserve community.
This line of action is also developed by some of the institutes comprising the National Movement for Cultural Diversity in Mexico.
According to data from the National Institute of Indian Languages (INALI), Linguistic diversity in Mexico is as follows: 11 families of languages, 68 language groups and 364 linguistic variants. Accordingly, the government's attention is directed to the linguistic and cultural diversity through educational, health, access to justice and social development, among others.
For the program of the Directorate General of Popular Culture, the first requirement for carrying out investigations into textile iconography is an initiative of the community itself, so that involvement from the beginning of the project to the dissemination of the publication. As an example, completed the project of the “Tenangos” embroidered carried out in the municipality of the same name.
Since 2009 the INALI has collaborated with the National Forestry Commission (CONAFOR) to carry out translations into Indian languages of different informational materials. These serve two purposes: the first is to inform the indigenous population on the use of natural resources in a sustainable manner, the second is to promote a culture of conservation of natural forest resources. Until the year 2011 have been working with 17 indigenous languages.
Challenges identified in the implementation of this measure:
The challenge to overcome is the integration of the cultural sector to be a generator of resources for communities, whether through cultural tourism or supporting cultural industries and craft workshops.
Los Tenangos project was born out of the concern of women Embroiderers to identify and disseminate the origin of these embroideries, the result was published in 2008 under the title Los tenangos, mitos y ritos bordados. Arte Textil hidalguense.
In 2010 the INALI made the standard of competence "in their mother tongue attention to indigenous language-speaking population in social programs" in order to certify interpreters and translators of indigenous languages that work as promoters of the Oportunidades program of the Ministry of Social Development ( SEDESOL) in indigenous communities.
Identified by the program of Popular Art, craft objects by their physical characteristics and properties of raw material, technical, technology, finishes, presentation, dimensions, origin, and cultural characteristics, for each of the States of the Republic root. Disseminate inventories of the folk arts and crafts, information through printed and electronic means accessible to the public.
In the 2010-2011 period 19 interpreters have been certified developers in the field of social development and made 23 reviewers of the same. This ensures efficiency and quality of public welfare focused on the welfare of children and families speakers of national languages.