Creativity Across Cultures: Fostering Creativity Inside and Outside the Classroom
Creativity is highly valued in the global workforce, and educational policymakers around the world have embraced creativity as an important outcome in national curriculum documents. How are global educators fostering creativity both inside and outside schools? In this webinar for the edWeb.net edGlobal community, presenter Karen Collias, founder of Knowledge Without Borders, discussed how teachers and students combine elements of creativity in teaching and learning in formal education with research findings from a variety of countries (China, Australia, and Canada) and the International Baccalaureate program. Karen also explored concrete examples of creativity in informal educational settings with examples from Peru and Turkey. A design thinking challenge in Istanbul, Turkey, engaged secondary students in solving a local community problem. A collaborative partnership, Nourish to Flourish, in Arequipa, Peru, focuses on pre-school and primary students and their families working together to strengthen community identity. View the webinar if you are thinking about how to inspire creativity in the learning process.
Earn your CE Certificate for viewing this recording: Join the free edGlobal community on edWeb.net and take a quiz to receive a CE Certificate for viewing this webinar. Past webinars, presentation slides, and CE quizzes are available in the Webinar Archives folder of the Community Toolbox.
The edGlobal: Sharing Education Ideas Around the World community is a professional learning community that explores education initiatives around the world and provides a forum for a global exchange of ideas. This online collaborative community provides a forum where educators, administrators, government officials and corporate executives from around the world can come together to discuss various topics in global education, market trends, and opportunities for sharing international education information. This program is co-hosted by edWeb.net and the Education Division of the Software & Information Industry Association (SIIA).
Follow us on Twitter @edWebnet to learn about upcoming webinars and special events!