If you were able to make it through those long and dreadful 26.2 miles, then recovery will be a much simpler task. However, the process of recovering after a marathon cannot be overlooked; marathons place tremendous stress on the body which can cause damage, despite the amount of preparation previously done. Marathons commonly harm the muscular and immune system of a runner, which is why runners often find themselves sore, in pain, and more susceptible to colds after running a marathon. If disregarded, these minor injuries can escalate and cause much greater problems. However, the damage is reversible with just a little effort on your end and help from MaxWell Medical!
Below are some tips to help you recover in the fastest and safest way, so the marathon can be more of an achievement rather than a regret:
Hydrate and Eat- Recieving a medal for crossing the finish line might call for a celebration, but only after your body is rewarded too. Immediately after running, remember to drink plenty of water or fluids-to restore important electrolytes- and eat a light snack. Your post-marathon appetite might not allow you to eat a large meal, however, its best to eat a fruit or snack rich in carbohydrates and proteins that can easily be digested and supply your body with the macros it needs. This will effectively work to replenish glucose levels and begin the repair process of any damaged muscle cells.
Schedule a Manual Therapy Session- After 24 to 48 hours past the marathon day, it’s time to get manual therapy to ease your body of any pain or discomfort following the marathon. Constant running boosts your metabolism, converting more and more oxygen and glucose to lactic acid and other wastes. With manual therapy, applying gentle pressure to muscles, joints, and tissues will help release these wastes, which further relaxes the tension in the muscles, improves circulation, and eases any muscle pain.
Perform Therapeutic Exercises- Full recovery can only be done gradually through therapeutic exercises. Take a pause on your normal workout routine, and spend a few days following the marathon relaxing. After 4 to 5 days, add stretches to your daily routine. Since running utilizes the legs and calves the most, perform thigh or hamstring stretches to ease the stress of your leg muscles. Stretches should be followed by cross training or low intensity exercises. Cross training is described as low-impact and low-intensity activities such as cycling, swimming, or using the elliptical. Performing such activities will not only improve muscle strength and fitness, but it will also improve your running endurance and allow you to recover fully.
Crossing the finish line only signifies the start of the path to recovery. The real finish line lies ahead, and can only be reached after returning to your better health. Follow these tips to successfully recover from the damages of a marathon, and to ultimately reach the end of the real finish line.
It’s a holiday when overeating is subjective and exercise is non-existent. But Thanksgiving does not always have to be unhealthy. And it certainly does not have to be restrictive. Here are some ways you can gobble it all up while maintaining a healthy lifestyle:
Eat breakfast- Most people make the mistake of skipping breakfast thinking they will eat less by saving up until the big meal. However, starving yourself will actually result in you binging on all the unhealthy Thanksgiving specials later on. To prevent this, make sure to have a decent sized protein-rich breakfast that will keep you satisfied for the day and will make sure you eat less during the actual meal.
Divide Your Plate- The Thanksgiving table is always filled with a huge variety of mouth-watering foods, making it difficult to eat every single item on display. Try to prevent overeating by consuming foods specific to Thanksgiving-one’s that you don’t normally eat during the year. Or if that’s too hard, eat smaller portions of everything. Additionally, don’t forget to divide your plate into as many food groups as you can-vegetables, fruits, grains, proteins, etc. This will allow you to have some balance in your big meal. Remember to eat slowly, to savour each bite and be able to recognize when you are full, so you can prevent yourself from eating too much.
Hydrate- Being too engrossed in eating all those delicious foods, one easily forgets the importance of water. Being dehydrated, your body’s thirst can easily be mistaken as hunger, causing you to overeat. Try to drink as much water as you can to balance out the quantity of food you are consuming and to prevent overeating.
Take a Walk- Just because the meal is over doesn’t mean the day is over! Once dinner ends, go out for a walk and maybe even invite your family. Walking is a simple way of adding some physical activity to your Thanksgiving routine, when working out seems to be too much. However, once the holidays end, motivate yourself to gradually return back to your normal healthy food and exercise routine. This is done easiest by taking it one step at a time and disregarding any guilt you have about overeating.
This Thanksgiving, MaxWell Medical doesn’t want you to gobble til you wobble!
If there are two things
we all share as New Yorker’s, it is our unfaltering determination and our ability
to speed walk & expertly weave through pedestrian traffic. So, why should
something like knee pain stop us from either of these things? Here are some of
the best ways you can limit your knee pain to regain your speed and fulfill
Build your Strength- A weak body is prone to have weak knees. Don’t let yourself fall into that position, find a workout plan that will strengthen your quadriceps. Having stronger leg muscles will remove extra stress off of your knees, allowing them to be more aligned, ensuring that you don’t have to suffer from knee pain.
Find the Perfect Shoe- Think comfort over style- find your ideal walking shoes that have the best cushioning for your feet. With great support and flexibility, not only will your feet be comfortable, but it’s also ease the pain. Replace your shoes every couple of months to make sure you never lose the support.
Avoid Sitting for Too Long- Remaining in a position for too long, especially an uncomfortable one, will stiffen up your knees and joints. Prevent this from happening by adding small movements and stretches into your daily schedule that will add more flexibility to your joints.
Find your Healthy Weight – Make sure your body weight is not adding extra pressure on your knees. Find a diet or workout plan that will best help you lose some pounds. It may be hard, but by maintaining a healthy body weight, your knees will have less pressure on them, making walking easier and less painful for you.
Don’t give up because of your knee pain! Follow these tips to overcome your pain and moonwalk through life.
As the infamous heatwaves threaten to scorch us this summer, we must fight back with a wave of our own. Here are a few ways you can get the most water in your system while having the best summer:
Eat Your Water Instead- Who said water is only for drinking? Eating water-rich fruits and vegetables like watermelons, cantaloupes, cucumbers, and tomatoes can give you the benefit of hydration with a kick of delicious flavor!
Flavor Your Water- Speaking of flavors, why not infuse slices of your favorite fruits or vegetables with the bland flavor of water for an extra pleasant sip? Trick your mouth by adding slices of strawberries, lemons, limes, or cucumbers to water for a refreshing new taste of water. Or, try sparkling water to fizz things up. You’ll forget you were ever even drinking water!
Drink Your Water with Straws- Studies show that drinking through straws actually help you drink more at a faster rate. So, fill your cups up with water and stick in your favorite straw for fast and fun hydration!
Record and Reward- Keeping track of the water you consume is a good way to create goals that will motivate you to drink more water. There are many apps available that help you keep track of your water consumption, ensuring that you stay hydrated. Yet, if you still need some more motivation, try rewarding yourself with something like a snack, after you complete every goal. That way, you will definitely drink more water!!
Increasing your water intake has never been more fun! Follow these tips to stay hydrated and be entertained for the rest of the summer!
Summer should never feel like a bummer — this is the time for outings, vacations, and that New York City HEAT. Here are some useful tips to keep yourself hydrated and in peak form for summer fun.
Stay Hydrated — You should drink 1-2 glasses of water for every hour in the sun. Replenish your electrolytes with water or coconut water — and consider investing in a water filter for an economically beneficial and environmentally friendly source of water!
Apply Sunscreen — The general rule of thumb is to apply SPF 30 or higher every 2 hours that you are planning to be sitting in the sun. Remember not to neglect facial sunscreen — SPF in your makeup is NOT enough to protect the most sensitive skin on your body from harmful UVA and UVB rays!
Take Vitamin D Supplements — Although it may seem counter-intuitive, extreme heat often forces us to go inside and miss out on a vital resource of vitamin D — the sun! Our bodies require vitamin D for essential processes such as absorbing calcium and maintaining strong, healthy bones. In order to continue your normal vitamin D consumption without increasing your risk of heatstroke outdoors, invest in Vitamin D supplements!
Exfoliate — Heat leads to sweating more… which leads to more clogged pores and dead skin cells. Keep your body silky smooth and soft by exfoliating weekly with a loofah or make your own scrub with oatmeal or sugar-based recipes you find online, and don’t forget to moisturize after!
Have your healthiest summer yet by following these tips and tricks to help you feel great.
It’s Mental Health Awareness Month, and one can never be too mindful of the impact one faces due to stress, depression, anxiety and other mental health conditions. Fortunately, there are many acts of self-care that can aid in reducing the toll of everyday stressors on your mental health, such as getting a massage!
Reduce stress and anxiety — During a massage, the body reduces its levels of a hormone called cortisol, which in high amounts can be responsible for the exacerbation of stress and anxiety levels. The release of this hormone also allows us to breathe easier, which is directly related to our ability to relax and operate in an emotionally healthier state. Furthermore, when stress levels are low, the body’s ability to heal itself is at its utmost potential.
Better Mood — Massages stimulate the release of serotonin and endorphins into the bloodstream, which are the hormones primarily responsible for elevating moods. Many studies have shown that massages can aid in combating depression in people experiencing chronic illnesses such as fibromyalgia. Pain blockers, which can reduce chronic pain, are also components that can be released into the body via a massage.
Sleep better — Receiving massages causes your muscles to relax and release tension, which enables you to sleep better at night. Sleep quality often improves because of the release of serotonin, which is often a calming agent to help you relax.
Who knew that releasing physical tension could also help release mental tension?
As Earth Day draws near, we should keep in mind that April 22nd isn’t the only day we should take care of our planet — it’s every day! Here are some simple lifestyle swaps that can help you go green:
Use reusable shopping bags! — Approximately 100,000 sea turtles and other marine animals die each year because they are strangled by bags or mistake them for food. Though plastic bags may seem like an easy way to do simple errands and grocery shopping, a simple way to help prevent the negative environmental impacts is to use reusable bags for grocery shopping — stores such as Target, Whole Foods and Trader Joe’s even give discounts for doing so!
Use reusable straws! — Even though they’re usually made of plastic, straws are too lightweight to be recycled, and end up either contaminating recycling loads or being disposed of as garbage. Instead of using a plastic straw, get a reusable straw — come in twice a week for a massage and get rewarded with your own stainless steel (and recyclable!) straw to help keep plastic out of our oceans.
Walk more! — As the weather gets warmer, it is becoming more and more tempting to leave the car keys hanging, close that Uber app, and walk to work. Conserve the earth’s fuel and use your own by getting in some exercise to start your day.
Skip bottled water! — According to Ban the Bottle, the average American used 167 disposable water bottles last year, but only recycled 38. Get a reusable water bottle to carry with you instead, so you can stay hydrated while you save the planet. Come on in twice a week and you can also win a reusable water bottle!
Change starts with simple actions, but most of all, it starts with YOU!
How Chiropractic Care Connects With America’s Favorite Pastime
Erle V. Painter is just as famous in the chiropractic world as Babe Ruth is in the sports world. For all thirteen years he was on the Yankees’ payroll, he was widely considered one of the most valuable men to the team despite not hitting a single home run. As the team chiropractor and trainer, Painter was responsible for the well-being and peak performance of the team, including Babe Ruth himself. But why was chiropractic care so important to the Yankees?
Increased flexibility and Range of Motion – Realignment of your bones and joints during an adjustment creates a foundation for better physical performance. A healthy spine helps ensure that your body’s movement at its peak efficiency.
Preventative Care – Chiropractic care undoes some of the impact your body undergoes while playing sports, decreasing your risk of injury. Strenuous workouts can overwork your muscles as they grow, causing tension to build up between your bones. Chiropractic adjustments help dissolve that tension and decrease the wear and tear on your body.
Decrease muscle soreness from intense workouts – Chiropractic care relieves soreness, stiffness and tension in the body that cause sore muscles.
Natural pain relief for joint pain – Regular adjustments can reduce inflammation and improve the affected joint and nervous system by realigning the spine.
Chiropractic care is a great way to keep one’s body in peak condition, as regular chiropractic adjustments have been proven to improve joint mobility, function, and overall health. Baseball players such as Babe Ruth relied on chiropractic care to improve muscle strength and long jump distance.
Many workplace innovations have been suggested and implemented to improve workplace ergonomics — ie. yoga balls, treadmills, and standing desks.
There has been a link between reducing sedentary time and improving physical, mental and metabolic health. Sitting for long hours has been linked to stress-related injuries, back and neck pain and so many other issues.
Burns more calories (not that many) — Choosing to stand instead of sitting for an afternoon of work has been shown to burn an additional 170 calories more than sitting does.
It may lower blood sugar levels and risk of heart disease — Sitting after your meals and remaining sedentary often causes spikes in blood pressure levels.
Reduce back and neck pain — Neck and back pain are the most common complaints of office workers, often caused by long hours in an uncomfortable position at one’s desk.
Improve mood and energy — Sitting and remaining sedentary for extended periods of time has been linked to increased risk of developing depression and anxiety. People who stand at their desks report less stress and fatigue than those who remain sedentary.
If you are going to implement a standing desk in your office, keep in mind that you should EASE into your transition; beginning with standing for thirty minutes a day and gradually increasing standing time. It is also important to note that certain tasks are better performed while seated, especially tasks that use fine motor skills.
But, if your company isn’t shelling out $ for the newest gadgets. Here are a few cost-effective ways to ease you out of your sedentary life:
Try to maintain a correct posture while standing
Use a floor mat below you to soften your stance
Try to avoid looking down at the computer screen by adding a lift for proper alignment for your line of vision
Wear comfortable shoes that limit the impact that standing has on your knees and back.
And MOST importantly, use some tips and tricks provided by our office because MaxWell wants you to GET UP OFF THAT CHAIR!
Cupid never misses, and neither should you. If you’re still looking for a last-minute gift for your beloved valentine, here are a few MaxWell Medical-approved gifts that are guaranteed to hit the spot:
Don’t mask your feelings!– Keep your significant other AND your relationship bright and glowing by gifting them collagen-soaked Korean sheet masks; the ultimate symbol of self-love and self-care.
Are you nuts for your sweetheart? – Nuts are a great source of proteins, antioxidants, nutrients and help you live longer. Show your partner you’ll always want them around by gifting them a delicious bag of trail mix.
Your love can’t be beet – Veggie Go’s vegan and gluten-free beet bites are tasty, strawberry-flavored gummies that are a great way to eat the veggies you don’t always want to taste. What can we say? Sometimes the best gifts are small and sweet.
Show them they’re your main squeeze– Stress balls help relieve stress, boost your blood circulation and are commonly used as a meditation tool. Drop by MaxWell and we’ll provide you with a heart-shaped stress ball to give your love.
Less is more unless it’s love… MaxWell Wants You to LOVE More!