Tuberculosis affects over a quarter of the world population with the majority of those affected in the developing countries. An alternative treatment method to the current six months long multi-drug regimen is utilizing nanoparticles loaded with tuberculosis antibiotics such as rifampicin, which can decrease side effects and reduce the burden of the drug regimen. Lipid-polymer hybrid nanoparticles are ideal because of its controlled drug release and high stability. The standard method of nanoparticle formulation is a lengthy process and does not produce a controlled nanoparticle size distribution. A solution is to utilize a multi-inlet vortex mixer (MIVM) that uses a high mixing rate to produce nanoparticles, but its downfall is it utilizes energy-dependent syringe pumps. This is not cost-effective for developing countries. Here, 6 variations of cost-efficient and portable 3D printable MIVMs that eliminate the need for syringe pumps were developed and its design and production conditions were optimized. Simulations of the 3D printed MIVMs provided dynamic insight into nanoformulation production. Characterization techniques of nanoformulations produced included Transmission Electron Microscopy (TEM), Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy (FTIR), and Dynamic Light Scattering (DLS), Drug Release and Antibiotic efficacy. The results indicated that a high flow rate, small mixing chamber, and low polymer concentration made the smallest nanoparticle sizes. The most stable nanoparticles were ones that were made with a low polymer concentration, slow flow rate, and small device size. Stable lipid-polymer hybrid rifampicin-loaded nanoparticles were synthesized with this cost and time efficient device. Herringbone patterned generated by the additive manufacturing enabled repeatable and reproducible results in comparison to CNC mill machined devices. The nanoparticles produced by this method were effective in treating tuberculosis -like bacteria. This Bioinspired application of additive manufacturing can enable the production of MIVMs that can address diseases in resource poor nations.