- విడిపోవడానికిబదిలీ అయ్యేబోగీలు విడిపోవడం
Noun(1) the act of departing politely(2) a line of scalp that can be seen when sections of hair are combed in opposite directions
Verb(1) go one's own way; move apart(2) discontinue an association or relation; go different ways(3) leave(4) come apart(5) force, take, or pull apart
(1) his hair was dark, with a side parting(2) The chief appeared with a dramatic parting of tent-flaps.(3) I tried it, sort of expecting a parting of the Red Sea.(4) It was one o'clock, and I felt as if I had been up since the parting of the heavens and the earth.(5) Remember the parting of the Red Sea, along with so many other interventions which led to the Exodus from Egypt.(6) For a couple embarking on a serious relationship, discussion of the terms to apply at parting is almost a contradiction of the shared hopes that have brought them together.(7) Much similar to the parting of the Red Sea, the white cloud split into two as the mad scientist confidently strolled out of it.(8) When the two returned from Hardwar, Sahiban had a dot of sindoor on her forehead and some more in the parting of her hair.(9) The parting of her grey hair is once again red with vermillion, mark of a Hindu wife.(10) Most of these manly poses usually ended with one of us looking right down the barrel at certain death, or, on one occasion, holding the bloody thing the wrong way round and shooting a pellet right through the parting on his hair.(11) the parting of the Red Sea(12) Walking through the garden afterwards, she felt the usual feeling on their parting , fear and longing.(13) Londoners tend to scurry outside at the slightest hint of sunshine, so feel free to look for a parting of the clouds and mention how lovely it is.(14) The centerpiece is the parting of the Red Sea and its subsequent disposal of Rameses's guards and chariots.(15) Science can comment usefully on such issues as the age of the Shroud of Turin, the parting of the Red Sea, or genetic studies of alleged lost tribes of Israel.(16) the wrench of her parting from Stephen
(1) part :: భాగం
1. farewell ::
2. farewell ::
3. separation ::
4. division ::
5. part ::
6. leave ::
7. separate ::
8. leave ::
9. start ::
10. disunite ::
11. split ::
1. appearance ::
2. arrival ::
Different Formsimparting, parting, partings
English to Telugu Dictionary: parting
Meaning and definitions of parting, translation in Telugu language for parting with similar and opposite words. Also find spoken pronunciation of parting in Telugu and in English language.
Tags for the entry "parting"
What parting means in Telugu, parting meaning in Telugu, parting definition, examples and pronunciation of parting in Telugu language.