What you should learn about the Real Queens of this Six Musical
Yes, in the 1st six terms of Olivier Award–nominated musical Six, we learn the fate of every of Henry VIII’s wives. But simply how much have you figured out about their everyday lives?
Writers Toby Marlow and Lucy Moss dug to the reputation for Tudor England plus the court that is royal the words for their pop music opera, and greater historic knowledge means greater admiration for the nuances in Marlow and Moss’ writing. Listed below are the CliffsNotes that will help you navigate this chapter in Uk history.
Catherine of Aragon Queen from 1509–1533The “paragon of royalty” had been the very first wife of Henry VIII. A spanish princess, she ended up being the child of Isabelle and Ferdinand, hence the Latin beats and Spanish trumpets in her own Six solo “No Way.” Catherine first married Arthur (Henry’s older bro and heir obvious to your English throne) in 1501 whenever she ended up being 15. But five months after their wedding, Arthur passed away. Arthur’s father almost had to get back her dowry, however a King could not spend money—or European alliances. He married her down to their more youthful son, Henry VIII, in 1509, though Henry ended up being 5 years her junior. She faithfully served England, ruling as regent in 1513 when Henry had been away in France. However when she neglected to create a male heir, things got complicated. Together with her 5th pregnancy, Catherine provided delivery to Mary (the long run Mary we of England), but Henry became preoccupied with siring a child. He became convinced that their wedding to their brother’s widow ended up being cursed by Jesus, or, as Catherine sings, “You state it is a shame ‘cause quoting Leviticus ‘I’ll find yourself kidiless all my entire life.’”
It’s commonly thought he utilized the Bible as a justification to divorce the princess that is spanish a plan to marry her woman in waiting, Anne Boleyn. Catherine ended up being furious he cast her apart; she had tolerated their affairs (“I’ve never destroyed control regardless of how times that are many knew you lied”) as any Queen ended up being anticipated. Furthermore, Catherine maintained that she had never ever consummated her wedding to Arthur—so that is the wedding which was null. Complicated, we realize. Because the track implies, Catherine declined an annulment, claiming until her death that she had been the rightful Queen. Catherine had been delivered to a” that is“nun-ry fundamentally relocated to The greater amount of Castle. She passed away in 1536 in the chronilogical age of 50, nevertheless maintaining she had been the actual only real legitimate spouse of Henry VIII.
Anne Boleyn Queen from 1533–1536Though affairs amongst the King and their Queen’s women in waiting were common and anticipated, no body expected him to go out of Catherine to wed Anne—the sis of their mistress that is former that. Anne was raised during the court regarding the Queen of France before coming back house to England to become listed on the court that is royal.
Anne Boleyn is generally depicted whilst the devious spouse, presumably plotting to dethrone Catherine—unsatisfied to be merely a mistress, “some woman in a threesome.” Henry and Anne married in key January 25, 1533; they got the Archbishop to declare Henry’s wedding to Catherine null and their brand new marriage to Anne valid—thus breaking through the Catholic Church and starting the Church of England. Anne ended up being crowned queen 1, 1533; she soon gave birth to a girl, the future Elizabeth I june. But after three miscarriages, Henry took a brand new mistress: Jane Seymour. Needing option to rid himself of Anne, Henry stated that Anne had bewitched him as he ended up being hitched to Catherine. Anne maybe flirted with a few men “just to create him jel,” but that merely resulted in accusations of adultery and incest. She was beheaded during the Tower of London may 15, 1536, at age 35.
Fun reality: Historians think Henry VIII had written “Greensleeves” for Anne Boleyn, who he had been wanting to woo. Thus, the techno remix of “Greensleeves” in “Ex-Wives.”
Jane Seymour Queen from 1536–1537Just as Anne Boleyn overtook the girl she served, Jane Seymour ended up being a lady-in-waiting to Queen Anne, after serving Queen Catherine. Henry VIII became betrothed to Jane one time after Anne’s execution. Jane offered delivery up to a son, Edward, in 1537 and paper writers cheap died two weeks later of postnatal complications october. Jane is generally looked at as the favourite, as this woman is the only real wife Henry openly mourned plus the just one to get a queen’s funeral, and that’s why her song in Six is one of just like a energy ballad—even if it she sings that “without my son your love could fade away.” Henry VIII ended up being fundamentally hidden beside her at Windsor Castle.
Anne of Cleves Queen from January 1540–July 1540Anne of Cleves lasted just months that are sixth Queen, but she kept her mind. Musician Hans Holbein younger visited Germany to paint Anne and her cousin, as Henry VIII considered which may be their 4th spouse. (We find out about these travels in “Haus of Holbein.”)
But once Anne arrived after her portrait, Henry felt she “didn’t didn’t look like her profile image.” She revealed a lack that is general of, “sippin’ on mead and I also spill it to my dress,” which additionally displeased the royal. Fundamentally, the master made excuses for their displeasure together with her and discovered another excuse to be rid of her, saying there clearly was not a way she had been a virgin once they wed. Provided an annulment, Anne stayed in benefit because of the King and frequently checked out court through the reigns for the last two queens. She passed away in 1557.
Catherine Howard Queen from 1540–1541Catherine, better referred to as Kitty, ended up being very long the item of intimate attention as recommended in “All You Wanna Do.” She had been molested by her music instructor, Henry Mannox, as he ended up being 36 ( maybe perhaps perhaps not 23 as Six states) and she 13. At 15, she relocated along with her grandmother, “the dowager Duchess,” and became enthusiasts with “sexy secretary” Francis Dereham—an event that could started to haunt her later on. Her grandmother discovered the affair and delivered her into the Tudor court.
Like her cousin, Anne Boleyn, she served as a lady-in-waiting however in the court of Anne of Cleves. The king had been 49 yrs old as he married the 16-year-old. However the gossips at court—some of who had witnessed Dereham—quickly spread word to her behavior that Catherine ended up being committing adultery behind Henry’s straight straight back with Henry’s courtier Thomas Culpeper. Culpepper, Dereham, and Catherine were all performed (Dereham ended up being quartered and drawn). Catherine, beheaded February 13, 1542, had been hidden within an unmarked grave.
Catherine Parr Queen from 1543-1547The last spouse of Henry VIII lived in constant anxiety about her very own execution. Ahead of her wedding to King Henry VIII, she had two past husbands and ended up being widowed both in instances. She had dropped deeply in love with Thomas Seymour (Jane’s sibling) before she caught the optical attention for the King. Plus in “I Don’t Need Your Love,” she pleads with Thomas to keep her alone to save lots of them both through the King’s wrath and particular death.
Because of the right time she wed Henry, he had been 52 as well as in ill wellness. Catherine ingratiated herself into the master by becoming a mom to their three young ones: Catherine of Aragon’s Mary, Anne Boleyn’s Elizabeth, and Jane Seymour’s Edward. She actually is the one who restored Mary and Elizabeth’s royal standing therefore that they might can be found in the type of succession.
During her reign, Catherine ended up being 1st queen of England and Ireland; she had been also the queen most abundant in diplomatic influence since Catherine of Aragon, as she served as regent whenever Henry traveled to France once again. Catherine had been an advocate of reformation into the Church, Protestantism. In reality, she published publications on prayer in her very own name—and that is own was very very first Queen of England to do this. So that it’s real that she “fought for feminine education.” Before Henry VIII passed away 28, 1547, he instructed that she be respected as the Queen of England even after his death—which is what happened january. She stepped down through the throne whenever Prince Edward, Jane Seymour’s son, had been prepared to ascend in 1547. This time, she ended up being the only to re-marry, to gentleman regarding the court Thomas Seymour. She passed away 5, 1548 september.