- St Andrews
I also cover Edinburgh and the Lothians
Renewable Energy - The Future!
Solar Thermal Hot Water
Solar Photovolactic Panels
Ground Source Heat Pumps
With the ever increasing energy costs there has not been a better time to invest in the ever increasing range of renewable products on the market, often there can be grants available and can often be found on the following sites:
Some renewables offer Feed In Tariffs which could see you earn an guaranteed income from the government for the next 25 years tax free.
A modern solar heating system designed for domestic use can significatly reduce your heating bills by helping a conventional boiler or immersion heater to provide you and your family with hot water.
Photovoltaic solar panels, sometimes referred to as Solar PV, are the primary solution for households and businesses to generate solar electricity.
The direct grants have been replaced since April 2010 by the new government backed feed-in tariff (FIT) scheme with which you have the ability to earn back money by feeding unused electricity generated back into the national grid as well as earn money for the power that you actually use. Ofgem are administering this scheme and the electricity suppliers themselves are responsible for paying the reward back to the customers.
It is possible for a well sited solar PV installation to earn a tax free income of £700 as well as saving around £140 a year on the household electricity bill meaning that the system could pay for itself in less than half of its expected lifetime leaving you to reap the financial rewards as this scheme has been guaranteed by the UK Government for 25 years. Currently if your solar photovoltaic panels were installed by an accredited installer you can earn up to 44.3p p/kWh for the power you export to the national grid and up to 41.3p p/kWh for the electricity that you use.
How are the government paying for this you might ask well the answer is simple they will be raising the funds by increasing electricity prices to the standard customer in a hope for individuals to act as quickly as possible to convert to renewable solar energy whilst it makes financial sense.
Renewable energy from the earth: Ground source heat pumps transfer stored thermal energy from the earth into water heating systems cleanly, efficiently and renewably.
The Baxi GeofloTM ground source heat pumps are single phase units suitable fordomestic properties and available in outputs ranging from 4kW to 20kW TM ground source heat pumps are single phase units suitable fordomestic properties and available in outputs ranging from 4kW to 20kW.
Any of these installations adding underfloor heating will greatly reduce your energy costs and help our enviroment.
Underfloor heating (ufh) is widely used in northern Europe and has in recent years become quite popular in the UK, both for new builds and updating existing property. As with most things, there are various factors for and against ufh and whether underfloor heating is the choice for you depends largely on your lifestyle. In this article we try to set out the advantages and drawbacks so that you can make a choice based on knowledge.
With an underfloor heating system, the floor itself becomes the heat emitter and the heating of the room is from the floor up, unlike radiators in a normal central heating system where the emitters are mounted on the wall and the room is, effectively,
heated from the ceiling downwards.
Both electric and water based underfloor heating systems are available, they are almost identical apart from obviously, that one uses electric heating cable while the other circulated heated water through a pipe.
Water based ufh uses water heated to a lower temperature than conventional water central heating (typically 50°C rather than 60°C plus), which makes it ideal for use with a high efficiency condensing boilers; the lower operating temperature also makes
it more suitable for use with heat pumps or solar water heaters.
The water temperature to the heating pipe is controlled by mixing the water in the pipe with hot water from the boiler to achieve the required temperature, this is then passed to a manifold for distribution to the various zones. Normally an existing conventional boiler will suit ufh, however it may be necessary to fit a higher rated pump as the back pressure may be greater than in a conventional radiator type central heating system.
We supply and fit Underfloor heating from the following manufacturers:
Whether it be in a new build, renovation or retro-fit there is an underfloor heating system to suite any installation. Please get in touch for a free no obligation quotation for any of the above services or products.