Sure thing! Here are 10 popular historical fiction books to suggest to your book club:

1. The Silence of the Girls by Pat Barker - This reimagining of the Fall of Troy is told mostly from the perspective of the women who were enslaved by the famed victors and conquerors of the classic story. This book is popular with fans of Madeline Miller’s Circe. 

2. The Murmur of Bees by Sofia Segovia - This book features a male protagonist but focuses on a larger and more diverse family and community in a small Mexican town during the Mexican Revolution and the 1918 influenza epidemic. It also has some elements of magical realism. 

3. The Underground Railroad by Colson Whitehead - In this book, author Colson Whitehead reimagines the legendary network that heralded escaped slaves from the antebellum South to freedom in the north as a literal, physical railroad. This book is a New York Times bestseller and Pulitzer Prizewinner with elements of magical realism, which members of your club seem to enjoy. 

4. Moloka’i by Alan Brennert - Set in Hawaii in the late 1800s and early 1900s, this novel follows the story of a young Hawaiian woman sent to live in a leprosy settlement on the island of Moloka’i. 

5. The Mermaid from Jeju by Sumi Hahn - This book features a female protagonist living in Korea after the end of World War 2, coming of age and reckoning with the loss of her mother. 

6. The Book of Night Women by Marlon James - Set on a Jamaican sugar plantation in the late 1700s, this novel tells the story of Lilith, a woman born into slavery who becomes involved in the planning of a slave rebellion. 

7. The Shadow of the Wind by Carlos Ruiz Zafon - Set in Barcelona in the aftermath of the Spanish Civil War, this New York Times bestseller is a popular choice for book clubs focused on historical fiction. 

8. The Book Thief by Markus Zusak - Set in Nazi Germany, this book follows the story of a young girl who steals books to share them with her neighbors and the Jewish stowaway living in her basement to help keep spirits lifted during wartime. It is a historical fiction book well suited for book lovers and an ode to literature.

9. Homegoing by Yaa Gyasi - This story of two half-sisters born in 18th century Ghana spans multiple generations and continents. This book is popular with fans of Conjure Women by Afia Atakora. 

10. The Nightingale by Kristin Hannah - This story follows two French sisters navigating the backdrop of early World War 2, one harboring a German captain in her home against her will while the other joins up with the Resistance. It was the Goodreads Choice Awards winner for Best Historical Fiction novel in 2015.
