Children of all ages can get stressed and anxious. They can feel stressed for many reasons but the most common reasons are parental divorce, pressure at school and being buliled or abused. Be careful what you say, even when you do not think your child is listening to you. Children overhear parents talking about money worries or problems that are having at work and they start to feel anxious about these things themselves and take on worries beyound their years.
Many children feel under pressure to do things they are not happy about because of peer pressure. Friendships ae very important and children often suffer stress if they have fallen out with a friend.
Children can suffer from stress and anxiety due to high expectations from parents and family. Let them know that as long as they are doing their best, that is okay. Support them in getting extra help if they need it. Let them know you are there for them and that they can talk to you if they are worried. Mental health issues and depression can affect children. If you have concerns, speak out.
It is important that you know and recognise the signs of stress. This way you can support your child and get extra help if you need to.
Signs can include:
1. Your child seems stressed out
2. Have they fallen out with a friend? Are they being bullied? Pick a good time to chat.
3. Talk to their teacher and ask about friendship groups. If you are still worried, speak to your GP.
Getting your exam results can make you feel nervous. If you’re worried, ChildLine is always here to support you.
There are lots of ways you can help your child overcome or cope with stress and anxiety:
MindEd for Families: online advice and support you can trust
Is your child in crisis? Are you worried about them? Perhaps you just want some parenting tips. MindEd for Families is a website that aims to help you understand and support your child.
MindEd for Families was built by parents and the MindEd Consortium of professionals, funded by the Department of Education, in partnership with Health Education England. It is accredited by the NHS Information Standard.