Brenthis ino Rottemburg, 1775 Lesser Marbled Fritillary, Madesub-Perlmutterfalter oder Violetter Silberfalter, Nacre da la sanguisorbe, Перламутровка ино, Բրենթիս ինո
Distribution and biological peculiarities in Armenia: The species is distributed from Balkan Peninsula to the east of Eurasia until Amur region. present in Spain, France, Italy, Central and Northern Europe, Siberia, temperate Asia, Northern China and Japan. Armenia is inhabited by subspecies B. i. schmitzi Wagener, 1983, which is a specialist of wet mountain meadows, living at the elevations from 2000 to 2400 m a.s.l. The host-plants of the species are quite restricted and include Filipendula ulmaria andSanguisorba officinalis. Butterflies are on wing from late June till early August in one generation.
Population dynamics: The species is uncommon to rare even within its typical habitat and its population trend shows moderate decline during 2003-2013 (p<0.05). The decline could be justified by overgrazing and intensive mowing in the meadows, and by the fact that the species is more sensitive than, for example, closely related Twin-spot Fritillary.
Conservation measures: The species is not yet assessed for IUCN Red List and is not included in CITES and Bern Conventions. It was evaluated for European Red Book receiving a status of Least Concern, and for Armenian Red Book receiving status of Vulnerable VU B1a+B2a. Along its distribution range the species is protected in Lake Arpi and Lake Sevan National Parks, in Zangezur Biosphere Complex and in appropriate Emerald Sites. Also the Lesser Marbled Fritillary is presented in Kajaran and Artanish-Shorzha Prime Butterfly Areas. The current assessment of its national conservation status suggests no changes, however the changes should be made in proposed conservation measures. Those include: (1) identification of more Prime Butterfly Areas where the species occurs, their assessment, and further development into Emerald Sites; (2) development of management plans for the identified Emerald Sites, where the species is already recorded; (3) development, adaptation, and introduction of sustainable grazing and mowing schemes, which support in protection of meadows and their species diversity.