Take one wee step to conserving Scotland's mountains
The National Trust for Scotland
is proud to care for 76,000 hectares of spectacular
Scottish countryside. We have 7 National Nature Reserves, 45 Sites of Special Scientific
Interest, 46 Munros and over 400 miles of upland footpaths to look after.
A key part of our conservation work is done through path repair projects, which
protect our mountain landscapes from erosion. When thousands of people use the same path
it can become worn and rough, then when you add Scotland's famous climate, fragile surface
vegetation can simply wash away. The result can be disastrous as large barren scars appear
on the landscape, but we're dedicated to repairing those scars, conserving the land and still
ensuring people can use access the mountains. It's a huge job, that's why we could really
use your help.
Support Scotland's mountains at www.oneweestep.org
To find out how you can take one wee step to conserving Scotland's mountains visit our new
. From here
you can get closer to our mountain conservation work by watching videos of our team in action,
discover volunteering opportunities, donate to our Footpath Fund and even win a holiday in
A few simple tips to help conserve Scotland's Mountains
We've got some great tips that will help to conserve Scotland's mountains for the
The Trust cares for land at Glencoe, Kintail, Mar Lodge Estate, Ben Lomond, Ben Lawers,
West Affic and Goatfell. Help protect them by following some simple tips:
Always stick to the footpath. The vegetation surrounding the footpaths is very
sensitive to large boots! If you need a break from walking on the stone, have a seat and
take in the view.
Use walking poles with rubber caps. The point of a pole pierces the vegetation. It can
even dig in and dislodge stone. This allows water into the path base, leaving it exposed
to water and 'frost heave' - the lifting of a path surface by frost forming within the
Please do not drop litter, even fruit peelings. Although they will biodegrade, it
takes a very long time. And placing them under rocks only slows the process down - so the
rule is, if you bring it in with you, take it back out. If you spot someone else's rubbish
then please try and take that too.
You can help the paths in many simple ways. The cross-drains and water bars often get
filled up with stone and silt, so if you're willing you can drag your heel through the
drain to clear the stone, or even lift it out by hand. Just make sure the exit is clear,
although be aware that any removed stone will roll downhill, so check first that there is
no one below! When these bars and drains block, the water simply flows over them and erodes
the path surface below, and although we try to keep them clear, every bit of help helps!
Camping on the mountains can be a fantastic experience, but please be aware of the fire
risks and remove all signs of your visit when leaving. Restrict camping to one night, use
stable portable cooking equipment (ie no open fires), and please take all rubbish home.
If you see people working on our paths on the hill, please heed any advice they may
give you. This is especially important if there is a helicopter lift planned. We always
try to keep the sites open but please be patient if you experience a slight delay: it will
only be to keep you safe.