ATLANTA -- Progress continues on a Zika vaccine, with a possibility that one could be available under emergency use authorization before the end of next year, said CDC researchers at the Advisory Committee for Immunization Practices (ACIP) meeting here.
They updated ACIP members on the progress of four vaccines currently in development, as well as the timeline for development and deployment of these vaccines. Currently, there are seven phase I trials planned for the four vaccines.
"We know a great deal about flaviviruses in general and the types of pathology they have," said Gerald Kovacs, PhD, a consultant to the Biomedical Advanced Research Development and Authority (BARDA) at the presentation, adding that because vaccines exist for other flaviviruses, "we are using these lessons learned to develop new vaccines for Zika."
Several types of vaccines are in clinical testing, including some composed of viral nucleic acids (including DNA and mRNA) as well as purified inactivated whole virus.
The initial results of one phase I trial a nucleic acid vaccine are still being analyzed, while a second ongoing trial hopes to wrap up in a couple of months. Developers of a different DNA-based vaccine are now trying to figure out the best dosing regimen via trials at 30+ sites in the Caribbean and Central and South America among healthy volunteers ages 15-35.
Another vaccine in development is a live attenuated/recombinant Zika vaccine, though phase I trials have yet to take place. This vaccine would take the dengue vaccine developed by the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, and replace dengue genes with Zika genes. Kovacs said the monovalent Zika component should start phase I trials by the end of 2017.
The NAID announced a vaccine specifically targeting "mosquito-borne diseases" this week.
Safety and efficacy are still being evaluated in all of these vaccine types, Kovacs said that by 2018, BARDA hopes to build a dataset with one of two vaccine candidates, where they can deploy vaccines under emergency use authorization for the continental U.S. and Puerto Rico.
The hope is that by 2019 to 2020, one of these candidates will have completed full phase III trials, he said.
More Research Needed into Clinical Manifestations of Zika in Kids
The full spectrum of effects of congenital Zika virus syndrome on children is not yet fully understood, and more research is needed in understanding not only how the virus manifests itself in children, but the spectrum of clinical presentation of the disease. Researchers writing in JAMA Pediatrics gave examples of clinical manifestations among kids infected with Zika virus outside the spectrum of neurological and anatomical manifestations -- for example, exaggerated primitive reflexes, gastrointestinal motility problems, and lower respiratory complications, such as pneumonia. The hope would be that with more research, clinicians can help treat -- and eventually prevent -- the spectrum of complications from this disease.
New Mouse Models Help Aid Zika Research
A new mouse model may help shed more light on why Zika virus causes miscarriages. Researchers in Nature Communications created a new mouse that has capabilities of a human-like immune systems. They found that by administering Zika virus directly into the reproductive tract of healthy pregnant mice during the equivalent of the first trimester, they may have uncovered how Zika infects and damages the placenta by creating "disorganization" in the cellular layers. They also discovered that Zika may prevent antiviral mechanisms from protecting the body from the virus. Researchers noted that when the mice were infected in the first trimester, their offspring were born with thinner cortexes and more inflammatory cells in the brain than those infected later.
Researchers writing in PLOS Pathogens also have created a new mouse model to assist in studying Zika. Their purpose for this new model was to infect adult mice, who would show only a few mild symptoms -- similar to how adult humans respond to the virus. The immune system of the mice would then respond to the virus. Researchers said they hope the new model can be used to study specific immune responses to infection, which could potentially aid in the development of a vaccine.