A story about insecurity and attention-seeking (Therapeutic Parenting Books)
A comforting and compelling story, with gentle rhymes and imaginative illustrations, about worries and self-esteem.
This picture book, helps young children with feelings of anxiety and worry they may feel in their early years and suggests ways that can help children put their worries into perspective.
This book tells the story of a baby Blue Whale, who longs to be included, but is shunned because he is 'different.' However, when danger lurks the fish learn an important lesson about accepting and embracing each other's differences.
A story about fear and coping (Therapeutic Parenting Books)
An interactive self-help book designed to guide 6-12 year olds and their parents through the cognitive-behavioral techniques most often used in the treatment of generalised anxiety.
From colouring outside the lines and creating a unique piece of art to forgetting an umbrella but making a new friend, each page offers a kid-friendly take on the importance of taking chances, trying new things, and embracing life, mistakes and all.
Learning to cope with disappointment (for all children and dragon tamers, including those with Asperger syndrome)
A story about when feelings become too big (Therapeutic Parenting Books)
Wherever Jenny goes, her worries follow her - in a big blue bag. Jenny decides they have to go, but who will help her get rid of them?
A funny and reassuring look at dealing with worries and anxiety.
This fun-loving book proves to kids that, in a world where fitting in is the norm, being different is what makes us special.
There's Only One You in this great big world. Make it a better place. Adri's mama and papa share some of the wisdom they have gained through the years with their eager son. Their words, simple and powerful, are meant to comfort and guide him as he goes about exploring the world.
Managing Anxiety in Children Including Those with Asperger Syndrome
This picture book examines how and why people get frightened, illustrates scenarios of people being frightened and scared, and the best way to deal with it with age-appropriate content.
This picture book examines how and why people feel sad, illustrates scenarios of people feeling sad and upset, and the best way to deal with it with age-appropriate content.