Are Float Tanks Clean?
Yes. Float tanks are very clean because of its well-maintained system. Float tanks do not have chlorine or chemicals to do the job of cleaning. For commercial float tanks to be clean, it requires to be always cleaned, with the maintenance of the volume of water, hydrogen peroxide, salt concentration, and pH. For float tanks to be clean, it should start with high levels of Epsom salt or Magnesium Sulfate. With over 1,000 pounds of pharmaceutical approved Magnesium Sulfate or Epsom salt in 10.5 inches of water level, it has a salt concentration of 35%.
This high level of Magnesium’s concentration can mitigate the multiplication of the organisms and will eventually kill over time. The second way to assure that float tanks are clean is by filtering all the volume of water through a cartridge filter, which has a 10-micron cartridge. It should be done in each float tank for four to five times from the previous user to get rid of impurities that are organic. The water passes through the filtration system that has Ultraviolet light penetration, 10-micron filter that filters any impurities half the measurement of the human hair, 50 to 100 parts per million of Hydrogen peroxide and Ozone filter to form residual oxides that 100% destroys any matter that has passed through the filtration system previously. The tiny amounts of hydrogen peroxide do not harm the skin or hair, and it has been approved in the government where the float tank is located. Water salinity is measured by its Oxidation Reduction Potential that tells how well the water oxides contaminants that are new.
Through the process of oxidation, it destroys the cell walls of bacteria and makes it harmless. When the viruses, protozoa, and bacteria underwent exposure through the ultraviolet light’s germicidal waves, they are incapable of spreading infection and undergoing reproduction. Ultraviolet light gives faster and efficient inactivation of organisms by physical means. Ozone is ultimately active to be a disinfectant. Its benefits are from the disinfection’s strength and lack of harmful by-products. A vast number of microorganisms can be killed more by ozonation compared to the process of chlorination. Why not depend on the use of chlorine to clean the float tanks instead? It is because chlorine or bromine can seriously have induced problems due to its dangerous properties. These harmful properties are exhibited once they oxidize their contaminants.
Some of the disinfection byproducts can be left on the surface or top of the water that potentially causes respiratory ailments and skin diseases with continuous exposure. There are deaths every year noted from exposure to chlorine, and further researches are resulting in varied dangers associated with dioxin, which is a toxin chlorine byproduct. We do not have to depend on the filtration system only. The most important point of taking care of a float tank properly is through cleaning the inside walls two to three times a week. In addition, users should shower first before entering the float tank to let off some of their organic matter and microorganisms attached to them. These are the ways that float tanks are truly clean when you use it.