The Awesome Power of Feelings, Part 2: The Five Creative Emotions
We discussed in my last article that thought generates energy. The energy created by our thoughts travels first as an electromagnetic charge which creates a frequency of sound inside the brain. You don’t hear that sound, but sound is always created when energy is produced. A quick explanation of this is that energy travels through space by what we call “frequency”. Frequency is measured in amplitude and speed. Frequency is a vibration, and vibrations create sound. This understanding is foundational in learning how your feelings and emotions actually create your reality.
With that foundation of understanding, let’s look at a practical application. Think about what happens to the vibrations of energy and sound that are created by your thoughts. First, the energy and frequency of sound extend beyond your body from a few inches to infinity, depending on the degree of frequency. Second, you can’t physically see or hear this happening so our tendency is to ignore this fact. Big mistake because the energy and frequency of sound is having a dramatic effect on you and the people around you.
Let’s explore the effects on both. People around you feel the energy and frequency of sound that is being generated by you. The quality of energy and frequency of sound affects others in a positive or negative way. Yes, you heard that correctly; every thought has a quality, and the quality of that thought generates different frequencies of energy.
Okay, let’s see if we can build a visual of what happens to the frequency of energy generated by your mindset (thoughts) when it extends outside of you and into the field of space around you. Visualize yourself as a walking amplifier of sound. You can produce a quiet sound, a pleasant sound or a loud sound, based on the quality of sound you are generating. Here’s another important point — if you can’t see anything in the space around you, you may assume that space is empty. However, science tells us that there is no empty space in the universe. All space is filled with active particles that you cannot see. Again, remember that we have a tendency to discount anything we can’t see, hear, smell, taste or touch.
The seemingly empty space all around you is actually filled with small particles called subatomic particles. These particles serve as the building blocks for atoms. Up until the mid 1900s science believed that nothing was smaller than the atom. With the invention of supercolliders that can actually smash atoms apart, science discovered these small little particles that we now know make up our physical reality. These particles are neutral to most stimulus except for one major influence – our thoughts.
Everything in your current environment is made up of these subatomic particles. Take, for instance, the chair you’re sitting in. Where did it come from? It came from a craftsman or a manufacturer. How did that source attain the chair for you to buy? Someone came up with an idea of a great sitting chair and after much thought drew a set of working plans on how to build it. Then a craftsman was employed to apply the acquired skill to physically build the chair from raw material harvested from trees and other sources. If you were to apply this thought process to every physical object in your environment, you will come to this conclusion — everything that exists in your physical environment was first created in someone’s mind!
Our thoughts create our environments, and different thoughts create different energy frequencies. The most creative energy frequencies are those that create the most powerful feelings or emotions. Scientists can now measure the energy of our thoughts and feelings. From these scientific measurements we know that the highest frequency energies are generated from our strongest positive emotions of Presence, Love, Trust, Forgiveness and Gratitude.
The feeling of Presence is generated from thoughts of connectedness to all things, wholeness, and no separation from each other or our Creator. Love is the most talked about emotion, but it’s difficult to define. The best way to define it is to feel it by thinking of someone or something which you love. Trust is a thought that goes deeper than faith or belief. It’s something upon which you can place the full weight of your life. Forgiveness begins with thoughts of letting go of anger and fear, and the first person to forgive is yourself. Gratitude is the easiest emotion to feel. Constant thoughts of gratitude generate a powerful energy frequency.
The opposite of these five most creative emotions would be the emotions of Fear and Doubt. These emotions are easy to feel because they are a part of our human instincts. We feel these emotions naturally; we don’t even have to try. The problem with these thoughts of fear and doubt is that they’re just as creative as the five positive creative emotions.
Here’s how that works: If you were to fill your conscious thoughts everyday with the thoughts and feelings of fear, doubt, worry, stress, bitterness and hate, you would be creating a future reality represented by all those thoughts. Ironically, we create the very things that we are worried about or fearful of. However, when you look at the realities that would be created from the five most creative positive thoughts, it all begins to make sense.
Yes, when you become consciously aware of the power of your thoughts, it makes sense to invest your daily thoughts in the very things that you want to happen in your life. That’s called conscious awareness. When you can intentionally invest thoughts every day in support of the future that you truly desire, you literally move the universe to respond to the desires of your heart. This is not theory; it is science!
Until Next Time,
David Byrd is an author, coach, consultant, and a developer of personal growth behaviors in pursuit of Achievement. Founder and CEO of David Byrd Consulting, LLC, he is a master of effective leadership and works closely with leaders and their organizations worldwide utilizing a system of personal management and achievement called the Next Level Achievement System™. He is a best-selling author with four published books, a sought after speaker, and leadership development consultant.