This is one of our free samples - an expository essay example on breast cancer and its main stages. If you need to write an essay on similar topics, contact us.
This short essay on sports is a good example of a persuasive writing. It is an essay on games and sports importance. If you are searching for another argumentative essay topics, read the great list we’ve composed of the most interesting ideas and topics:
Sports in America are under attack lately, especially the more violent ones – like football, hockey, rugby and even baseball. Even in high school, athletes are dying on the field – and it’s all too scary. College and pro athletes are risking their lives every time they step on the field. They are getting spinal and brain injuries and the abuse they take will haunt them for the rest of their lives. It is horrendous that this happens to people every day all around the world. And this means that fewer people begin playing sports in the first place.
Despite all of this, there are still many benefits to playing sports as a young person, as in before one hits the workforce (or even while they are still in a working adult). People learn essential life lessons playing sports, lessons that will play to their advantage for the rest of their lives.
One benefit of playing sports is learning how to collaborate with people on a given task or objective. People who have played sports a great deal understand how to work with others, how to get the best out of people, and how to help people do what they do best, in order to win the game. Sports condition and encourage people to put aside differences, grudges and personal incompatibility for the sake of the task at hand. This comes from being on a team and working with people, who are often complete strangers one would have never normally come into contact with. People who have played sports learn the true meaning of ownership and of ‘we’, and hardly give themselves credit when it’s directed at them.
Dealing with adversity, and therefore building character is another benefit one gains from playing sports with other people. People deal with adversity every day – in their careers, families and even communities. Playing sports as a young person teaches a person to not only expect adversity – losing, essentially, or failure to be successful at something, like getting struck out in a baseball game – but to anticipate how they will handle it. This translates into a person’s adult life where they come across adversity on a daily basis: getting fired from a job, not getting a promotion, getting reprimanded by a boss, losing a big business deal, dealing with an angry co-worker who doesn’t like you. Playing sports from an early age can help a person to accept adversity with grace, class, and optimism later in life. They become better people for it, too.
As a side note, it should also be acknowledged that another benefit to playing sports is exercise and making the habit of exercising. For exercise helps a person relax and handle stress in a healthy, moderate, controlled way. A relaxed, happy person is going to naturally be a better person to work with, a better person to hire and a better person to be around because they are their optimal self. Exercise invigorates people and can help them feel at ease and confident, which can help them become successful.
When it comes down to it, it appears that the benefits of playing sports – both as a child, teenager and adult – outweigh the associated risks. Of course small injuries are part of any strenuous exercise, and some sports are more dangerous than others, and of course some people are not healthy enough to play sports, but the playing of sports really can and does provide a person with lasting benefits – ones that extend into their personal, social and career lives. In spite of this, a person should never avoid playing sports solely for this reason. There is much to learn by playing sports, for they are something that can teach people character and how to work with others – especially people who are quite different from them – and it teaches people to try new things, things that may aid in making them a better person.
Did you like this essay on sports? Our essay writing service is able to write on different persuasive essay topics on sports. Just inform us about the topic you are assigned to write on and our writers will help you. If you wish to get an instant quote, place an order on our Order Page.