Welcome to Owlets R
Mrs Worthy, Mrs Cutler and Miss Begum welcome you to our reception class. Please read through the information below to help you and your child understand all that will be happening in our school year.
There will be parent information meetings that will explain in further detail Reading, Writing and Maths.
We will be inviting parents to our Play and Stay sessions each half term.
Personal, Social and Emotional Development
We will be learning about demonstrating friendly behaviour, initiating conversations and forming good relationships with our peers. As well as explaining our own knowledge and understanding. We will be doing circle times to become aware of our own and others feelings understanding that some actions and words can hurt others’ feelings.
Communication and language
We are learning to listen to stories with increasing attention and recall, as well as using language to
imagine and recreate roles and experiences in play situations. We will be listening and responding to ideas expressed by others in conversation or discussion. We will begin to question why things happen.
Throughout the year children will focus on the way stories are structured and suggest how a story might end. We will begin to read words and simple sentences, representing sounds correctly and in sequence. We will write our names, picture captions and labels. We will have a daily ‘Letters and Sounds’ and guided reading session.
We have a daily ‘Magic Maths’ session where children learn about different mathematical concepts in a fun and practical way.
Understanding the World
We are going to be showing an interest in different occupations and ways of life. We will have a weekly visit to our woodland area and will regularly visit our local area. We will be learning about where we can find information and how to complete a simple program on a computer.
Expressive arts and design
Children will join construction pieces
together in order to build and balance. We will aim to construct with a purpose in mind, using a variety of resources and to be able to use available resources to create props to support role-play. We will introduce a story line into their play and encourage children to play alongside other children who are
engaged in the same theme.
Children will begin to form recognisable letters. In PE we will experiment with different ways of moving. We will also learn good practices with regard to exercise, eating, sleeping and hygiene which can contribute to good health.
Your child has been provided with a Phonics book, please go through the Phonics book weekly. Each week your child will be provided with ‘Talk homework’ in their ‘Buzy Bee Book.’
Have a look at our wonderful learning. We have enjoyed outside learning, had fun in the Ministry of Magic, gone shopping to buy ingredients for making gingerbread men, learnt about the festival of Diwali, had adventures in the woodland area, created natural pictures and a lot more!