Natural Zika prevention measures
The Zika virus is transmitted by the bite of Aedes aegypti mosquito, the same insect that transmits dengue and Chikungunya, and has been associated with microcephaly and other neurological disorders in infants, although more studies are needed to prove this relationship caused effect.
By itself the virus usually does not present a danger for the health of adults beyond the discomfort that causes redness of the skin, intermittent fever and muscle aches and headaches. These symptoms usually disappear spontaneously between three and seven days for his appearance.
However, the possible association of Zika with disorders in infants, has led the Emergency Committee of the World Health Organization (WHO) to consider the zika as a threat “alarming proportions”.
The virus was discovered in Uganda in 1947 and spread to Asia and Oceania to reach in recent years many countries in South America, where today there are more cases.
There is no vaccine or specific treatment virus Zika, so the recommendations of all international agencies are directed to prevent mosquito breeding and bites people.
Here we describe some natural methods designed to meet these WHO recommendations naturally, with natural insecticides and repellents aimed at scaring away mosquitoes and some tips to protect you from bites and avoid places where the Aedes aegypti mosquito breeds.
Natural insecticides and repellents:
- Lemon eucalyptus oil: a recent study by the Center for Disease Control and Disease Prevention of the United States showed that a mixture of 32 percent oil of lemon eucalyptus provides 95 percent protection against mosquito bites during a period of three hours. It can be done by mixing one part lemon eucalyptus oil and 2 parts sunflower oil, although researchers at the University of Florida does not recommend its use in children younger than 3 years.
- Lavender: the scent given off by the flowers of lavender is a natural mosquito repellent, making it ideal for the interior of our home to keep mosquitoes away from our place of rest plant. You can also crush the flowers and the oil obtained can be applied to areas of the body that we want to protect from insect bites. Remember that lavender has antiseptic and analgesic properties, which soothes and softens the skin.
- Garlic: Garlic contains sulfur which repels mosquitoes naturally.
So far, the research projects do not foresee that we can have a vaccine in a short time, so the other option is that recommendations not to travel to countries affected, especially to pregnant women are made higher risk group, as they have done the European and US health authorities.
Mozzigear recommends essential oils from Wild Products Singapore.