Bionic Pancreas Outperformed Insulin Pump
People with type 1 diabetes have to vigilantly keep track of their blood sugar levels. A new piece of wearable technology, the bionic pancreas, could help streamline the daily routine of insulin injections and blood sugar testing.
Long-Term Blood Sugar Control Delayed Kidney Problems
Managing blood sugar levels is a central part of treating diabetes and preventing complications related to diabetes. And now, new research has reinforced that important fact.
Rare, Deadly Disease More Likely in Obese Women on Dialysis
Scientists don’t fully understand calciphylaxis, a rare and potentially deadly blood vessel condition. But new research points to some of the major factors linked to the disease.
Ensuring the Right Nighttime Insulin Flow
Seizures triggered by severely low blood sugar levels tend to occur when diabetes patients are asleep. Figuring out how to better regulate those blood sugar levels during sleeping hours has been an important aspect of diabetes care.
Diabetes Has Increased in US Youth
Type 1 diabetes usually occurs in childhood. But more children are now getting type 2 diabetes, and the rates of both seem to be rising.
Early Warning Signs for Kids
A variety of early signs might help clinicians and parents learn if children are at higher risk for diabetes. The trick is seeing the signs early enough.
Urine May Reveal Heart Risk in Young Diabetes Patients
For adults with diabetes, a urine test can spot those at risk for heart and kidney disease. The same test may also work for young people with type 1 diabetes.
Of Diabetes and Depression
Living with a chronic disease like diabetes can be challenging. That challenge can take its toll on a person, especially if that person is a child.
Diabetes-Related Diseases Linked to Stroke
For patients with type 1 diabetes, keeping a close eye on blood sugar levels and managing their disease is a part of everyday life. A recent study may give these patients another reason to stay on top of their medical care.
Growing Up With Diabetes
For children with type 1 diabetes, a routine of care develops early and a relationship between child, patient and doctor builds over time. But what happens as these children age and transition from pediatric to adult care? Does anything get lost in the shuffle?