It was witnessing at first-hand the devastation caused by poverty and unemployment in Fife in the 1960s that made Gordon want to do something about it. He delivered his maiden speech in the House of Commons in a debate on social security, in which he concluded with a question: “In 1948…the welfare state was created to take the shame out of need. Is that principle to be overthrown by an ever-increasing set of government assaults on the poor that are devoid of all logic, bereft of all morality and vindictive even beyond monetarism?” And during his first year in parliament, Gordon edited a book with Robin Cook, Scotland: The Real Divide, in which he called for action on poverty and deprivation.
When Labour entered government in 1997, one in three children were living in families whose incomes were less than 60 per cent of the national median, meaning they were officially in poverty and brought up in families unable to pay for even basic necessities. As Chancellor of the Exchequer, Gordon sought to address these inequalities by introducing a system of tax credits which, by 2010, transferred £28 billion a year to low- and middle-income families. Research by the Resolution Foundation shows that tax credits reduced the number of children living in poverty in the UK from three million in 1998 to 1.6 million in 2010, as the Labour government met their goal to reduce the number of children in poverty by a quarter by 2004 and came close to the 2010 goal for halving it.
Gordon’s approach to tax credits was underpinned by what he describes as “progressive universalism”: a floor of basic social rights for all, but with more support to those most in need. The pension credit was based on the same principle, and had a similar impact in reducing poverty. Even after housing costs are taken into account, pensioner poverty fell from 29 per cent to 15 per cent between 1997 and 2010.
There was a raft of other initiatives that contributed to Labour’s war on poverty. These include the introduction of the National Minimum Wage, Sure Start, increased financial support for childcare, significant increases in education spending and an expansion of the number of young people going on to higher education. None of these path-breaking reforms could have happened without a Labour government.
Reducing child poverty was one of the many achievements of the previous Labour Government
Despite the advances made by the previous Labour government in tackling child poverty, it is a sad fact that more children – 4 million of them – are in poverty today than in 1965 when the Child Poverty Action Group was founded to deal with a poverty emergency. On current trends, 5.2 million children in the UK – one in every three – will be consigned to poverty by 2022, more than at any time in the Thatcher-Major years.
In Scotland, an April 2018 report for the Scottish Government – Forecasting Child Poverty in Scotland – reveals that almost two Scottish children in every five could be in poverty by 2027-28. That would represent a doubling of poverty in Scotland from 210,000 in 2010 to more than 400,000 during the 2020s.
This escalating poverty crisis is being driven by Tory cuts to social security benefits and tax credits, and the introduction of Universal Credit, which will be fully rolled out by 2023. But the recent Scottish-Government-commissioned report is also blunt about the failure of the SNP to address rising poverty, despite the substantial powers the Scottish Parliament now has.
Gordon is campaigning for both the Scottish and UK governments to take action to ensure that every boy and girl can have the best start in life. He has called for an increase in child tax credit – together with a living wage and higher child benefits – as the most effective way to tackle child poverty.