“Welcome, my sweet little lambs!” Ang said, gently patting the children on the head as they filed in. “Are you excited to learn today? I know I am!” She smiled.  “Did you bring back the ‘homework’ from last week?” Even without looking, Ang knew the parents were watching, so the show had to be perfectly presented until the last of them trickled out the door. 

Feigning affection and presenting herself perfectly was something that she had long ago mastered, and the power it gave was addicting. Ang never tired of small talk and convincing the parents that she really did care about their mundane lives; once they trusted her, they brought her the never-ending supply of the wonderful free labor she needed for her plans.  

“Have a seat, my angels, and gather around,” Ang said, smiling warmly and gesturing calmly. “Today, we’re going to talk about the turquoise stones from the Southwest. Each one of you has a bowl I’ve got for you, and you can pick them up and look at them! 

Ang droned on, purposely keeping the tone light and simple, childlike and repetitive to bore the parents. Her monologue was, in fact, educational but simplistic enough that finally the last parent grew weary of listening and finally departed. 

Ang turned to her desk, and when she turned around, ruler in hand, her demeanor had completely changed; her face was contorted in rage, and she seemed to tower over the cowering children. “Production numbers are down, again!” Ang shouted. “You needed to make twelve necklaces for homework last week, but most of you FAILED!” 

Ang glared menacingly around the room. Some of the smaller children’s lips were quivering. “Good,” she thought. “Fear ought to be the proper motivator to reach the month’s budget.”

Ang glanced over to the nearest potential scapegoat. “Daisy,” she said softly. “You like juice boxes, right?” 

The small girl looked up hopefully from the box she was sipping. “Yes, I love ‘em-these berry ones are soo good!” 

“NO JUICE BOXES EVER AGAIN UNTIL WE MEET THE QUOTA,” Ang raged, slapping the box from her hand to the floor. “God gave you little fingers to put the beads on the wire, and that’s what you’re going to do!”

One way or another, they were going to be the most profitable Etsy store ever!
