Harry Potter and the Sorcerer's Stone" is purely an adventure movie surprisingly faithful to the novel. Chris Columbus' movie is a classic that does justice to a challenging story. The vivid novel by J.K. Rowling could have been made into a cute and cuddly movie but luckily wasn't. It tells a supernatural adventure tale like "Indiana Jones" for younger viewers. The characters encounter a three-headed dog, a scary plant called the Devil's Snare, and a two-faced immortal who drinks unicorn blood. 

Three kids populate the center of the movie. Daniel Radcliffe plays Harry Potter, with those round glasses, who once played David Copperfield on the BBC. In the beginning, whether Harry is the hero of his own life in this story is doubtful.

Deposited on a suburban doorstep, Harry is raised by his aunt and uncle, then summoned by a series of letters to become a student at Hogwarts School of Witchcraft and Wizardry. Hogwarts sets the tone for the movie's special effects when it first comes onscreen. "Harry Potter" balances realism and fiction regarding the sets and locations. Hogwarts' Gothic battlements and its corridors, cellars, and Great Hall continue to feel like illustrations from a book, even though they are visually created from actual buildings. At Hogwarts, Harry makes two friends and an enemy. The friends are Hermione Granger (Emma Watson), who nudges Harry nudges to lighten up, and Ron Weasley (Rupert Grint), who is spirited and talented. The enemy is Draco Malfoy (Tom Felton), who will do anything to ensure his house is first at the end of the year.

The adult cast of prominent British actors plays their roles believably. There is a broad style of British acting that the actors dialed down. Alan Rickman draws out his words yet somehow stays in character. Maggie Smith, Professor Minerva McGonagall, assigns first-year students like Harry to one of the school's four houses. Richard Harris is long-bearded Dumbledore, headmaster of Hogwarts. Robbie Coltrane is the gamekeeper, Hagrid, with a history of misbehavior and says essential things and then protests he didn't tell them.

Computers create gravity-defying action scenes. Readers of the book will wonder how the movie visualizes the game of Quidditch. Quidditch in the film and other magical locations were masterfully created.  A chess game with life-size pieces. A room with flying keys. The previously-mentioned Devil's Snare and a dark forest with a creature that threatens Harry but is scared away by a centaur. And don't forget the Hogwarts library, cellars, hidden passages, and dungeons, where an invisibility cloak can come in handy.

"Harry Potter and the Sorcerer's Stone" can be predicted to be an ageless classic, projected to make many generations of fans. The movie's plot takes its time to develop. It doesn't overwhelm the audience with cheap thrills; it tells a well-crafted story and creates its characters purposefully. Like "The Wizard of Oz," "Willy Wonka and the Chocolate Factory," "Star Wars," and "E.T.," it's more than a movie; it's a world with its own magical rules.
