In this article, we will discuss what python language is and its benefits. Also, you would come to know that how to install Python on Windows and Ubuntu operating system.
What is Python?
Python is an interpreted, object-oriented, high-level programming language with dynamic semantics. It’s high-level built-in data structures, combined with dynamic typing and dynamic binding, make it very attractive for Rapid Application Development, as well as for use as a scripting or glue language to connect existing components together. Python’s simple, easy to learn syntax emphasizes readability and therefore reduces the cost of program maintenance. Python supports modules and packages, which encourages program modularity and code reuse. The Python interpreter and the extensive standard library are available in source or binary form without charge for all major platforms, and can be freely distributed.
Features of Python language.
(a) Portable: – Python runs on multiple (such as Windows, Macintosh, and Linux) operating systems without any problems. If you write code in Windows operating system and you can see that it will run in any type of platform without any error.
(b) Databases: – Python can work with every database.
(c) GUI Programming: – Python supports GUI interface application. It makes any type of Graphical User Interface file. It makes Windows software or any operating system software.
(d) Integrated: – It can be easily integrated with C, C++, JAVA, etc.
1. How to install Python on Windows operating system?
First of all, make sure that you have at least 32-bit operating system and 90Mb – 1Gb of disc space. After confirming, you can hit this link https://www.python.org/downloads in your favorite browser or Click Here to download:
Python Latest Version 3.7.4
The referred page will come into your browser.
Make sure that downloaded file should be – python-3.7.4.exe.
2. Installation Python on Windows System.
- Go to the downloaded file and save that file into a permanent location for your ease.
- Double click on the python-3.7.4.exe file and a popup window will appear.
- Click on “Install Now”
- After completing the setup, click the close button.
This is how you can install Python in your system. Hope you have installed Python successfully.
How to install Python on Ubuntu operating system?
We do not need to install Python on Ubuntu system because when installing Ubuntu operating system already installed Python on Ubuntu operating system.