You will be given journal assignments throughout the semester.
Narrative Elements Setting What is it? Why is it important? How do I create it? The setting is the environment in which a story or event takes place. Setting can include specific information about time and place e.
Boston, Massachusetts, in or can simply be descriptive eg. Often a novel or other long work has an overall setting e. Geographical location, historical era, social conditions, weather, immediate surroundings, and time of day can all be aspects of setting.
Setting provides a backdrop for the action. Think about setting not just as factual information but as an essential part of a story's mood and emotional impact.
Careful portrayal of setting can convey meaning through interaction with characters and plot. For example, in Jack London's Call of the Wild, the setting for Buck's adventures changes frequently, moving from a civilized environment to a wild and dangerous environment.
These changes of setting are crucial to Buck's development as a character and to the events in the tale. To create setting, provide information about time and place and use descriptive language to evoke vivid sights, sounds, smells, and other sensations. Pay close attention to the mood a setting conveys.
To portray setting in both fiction and non-fiction, Refer specifically to place and time: Darwin Provide clues about the place and time by using details that correspond to certain historical eras or events: With its quilted liner, the poncho weighed almost 2 pounds, but it was worth every ounce.
In April, for instance, when Ted Lavender was shot, they used his poncho to wrap him up, then to carry him across the paddy, then to lift him into the chopper that took him away. Empty benches rose on either side of him, but ahead, in the highest benches of all, were many shadowy figures.
They had been talking in low voices, but as the heavy door swung closed behind Harry an ominous silence fell. Rowling, Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix Describe the weather and the natural surroundings: They could not have had a more perfect day for a garden-party if they had ordered it.
Windless, warm, the sky without a cloud. Only the blue was veiled with a haze of light gold, as it is sometimes in early summer.
The gardener had been up since dawn, mowing the lawns and sweeping them, until the grass and the dark flat rosettes where the daisy plants had been seemed to shine.17 thoughts on “ Use Word Choice to Set the Mood ” annbrown11 May 4, at pm Hello good day, i will like to meet you in person, am miss Anna, am from France and am leaving in London, please contact me on my email id at ([email protected]), for more information about me.
The term sense of place has been used in many different ways. It is a characteristic that some geographic places have and some do not,  while to others it is a feeling or perception held by people (not by the place itself).
Do you get why this sentence doesn’t make logical sense? The writer didn’t compare like with like; he compared Picasso’s art to Van Gogh the artist. You know what he means to say, but you might well have to go back and re-read the sentence to understand what the author really wants to say.
The best writers re-write and re-write. New writers tend to think that editing merely means a brief read through for typos and spelling errors. That's the very last thing to do. I’ve been a reader of authors who have a strong sense of place, because in my own life I’ve been somewhat placeless.
I always traveled as a kid, and went to a new school every year. Continuing my reflections on living as if I only have a year to go. And joining in on a ‘Blog Tour’ too. A friend has contacted me this week and asked me to take part in a sort of blogging chain letter.