The tamburitza has six strings which are played in pairs. The strings are tuned as A, D, and G.
Playing music that covers more than one octave requires a great deal of skill because
the fingers must move swiftly up and down along the neck of the instrument.
The bridge is not glued to the body, but can be moved to make minor adjustments to the tuning.
The resonance of the double strings give the tamburitza a loud voice that can be heard clearly
even over the stomping of feet on a dance floor.
You can hear the sound of the tamburitza in the following version of the Shaker hymn
"Simple Gifts" written by Joseph Brackett, Jr. in 1848.
These are the lyrics:
'Tis the gift to be simple,
'tis the gift to be free,
'Tis the gift to come down where we ought to be,
And when we find ourselves in the place just right.
'Twill be in the valley of love and delight.
When true simplicity is gained,
to bow and to bend, we will not be ashamed
To turn, turn, will be our delight,
'Til by turning, turning, we come round right.
Today's Free MP3 Download: Greensleeves 694K MP3
Greensleeves came to the American Colonies along with the English pilgrims.
It has become a popular Christmas song known as "What Child Is This".
The classical guitar developed in Spain during the 15th century from the vihuela
which was a small four- or five-string guitar. By adding a sixth string, the guitar gained a
range comparable to the lute, which was a popular string instrument at that time.
The guitar's flat back and curved sides make it easier to handle than the bowl-shaped lute.
Today, the guitar is an indispensable instrument in such diverse genres as classical music,
folk music, jazz, soul music, rock-and-roll, etc. The popularity of the guitar is due
in part to its expressiveness and portability. Electric guitars were introduced in the 1930s.
Modern electric guitars have solid bodies and rely on the amplification of the string vibrations
through a loudspeaker to produce sound. The electronic signals can be modulated to produce
unusual sound effects.
Although the origin of music is not known, the first music probably
consisted of whistling, chanting, and rhythmical tapping. Instruments developed with the
discovery of the resonant properties of hollow tree trunks, bamboo pipes, and taut strings.
The Australian aborigine didgeridoo (also spelled "didgeridu") is believed to be one of the world's
oldest musical instruments. The Didgeridoo varies in size from 4 to 7 feet and is basically
a gum tree branch hollowed out by termites that is fitted with a beeswax mouthpiece.
Music is frequently downloaded using peer-to-peer sharing programs such as Napster,
Kazaa, iTunes, and Rhapsody. Sharing music has impacted the sales of musical recordings (CDs)
to such an extent that the recording industry has taken legal action to enforce copyright laws.
Some file sharing systems have gone out of business, while others have adapted by allowing
legal downloading of music and songs through paid subscription services.
Amazon.com: Music / Bestsellers
Madonna, the most popular and significant female artist in pop music, ... Popular Music, - Artist Name, - Album Title, - Song Title, Used Music ...
BUBL LINK: Popular music
Includes male and female artists and country music in MIDI format. ... Includes links to artists. Author: About.com Subjects: dance, popular music ...
Wall Of Fame - Greatest Popular Music Artists - UMO Music
The Artists who have Changed Popular Music History*. Beatles. Bee Gees. Led Zeppelin. Michael Jackson. Pink Floyd. Rolling Stones ...
Lyrics Search Engine - Popular Lyrics
Search and find music lyrics. ... Tip: Place artist name or song title first in your searches. New lyrics are added daily! Hate those ads? ...
Artist-specific Internet Sites
Indiana University School of Music Worldwide Internet Music Resources. Individual Musicians (All Genres) and Popular Groups ...
Free Music Download, MP3 Music, Music Chat, Music Video, Music CD ...
Free Music Downloads, MP3 Music, Music Videos and Music CD's at discount prices - Artist ... artists, songs, videos. Most popular songs on ARTISTdirect ...
Pop music - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Pop music is a common part of popular music, sometimes regarded as a ... And Rock Music Encyclopedia - United States music charts and popular artists pages. ...
Lycos Music - Your source for anything to do with music on-line: MP3, music news, radio stations, CD's, charts, videos, ...
Popular Artists in Concert ...
Bangla Music Video Mp3 Bangla News Bangla Band Song Bangla Gaan ...
First and biggest Bangla music portal featuring Bengali artist profile Bangla songs Bangla music video Bangla ... Most popular bangla song's music lyrics. ...
List of musicians
(Redirected from List of popular music performers). Jump to: navigation, search ... List of minimalist artists · List of noise musicians ...
BJ THOMAS - Country, Pop, Gospel Music Artists - Corporate ...
BJ Thomas, Country, Pop and Gospel Music Artist, may be available for your event. Book him if you can. You will have the time of your life!
freie mp3-Musik, Musik im Internet. MP3-Downloads, legal aufnehmen, frei - kostenlose Musik.
Free Christmas music downloads from ChristmasGifts.com. Download free Christmas carols and traditional holiday music. This site offers free searches for ...
CHRISTMAS SONGS - Christmas Songs
by Catholic.net Christmas songs can be enjoyed all through the year! January 27, 2004 / Here is a collection of Christmas songs. Simply click on the title, White Christmas ...
Kids Domain - Christmas Music on the Web
Christmas Music on the Web. Carolers Christmas cheer is all over the web, and we would like to highlight some of the best files we could find. ...
Search accuracy may be improved by properly spelling the search terms, but
retrieval may be increased by including common misspellings and foreign cognates
in the search query.