Preparación exámenes B1/B2 Lección 1: Internet
Communication Over The Internet
Communication is changing and the big difference is time. Today, the internet is the biggest communication machine in the world. To find what we want we need to open several windows, but we don’t have the time to read it all, so we have to become selective.
In this universe the most powerful way to communicate is through video. Nowadays the video already represents 53 percent of the internet traffic, until 2015, it will rise to 93 percent. This means that it is easier to find 50 people watching a video in the street than it is to find an elephant in the room.
Promoting a product through video raises the chances to be bought by 85 percent. And it is not a big surprise that in 2011, on YouTube alone, were watched one trillion videos.
One trillion videos
Well if within one million steps you can go from the north to the south of Portugal, with one trillion steps you can go from the Earth to Jupiter.
An average time in a text based website is 42 seconds. Any site with a video is 5 minutes and 50 seconds. And it is easy to understand why.
When browsing the internet we prefer to click play than to read a big text. Let’s see..
During these two minutes, in the whole world, 1200 sites have been launched, and other millions of contents on this internet.
And what about your message? How will you make it go through?
In the middle of such a confusion, your message needs to become alive, and this is what we do. We bring life to your message. By the way, if this was a text, would you still be reading?
one trillion steps
un billón de pasos
an average time
un promedio de tiempo
text based website
página web con mucho texto
Verbs and idioms
Verbos y expresiones
to become selective
to raise the chances
aumentar las probabilidades
within one million steps
a menos de un millón de pasos
to browse the internet
navegar por internet
in the whole world
en todo el mundo
1200 sites have been launched
se han lanzado 1200 webs
to make your message go through
hacer llegar tu mensaje
in the middle of such a confusion
en medio de este caos
to become alive
to bring life to your message
darle vida a tu mensaje
The Modern Menace – Spyware
Sometimes we install seemingly innocent programs, but unbeknown to us there are other programs waiting to be installed as well which are not innocent. Some piece of software just annoy us with adverts we can get rid of, but others can harm your computer or even your bank account by giving away crucial information about you. Let’s take a deeper look at this software.
The biggest problem with Spyware that makes it most irritating is that it places itself on your computer without you ever knowing. Spyware works in the background of your computer to the point where your computer system will become sluggish. You won’t know it is there until you either do an investigation of your computer processes, or notice it listed on your program register.
Most spyware will give up when it is found, you just uninstall it, scan your computer for more of them using remover software and then you are clean. However there are some which make it intentionally difficult for you to remove, I am talking REALLY difficult to remove! Don’t ask me why, it is not like you are just going to leave it there potentially giving out all your details across the web, but that shows the type of people who make these programs.
Spyware gets its title because it monitors your browser. In other words all of the websites you view are taken note of by the Spyware so that it can learn your diversions, activities, and even online buys. With this data the Spyware can forward tailored notices to your PC.
Pop-up ads are likely the most bothersome aspect of being infected. The notices can pop up on the exterior of a web browser, or Source from the webpage. Third party advertisers hire these programmers to exhibit their notices to a specific group.
This software can also harvest your personal details off your computer, or the websites where you fill in your details. Websites have named areas where you put your details, software can recognise you are putting your address in by the name of this area and remember it to transmit later.
People online can make money by directing you to sites of interest, which then pay the person who sent you there by tracking the process using cookies (all legit). Now these scammers can replace the cookies with their own (highly illegal) so that honest hard-working people online are cheated out of their money.
It is not all doom and gloom, there are programs out there that are perfectly legitimate and harmless, like the Alexa toolbar which I have on my computer. I allow it to track my activities willing and I know it is safe. However sadly 95% of the software out there has ulterior motives and can be used to steal from and manipulate you, that is why there are calls to ban this scourge completely.
(Article Source: Articlelogy.com)
anuncios a medida
Adjectives and adverbs
Adjetivos y adverbios
Verbs and idioms
Verbos y expresiones
to get rid of
to harm your computer
dañarte el ordenador
to give away
let’s take a deeper look at
vamos a profundizar en
to do an investigation of
to give out all your details
divulgar todos tus datos
to monitor your browser
rastrear tu navegador
to cheat out of their money
apoderarse ilícitamente con tu dinero
it is not all doom and gloom
no todo es tan apocalíptico
ESSAY: It’s better to find information in a library than on the internet. Discuss the pros and cons.
LETTER: For you, it is more important to study science and technology than to study the arts and humanities. Write a letter to your parents explaining your choice.
Technology Life Cycle (Source: Wikipedia).
This visual aid shows the adoption stages of a new product. Summarise the information by selecting and reporting the main features, and make comparisons where relevant.
REPORT: Write a report on the growth in social network patents, based on the graph.
REVIEW: You have just downloaded a new app for your phone or a new piece of software for your computer. Write a product review.
PROPOSAL: Write a proposal to your co-workers on how to avoid spyware and viruses on their work computers.