Success in life is simply the achievement of the goals you are proposing to reach. A fundamental role is represented by the identification of success, that is, by the goals you want to achieve.
The main reason for the failure is that people do not develop new plans to replace those plans that did not work.
If you are ready, let’s start.
The process for setting goal and OKR goes through 11 very specific steps to follow in order …
1 – Decide exactly what you want in each key area of your life
Begin by idealizing, imagining that there are no limits to what you can be, have or do. Imagine having all the time and money, all the friends and contacts, all the education and experience you need to succeed.
Imagine being able to shake a magic wand and make your life perfect in each of the four key areas of life.
Income: How much do you want to earn this year, next year and from today to five years?
Family: What kind of lifestyle do you want to create for yourself and your family?
Health: How would your health be different if it were perfect?
Net value: How much do you want to save and accumulate over the course of your working life?
In less than 30 seconds, note the three most important goals in life right now.
Whatever your answers to this fast method, most likely they are an accurate picture of what you really want in life.
2 – Write it down
Your goals must be in writing. They must be clear, specific, detailed and measurable.
You have to write to your goals as if they were to be produced in a place far away from you and therefore you must know how to explain them well. Make your description clear and detailed in every sense.
Only 3% of adults have written goals, while all others work for them.
3 – Set a deadline to reach it
Your subconscious uses deadlines as “forcing systems” to guide you, consciously and unconsciously, towards achieving your goals on schedule. If your goal is large enough, set lower deadlines.
If you want financial independence, you can set a goal of 10 or 20 years and then break it down, year after year, so you know how much you need to save and invest each year.
If for some reason you don’t reach ORKS by the deadline, set a new deadline. There are no unreasonable goals, only unreasonable deadlines.
4 – Identify the obstacles you will have to overcome to reach your every goal
Why are you not yet at your goal?
What is this for you?
Pareto’s “80/20” rule also applies to constraints. 80% of the reasons that are holding you back in achieving your goal are within you. They are the lack of a skill, a quality or a knowledge. Only 20% of the reasons you are not reaching your goal are outside of you.
So start looking inside yourself.
5 – Identify the knowledge, information and skills needed to achieve your goal
In particular, identify the skills you will need to develop to be at the top of your field.
Your weakest key skill sets the height of your income and your success. You can make a lot of progress if you work on that skill that holds you back more than others.
The key question to answer is: “What skill, if you develop it excellently, would have the greatest positive impact on your life?”
Whatever the skill, write it down, make a plan and work on it every day.
6 – Identify the people who will help you achieve your goal
Make a list of every person in your life that you will be working with to reach your goal.
Once you’ve identified the key people you need help with, ask yourself this question: “What’s for them too?”
Be “one who gives” rather than “one who takes”.
To achieve great goals you will need to help and support of OKR Software. A key person in a certain period of your life will make a difference. The most successful people are those who build and maintain the largest networks of other people who can help and from whom they can receive help in return.
7 – Make a list of everything you need to do to reach your goal
At this point put together the obstacles you will have to overcome, the knowledge and skills you will need to develop and the people you will need. List each step that you think you will need to follow to get your goal.
When new items come to mind, add them to your list until your list is complete.
Once you have made a list of all the things you need to do to reach your goal, you begin to understand that this goal is much more reachable than you had thought before.
8 – Organize your list in an action plan
Planning is essential. When you have a goal and a plan, you increase the probability of reaching your goals 10 times, by 1000%!
Organize your list in a series of sequential steps and priorities from the beginning to the completion of your goal.
Sequence: what should you do before doing something else and in what order?
Priority: what is more important and what is less important?
9 – Select the most important task for each day
Set priorities on your list using the 80/20 rule.
Ask yourself this question: “If you could only do one thing on this list, which activity is more important?” Whatever you answer this question, put a number “1” next to that activity.
So ask yourself, “If you could only do another activity on this list, what would be the most valuable use of my time?” Then write a number “2” next to that activity.
Repeat until you have your seven main tasks, organized by sequence and priority.
Focus and concentration are the keys to success. The focus means that you know exactly what you want to accomplish, concentration requires that you dedicate yourself to doing only those things that push you towards your goal.
10 – Develop the habit of self-discipline
Once you have decided on your most important task, concentrate with determination on that single activity until it is 100% complete.
Your ability to select your most important task and then work on it, without distractions or distractions, will double and triple the quality and quantity of your production and your productivity.
Single management is one of the most powerful of all time management techniques. This means that when you start the activity, you avoid all distractions and stay with that activity until it is completed.
11 – Exercise the visualization of your goals
Create clear, vivid, exciting and exciting images of your goals as if they were already a reality.
Look at your goal as if it had already been achieved. Imagine enjoying the achievement of this goal. If it’s a car, imagine driving this car. If it’s a vacation, see yourself already on vacation. If it’s a beautiful home you want, see yourself living in a beautiful home.
In visualizing, take a few moments to create the emotions that would accompany the success of your goal. A mental image combined with an emotion has a huge impact on your subconscious and on your super-conscious mind.
Visualization is perhaps the most powerful faculty at your disposal to help you reach your goals faster than you ever thought possible are.