Next Episode of Unearthed is
Unearthed decodes mysteries and combines scientific investigations with CGI animation to reveal the hidden secrets of iconic structures and monuments from around the globe -- ancient and present-day. The show explores how they were designed, built, used, and in some cases, lost and rediscovered. At critical points in each episode, stunning "blow apart" CGI animation deconstructs the structures to reveal hidden anatomy while exploring the secret history of each edifice, immersing us in the age and culture in which they were constructed.Archeologists travel to various parts of the world, in search of ancient secrets of mysterious civilizations. From the tallest pyramids to an underwater city, experts take viewers on an unforgettable journey.Unearthed fuses elements of engineering, history, geology, and archaeology, revealing the deepest secrets of each structure. We'll see the latest technology used to solve mysteries such as how the Parthenon still stands against earthquakes; how sticky rice was used to build the Great Wall of China; and what sacred secret lies beneath the Mayan temples of Chichen Itza.They may be older structures, but scientists and archaeologists use the latest technology including LiDAR scanning, X-ray imaging, carbon dating, and 3D printing techniques to reveal secrets of the past in ways that weren't possible before. Unearthed shows the future of science and technology are key to understanding our past, and without these developments, we wouldn't be able to unravel some of the world's greatest mysteries.
The Seven Wonders of the Ancient World are the engineering marvels built by great minds of long-lost civilizations, but we're not sure if some even existed; new discoveries and cutting-edge archaeological methods might prove what they looked like and why they disappeared.
A strange site called Saqqara is home to Egypt's very first pyramid, and here, experts use cutting-edge tech to reveal why the ancient Egyptians started building pyramids and if the mummified animals found here are evidence of a bizarre religious cult.
Alcatraz in San Francisco Bay is home to secrets that only cutting-edge archaeology can reveal, and using the latest science and the newest tech, experts search for hidden evidence to investigate why so many tried and failed to escape America's toughest jail.
The Roman Empire built Hadrian's Wall to guard its frontiers at the edge of the world; new discoveries reveal who the Romans were trying to keep out with this 72-mile-long megastructure and what it tells us about the ancient people of Iron Age Britain.
Looks like something went completely wrong!
But don't worry - it can happen to the best of us,
- and it just happened to you.
Please try again later or contact us.