The following sites contain information and resources on how to improve access and reduce barriers for individuals with disabilities.
Accessible Emergency Information
Northeast Texas Public Health District developed a website with emergency preparedness information primarily for those with limited hearing and sight abilities. The website includes videos with ASL and printable content in Braille.
2019 Most Affordable Online Colleges for Students with Learning Disabilities
A resource listing 21 colleges that represent the most affordable and supportive online schools for students with learning disabilities.
College Scholarships and Financial Aid for Students with Disabilities
A resource listing of scholarships, both narrowly- and broadly-focused, that can help students with disabilities pay for their educations, as well as additional resources for obtaining funding.
AHEAD (Association on Higher Education and Disability)
A professional organization that focuses on the promotion of accessibility of persons with disabilities in post-secondary education.
DAIS (Disability Access Information and Support)
Provides a variety of services and resources to those concerned with disability and access in higher education.
DO-IT (Disabilities, Opportunities, Internetworking and Technology)
Provides programs, publication and resources on a variety of topics. DO-IT promotes the use of computer and networking technologies to increase independence, productivity and participation of individuals with disabilities in education and employment. DO-IT also features information for faculty and administrators at post-secondary institutions to learn about how to create classroom environments and academic activities that maximize the learning of all students, including those with disabilities.
National Center for College Students with Disabilities (NCCSD)
Information, training, and resources for college students with disabilities, their families, and higher education faculty, staff and policymakers. The NCCSD is a federally funded program.
PepNET (Post-secondary Education Programs Network)
Assists post-secondary institutions across the nation to attract and effectively serve individuals who are Deaf and Hard of Hearing. Includes a free note taker training module and other free training resources.
Provides information, promotes advocacy and mentorship, and creates a network for individuals with hearing loss interested in or working in health care fields.
A comprehensive site containing resources on hearing loss, Deafness, education, employment and other areas pertaining to hearing loss.
Contains a wide variety of resources for students with disabilities who are interested in, or already working, in the nursing profession. This site is also a resource network for educators who are committed to the inclusion of more people with disabilities in the nursing profession.