In September, magnitude of the whole spectrum (380-700 nm) decreased significantly, and the absorption feature of phytoplankton with accessory pigments appeared slightly at the short 400-450 nm wavelength region around 440 nm, with values between 2.47 and 4.69 m-1.
Previous studies have demonstrated that fluctuations of [a*.sub.ph]([lambda]) were mainly associated with relative contributions of accessory pigments (Chl.b, Chl.c, and carotenoids) and chlorophyll present in phytoplankton cells under different light and nutrient conditions [15, 17, 23, 32-35].
Under drought stress Carotenoids are reduced and are not able to function as accessory pigments. In the present study, a significant decrease was observed in Carotenoids content under stress.
Anthocyanins also function as accessory pigments which protect the plant from water stress .
Others such as carotenoids and anthocyanins are known as accessory pigments that absorb light at different wavelengths than that absorbed by chlorophyll.
In nature, xanthophyll acts as accessory pigments to broaden light harvesting capability.
Among their changes are updating classifications of algae, modifying the section on the endosymbiosis and origin of eukaryotic photosynthesis, adding new types of root systems and algal swimming patterns, and adding the adsorption of spectra of all the chlorophylls and the accessory pigments
. They cover anatomy, photosynthesis, working with light, the biogeochemical role of algae, algal culturing, algae utilization, and oddities and curiosities in the algal world.
This mode of action blocks the formation of carotenoids (accessory pigments
) that protects chlorophyll in the plant and ultimately results in a characteristic bleaching of the plant tissue.
To cope with widely fluctuating light levels, many phytoplankton have certain red accessory pigments
called xanthophylls that act like gatekeepers.
Carotenoids are lipid-soluble pigments and antioxidants, which participate as accessory pigments
in the light-absorption process of photosynthetic organisms.
Thus, it becomes necessary to study the effects that the light intensity can bring about, changes on the cyanobacterial light harvesting accessory pigments
The accessory pigments
are less subject to photo oxidation than chlorophyll and tend to last longer in the fall.