IELTS writing Task 1 is different for the IELTS General test and IELTS Academic test. In the general exam you need to write a letter such as an invitation to a friend, a complaint, an apology, making an arrangement, an application or something informative like a newsletter.
The IELTS academic exam writing task 1 consists of 6 types of charts such as process diagrams, maps, bar charts, pie charts, tables or line graphs. You will need to write a report about one of these, but remember it is very different to writing task 2, it is not an ‘essay’ it is a factual report.
In academic task 1 there must be an overview and a factual description of the main parts of the task, no opinion is given and do not write a conclusion for this type of task. This part of the test is worth one third of your marks for the writing section, writing task 2 is worth much more in marks.
You only have about 20 minutes to complete writing task 1. For tips and advice on word count in task 1 writing click this link here to find out more.
IELTS General Writing Task 1 Lessons
Guide to IELTS academic and general writing task 1
How to write an informal letter in IELTS General
How to write a formal letter in IELTS General
Model answer for a formal letter: Job application
Model answer for an informal letter: Selling a Laptop
Model answer for an informal letter: Letter to a friend about a problem at work
Model answer for an informal letter: Letter to a friend about doing exercise
Model answer for a formal letter: Asking your boss for time off
IELTS Academic Writing Task 1 Lessons
Grammar and vocabulary:
Academic writing task 1 vocabulary: ‘number, amount, figure, total, accounted for’
Using vocabulary accurately to report on figures in writing task 1.
Vocabulary and grammar for describing trends.
How to use prepositions accurately.
Model Answer: Present-future maps IELTS 17, Norbiton town
Model answer: Floor plan lesson with grammar and analysis.
Model answer: 2 Maps with key grammar and vocabulary.
Model answer: 3 Diagrams/maps with model and analysis.
Model answer: 2 maps of a park layout with model answer and tips.
Model answer: How instant noodles are manufactured.
Model answer: How geothermal energy produces electricity
Model answer and grammar: The process of making dairy products.
Model answer and analysis: Recycling process of aluminium drinks cans.
Model answer: Natural process diagram on the lifecycle of a honey bee.
Model answer and analysis: Fast Food restaurants in the USA.
Model answer: Bar graph about passengers using public transport.
Model answer and analysis: UK Telephone calls.
Model answer and analysis: CO2 emissions in four different countries.
How to write about Line graphs with a future trend.
Line graph with a future trend: US energy consumption by fuel source (model answer).
Two model answers: 3 pie charts making comparisons about 4 types of nutrients.
Model answer: Pie chart and table about postgraduate students.
Model answer: Visitors to a museum, 2 pie charts with a table and exercise.
Model answer: Fuel sources in France, two pie charts.
Model answer and analysis: Underground railways in 6 cities.
Model answer and analysis: Consumer spending in 5 different countries.
Model answer: Factory workers table with dynamic data.