|Learn some tips and tricks from Kathryn Brickell Music school for singing. Sign up for singing lessons here, or inquire more through our Contact us page.|
Continuing from where we left off last. Missed those articles? Find them here and here. Here are a few other ways to help you sing in tune.
1. Learning to match pitches with a digital tuner:
This is a simple way to practice singing with good pitch while hitting the right notes. You may use any kind of digital tuner e.g. a guitar tuner or simply an online version of a digital tuner.
The idea behind it is … like tuning an instrument, you will learn to tune your voice. Digital tuners allow you to play the target note with an instrument, so you need to have a handy instrument to play the note you’re aiming for. You can then use the digital tuner’s display to help develop your “feedback loop”. This provides a visual result to know whether you’re singing too low or too high.
Hearing the note in your head:
“Audiation” is the skill of imagining music in your head. It is powerful for singing: it connects hearing music with singing it.
Singing the note:
While you sing, watch the tuner to see if your pitch is too low or too high. Gradually adjust your pitch until you hit the target note.
Listening carefully is the most important part of this exercise. Always try to hear whether you are too low or too high before checking the display. This way you will gradually develop your own inner tuner so that in future you won’t require the assistance of a digital tuner.
2. Learning to match pitch with an app
Apps such as Sing True are especially designed to help people learn to match pitch with their voice. They automatically choose notes in your comfortable singing range and give you a range of simple fun exercises to practice matching pitch. These Apps also allow you to practice matching pitch with your voice through visual graphics.
3. Learn to match pitch by recording yourself:
You can also check your pitch accuracy using an audio recorder and analysis software such as Audacity.
1. Record yourself singing a simple melody.
2. Use the software’s pitch analysis to view the actual pitch of your voice during the performance.
3. Identify notes which you sang off-pitch and then try again and correct them.
4. Analyse your pitch matching with software
Contact Kathryn Brickell Music by calling 800-285-5732, or visits us on our contact page here.