Although he is possibly the most talked about president in history, there are probably numerous things that you still don’t know about good ole’ Honest Abe. To start with, did you know that he hated being called Abe? Apparently even his wife called him Mr. Lincoln. And he wasn’t exactly a social person. According to some accounts he was often so lost in thought that he could walk right past you in the street. A man of few friends some would say. But Abraham Lincoln’s life was a lot more unique than that. He was the tallest president at 6’4″ (193 cm) and had the biggest shoe (size 14 US). He was also a wrestler, something that he was quite good at. Did your history book ever mention these Abraham Lincoln facts?
Combining his athletic pursuits with the fact that he never finished college would seem to make him an unlikely candidate for office. But with less than 12 months of formal schooling, that’s exactly what he did. While there are plenty of legends surrounding his life, there almost don’t have to be. His life was legendary just as it was. And that is probably at least partly why he is still one of the better known presidents. These are the 25 coolest things your history book never taught you about Abraham Lincoln!
He was a certified bartender
He was also a proficient wrestler. In fact, he is enshrined in the National Wrestling Hall of Fame and he only lost 1 in 300 matches
Lincoln was the first major leader in US history to advocate for women's suffrage
In 1876 a gang tried to steal Lincoln's body from his tomb. They were planning to request $200,000 in ransom.
For those of you not familiar with American history, Lincoln's assassin, John Wilkes Booth, was a famous actor. The craziest part? Lincoln was actually a fan!
Lincoln's pocket watch had a secret message engraved in it by a jeweler. It wasn't discovered until 2009. (the message marked the beginning of the Civil War)
Fido, Lincoln's dog, was also "assassinated" (he was stabbed to death by a drunk man 1 year following Lincoln's death). This is actually the reason that Fido (meaning "trusty" or "faithful") became such a popular dog name
There was a Balloon Corps that fought in the Civil War. It was established by Lincoln
Lincoln suffered from depression and avoided carrying knives for fear of using one on himself
He established the Secret Service just hours before his assassination but its intent was to fight against currency counterfeiting, not to protect the president. It wasn't until the assassinations of 2 more presidents that the Secret Service assumed that responsibility.
Lincoln doesn't have any confirmed living descendants. The last one (his great-grandson) died in 1985
Want to learn about another American President? Why not check out these 25 Interesting Things You Didn’t Know About George Washington.