Views: 0 Author: Site Editor Publish Time: 2022-08-05 Origin: Site
First of all, variable voltage was first discovered by Faraday, and it was not practically applied in various places until the 1980s. The device that uses the principle of electromagnetic induction to change the AC voltage is a kind of electrical energy conversion equipment. In the competition that the power generation field should output direct current and alternating current, the use of transformers for alternating current is one of its advantages. Transformers can convert electrical energy into high voltage and low current form, and then convert it back, so the loss of electrical energy in the process of transmission is greatly reduced. Usually we use a variety of voltages, such as 220V for living lighting and 220V for industrial safety lighting. 36V, the voltage of the welding machine needs to be adjusted, which is inseparable from the transformer. The transformer can reduce the voltage to the voltage we need through the principle of electromagnetic mutual inductance of the main and auxiliary coils. In the process of long-distance voltage transmission, we need to increase the voltage to a very high level to reduce the loss of voltage, usually to several thousand volts or even tens of kilovolts, to ensure that the voltage can meet the needs of different electricity consumption.
Careful people have seen a lot of letters on the transformer windings. And the model specifications of the transformer are also marked on it. Do you know the meaning of these letters?
There are actually many types and specifications of transformers. Transformers of different specifications have different meanings. Our common transformers, such as dry-type transformers, have a model between SCB-10KVA, and S means that the transformer is a three-phase dry-type transformer. , if S is replaced by D, it means that the transformer is single-phase, and C means that the winding of the transformer is a solid resin cast, that is, a dry-type transformer, B means a foil winding, and if B is designed with a serial number, it is also called the technical serial number , 1000KVA means that the transformer is 1000 kVA, and 10KV means the rated voltage.
The models of power transformers commonly used in our lives are usually composed of symbols representing the number of phases, cooling methods, voltage regulation methods, winding cores and other materials, as well as the capacity, rated voltage, and winding connection methods of the transformer.
Among the specifications and models of the transformer, if it is divided according to the voltage level of the transformer, the model of the transformer can be divided into 1000KV, 750KV, 500KV, 330KV, 220KV, 110KV, 66KV, 35KV, 20KV, 10KV, 6KV, etc.
To sum up, there are too many models and specifications of transformers on the market. Everyone makes a choice according to their own application. If you don’t understand, you are welcome to leave a message~~~
Copyright ©️ LINKWELL ELECTRIC (Shanghai) Co., Ltd. 沪ICP备12048522号-1
top exhaust fan
Industrial air conditioner
Electric control cabinet accessories