As per the Article 38 of the Directive Principle of State Policy under the Constitution of India, the State Government formulates and implements different welfare schemes in order to establish socio- economic and political stability in the state.
These welfare schemes are implemented under the responsibility of the state Government for which no support from the court is taken. These social welfare schemes are implemented by both State Government and the Central Government.
The Bihar Government is also implementing various schemes such as Saat Nishchay, housing schemes, pension schemes, educational schemes, child marriage prohibition schemes and so on.
Some of the important welfare schemes of Bihar are given below:
Welfare Schemes of the Bihar Government
With the aim of the complete development in the state, the Bihar Government has started Seven Resolves or Saat Nishchay on the ‘Bihar day’ (Bihar Diwas) on 22nd March, 2015. It is a part of the ‘Programme of Good Governance 2015-2020’.
These Saat Nishchay are the integrated and effective developmental programmes which are given below:
1. Aarakshit Rozgar Mahilao Ka Adhikaar
➤ It is one of the important schemes for the women empowerment in Bihar.
Since 20th January, 2016, the Bihar Government is providing 35% reservation to women in all government jobs in the state.
➤ Women Employment Scheme is being implemented in the state from 2015.
➤ The State Government has provided 50% reservation to women in the Panchayati Raj Institutions and Municipal bodies.
➤ Besides, the State Government has established Women Police Stations, Women Police Batallion, etc and reserved 35% jobs in the Bihar Police Service for women.
➤ The Woman Self Help Groups, formed under Jeevika, help to enhance women’s confidence and self-esteem.
2. Aarthik Hal, Yuvaon Ka Bal
This Nishchay consists of 5 schemes which will focus on education, skill development and employment opportunities for youth of Bihar, such as:
➤ Under the Students Credit Card Scheme, students who have passed their class 12 examination can get an education loan upto ` 4 lakh from banks through the student credit cards.
➤ Under the Bihar Start up Policy 2017, a provision for Venture Capital Fund of ` 500 crore has been approved to support the youth for establishing businesses and will nurture new business ideas in the state of Bihar. The State Government has approved a proposal to provide free wifi in all the unversities and colleges in the state of Bihar.
➤ Under the scheme Mukhyamantri Nishchay Swayam Sahayata Bhatta Yojana, which was launched on 2nd October, 2016, every unemployed and youth of Bihar in the age group of 20-35 years will get ` 1000 every month for two years.
➤ Under Kushal Yuva Yojana, the unemployed youth in the age group of 15-25 years, who have passed at least 10th standard will get theoretical and practical training which will help to enhance their interpersonal skills and communication level.
4. Har Ghar Bijli Lagaatar
➤ This scheme was launched on 15th November, 2016. The aim of this scheme is to provide electricity to every household in the rural areas of the state.
➤ Under this scheme, around 1,387 villages have been identified which have no electricity connection.
➤ Around 217 villages are in inaccessible areas, where the State Government will provide electricity through renewable energy.
5. Ghar Tak Pakki Gali-Naliyaan
Under this scheme, all the unreached habitations of the state will be connected to the nearest paved roads. This Nishchay consists of three other schemes which were started on 28th October, 2016, Such as:
➤ Mukhyamantri Gramin Gali Naali Pakkikaran Nishchay Yojana The aim of this scheme is to construct pucca lane and drains in rural areas of the state. The scheme is being operated by the Panchayati Raj Department.
➤ Gramin Tola Sampark Nishchay Yojana The aim of this scheme is to provide all weather road connectivity to all the uncovered villages which left out by the Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana (PMGSY) and Chief Minister Gram Sampark Yojana (CMGSY) under PMGSY. It has covered those villages by the end of 2019-20 which have a population of 500 or more throughout the state.
Likewise, CMGSY also provides all weather road connectivity to all the villages with a population ranging from 250 to 499 in 27 districts.
For the remaining 11 districts, these facilities are provided in the areas which have a population of 250 or less.
➤ Mukhyamantri Sahari Naali Gali Pakkikaran Nishchay Yojana This scheme will be operated by the Department of Urban Development and Housing. It has the following aims: – To link all the wards with the nearest paved road in the towns.
– To construct necessary roads and drains in the wards to link each house with a paved road.
– To construct Portland Cement Concrete (PCC) roads and interlocking paths.
– To construct drain along the path where the PCC road is to be constructed.
6. Har Ghar Nal Ka Jal
The aim of this scheme is to provide clean drinking water to every citizen of Bihar, without any discrimination.
This Nishchay consists of four other schemes which were launched on 27th September, 2016, such as:
➤ Chief Minister Rural Drinking Water Scheme (Quality Affected Area) The aim of this scheme is to provide water through pipe line to the areas where the water is affected by iron, fluoride and arsenic. It will also cover those areas which have 500 households. This scheme is being implemented by the Public Health and Engineering Department.
➤ Chief Minister Rural Drinking Water Scheme This scheme is operated by the Panchayati Raj Department.
The aim of this scheme is to provide clean drinking water to all the households of Gram Panchayats of the state till the year 2019-20.
➤ Chief Minister Urban Drinking Water Scheme The aim of this scheme is to provide clean drinking piped water to all the 143 municipal corporation areas of the state. This scheme is being implemented by the Department of Urban Development and Housing.
➤ Chief Minister Rural Drinking Water Scheme (Non-quality Affected Area) This scheme covers only those areas where the water quality is not affected or in those areas where the water supply schemes are already being run by the State Government. This scheme is being implemented by the PublicHealth and Engineering Department, Bihar.
7. Shauchalaya Nirman Ghar Ka Samman
This scheme was launched on 27th November, 2016. It aims to provide toilet facilities to all the households of the state.
It consists of two other schemes such as:
➤ Shauchalaya Nirman (Urban Areas) Yojana The aim of this scheme is to provide toilet facilities to all urban households which do not have such facility. The scheme is being implemented by Department of Urban Development and Housing in all the 143 municipalities of the state.
➤ Lohiya Swachh Bihar Abhiyan This scheme is being operated by the Department of Rural Development.
The aim of this scheme is to cover all the rural households (also APL families) which were left out by the Swachh Bharat Mission and provide ` 12000/- amount, to both APL and BPL families to construct the toilets without any discrimination.
8. Awasar Badhe, Aagein Padhein
The aim of this scheme is to establish institutions of higher learning along with vocational and technical education institutions at sub-division and district level.
This Nishchay aims to establish following institutions:
➤ One para-medical institute in each district (5 districts already have been covered).
➤ One General Nursing and Midwifery (GNM) school in every district (5 district already have been covered).
➤ One polytechnic institute in each district.
➤ One engineering college in each district.
➤ One women industrial training institute in each district.
➤ One nursing college in each medical college in every district.
➤ One government industrial training institute in each sub-division.
➤ One Auxiliary Nurse and Midwives (ANM) school in each sub-division.
➤ Five new medical colleges in the state.
Other Welfare Schemes of the Bihar Government
Other important welfare schemes of the Bihar Government :
Students and YouthWelfare Schemes
The ongoing students and youth welfare schemes of Bihar :
Bihar Student Credit Card Yojana
This scheme was launched on 2nd October, 2016, by the State Government.
Under this scheme, students who have cleared their class 12th examination and are under the age of 25 years will get a loan of ` 4 lakh from banks through these cards.
Civil Seva Protsahan Yojana
The State Cabinet has approved this scheme on 15th May, 2018. The aim of this scheme is to provide cash reward to the SC/ST and backward class students who have cleared the UPSC and BPSC, preliminary exams.
The candidates will get ` 1 lakh in order to pass preliminary level exam of UPSC and ` 50,000 for preliminary level exam of BPSC. For this candidates should apply through online mode.
Kushal Yuva Yojana
This scheme was launched on 2nd October, 2016. An agreement has been signed between the Bihar Government andMaharashtra Knowledge Corporation Limited (MKCL) in order to improve the interpersonal communication skills and soft skills of Bihar youth.
Free wifi in All Universities/Colleges
To provide e-Governance, e-Technology and e-Learning to students, the State Government of Bihar is providing internet/wifi facilities in all universities, colleges, engineering colleges,medical colleges, etc. This scheme is being implemented by BELTRON (Bihar State Electronics Development Corporation).
District Registration and Counselling Centre
The State Government has established District Registration and Counselling Centre in each district in Bihar on 2nd October, 2016. The aim of this centre is to operate schemes like Student Credit Card Scheme, Swayam Sahayata Bhatta Yojana and Kushal Yuva Yojana.
These centres have many facilities for applicants such as help desk, waiting room, token counter, drinking water and washrooms, etc.
Social Welfare Schemes
Important social welfare schemes of Bihar :
Safe City Surveillance Scheme
This scheme has been launched by the State Government in the year 2017.The aim of this scheme is to check crime against women. Under this scheme, the State Government has decided to bring all the major public places under watch of CCTV cameras and improve overall crime control in the state.
Mukhyamantri Gramin Awas Yojana
This scheme was launched on 4th October, 2018, by the State Government of Bihar. This scheme is for those families who were not covered by the Pradhan Mantri Gramin Awas Yojana. Under this scheme, the beneficiary gets financial assistance of ` 1.20 lakh.
Mukhyamantri Kshetra Vikas Yojana
This scheme was launched in the year 2011-12. The aim of this scheme is to formulate a balanced regional development of the urban as well as rural areas of the state.
Mukhyamantri Bhikshavriti Nivaran Yojana
This scheme is being implemented under the ‘Saksham’ as mission by the SocialWelfare Department of Bihar.
This scheme aims to protect and promote rights of beggers (especially women beggers) by ensuring their care, protection, development, socio-economic and cultural empowerment through enabling policies and programmes.
Kabir Anteyeshti Anudan Yojana
This scheme was launched in the year 2007 by the Sate Government. Under this scheme, a BPL (Below Poverty Line) family gets a financial assistance of ` 1500 by the government during the death of a family member to perform the last rites.
National Family Benefit Scheme
Under this scheme, financial assistance is provided to a BPL family on the death of its primary income producer.
A financial help of ` 20,000 is provided to a BPL family on the death of its income producer who must have the age between 18 to 64 years.
Bihar Ayushman Bharat Yojana
Under this scheme, the patients can get online free consultation from doctors.
There is no registration fee under this scheme. The under priviledged sections get an insurance of ` 5 lakh by the State Government of Bihar.
Bihar State Social Security Pension Scheme
Under this scheme, the benefit is given to those persons who have the age group of 60-64 years and belonged to poor families whose annual income is less than ` 5,500 in case of urban regions and less than ` 5000 in case of rural regions.
Under this scheme, the beneficiary gets a pension of ` 400 per month. In case of bonded labour, there is no age bar.
Bihar Mob Lynching Victim Compensation Scheme
Under this scheme, the Bihar Government is providing compensation of ` 1 lakh to ` 3 lakh to the family of the mob lynching victim.On the other hand, the State Government has decided to take strict actions against such criminal act in the state.
Women and Child Welfare
The important ongoing women and child development/welfare schemes of Bihar :
Mukhyamantri Kanya Vivah Yojana
This scheme was introduced in the year 2007-08. Under this scheme, financial assistance is given to the poor families at the time of girls marriage who have attained the age of 18 years.
The other goals of this scheme are to discourage child marriages, encourage marriage registration and encourage girls’ education.
Sapno Ko Chali Chhoone
It is a joint initiative by Jagran Pehel and United Nations Propulation Fund (UNFPA) which was started in the, year 2009, for creating gender equality, gender sensitive environment among college going girls in Bihar.
Sapano Ko Chali Chooney (SKCC) has become an important programme byWomen Development Corporation (WDC) of Bihar in the year 2011.
Thus, it is being implemented by both Jagran Pehel andWDC,Government of Bihar.
This programme is aimed to provide leadership training or gender related issues. After the training, students will work to create awareness among general masses.
In the last three phases, the programme covered almost 50% of the districts across 9 commissionaries in Bihar.
Lakshmibai Social Security Pension Scheme for Widows
This scheme was launched in the year 2007 by the State Government. Under this scheme, widow women of the age group more than 18 years get benefit of pension.
Under this scheme, a pension of ` 400 per month is provided to widow women. This scheme covers those widows who are not eligible for the NationalWidow Pension Scheme.
Mukhyamantri Nari Shakti Yojana
This is a comprehensive scheme which aim to empower women socially, economically and culturally. It focusses on those women, who are affected by domestic violences.
Besides this, setting up of women’s helpline, short stay homes, protection homes, constitution of Self Help Groups (SHGs), promoting inter-caste marriage and so on are also a part of this scheme.
All the 38 districts of the state have fully functioning women helpline which provides free psychological and legal aid to the victims of domestic violence.
Prevention of Child Marriage Scheme
This scheme was launched under the Child Marriage Prohibition Act, 2006.
The aim of this scheme is to stop marriages conducted before the eligible age declared by the Indian law. Under this scheme, the eligible age for marriage for girls is 18 years or above and for boys is 21 years or above.
Mukhyamantri Sanwasin Vivah Anudan Yojana
This scheme was launched by the Department of SocialWelfare, Government of Bihar. This scheme aims to provide financial assistance to those orphan girls who stay in Government run homes and have reached the marriageable age. These are the girls whose parents and caste identities are unknown. Under this scheme,` 20,000 is provided to orphan girls and the amount is paid to the beneficiary girl through cheque by the suprintendent of the home in which she lives.
Schemes for Physically Challenged People
Some important schemes/programmes for physically challenged people of Bihar :
Bihar Disability Pension Scheme
It is a Bihar Government scheme which covers only those persons with disabilities who are not covered under the Indira Gandhi National Disability Pension Scheme (IGNDPS).
Under this scheme, a pension of ` 400 is given to the applicant. There is no minimum and maximum age limit for availing the pension.
Indira Gandhi National Disability Pension Schemes (IGNDPS)
It is a part of National Social Assistance Programme (NSAP) which was introduced in Bihar in the year 2009-10.
It is a centrally sponsored scheme in which a beneficiary (having severe of multiple disabilities) receives an amount of ` 400 per month.
Mukhyamantri Nishaktajan Shiksha (Loan) Yojana
Under this scheme, educational loan is provided to students suffering from disabilities, who want to pursue higher professional education.
Under this scheme, educational loan will be provided for degree, diploma or other equivalent recognised technical and commercial courses which are recognised by Government of India, Universities Grants Commission (UGC) and All India Council for Technical Education (AICTE).
Assistance to Disabled Persons for Purchase/Fitting of Aids and Appliances (ADIP Scheme)
This is a centrally sponsored scheme. It aims at helping the needy disabled persons by bringing suitable, durable, scientifically manufactured modern, standard, aids and appliances within their reach.
These can promote their physical, social and psychological rehabilitation, by reducing the disabilities effects and enhance their economic potential. It is mandatory that the aids and appliances supplied under the scheme must be ISI certified.
Mukhyamantri Nishaktajan Swarozgar Yojana
Under this scheme, loans are given to persons suffering from disabilities for self employment and for the purpose to establish small scale industries, manufacturing units for agriculture and so on.
Under this scheme, a maximum loan of ` 1.5 lakh is provided to beneficiary persons at an annual interest rate of 5% and the repayment of the loan amount started after 1 year of sanction of the loan. This scheme is being operated by the Bihar State Backward Class Finance and Development Corporation.
Mukhyamantri Samarthya Yojana
This is a state sponsored scheme. It aims to facilitate physical, social, economic and psychological rehabilitation of persons with disabilities.
Under this scheme, the beneficiaries get aids and appliances such as tricycles, hearing aids, calipers, spectacles for low vision and other similar and useful aids.
Scheme of National Awards for Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities
This is a centrally sponsored scheme.
The government has decided to encourage the physically challanged persons through national awards in different categories like Best Employee, Best Creative Child, Role Model and so on.
Scholarship for Disabled Students
Under this scheme, the State Government provides financial assistance in the form of grants and scholarships to students suffering from disabilities for continuing their education. The scholarships are given to students studying at any level. For example, from Class I to Post Graduate level and for the courses whether vocational or technical.
Mukhyamantri Kanya Suraksha Yojana
This scheme aims to prevent female foeticides, encourage girl child birth, encourage birth registration and improve sex ratio of the state.
Under this scheme, the benefits are given to only two girls per family who were born after 22nd November, 2007, in BPL families. The State Government invests ` 2,000 in the name of girl in Child Carrier Balanced Plan of UTI Mutual Fund.
Other Important Schemes
Indira Awas Yojana
It is centrally sponsored, rural housing scheme which came into effect on 1st April, 1999. The aim of this scheme is to provide shelter to the poors of Below Poverty Line (BPL), SC/STs and bonded labourers. The government provides a grant of ` 20,000 per unit in the plain areas and ` 22,000 in hilly/ difficult areas for construction of houses. It also provides grants of ` 10,000 for conversion of a kutcha house into pucca/semi pucca house.
Under this scheme, the household is alloted in the name of a female member of the beneficiary household. Under this scheme, funding is shared between the central and state government in the ratio 75:25 respectively.
This scheme was launched on 1st April, 2001 by the Central Government. It has been amalgamated into the state plan since year 2002-03. The aim of this scheme is to provide food security to senior citizens who are not getting the National Old Age Pension (NOAP) but have its eligibility.
Under this scheme, the old destitutes are being provided 10 kg food grain (6 kg wheat 4 kg rice) per month free of cost as food security. This scheme is being operated by the Food Supply and Commerce Department of Government of Bihar.
Integrated Child Development Scheme
This scheme was launched by the Central Government on 2nd October, 1975, in 33 experimental blocks in the country.Out of these, 3 blocks were in Bihar.
The scheme is running in all the 38 districts of Bihar. The aim of this scheme is to provide a package of six services i.e. supplementary nutrition (non-formal pre-school education for children) between the age of 3-6 years, and immunisation health check ups, referral services and nutrition and health education to mothers.
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act (MGNREGA) 2005
It is an Indian labour law and social security measure which was launched by the Central Government. It aims to guarantee the ‘Right toWork’. To achieve this goal, the scheme provides at least 100 days of wage employment in a financial year to every household whose adult members volunteer to do unskilled manual work.
If any situation arises due to which work is not provided within 15 days of applying, then applicants are entitled to an unemployment allowance. Under this scheme, funding is shared between the Central and State Governments in the ratio of 75:25, respectively.
Integrated Programme for Older Persons
This scheme was launched by the Central Government in the year 1992. The aim of this scheme is to improve the quality of life of senior citizens by providing basic amenities like shelter, food,medical care and recreational opportunities.
The scheme has provided upto 90% of the project cost to NGOs for establishing and maintaining old age homes.
Mukhyamantri SC/ST Udyami Yojana
It is a Bihar Government sponsored scheme. Under this scheme, the State Government provides a loan of ` 10 lakh to SC/ST people for the establishment of industry and elimination of unemployment among youth of these groups. The half of the loan amount will be available without any interest and rest of the loan amount can be returned through 84 easy installments.