Fatigue also called tiredness, exhaustion and lassitude is completely different from drowsiness. Drowsiness is the need to sleep, whereas fatigue is lack of energy and motivation. Many times depression, underactive thyroid, sleeping disorders, cancer, diabetes, anemia and medications cause fatigue. Fatigue, which is pro-longed for at least six month is also called chronic fatigue. Fatigue is described as physical fatigue and mental fatigue.
Physical fatigue means lack of physical activity, whereas mental fatigue means you’re more slanted towards sleep and being unable to concentrate properly. Listed below are few herbs, which will help to deal with your problems of fatigue.
6 Remedies For Fatigue
St John’s wort
St John’s wort has been used for ages to combat anxiety, sleep disorders and depression, which are main causes of fatigue. This herb helps to regain clear thinking because of it’s calming effects.
Hypericin and hyperforin are the two important compounds available in St John’s wort, which helps to inhibit the breakdown of neutrotransmitters in the brain for those suffering from depression. St John’s wort herb is available over the counter local shops in tablet as well tincture form. Pregnant and nursing women should avoid using this herb.
Ginseng is a popular herbal plant that helps to fight fatigue. American ginseng contains ginsenosides, which are phytochemicals, thereby helping the body to relieve from external stress.
It contains antioxidants, which believes to support immune system to function properly. Ginseng helps to relieve fatigue with patients suffering from cancer and can be taken even for a long term. Ginseng can be consumed as a tea or supplement form.
Gingko also well known as ‘gingko biloba’ is an excellent herb useful in treating numerous health conditions including fatigue. The leaves of this plant is used for it’s medicinal purposes such as exhaustion.
Gingko biloba relieves from anxiety and depression, which is due to bad blood circulation. This herb contains antioxidants helping to improve your blood circulation and is best taken in tea form.
Best Vitamins For Chronic Fatigue
Herbal Remedies For Adrenal Fatigue
Natural Cure For Adrenal Fatigue
Natural Cure For Chronic Fatigue Syndrome
Stinging nettle has many natural properties that helps to fight exhaustion and chronic fatigue. Nettle contains minerlas, high amounts of chlorophyll, malic acid, potassium, copper, manganese, vitamins, anti-inflammatory compounds and antioxidants, which helps to heal the body and restore energy.
Stinging nettles helps to open blood vessels and increase blood circulation throughout the body, thereby helping to relieve exhaustion and fatigue. This herb is best to be taken as a daily tonic.
Maca root is a natural herb that has adaptogenic properties increasing body’s stamina towards trauma, stress and fatigue. Consumption of maca root supplements help to boost immune system and increases power, thereby helping to relieve from fatigue.
Maca root is best for treating mild fatigue or chronic fatigue syndrome. This herb is a nutty flavor and can be taken raw or as a cooked vegetable. The powder of this herb is useful in adding in to nutritional shakes and sprinkled over fruit or vegetables.
Echinacea is a popular herb containing immune stimulating and anti-inflammatory properties, which is considered as blood purifier, thereby treating chronic fatigue. Echinacea is to be consumed every two hours and the dose should be then reduced to three times a day for optimal immune function. It is recommendable to take 40 drops of the extract or 1000 milligrams of the ground herb.
If you wish to prevent from fatigue eat a healthy and balanced diet, which includes fruits and vegetables, maintain a consistent sleep schedule, drink at least 8 ounce of water daily and exercise regularly.
Caution: Please use Home Remedies after Proper Research and Guidance. You accept that you are following any advice at your own risk and will properly research or consult healthcare professional.