describe the concept of helping clients during the case management process
Write a 700- to 1,050-word paper based on your selected case study. Include the following in your paper: • A brief description of the selected case
• The best intervention practices when working with clients and how this can have a positive effect on a client’s behavioral patterns
• The concept of helping and intervention practices that should be used in this case
Format your paper consistent with APA guidelines.
Selected Case Study Below
The Case of Rick Rick is a 16-year-old male who has had numerous encounters with law enforcement. Currently, Rick is on juvenile probation and attends an alternative school. Among other things, Rick was diagnosed with attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder in his early childhood. Rick’s parents have brought Rick in for counseling to your office because even they do not believe that his probation supervision is sufficiently restrictive. Rick has routinely been in trouble at school and in the community. He surrounds himself with a number of younger youth who look up to his acts of violence and intimidation. Rick also experiences periods of very serious anger and is given to outbursts when he is frustrated. He has been known to hit other kids when he is angry and he has even made threats at teachers during his periods of intense fury. Rick is also very good at lying. He lies constantly about his whereabouts and is difficult to locate. He is fond of going from house to house and friend to friend. He also stays out late despite his parent’s attempts to keep him from doing so. He breaks the city ordinance curfew for juveniles. In fact, two nights ago Rick was reportedly out in a neighborhood at 2:00 a.m. with some other youth, drinking beer and beating mailboxes with an aluminum bat. One of the girls who was with the group told him that he was immature and he should stop. Rick called her a number of inappropriate names and then threw a brick at the girl, luckily he missed. At age 11, Rick was diagnosed with conduct disorder in addition to his diagnosis of ADHD. He exhibited acts of cruelty toward pets and other animals and seemed indifferent to the pain they suffered. In fact, he indicated a bizarre and morbid fascination with their death. The violence committed by Rick continued to progress and, by the age of 13, Rick had coerced one of his 9-year-old female cousins into sexual intercourse. In fact, he had done this on three different occasions, and, were it not for another family member accidentally walking in on the third circumstance of victimization, it is unknown how many times he would have done that. This was reported to the authorities and Rick was charged with this offense in juvenile court.