Kiwi is a small fruit that has a sweet and tangy flavor. It is rich in nutrients for humans such as vitamin A, vitamin C, vitamin K, and vitamin E, folate, and potassium. It helps in improving eyesight. But do dogs also get nutrients from kiwi? Can dogs eat kiwi? Well, the short and little tricky answer is yes. Dogs can eat kiwi but make sure you remove the skin and seeds before giving them. As with any new food, it is recommended to introduce your dog slowly so that you can determine if your dog has an allergy, intolerance, or any other problem.
Kiwi Nutritional Facts
|Nutrition||Values as per (1 kiwi \ 69 g)|
|Carbohydrates (g)||10.1, including 6.2 g of sugar|
|Vitamin C (mg)||64|
|Beta carotene (mcg)||35.9|
|Lutein & zeaxanthin (mcg)||84.2|
|Vitamin E (mg)||1.0|
|Vitamin K (mcg)||27.8|
Is It Safe Feeding Kiwi To Your Dog?
Dogs can eat a small piece of kiwi, and that too if given after removing the skin and the seeds. Despite the fact that kiwi provides several benefits to humans, it can be harmful to dogs and can cause intestinal blockages and stomach upset. Make sure your dog does not eat seeds as, like many other fruits, kiwi also contains seeds. These seeds can be fatal if ingested in large quantities.
Most importantly, be sure to remove the skin of the kiwi. The skin is not toxic, it is hard to chew and can cause choking hazards, especially for small dogs, and if gulped the whole, it can cause obstruction in the digestive tract, encouraging other health problems. This would only need surgery to remove the skin from the tract, and they can be responsible for the sad demise of the dog, so it’s best to be careful.
Overeating of kiwis can cause stomach upset, and if your dog experiences any of the mentioned symptoms, then you should immediately rush to the vet so that he can perform the surgery well and on time. The symptoms may include:
- Abdominal pain
- Loss of appetite
- Swollen belly
Also, inform your vet if your dog is already suffering from any kind of allergy so that he can determine the mode of treatment.
How To Serve Kiwi To Your Dog?
As it is always said, you should rinse every fruit in water before any preparation. Introduce the fruit in small amounts as giving in large amounts could be life-threatening. Cut the fruit into small pieces for easy digestion and to avoid the risk of choking. Always remove the hard ends as they can pose the risk of blockages. Frozen kiwi would be an excellent idea. It can even be combined with healthy frozen fruit or veg popsicle for hydrating your dog during hot summer days.
If your dog develops any side effects, stop giving them the fruit, and if your dog has a sensitive stomach, avoid giving the kiwi. Get to the vet if they get severe with the passing days. The issue may include vomiting and diarrhea, and most of the time, they are self-limiting. This includes a bland diet with plenty of water, as there is a risk of dehydration and deterioration. This way, you can be sure which food is responsible for the toxicity, and you can avoid it in the future.
Your dog can eat kiwi but make sure you remove the skin and the seeds prior to offering him. Although the skin is not toxic, it is hard to chew and can cause choking hazards, especially for small dogs, and if gulped the whole, it can cause obstruction in the digestive tract, encouraging other health problems. If your dog ate too many kiwis, then you should look for the symptoms such as vomiting, diarrhea, drooling, swollen belly, loss of appetite, etc., and contact your vet immediately. Well, with all the food types, moderation is the key.
To get a detailed info about other options do visit our post for what fruits can dogs eat safely?
You might also like to read
I am a pet lover who spent her childhood in the company of a friendly Labrador Retriever. I believe that pets make our lives more enjoyable and stress-free. Currently, I have two budgies Kiwi & Koko as pets, and planning to adopt a pup soon. So, here I am, attempting to share my experiences and knowledge to improve the lives of pets and pet owners.