Grandma would be so disappointed, I knew. She’d been looking forward to the marathon for months. There wasn’t much on her social calendar, not much else besides sitting at home watching tv, or tending her garden, maybe shopping once a week. She’d never win any medals, but walking for miles with her out-of-state friends during the event was her highlight. They never minded the chill or the snow flurries, chattering about the events of the years before as they brought up the rear. 

I couldn’t do anything else though; flyers, social media, nothing could encourage the apathetic community. We’d have to cancel unless I could find more participants. I decided to bake some of her favorite cookies to soften the blow when I gave her the sad news. 

I added the ginger and nutmeg. I’d make Grandma a house to decorate; that would keep her busy and distracted from her disappointment. I cut pans of walls, roofs, and a variety of people. 
She’d have an entire neighborhood to decorate. That would last her until Christmas. 

The house was filled with the rich smells of spices when I finally finished putting the last baked tray on the full counter. It was only the afternoon, but I was exhausted and went to nap soon after.

I woke to the sound of pan clattering. Patrick had better not be getting into Grandma’s undecorated cookies! “Don’t touch the good ones,” I yelled, throwing on a robe and hurrying to the kitchen. “There’s broken ones on the plate for us.”

 It wasn’t my husband. Covering the curtains, walking upright on the floor, and jumping on the trays, were the gingerbread people I had baked earlier. 

One little gingerbread cookie scampered away, then turned to look back. He took a few steps closer. I had a brilliant idea. What if the marathon could be saved after all? This might be the perfect (though certainly unorthodox) companion for Grandma. I held out my hand to the gingerbread people on the kitchen floor. “Little gingerbread man, “ I began. “How’d you like to run as fast as you can?”
