Read, evaluate & answer reading comprehension questions as a class
Build reading comprehension skills with your class, reading or listening to texts, highlighting relevant evidence and forming the answers to questions together.
Save time with step-by-step teaching notes for each unit, including useful strategies for embedding comprehension and full answers in the print teacher’s guide.
Measure progress and identify gaps in knowledge with approximately 30 self-marking low-stakes interactive quizzes per year group and progress tracking.
Make comprehension practice relateable with texts from well-loved authors including Dick King-Smith, Michael Morpurgo and William Shakespeare.
Why not request a free 30 day trial? Find out what's available below.
Request a free trial of Cracking Comprehension and enjoy access to online comprehension activities and resources for 30 days without paying a thing.
Try online sample lessons with your pupils and see how easy it is to join the 3,500 other schools already Cracking Comprehension
I love it! I've been using the Reception level for my class and it's been great. Giving the children lots of confidence as it progresses gradually. My class have really enjoyed it
...we really like how CC is packaged with the whole class digital version and then practice and assessments.
Cracking Comprehension resources...provide the children of Barry Island Primary School with stimulating and meaningful learning opportunities for the 21st century learner...
Cracking Comprehension has resulted in all children in Year 6, (56 pupils) achieving a minimum of 100 on the scaled score and an average scaled score for the cohort of 109.1.
In editions 2 and 3 of Cracking Comprehension Years 1-6, published in 2013 and 2016 respectively, we wrongly attributed the text for The Winged Horse to the author Rosalind Kerven. This is incorrect. The Winged Horse as featured in Cracking Comprehension editions 2 and 3 is not the work of Rosalind Kerven. We apologise for any inconvenience caused.
Each year group pack contains:
Cracking Comprehension Costs:
Purchase includes one year's access to the digital resources.
Annual subscription to the digital resources is charged as:
You can access your Cracking Comprehension subscription via My Rising Stars
If you have any problems accessing your subscription please contact our digital support team