Ethics and Moral Reasoning
The belief of ethics will give an explanation to the solution of inequality of gender and consider the questions that will assist in removing said issues that remain in the society.
An increasing occurrence antiquated in the spotlight for quite some time now, Inequality of Gender continues to be an obstacle for some and toleration for others in our society at the moment. Like even in America, there are sections that endure the disadvantages of applying laws that will embrace and encourage equality of gender. This paper will talk about the effectuation of a few theories of ethics and will allow us to accentuate the dilemma and talk about it in aspects. The fact that there are less people who are willing to work towards the principle is what makes this question important.
Today, considering we have been made aware of and have the knowledge and the ability to bring forth change, regardless if it is possible by applying theories of ethics or expressing our viewpoint, we should certainly move forward. In consistency accompanied by the belief of Utilitarianism, the beliefs of ethics, Deontology and Rights will be brought together into this paper so that a perceptual ending can be achieved.
Application of Deontology:
The belief of Deontology affirms that the honesty of an action should be decided by responsibilities or regulations. In other words, this means that in day to day circumstances people need to obey laws and statutes so they can carry out their responsibilities. [Catherine Rainbow (2015)] I feel that gender equality relates to deontological ethics because every person has a duty and obligation to look at and act toward everyone equally regardless of any ramifications. The theory of deontological should be built totally by considering ones duties and the rights of other people.
According to Immanuel Kant, a German philosopher, the Deontology belief consists of three prime features which combine Duty, The Categorical Imperative and Respect. First, Kant voices that it is drastically crucial for people to act from duty if they want to act right or in a moral way. Another theory that Kant voices is the categorical imperative, meaning people who consider something is right for them should be right for others also. For example, if someone cheats on an exam for personal gain. The person that is actually doing the cheating should have some sort of feeling about the other people taking the exam but can’t because he’s only thinking about himself getting an A. This also puts pressure on the principles of respect because no one should ever use any measures for personal gain. Regardless of who it is, it should be conducted with modesty and understanding (Misselbrook, 2013).
While having in mind the above factors and expressing the source of the issue being the inequality of gender, the deontology theory is connected to this theory in several ways. First, the moral commitment of man, which is the father, brother, uncle, husband, or friend should be the one that takes care of the woman whom he is with. Having a blood relationship is not necessary for the man, because it is only right for the man to deem that it is his commitment to shield any woman that he believes is unjustly treated. This meets the first component of deontology theory. Furthermore, the male must remain honorable and treat the females he is attached to equally. He is intended to obtain an ideal equilibrium between his mother, wife, and daughter, in order for his son to learn and accede the heritage. In contrariety to this, if a male is abusive to his wife but expects his daughter to be treated fairly by his son in-law this would not be in compliance with the regulations of the categorical imperative.
Finally, and most significantly, the aspect of Respect expresses that it is imperative for people to have a good heart and be humble to each other. Comparably, the mother, wife, daughter, and other females that the man is attached to, it is his duty to respect and care for them. He is always to treat them respectfully, lovingly, caringly, and humbly, never looking down on them.
Obeying the moral rules from time to time is not sufficient; as a replacement, it is essential that our forethoughts and reasons are correct also. This means that it is not inevitable that the person who is performing the duty is right almost certainly because it is consequential that there is a well formed meaning connected with it also. If the duty is integrated with honest understanding it will be considered a truthful duty.
Application of The ethics of Rights:
In the theory of Rights ethics, the fundamental notion that is put in front is considered that in any nation everyone’s rights should be safeguarded and honored, and allowed precedence. It is some privileges that are both favorable and opposing; these can be considered as lawful or innate. The lawful privileges are artificial while the ones that are innate are widespread.
Lawful privileges are the ones given to us by the state constitution or by the Government. The privilege to live as you please, the privilege to embrace spirituality, and gender inequality, are included in these rights, which are artificial and placed throughout the constitution.
Innate rights furthermore are built on teachings like idea, opinion and ethics. These rights are inevitably a natural part of a person. One of the privileges that is mentioned takes in to account “The right to marry”, it is accurate to affirm that a person have the right to marry any person they want to marry. It should be up to the man and woman to decide whether they like each other enough to marry. [Prof. Charles D. Kay (2015)]
In Asia, this is a serious matter and has been for many years now. Astonishingly, in certain countries, the girls are never asked if they want to get married by their parents, basically their just given away. Even more appalling is the fact that the men are more than twice or three times the age of these young girls. In order for the theory of rights to be beneficial, it is crucial that we all become proficient to stand up for what appears to be wrong, we should be able to express how we feel and make our viewpoints matter so that the negligence in our financial system is eliminated.
Comparably, it is crucial for us to do justice in one of the most significant characteristics of our nation that is in strains these days, Inequality of Gender. Despite the fact if fairness of gender is stated in the constitution, furthermore it is being influenced at not just places of residence but at companies as well.
As a result of the existing inequality of gender in Asia, other than the abuse that recently married women have to endure, sexual abuse at companies are frequent. If the women are seeking a better position in a large company the managers are caught asking them to trade sex in order to obtain a better position. Consequently, influencing them, breaking them and not giving them equal rights. Regretfully, in order to provide for the family, the women that are financially disabled have to surrender and assume the responsibility that they are not equivalent to males and feel that they have to perform undesirable acts.
Supposedly, being able to stand up for yourself is the right of every girl and woman, and having the belief that they are as equal and stable as a male. Our bureaucracy and financial system needs to be held accountable for entirely ending such unethical acts and applying the rights of theory.
In comparison to the two theories, Deontology and Right Ethics considerately, in my opinion, the rights theory is a more effective dispute with regard to our subject matter, Inequality of Gender. The reasoning along these lines are, the theory of Deontology only discusses the duties performed and does put a bunch of agony on the essential meanings. For instance, if someone is extremely excited one of their friend’s wedding and is assisting with everything that is needed, but talking about them to other people, this is considered wrong. This means that although they are performing the needed obligation they are still exhibiting bad intentions.
The Deontology theory is a bit defected because it only considers the strict duties that are being performed and not giving any consideration to the unethical motives involved. On the contrary, the Rights ethics seems to be a more useful opportunity because not only do they discuss the freedom of expression and freedom of independence, they also take into consideration inequality of gender. [J.P. Moreland (2015)]
The Rights theory also discusses the entitlement of females and the power they have in the business part. The Rights theory gives a large amount of females the opportunity to emerge from their restrictions and endure life fairly and equally.
From my viewpoint, some of the disagreements with this theory would be that, females that already have financial power can influence the reality of this belief and fix it so it can be applied in a antagonistic way. For instance, if a woman’s boyfriend appeared in her life all of a sudden and she wants to unlawfully divorce her husband, this would be considered the negative part of the theory, which can be portrayed as something else because she can say that her husband is abusing her and committing adultery. The theory of rights could be used in order for her to get out of the marriage.
Defense of the Objection:
It is realistic to believe that corresponding incidents, considering the incident that was mentioned above would hardly happen, however because of the realization it is certain to intensify. Attorneys should be aware if they are ever faced with this issue. If a woman is unfairly requiring to be freed on the proof of the rights theory, it will be easier to detect it. The appropriate managing of this theory can cause the attorneys to be intelligent while presenting the case.
This paper’s goal is to find the best way to solve the issues regarding inequality of gender with the appliance of a few significant theories of ethics that combines Deontology and Rights. Even though it may not be accurate, throughout the research process some resolutions can be reached. This paper gives a clear understanding of the theories in circumstantiality, their agreeable and disagreeable viewpoints and how each connects to the issue imminently.
It is accurate, nevertheless that if these beliefs are only retained on paper, it will be ineffective because people will continue to read the papers and won’t attempt to apply the beliefs. For these beliefs to become successful, it is immensely essential that the research be removed from the paper and implemented.
The paper also talks about how the legality theory is analogously preferable as collated to the deontology belief but the two have their pros and cons. The viewpoints on this topic have also been shared by the views of Kant.
Lastly, the entitlement of women and gender equality are topics that really need some emphasizing on these days. In order for this inequality that is happening to be completely fixed someone needs to step outside the box and remove the hindrance.
[Catherine Rainbow (2015)] Description of ethical theories and principles [WEB] retrieved from:
[David Misselbrook (2013)] Duty, Kant and Deontology [WEB] retrieved from:
[Professor Charles D. Kay (1997)] Notes on Utilitarianism [WEB] retrieved from:
[J.P. Moreland (2015)] Ethical Theories: Utilitarianism Vs. Deontological ethics [WEB] retrieved from: