Ice cream and frozen yogurt are the first things that come to mind when I think of summertime treats. The best summertime treat is anything frozen. However, most store-bought choices include all that processed sugar and fat, and I decline. Contrary to popular belief, making frozen yogurt without an ice cream maker is not at all difficult. Additionally, purchasing an ice cream machine and using it perhaps only a few times a year doesn’t seem like the wisest investment if you don’t intend to make ice cream at home frequently.
Fro yogurt’s nutritional value can change depending on the type of milk, sugars, and flavorings added to the yogurt combination. For instance, nonfat milk used to make frozen yogurt will have less fat than whole milk used to make other variations. Additionally, the toppings you select could increase the final product’s calorie, fat, and sugar content.
Frozen Yogurt Nutrition Facts
What is Exactly Frozen Yogurt?
A common treat created with yogurt is frozen yogurt, which tastes tart and sweet and has a creamy texture.
The fundamental distinction between frozen yogurt and ice cream is that the former is produced using milk rather than cream.
Additionally, it is frequently sold in cups or cones, much like ice cream, with various topping choices, including fruit, cookies, and chocolate chips.
Frozen yogurt can be made at home or purchased in supermarkets. Additionally, it is occasionally used as a substitute for ice cream in desserts or as an ingredient in drinks like smoothies.
Ingredients can vary slightly between brands, but the main ones are:
- Milk: This can be liquid milk or powdered milk. Powdered milk is referred to as “milk solids” on the ingredients list.
- Yogurt cultures: These are “good” bacteria like Lactobacillus bulgaricus and Streptococcus thermophilus.
- Sugar: Most companies use regular table sugar, but some brands use alternative sweeteners like agave nectar.
To enhance frozen yogurt’s flavor and texture, many brands also use stabilizers and flavorings.
Manufacturers combine milk and sugar to create frozen yogurt. To kill any potentially hazardous germs, they pasteurize the combination by heating it to a high temperature.
After adding the yogurt cultures, the mixture is given a chance to rest for up to four hours before being frozen.
How to Make Frozen Yogurt?
With the frozen fruit of your choosing, this delicious and creamy frozen yogurt is prepared (I used strawberries and bananas). It is only 5 minutes of work, but remember to use my advice for a creamy texture.
- 4 cups sliced frozen strawberries or other frozen fruit of your choice (see notes)
- 2 cups sliced frozen banana
- 1 cup Whole milk Greek yogurt
- Two teaspoon orange extract, or vanilla extract, if you like
- 4 to 6 tablespoons honey, more to your liking. I used Greek honey
- ¼ cup sugar, optional but highly recommended
- One tablespoon corn syrup, optional
Combine the frozen strawberries, banana, yogurt, orange extract (or vanilla extract), honey, sugar, and corn syrup in the bowl of a food processor fitted with a blade or a heavy-duty blender.
Blend until everything is combined into a creamy smoothie-like mixture. Taste; if you like it sweeter, add more honey.
Transfer the mixture to a freezer-safe container and smooth the surface. Press a piece of parchment against the top of the yogurt to prevent ice crystals from forming. Freeze for at least 6 hours or overnight.
To serve, allow the frozen yogurt to sit at room temperature for a few minutes until soft enough to scoop. Scoop the amount you need (long, shallow pulls or strokes will produce better scoops). Enjoy!
How to Make Frozen Yogurt More Creamy?
You can make your frozen yogurt more creamy by following these steps:
- Use whole milk Greek yogurt, and add cream if you like. I love the rich and tangy flavor of Greek yogurt, but it is also far thicker in consistency. Greek yogurt is concentrated or strained yogurt, where whey and other liquids have been eliminated, making a better, creamier base for fro-yo. You also have the option to add a little heavy cream. And if you want the thickest, creamiest result, you might even swap the Greek yogurt for labneh, which is extra strained yogurt (I’m doing this next time!)
- Use a little corn syrup. I say corn syrup is optional here, but a little bit of it can help the texture of your strawberry frozen. Yogurt by preventing the formation of large ice crystals while the mix freezes.
- Use some sugar. I wanted so badly to rely only on honey for this recipe, and it works with just honey, but the sugar here does two things. First, similar to corn syrup, it does help the texture. And as it freezes, the yogurt mixture will lose some of its sweetness, so even if it tastes good to you before freezing, it will be dulled later. The added sugar helps the flavor.
- A banana can help! A natural way to add creaminess and volume to a frozen strawberry yogurt is simply adding a sliced frozen banana.
- Cover the top of the yogurt mixture with parchment paper before freezing! Adding a layer of parchment on the surface of the yogurt before tightly covering the container will also help keep ice crystals from forming.
Why is Frozen Yogurt Tricky?
If you want to make frozen yogurt, you probably anticipate using yogurt in your recipe for a sizable percentage of it. (After all, it is the “yo” in fro-yo.) The issue is that yogurt, despite appearing creamy when slurped from the carton, contains much more water than fat. When water is frozen, crystals form, making fro-yo chilly and not creamy. Because of the water, it is difficult to freeze yogurt into something scoopable rather than just a solid ice cube.
You can approach this problem in different ways: Yogurt can be drained of liquid by hanging it overnight in cheesecloth, then adding heavy cream to restore the yogurt’s appropriate consistency. Use Greek yogurt and combine it with cream in the same manner. Add some eggs to the mixture to make it more like traditional ice cream. Even Jeni Britton of Jeni’s Splendid Ice Cream whisks cream cheese and cornstarch into her frozen yogurt.
Although each approach has potential, I just wanted something straightforward rather than a project. Regular yogurt requires too much effort to drain the liquid, while Greek yogurt, although thicker and creamier, frequently produces fro-yo that is simply too tart, even for my tart-loving self. Everything else seemed to veer off-topic, and yogurt is that.
To ensure a spoonable, somewhat creamy, and thoroughly enjoyable dessert, I ultimately chose to accept plain yogurt and use a few cooking techniques.
How Healthy is Frozen Yogurt?
Frozen yogurt may have some health benefits compared to other frozen desserts.
It can contain beneficial nutrients and bacteria, lower levels of lactose and fewer calories than desserts like ice cream.
It Contain Good Bacteria.
Some frozen yogurt has probiotics, much like regular yogurt. Live bacteria are referred to as “good bacteria” and probiotics, and they can be good for your health when consumed.
However, for the bacteria in frozen yogurt to be beneficial, they must endure the production process. The beneficial bacteria will have been eliminated if your frozen yogurt was pasteurized after adding the probiotics.
Additionally, it has been hypothesized that freezing could kill off beneficial bacteria. Freezing may not be a problem, but some research indicates that this isn’t the case.
Look for the label “living cultures” statement to verify if your frozen yogurt contains probiotics.
It May Contain Lower Levels of Lactose.
Consuming dairy products might result in digestive problems like bloating, gas, and pain if you have lactose intolerance. Most lactose-intolerant persons, especially if the dairy contains probiotics, can tolerate tiny amounts of dairy.
This is because some of the lactose is broken down by probiotic bacteria, lowering the amount per serving. People with lactose sensitivity may be able to eat some frozen yogurts without experiencing any digestive issues because some of them contain probiotics.
Not all types, however, include live bacteria; thus, they might not all offer the same advantages.
It May Provide Nutrients that Benefit Bone Health.
Additionally, frozen yogurt has a good quantity of calcium and protein, two nutrients associated with strong bones. Despite this potential advantage, it’s important to remember that normal yogurt still contains these nutrients.
It can be Lower in Calories than Regular Ice Cream
Frozen yogurt has fewer calories than traditional ice cream if you attempt to lose weight. Watch your portion amounts and topping selections, though. These can quickly increase the number of calories if you’re not careful.
Is Frozen Yogurt as Healthy as Regular Yogurt?
A delightful and nutritious supplement to your diet might be yogurt. Frozen yogurt typically has a lot of added sugar, in contrast to most plain, ordinary yogurts.
In reality, one of the most crucial components in production is sugar. Before the yogurt is frozen, sugar is added to avoid the formation of huge ice crystals and maintain the frozen yogurt’s creamy consistency. Additionally, it improves the flavor by turning it from sour to sweet and tart.
Frozen yogurt can nevertheless have more sugar added than regular yogurt that has been sweetened with sugar. Pick a simple, normal sort of yogurt if you want to get the healthiest option. You will receive all the health advantages without additional sugar using this.
Frozen yogurt evolved from being quite sour initially, with Dannon producing one of the first commercial varieties in the 1970s. The trend of sweeter yogurts was first introduced by stores that sold it in soft serve form, frequently in a rotating array of flavors with a selection of wet and dry toppings. As a low-fat substitute for ice cream, the dessert gained popularity throughout the 1980s and 1990s.
The popularity of sour frozen yogurt has increased somewhat in recent years. Offering tart, fat-free yogurt topped with fresh fruit has proven successful for several businesses.
With an ice cream maker, it’s simple to produce frozen yogurt at home, and cooks may adjust the sweetness or sourness to their preferences. Many people experiment with their favorite taste combinations when making it at home. Yogurt takes a little longer to combine than ice cream since it freezes and melts more slowly than cream. Many recipes, from the traditional chocolate and vanilla to unique concoctions like lemon-ginger and vanilla-lime, may be obtained online. Some ice cream producers even include one or two frozen yogurt recipes in their recipe books.