At Barnfields Primary School, pupils are encouraged to develop a greater understanding and knowledge of the world, as well as their place in it. Our children are enabled, through our Geography curriculum, to understand and begin to address global environmental issues facing the world today.
We seek to inspire in children a curiosity and fascination about the world and its people which will remain with them for the rest of their lives; to promote the children’s interest and understanding of diverse places, people, resources and natural and human environments, together with a deep understanding of the Earth’s key physical and human processes.
Surrounding the school, we have a rich local Geography (such as Cannock Chase) and this is used to give children a deep understanding of their own locality, its interconnection with other places and change over time.
Our Geography Approach at Barnfields
Our curriculum is carefully designed to follow the National Curriculum, whilst utilising our six curriculum drivers of relevance, enquiry, ambition, creativity, community and values in order to develop powerful knowledge and create learners who can think geographically. Alongside progression grids, carefully informed Medium-Term Plans (MTP) are used to design lessons that are sequenced so that children are taught how to take an enquiry-based approach recommended by the GA to the subject by:
Understanding Geographical data which includes maps from Digi-Maps, visual data of all kinds, statistics, graphs, quality images and text from Oddizzi. Our pupils need to use geographical data to help them understand the complex world in which we live.
Applying the ambitious ‘grammar of Geography’, will help our pupils to organise and attach significance and relevance to geographical vocabulary' empowering them to be able to generalise and relate facts to one another and think both creatively and geographically.
Developing discussion and dialogue, sorting Geo-data, ranking information, identifying links between concepts, reconstructing information in alternative forms and discursive writing will allow pupils to follow lines of geographical enquiry. This consistent approach across the school will enable our pupils to develop their powerful knowledge year-on-year and develop a greater understanding of their place in the world.
Geography Curriculum Overview