Chinese medicine is based on the premise that everything is part of a web of infinite dimension, which connects everything in the universe. As part of this web, we humans are influenced by everything that exists in the web: the stars, the weather, the food we eat, the sounds we hear, and all things that touch us, including other human beings. When we are in balance with those things and, most importantly, within ourselves, we are healthy. But we are seldom in perfect balance, even with our immediate surroundings, much less within ourselves.”
Traditional Chinese medicine is an ancient medical system that originated in China over 3000 years ago.
Its fundamental concept of Yin and Yang reflect all aspects of the natural world around us and within us.Yin and Yang are opposing forces, but function as a whole. One cannot exist without the other. There cannot exist light without dark, action without rest, or summer without winter. This concept also exists in relation to how the body functions. In Chinese medicine, all of our organs, emotions, and various diseases are classified most basically by this concept. Similar to an ecosystem, TCM's principles teach that our health is determined by how well each part of us (mind, body & spirit) is able to function as a whole.
“We all have both yin and yang qualities within us. The balance between these two qualities is not static and concrete, but moving and shifting. At times our yin side asserts itself, at other times our yang does.”
" The Chinese method is thus holistic, based on the idea that no single part can be understood except in its relation to the whole” – Ted Kaptchuck
Although acupuncture is the most well-known practice of Traditional Chinese Medicine, its practice includes the use of herbs, diet, massage (Tui-Na), and exercise (Tai-Qi, Qi-Gong). As a holistic health system, Traditional Chinese Medicine is concerned not only with the treatment of one's current dis-ease, but also with the prevention of future disharmony.
"Yin and Yang is the Way of heaven and earth, the fundamental principles of the myriad things, the father the mother of change and transformation, the root of conception and destruction”
Traditional Chinese Medicine is a safe and effective practice that is strictly regulated in the province of British Columbia. For further information on regulations and practice standards, please visit the College of Traditional Chinese Medicine Practitioners & Acupuncturists of British Columbia (CTCMA) at www.ctcma.bc.ca
Visit the Understanding TCM page for more detailed information about the practice of Chinese medicine, and the Treatment & Self-help page for tips on staying healthy.