Our Eye Doctors answer your questions about eye health:
Q.What is UV light?
A. UV is the high energy part of sunlight. Natural sunlight is composed of a spectrum of colors. Sunlight is composed of a spectrum of colors such as infra- red, red, green, yellow, blue, and ultraviolet (UV). Infra-red and ultraviolet light is not visible to the human eye.
Q. What is Computer Vision Syndrome?
A. Computer Vision Syndrome, also known as Digital Eye Strain, describes a group of eye and vision-related problems that result from prolonged computer, tablet, e-reader and cell phone use. Many individuals experience eye discomfort and vision problems when viewing digital screens for extended periods. The level of discomfort appears to increase with the amount of digital screen use.
Q. Why is Computer Vision Syndrome happening now?
A. The average American worker spends seven hours a day on the computer either in the office or working from home. Most of us no longer work or play much outdoors any longer. Our visual system was “designed” to function in an open environment not a closed environment. Did you know each eyeball has 6 muscles that control how the eye points and one muscle inside the eye that helps us to change focus? In addition we have eyelid and facial muscles that may also be involved with the process of sight. An example of this would be squinting.
Q. What can cause the symptoms of CVS?
A. Here are some factors that may contribute to these symptoms:
- Poor lighting
- Glare on a digital screen
- Improper viewing distances
- Poor seating, including head and posture
Q. Why the concern about UV?
A. Because UV has so much energy, long term exposure to UV has been found to cause damage to tissues of the human body. We all know about the connection between UV and skin cancer. Keep in mind these are cumulative effects. The more exposure to UV the more likely damage to human tissue. This is similar to radiation exposure. The more you are exposed to it, the more likely you will develop problems like cancer.
Coming Soon Extended Saturday OPTICAL ONLY Hours: 9:00 AM - 3:00 PM.