Mongolians are the people who have a tradition of matching foods, meals, and drinks during the season. They have matched a variety of meals, drinks, and their volume, depending on the annual four seasons, daily hours, the sex, age, specific features of the human body, metabolism, and energy accumulation.
Therefore, Mongolians have mainly worshipped animal husbandry from ancient times and lived in nomadic culture, they have often consumed the domestic animal's milk and meat in various methods.
Due to the volume of the metals such as lead, mercury, arsenic, and cadmium where are in the Mongolian domestic animals' meat being at the several times minimum rate less than the allowed maximum volume, it considers an ecologically pure product.
Mongolians have circulated a balance of hysteria, jaundice, and cancer of the stomach at the functional level categorizing hot, warm, and cool by the meat quality. Specifically: For a category of the hot quality meat, the horse, marmot, deer, and fish, In a category of the warm quality meat, the sheep, And as to the cool quality, cow, goat, camel, and pork meat have been considered, respectively. What are meals for the most respectful guests by Mongolians are roast meat, khorkhog / - meat dish prepared in its skin or a rumen sac into which red hot stones are put to cook the meat/, the fried sheep juice, and the fried meat juice through boiling.
Fried meat pie, steamed meat dumplings, and dumplings are one variety of Mongolian national meals. It is made by covering the meat flavored in the flour and making by pinching the flour edge, and the pinching method is various. It is one of the main courses for hospitalizing the respectful guests to the family for the time being celebrated the white month and another occasion.
It is a soup being the inside of the vessel with a good tap or farding bag, and large intestines, well-sealed the brim or covered sealing with rolled flour, boiling into the steam, and the ingredients consist of the sheep meat. It can be flavored with salt, onion, and garlic.
The meal can make of a big piece of the removed meat from the bone in the well-sealed vessel. During ancient times, it was made in the large intestines of small cattle. The large intestines should be cleaned washed several times, and flavored with salt, onion, and ramson of fragmented meat into the vessel. Boil the soup with water for a few minutes, drop branching inside with the ignited stones, wrap the brim with bristle, and fry in the manner of rounding on the glowing coals of cow dung or firewood. If you don't loosen the brim bandage and ejaculate the air several times, it might be split off. Khorkhog can be made of any domestic animal's meat. Being well-cooked the fragmented meat with the hot stone should be moved with the large intestines such as less shaking and bowling.
When great Chinggis khaan and his warriors depart to the far away warfare for many days, they were consumed as food. Having put it on the shield with the fire for the time being fried the hunting meat, eating in the method of mixing, cooking meat over a fire, and frying with the help of the sword and arrow of the bow was a fried meat derivation and familiar with a name of "barbeque" in the worldwide. It used to name "barbeque" and from that time, there was determined a ritual in which all of them equally eat them. According to the Mongolians' notion, the hunting animal has belonged to the sky possession, they have considered that each person has a right to equally eat, and all of the families have eaten them prohibiting being stingy the meat and owning it.
Head and legs
There are some methods of washing and cooking with the hot water burning the small cattle's head and legs with the fur as well as boiling and cooking to clean and remove the skin without burning. Boiling the head and the legs up to softening, taking an edible piece out of them, cutting in the narrow shape, mixing others, and cooking a cold dish can be made. Chopping scalp, tongue, palate, brain, and cartilage forming the nose ducts, then, it can be prepared as a dish, independently. That's why a slice of bigger meat out of the big cattle's head can be removed, there can be cooked various meals, salads, dumplings, and fried meat pie.
Frozen tripe and blood sausage
A possible preparatory meal including the cattle blood is the frozen tripe and blood sausage. Here: Equally prepare such as the small intestine, liver, kidneys, heart, and lungs named the five internal organs, mix with the blood, and freeze into the large intestines. Because a meal with frozen tripe and blood sausage is fatty and nutritious, during the period of the coldest winter, it was consumed very abundantly for the dinner.
When the yogurt is boiled, there will be a very acid white fluid. While bucketing the fluid, there will be available white grounds and the grounds can be filtered into the vessel. Having remained the filtered fluid names sour milk, it should be thickened by pressing in up to being non-juice and wrapping in the butter cloth in the mid-big stone. Get dense sour milk out of the mid-stones, cut with a narrow string, place and put on a specifically prepared panel, and dry in the sunlight. The sour milk is very rich in protein and it will be transformed into dried curds in the environment of sun and wind for a few days. Dried curd can be made in the shape of cutting and printing and it is named by a variety of Mongolian cheese, worms, sliced, clawed, clenched, pill, printed, round, cubic, and round cake. Dried curd is good for the human stomach digestive and if a long-kept dried curd eats in the soup cooked with the two year - sheep meat, it will be helpful for cold.
This acid and milky-flavored drink are made of half-cooked or boiled milk. Firstly, the boiled milk should be heated up to 42-45 Celcius and mixed a yeast for making the Mongolian yogurt. Mixing the yeast should be made of the milk by 1-3 percent. In the yogurt yeast, there are invisible milky acid bacterias and the yogurt is made as a result of the transformation of having dissected the lactose to the milk acid. If the yeast is in shortage of them, being made of the yogurt is delayed and if the yeast is over, it will be too acid. After having mixed the yeast in the milk, it should be well-ladled, equally mixed, covered in the vessel, and preserved immovable in the warm circumstances of 35-40 Celcius. After having filtered a new yogurt, the remained thick percent is called the yeast. Except the yogurt is nutritious and is helpful for medical treatment. It is functional in stopping the bacteria's growth which is emerged the infectious diseases such as typhoid and dysentery.
Skim and sour cream
While ladling the milk bucketing with a ladle, slowly dropping from a rather height and why the fatty balls are very light out of the milky element, and it will be ascended in the process of heating, foaming in ladling, layering on the milk, finally, the skim has emerged. The skimmed layer is approximately become for about 30 minutes. While hardening the skim, slowly cool off the boiled milk, and disperse the foaming, it will be often remained to pasteurize in the evening, re-heating with a low fire. Being pasteurizing is purposeful to be embodied the skim even thicken, and layer a cream. Also, if it is over-heated on the fire for making congealed the skim, it will be negatively affected to thicken, furtherly through overboiling the milk, cracking the skimmed layer. Also, if the milk heat and its congealing process are in lack of, the skim is thin and crisp. Therefore, be out of the congealed skimmed milk in the pot, and keep it in the cool place for 12-24 hours, edge the skim where is in the pot, carefully fold by the mid-part, join in the part of the butter, and dihydrate on the shelf. This is named to make a skim. Except for segregating the butter out of the milk, when the milk is cooled off in a cool place without boiling, the milk butter is congealed on the outer. This is named "buttery". In the sutra was recorded that the buttery is helpful such as being contradictory to vegetable toxic or water, chilly in the cold, and moistening why the buttery is capable of being detoxified. Hence, if the pot's skim is accumulated in a large intestine of the domestic animal or wooden vessel day by day and preserved in a cool place, it will be half-cooked skim or "cream". This is called accumulating a cream. When accumulating the skim, fermentation against the lactic acid is in the process within it, and some of the lactose and protein are eliminated. Being melted for the butter in the process of the reaction, the Mongolian melted butter emerges. In a sutra of the Yuan empire was recorded that the cream helps improve the strength of the heart and lungs revealing the cold, eliminating the lungs emaciation, and stopping vomiting blood.
When it is falling, and the seed and root plant grow up, fruits named green foods such as strawberries, blueberries, bird berries, blackcurrants, gooseberries, blackberries, mushroom, nut, onion, spring onion shallot, and the agriophyllum. Constantly consuming these for meals and foods in the combination with dairy products is very helpful for the health.
During a harsh winter, they should widely consume the foods in a variety of preserved fatty meat with rich protein and nutrition to refresh strength and keep on inner energy at a warm temperature. During the winter, people used to adequate quality and nutrition in the combination with multiple varieties of dairy and green products such as red or meat, yellow or fatty dried curd, sour milk, curds cheese, barley, wheat, and rice as well as there have consumed matching the absorption functional into the human body. For example: Because the horse meat is qualitative, energetic, and easy to digest, it is consumed for the strong cold - nine days, why the sheep meat is adequate for nutrition, warmth, and quality, it is more suitable for the end of the autumn, the beginning of the winter, and the end months.
During a season of the spring, the human cancer of the stomach is increased, hence, because the cold quality is added, there are consumed being matched the anti-action - yellow products meals or drinks such as melted butter, protein, and tea with rice. Particularly, they are more used to meat, fatty ones, skim, and dried curds for a scanty period of the spring and prefer to eat the sour milk bouillion, barley mixed with the melted butter, garlic meals, thick tea, and honey, slowly walk and go outer in the environment of pure air. However, in the piercing cold wind of springtime, they have prohibited slaughtering domestic animals, consumed dried meat, frozen tripe or blood sausage, and chopped meat in its juice. Hence, their body is in the preparatory process for the hot summer's light foods. That's why Mongolians consider that the goat meat has a cool quality, for the warm season or winter, they have dried them, and during the spring or summer, the people have consumed them properly.
For the summer season, they should reject the meat products and often consume dairy products. They have transformed into the milk, dairy products, or drinking diet, and eat or drink yogurt, mare's fermented milk, drink made by thinning, and water mixed with meat. Despite this, they have combined them with barley. The diet of the dairy products will be continued for the summer season. If they overeat red or meat, the yellow or fatty foods for the warm season, there have over-accumulated the energy for the human body, and it is a reason for any ill emergence.