7 green foods rich in vitamins
Here are 7 green foods that are a health staple;
Artichoke: Known as liver friendly, artichoke is used as a supportive treatment in many diseases, especially as a food support, with its vitamin and mineral density and antitoxin properties a result of research. Artichoke is also known as a disinfectant for the stomach and digestive system. In addition, it is useful in heart disease, rheumatism and gout, gallbladder and liver disease. When cooking artichokes, it is recommended to cook not only the base part, but also the leaves and eat the lower part of them.
Pea: It is a vegetable rich in protein, fiber and starch. It is a nutritious vegetable that contains vitamins A, C and B, as well as minerals such as iron, potassium and phosphorus. Peas can be used in many types of dishes, but also in cold dishes and soups.
Pods: The beans of the broad bean, an extremely rich vegetable in protein and vitamins, are green when fresh and light brown when dried. Dried broad beans are more nutritious than fresh broad beans. About 25 g per 100 g of dried broad beans. Egg white, 60 gr. There are carbohydrates. In addition, fava beans are rich in vitamins B1, B2, B6 and K, as well as potassium and magnesium minerals.
Spinach: Spinach, known as an iron store, is also a vegetable rich in vitamins A, B, C and E, magnesium, phosphorus and iodine minerals and protein.
For this reason, it increases the body’s resistance and protects the body from recurring diseases, especially in spring. It also strengthens bones and teeth. It is protective against tooth decay. We can use spinach as a salad, as a meal with minced meat or olive oil, even in snacks. (Besides all these benefits, spinach is not recommended for gout sufferers, people with arthritis and people with kidney stones.
Green beans: Being a vegetable rich in vitamins, minerals and antioxidants, it is recommended to consume it twice a week, especially in season, with meat or olive oil, especially at lunchtime.Although it is a low-calorie and low-fat vegetable, it aids the digestion of other foods due to its abundant fiber structure. It is a useful food as it makes the digestive system work more comfortably and also prevents the absorption of bad cholesterol from the intestine. It is especially rich in vitamin A, it is useful for skin and eye health. Thanks to the antioxidants such as Lutein, Zea-xanthine and Beta-carotene it contains, it destroys the harmful effects of free radicals in the body, delays aging and strengthens the immune system.
Broccoli: It is rich in vitamins A, C, E and other vitamins, as well as iron, copper, potassium and calcium minerals. It is often consumed as a salad, cooked, as a meal with olive oil, and as a soup. It is an excellent antioxidant.
Fresh Garlic: As a preventative agent in seasonal epidemic diseases, as a blood pressure and cholesterol lowering agent, as a blood thinner and as a strengthening of the immune system, the benefits do not stop at counting.