Madras Curry is curry (a sauce made from curry powder) that is distinctive to Madras (the former name of a major city in India, now called Chennai) that is set on the Coromandel Coast that borders the Bay of Bengal. The components of curry powder include: chili powder, turmeric, pepper, and ground ginger, cumin, plus coriander. The powder (and curry sauce) of the Madras Curry has a signature red appearance. There are other types and colors of Indian Curry.
Madras Curry Sauce is the central element of any dish on which it is served. Even cauliflower, a somewhat overlooked vegetable, can gain regal status when it is drenched in Madras spicy red curry. The spice will withstand the further creativity of a chef. Add some crunch with nuts: almonds, or even pistachios. Add some chew: raisins, or perhaps pitted dates. Build upon the cauliflower by adding rice to dam the sea of curry so that the bite-sized portions of cauliflower become islands in the dish. Spread about a cup of Cilantro leaves to draw out the uninformed (some diners believe that you created a Mexican dish).
If you add the rice, be certain that you choose the slender aromatic grains of Basmati Rice, the centuries-old cultivated rice of India. Your guests will ask you, and you would rather say, “Of course the rice is Basmati,” than to say, “Umm, Bass what?” As you share this fine dish with others, consider teaching them some history about Madras. It was once the capital of the Honourable East India Company (HEIC), aka British East India Company, which stood for 200 years. If your guests are from India, then don’t talk about the HEIC. They will not want to hear it. Remember that the people of India ditched the name Madras for Chennai. Did you know that the Christian Bible contains a quote from God about the gift of grain (such as rice) as food. Web Search a verse in the book of Genesis 1:29.
Have you wondered who heard and wrote such words of God? Moses wrote the first five books in the Bible: Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers, and Deuteronomy. God directed him to lead the Hebrew people from bondage in Egypt to a land that he had promised for the children of Abraham. The journey lasted 40 years, because it took that long for the people to turn back to God, even though they saw his presence for all of that time (Exodus 13:21-22). Moses had plenty of time and opportunity to write what God wanted the Hebrews (and all of us) to know about who he is and what we mean to him.
Resource Box: Pray to Father God. Ask him for his grace in your life. Web search what you want to know about God, Jesus, the Holy Spirit, and other subjects in the Christian Bible at the online Bible Gateway, [https://www.biblegateway.com/]https://www.biblegateway.com/. You can always make a change for good in your life.
Please share my article with others.
Article Source: [http://EzineArticles.com/?Madras-Curry&id=10337230] Madras Curry