Insecticide Poisoning in Dogs
Depending on how long it has been since your pet ingested the toxin (if exposure was via ingestion), you veterinarian may induce vomiting for your pet. Your doctor may also wash out your pet’s stomach with a tube (lavage), and then give it activated charcoal to detoxify and neutralize any remaining insecticide. Antidotal treatments specific to the toxin will also be given to your pet. Further treatment may include an oxygen cage if your pet is having trouble breathing, and fluid therapy if your pet has been unable to drink or is anorexic.
Dogs suffering from seizures will be given anti-seizure medication to stop the seizures. If exposure to the toxin came through the skin, your veterinarian will use specialized wash for removing the residue from the hair and skin of your pet.
Living and Management
The sooner your dog is treated after being exposed to organophosphate or carbamate insecticides, the better the prognosis is. Avoid using insecticides -- flea or tick treatments -- on sick or debilitated animals, as it will affect the body more easily because of the weakened immune system.
If your dog needs to be treated for pests while it is recovering, or if it is sick for any other reason, ask your veterinarian to recommend some alternatives to chemical treatments. Organophosphates and carbamates both inhibit cholinesterases enzymes; giving both at the same time is likely a toxic dose of insecticide.
And as always, read the instructions on the insecticide labels before using them.
The prediction of a disease’s outcome in advance
An involuntary action in which the muscles contract; caused by a problem with the brain.
Any sub stance that allows impulses to be transmitted from one neuron to the next
A chemical that kills insects by poison or fumigant
To slow something down or cause it to stop
Losing of strength; becoming weaker.
Irritating tissue with a great deal of some type of fluid
Head Pressing in Dogs
Head pressing is a condition characterized by the compulsive act of pressing the...
Tick Medicine Poisoning in Dogs
Amitraz toxicosis (or poisoning) occurs when a dog is overexposed to the pharmaceutical...
Latest In Dog Nutrition
How Antioxidants Improve Our Pet's Health, ...
The science behind pet nutrition continues to make major advances. One such example...
Five Life-Lengthening Health Tips for Your ...
Anyone who has ever had a dog or cat wishes just one thing — that he or she has a...