IB Math AA SL - Practice Exams
The IB Math Analysis & Approaches (AA) SL Practice exams are the perfect resource to customize your revision plan. You can hone your skills on important concepts using the AA SL Popular Quizzes, like Kinematics, or ascend the AA SL Revision Ladder to reach the hardest questions in the IB! Finally, full length RV-exclusive AA SL Mock Exam Papers will simulate the experience of taking the actual exams from start to finish.
Choose revision type
Thank you Revision Village Members
#1 IB Math Resource
Revision Village was ranked the #1 IB Math Resources by IB Students & Teachers in 2021 & 2022.
34% Grade Increase
Revision Village students scored 34% greater than the IB Global Average in their exams (2021).
70% of IB Students
More and more IB students are using Revision Village to prepare for their IB Math Exams.
Frequently Asked Questions
What types of AA SL Practice Exams are available?
Revision Village has created three types of IB Math Analysis and Approaches (AA) SL Practice Exams: Popular Quizzes, a Revision Ladder, and Mock Exam Papers. Each of the AA SL Practice Exam types have a different purpose, depending on your aims and stage of exam revision. The AA SL Popular Quizzes are designed for students who want to test themselves on a specific concept (e.g. Kinematics). The AA SL Revision Ladder is designed to cover all AA SL concepts and progress by difficulty of question (easiest to hardest). The AA SL Mock Exam Papers are designed to simulate actual IB Math Analysis and Approaches SL exam papers; their length, difficulty and composition of concepts.
What are the AA SL Popular Quizzes?
Popular Quizzes are one of the three types of IB Math AA SL Practice Exams that Revision Village offers. These short quizzes target specific concepts in the AA SL course (e.g. Exponents & Logs) and range from 30 to 90 minutes in length; perfect for a single study session. The AA SL Popular Quizzes are similar to the Questionbank section (focussing on specific concepts), however students sometimes don’t have the time available to practice all of the questions in the Questionbank. This is where the Popular Quizzes become very useful.
What is the AA SL Revision Ladder?
Revision Village has pioneered a new type of AA SL Practice Exam to support the exam revision process: the Revision Ladder. The AA SL Revision Ladder has 10 levels which increase in difficulty. The questions in all levels of the Revision Ladder involve all concepts in the AA SL course, therefore providing students a starting point with their end-of-course revision. Rather than starting with Mock Exams or Past Papers (which are often too difficult to start with), students can start their end-of-course revision with the Revision Ladder, and build their confidence as they advance through each level.
What are the AA SL Mock Exam Papers?
The Analysis and Approaches (AA) SL Mock Exam Papers are a set of AA SL Practice Exam Papers designed to simulate the actual exams students will encounter at the end of their Analysis & Approaches Standard Level course. The Mock Exams are AA SL Practice Exams that should be used once a student has finished learning all of the topics in the AA SL course. It is recommended that students use the AA SL Mock Exam Papers under exam conditions to gain familiarity and confidence on the difficulty and time duration of AA SL exams.
More IB Math AA SL Resources
All the questions you could need! Sorted by topic and arranged by difficulty, with mark schemes and video solutions for every question.
Choose your revision tool! Contains topic quizzes for focused study, Revision Village mock exams covering the whole syllabus, and the revision ladder to precisely target your learning.
Helpful refreshers summarizing exactly what you need to know about the most important concepts covered in the course.
Full worked solutions to all past paper questions, taught by experienced IB instructors.