Linux and Windows AD User Environment
Home Directory $HOME and U: Drive
If you save or remove files from your U: drive, both in Windows and in Linux, are the files saved or removed at the same time to both systems. This is possible because both the Linux and Windows AD user environments have a shared home directory on a Linux server.
All computers have a centralized virus protection installed which automatically will delete infected files. It is recommended that you leave the power on to the computer after logging off. This is to ensure that necessary updates can be distributed to over the network (only Log Off – don't Shut Down).
For the students of the school a so called roaming-profile has been activated. This means that
- files stored onto the Desktop and into the Documents-folder
- browser favourites
- and some Windows settings (such as the desktop background)
will remain the same even if switching computers.
The storage folders can also be found on the X-drive. There are some programs (e.g. WinSCP) that do not understand the redirection to the x-drive and have to be pointed to the x-drive manually.
Note! The files stored within the roaming-profile will not be backed up! Therefore the safest storage place for important files is still your personal homedirectory on the U-drive.
Homepages (public_html Directory)
Under the home directory there is a directory (folder) called public_html, which is automatically published to the web using Apache HTTP Server. If you save into your public_html folder a file called index.html containing HTML code, it will be visible to the whole world at http://www.cc.puv.fi/~e0501234/ (or http://www.cc.puv.fi/~e0501234/index.html). This way you can create your own homepages - don’t forget about copyright and regulations.
Each username has a disc quota of 1024 megabytes for saving files on the home directory. You can see how much of your U: drive is in use in Windows by right-clicking on the U: drive in My Computer and then selecting Properties. Of educational reasons it is possible to increase the quota. In such a case, contact your teacher.
CGI, PHP and MySQL Support
CGI programs can be run on the Apache HTTP Server at http://www.cc.puv.fi/ by placing them in the $HOME/public_html/cgi-bin/ directory. PHP pages work in the $HOME/public_html/ directory and in its subdirectories (except cgi-bin). If your applications need MySQL database support, create a MySQL account at http://mysql.cc.puv.fi/ (works in intranet only). MySQL usage instructions will be printed to the screen after you've created the account. If you need support for some other database engine ask your teacher for more information. There are servers for special work and projects. Your teacher gives you more information regarding them.
Servlets and JSP Server
Linux server with Tomcat application server at http://app.cc.puv.fi/.
A backup is taken each night of the home directory. A backup is stored for at least a month, so if you accidentally loose a file it is possible to retrieve. Make the request through the Helpdesk or contact someone of the data systems team.
Mutual Network Drive Y:\
There is a mutual network drive Y:\ for temporary information exchange between students and staff. Students and staff have the right to read and write onto the drive by default. The drive is only meant for temporary information and file transfers and no backups are taken of the drive. The ICT team has the right to remove files, starting with the oldest files, in order to free up space on the drive. Persons sharing information on the drive are responsible for keeping the posted materials copyrights. No illegal or offensive material is allowed onto the drive.
Additional Services for the Staff
Personal Home Directory S:\
An additional home directory S:\ is added during logon for the staff, which is only available on the staff network. The staff network is only available in the staff offices. The S:\ home directory is therefore NOT visible in classrooms or CITRIX. Files that are needed in classrooms should not be saved onto the S:\ drive but rather onto the U:\ drive.
A backup of the S:-drive is taken every night.
Mutual Network Drive V:\
During staff logon a mutual network drive V:\ is also connected. Different folders can be found on the network drive and the user rights are defined according to specified needs. Contact the Helpdesk if you need a mutual workspace for your team and restricted access to your space. The mutual network drive is in the public network and can therefore be accessed from the staff network, classrooms, via CITRIX and OpenVPN