Could These Tiny Proteins Be a Hidden Cause of Health Issues?
“Sara, I am eating such a clean, healthy diet but still experiencing arthritic pain, digestive issues, and weight gain. What else could be going on?”
Bread. Pasta. Grains. Potatoes. Rice. Corn. Peppers. Tomatoes. Beans. Lentils. Certain Nuts.
What do these foods have in common? Well, they’re probably in almost all your favorite dishes — I know they were in mine. But they’re also chock-full of a dangerous plant toxin known as LECTINS. If you are like me, you are thinking, if I can’t eat these, then WHAT CAN I EAT??!!!
Most people have never even heard of them, but according to Dr. Steven Gundry, lectins are the #1 Biggest Danger in the American Diet.
His research has shown that if you’re overweight, if you get sick way too often, or you suffer with terrible indigestion no matter what you eat — you’re most likely dealing with an intolerance to Lectins.
What are Lectins?
On the molecular level, they are just a type of protein found in most plants. But unfortunately they’re actually toxic to the human body. You’ve heard of gluten allergies? Well, gluten is a type of lectin — but it’s not nearly the most toxic. The most toxic is the red kidney bean, which can cause extreme food poisoning if eaten even slightly undercooked.
Three Important Facts About Lectins
1. Lectins Cause Massive Digestive Damage.
Lectins don’t get broken down by your GI tract, so they disrupt your digestion, reduce energy absorption, weaken your immune system, and throw off your gut bacteria.
2. Lectins Poke Holes In Your Intestinal Walls and Leak Into Your Bloodstream.
This is known as “Leaky Gut,” and it causes massive inflammation all over your body. This can damage your internal organs, your joint tissues, and may even be the source of autoimmune disorders such as rheumatoid arthritis or diabetes mellitus.
3. Lectins Are Directly Linked to Weight Gain
Lectins stick to your insulin receptors and block the hormone which controls your appetite. And when this hormone is blocked, your brain never gets the “message” you’re full — so you just keep eating! Studies show conclusively that blocking this hormone actually causes human weight gain.
What Foods Contain Lectins?
Here are some of the main lectin-laden foods:
- Nightshades: Tomatoes, Eggplant, Peppers, Potatoes
- All Beans, including Spouts; all Lentils; Pea protein
- Fruits: Cucumbers, Zucchini, Pumpkin, Squash, Melons
- Grains: Wheat, Oats, Quinoa, Rye, Bulgur, White Rice, Brown Rice Barley, Corn, Spelt, Wheatgrass, Barley
- Corn Syrup, Constarch
- Dairy from “A-1” Cows
- Nuts & Seeds: Pumpkin seeds, Sunflowers seeds, Chia seeds, Peanuts, Cashews.
- Oils: Soy, Grapeseed, Corn, Peanut, Cottonseed, Safflower, Sunflower, Partially hydrogenated Vegetable, Canola.
Click Here for a complete, downloadable list of Lectin-Free Foods to choose and Lectin-containing Foods to Avoid.
Fix the Damage Caused By Eating Lectins…
…by Taking care of the GOOD BACTERIA in your gut.
Hippocrates, the ancient Greek physician and “Father of Modern Medicine,” once famously said: “All disease begins in the gut.”
The “environment” inside the human digestive system is known as the “microbiome,” and it is home to literally trillions of microscopic cells: yeasts, viruses, and especially many hundreds of species of bacteria.
- There are “good” strains of bacteria, which keep you healthy and metabolizing food efficiently.
- And there are “bad” strains, which make you sick, tired, fat, and unhappy.
Most scientists agree that Americans are suffering from a major gut imbalance. The added sugar, artificial sweeteners, refined carbs, and processed foods have caused your “fat-causing” bacteria to grow out of control.
And you’re paying the price with: weight gain, indigestion, unhealthy skin, constipation, low energy, mood swings, and poor immune function.
Probiotics have an incredible power to transform your digestion and create bio-energy. They make your body run better, they fight disease, and allow you to eat the foods you want without the digestive discomfort.”
— Dr. Steven Gundry
Now Here’s The Catch…
Probiotics are only one small part of the “microbiome” in your gut. It’s just as important to make sure you’re feeding and nourishing the good bacteria with the nutrients they need…
Prebiotic Fiber and a Clear Landscape.
You need to “Clear out the Landscape” with a SBO (Soil Based Organisim) like Accelerated Leaky Gut Bundle, to make room for the Good Bacteria. Also, you need to feed the Probiotics with certain foods are rich in Prebiotic fiber — tubers, rutabagas, parsnips, chicory, etc. Prebiotic fiber actually helps reduce your cravings for fattening and unhealthy foods.
How Do I Heal My Gut?
With my Gentle Detox Protocol and a Lectin-Free, Ketogenic Diet. My protocol turns On the Good Genes and turns Off the Bad Genes, rebalances the Gut Microbiome, allows the Gut walls to heal, and promotes Fat loss if it is needed.
Sara Banta is a Stanford University Graduate with a Degree in Economics and Psychology, and a certified Natural Supplement Expert & Graduate of the Institute for Integrative Nutrition. Sara is the Founder of Accelerated Health Products and host of the health & wellness podcast, Accelerated Health Radio.