WWF recognizes the importance of promoting gender equality across the entire organization and applying its principles to all our work. Our gender policy guides this effort.
WWF recognizes the importance of promoting gender equality across the entire organization and applying its principles to all our work. Our gender policy guides this effort. Our general objective is to contribute to a society in which women, men, boys, girls, and people of other gender minorities, have access to the same opportunities, rights, and obligations in all spheres of life.
WWF’s Gender Policy Statement signifies our ongoing commitment to equity and integration of a gender perspective in our policies, programs, and projects, as well as in our institutional structure. WWF understands that gender refers to the socially constructed roles, responsibilities, and opportunities associated with women and men, boys and girls in a society at a specific time and place, and that gender roles and relationships are not fixed; they evolve based on circumstances.
Refers to the equal rights, responsibilities, and opportunities of women and men and girls and boys and other gender minorities. Equality does not mean that women and men will become the same but that women’s and men’s rights, responsibilities, and opportunities will not depend on whether they are born male or female. We see equality between people of all genders as both a human rights issue and as a precondition for, and indicator of, sustainable people-centered development.
We promote gender equity because we appreciate that every WWF policy, program, and project may affect women and men, and other gender minorities differently, and may include specific measures to empower specific marginalized groups and individuals. This is an essential building block for sustainable development and effective conservation or regeneration and it is an integral part of our mission to ensure that the natural resources of our planet are shared equitably.
More details about WWF’s commitments to Gender equality can be found in the WWF policy statement on Gender, as well as several documents below.
WWF’s Environmental and Social Safeguards and Social Policies are extensive and cover many different topics. Below you can find six topics that are frequently searched for.
Indigenous Peoples and Free, Prior and Informed Consent
The rights of Indigenous Peoples to give or withhold their consent to actions that will affect them.