Assistance to a person having a cardiac arrest: 3 first aid actions to apply
It is possible one day to find yourself in the presence of a person having a cardiac arrest. In a situation like this, the first instinct to have should be to call the emergency services so that the person concerned can be taken to the hospital. While waiting for the latter to arrive, there are very important first aid actions to practice to avoid the worst. Discover in this article some actions that could prevent the person having a cardiac arrest from dying.
Perform chest compressions
Once you you are assured that the emergency services have been called, it will be necessary to perform chest compressions on the subject concerned. This is a type of massage applied to the heart to allow it to continue to perform its functions. Thanks to this life-saving gesture, the circulation of blood in the body will always be effective.
In addition, the brain and the various cells will be able to continue to be oxygenated. If you want to learn how to do chest compressions correctly, you can opt for Afgsu training to acquire the necessary knowledge. This rescue action consists of first laying the victim on his back and freeing his chest.
Then, kneel down next to the subject and place your hands on his chest. Hands intertwined on each other, you need to press on the victim’s chest. Your movement must be very regular so that you do at least compressions every minute. Alternately, you will need to perform rescue breaths.
Provide rescue breaths
Respirations are needed to support chest compressions. This is the act of bringing oxygen into the blood. This is what will promote the delivery of the latter to the organs that need it to continue to function. In this case, the insufflations can only be done by the mouth-to-mouth technique. To achieve this, you must start by lifting the victim’s chin so as to tilt his head backwards.
Then, you must maintain his head in this position placing his hand on his forehead. Pinching his nostril, you can put your mouth on his. It is especially necessary to take a good inspiration before and your mouth must cover that of the patient in its entirety. Now you can begin blowing air into her mouth gently and steadily.
Use a defibrillator on the heart of the person
There is a third emergency action you can take to help someone who has had a cardiac arrest. This is the one that consists of using a defibrillator on the heart of the latter. It is a device which has the utility of trying to revive the cardiac activity of a person in this situation.
You will certainly not have too much difficult to apply this gesture. The device is fully automated so you will have voice assistance to use it. Your role will therefore be to place the electrodes on the chest and everything will be done. By respecting these three gestures, you will be sure to properly assist a patient until help arrives.
Read also Hearing aids and hearing aids: increasingly innovative technologies