Published on Nov 14, 2018
In a remote area of northwest Greenland, an international team of scientists has made a stunning discovery, buried beneath a kilometer of ice. It’s a meteor impact crater, 300 meters deep and bigger than Paris or the Beltway around Washington, DC. It is one of the 25 largest known impact craters on Earth, and the first found under any of our planet’s ice sheets. The researchers first spotted the crater in July 2015, while they were inspecting a new map of the topography beneath Greenland’s ice sheet that used ice-penetrating radar data primarily from Operation IceBridge, an ongoing NASA airborne mission to track changes in polar ice, and earlier NASA airborne missions in Greenland.
Read more: https://go.nasa.gov/2RSkn1u
This video is public domain and along with other supporting visualizations can be downloaded from the Scientific Visualization Studio at: http://svs.gsfc.nasa.gov/12941
Credit: NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center/Jefferson Beck
Footage and co-production courtesy of the National History Museum of Denmark/University of Copenhagen, the Underground Channel, and the Alfred Wegener Institute
Music credit: “Timelapse Variations – Remixed”
Natalie Draper, Composer
Original recording: Symphony Number One, SNOtone Records
Dan Rorke, Audio Engineer
Jordan Smith, Music Director
If you liked this video, subscribe to the NASA Goddard YouTube channel: http://www.youtube.com/NASAExplorer
Follow NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center
· Instagram http://www.instagram.com/nasagoddard
· Twitter http://twitter.com/NASAGoddard
· Twitter http://twitter.com/NASAGoddardPix
· Facebook: http://www.facebook.com/NASA.GSFC
· Flickr http://www.flickr.com/photos/gsfc
Science & Technology
Black Friday Sale! Save 50% on SGI Classes and Cosmic Patterns and Cycles of Catastrophe! Use Coupon Code:GNOSTICA
Sale ends 11/27!
helpful than ever before. Rispetto al 2019 l’audience dei siti farmaceutici Cialis che vendono prodotti https://www.vieuxcastillon.fr/sansordonnance.html di bellezza e farmaci otc (senza obbligo di prescrizione medica).
In the fall of 1970 I saw something surreal. I was headed west on highway 34 between Akron and Brush Colorado at around 2AM in the morning, the night was cold and clear.
I was looking to the south when I noticed a dark ball in the sky, about 35 degrees above the horizon, with a very dim orange outline.
At first I thought it was the moon behind clouds, but there was no moon out and the night was clear. Then I noticed this ball was moving slowly to the west and was becoming brighter on the front in the direction of travel. This ball suddenly had flames trailing off of the front and leaving a trail of sparks. The flames then subsided for a ways then it did it again, maybe two more times, before it disappeared into the western sky. This ball was flying horizontal and not coming down, it appeared to be about how the moon looks, in size. I thought I would hear about it on the news, but nothing was ever said.
I understand the desire to withhold this information, even for 3 years. I do not understand why they don’t (yet) have a tighter timeline of the crater’s age. Also, are there ice-penatrating maps of the rest of Greenland and of Antarctica that are publicly available?