Sotos syndrome is a rare genetic disorder characterised by abnormal growth before age three. Children with Sotos syndrome are significantly larger than other children their age. Children with Sotos syndrome may also have impaired intellectual development and behavioural problems. Sotos syndrome is also sometimes called cerebral gigantism.
What Causes Sotos syndrome?
Sotos syndrome is genetic, but is not necessarily an inherited condition.
Is Sotos syndrome serious?
Sotos syndrome is not life-threatening, but it can result in developmental delays and behavioral problems. Children with Sotos syndrome have a normal life expectancy.
Can I Prevent Sotos Syndrome?
Sotos syndrome is genetic, but necessarily inherited. There are some instances of families with more than one individual with Sotos syndrome, but most cases appear sporadically.
How do I know if my child has Sotos syndrome?
Kids with Sotos syndrome are born with abnormally large heads (macrocrania) and are often taller and heaver throughout the toddler years. They may have a protruding forehead, large hands and feet, and downward-slanting eyes. Growth generally slows to normal around preschool, but intellectual disabilities may remain. Children may also experience decreased muscle tone, clumsiness, awkward gait, speech impairments, and aggressiveness.
How do I treat Sotos syndrome?
Sotos syndrome itself requires no treatment. However, early academic intervention and physical therapy may help your child reach his full potential.
Should I call the doctor?
Sotos syndrome is most often diagnosed at birth or during a routine baby clinic visit. Your doctor will monitor your child's growth and development and help you devise a treatment plan that best suits your child's intellectual needs. Other sources of help include your child's teachers, school psychologist, and other parents with children who have Sotos syndrome.
What you need to know about Sotos syndrome
- Sotos syndrome is a rare genetic disorder, affecting 1 in 14 000 babies.
- Kids with Sotos syndrome may be born with large heads, protruding foreheads, large hands and feet, and weigh more than other newborns.
- Sotos syndrome is not life-threatening and children can lead healthy, productive lives.
Find more relevant articles and information:
- Read more about baby development from newborn to 3 months
- Read more about baby development from 3 months to 6 months
- Learn more about mental retardation
Written by Rebecca Stigall for Kidspot, Australia's parenting resource for family health. Sources include Better Health Channel, NSW Health and Health Insite.
Last revised: Wednesday, 20 January 2010
This article contains general information only and is not intended to replace advice from a qualified health professional.