Modern coil slitting lines are high-performance machines, running at speeds of up to 2,000 feet per minute, designed to produce 24 hours a day, 365 days a year. For these reasons, coil processors must ensure that all production line components are properly maintained, and if they do not understand which components are critical, this can represent significant effort later on.
A typical slitting line has the following components:
Static or dynamic coil storage
The coil car
Waste shears and waste collectors
The crushing roller
The movable tensioning device with felt pad, pinch roller, slitting shears and onboard straightener
Outlet coil car
Exit gate and so on.
These devices act as links in the slitting chain. If one of them fails, the entire slitting chain fails. The user must ensure that any elements in the line are ready to execute correctly. Much depends on machine maintenance.
Sooner or later, all the hydraulic circuits will leak. To keep the workshop safe, coil processors must not allow oil from leaking lines to drop to the floor, so all slitters should have a catch pan. Oil flying out of the belt under the pressure of the roll shall be collected by the tank. These tanks should have a low point where a pump can be installed to remove the collected oil
Slitting line equipment is powered by pressure oil produced by a special hydraulic group. The pipeline has multiple hydraulic groups, so if one fails, the other can run the pipeline. However, this can be expensive, so many coil processors find it more cost-effective to use a single hydraulic bank with two pumps – one operating while the other is on standby. The pump should be inspected every 2,000 hours to ensure that the correct pressure and flow is achieved and the bearings are thoroughly lubricated and cleaned. The hydraulic tank should be cleaned every 1,500 hours. Cleaners and cleaners must be used to remove all sludge from the tank bottom. Before maintenance, the pressure in the hydraulic circuit must be released to prevent sudden oil injection.
Solenoid valves act as the nerves of the system, connecting power to all components, and controlling and distributing clean oil. It is important to check all seals every 1,000 hours. If new seals are required, grease should be applied before installation to prevent them from being scratched by friction. All pressure should be released, including any pressure in the solenoid chamber. If the pressure is not released, the remaining pressurized oil can produce unexpected showers or cause unstable and sudden whiplash movements in the flexible pipe.
Replacing these seals is a precise task and should therefore be performed by skilled personnel. Each pipe in the solenoid manifold shall be labeled for easy identification. Only authorized personnel should have access to the line during maintenance, as operating the solenoid valve may accidentally activate the line.
Hydraulic cylinders combine signals from solenoid valves and oil pressure to activate various components, including mandrel, straightener openings, felt pad openings, coil cars and pinch rolls. If the cylinder is started frequently, it must be checked every 1,000 hours, and if intermittently, every 2,000 hours.
Other hydraulic and pneumatic components.
Pressure monitors, electrical components, flow sensors and lubrication devices should be checked every 1,800 to 2,000 hours. Orderly piping ensures correct access to maintenance and inspection procedures.
Separators and cutting tools must be inspected from time to time. During the cutting process, some knife scratches may occur, which can increase the burr on the cut and reduce the edge quality. Visual inspection should be performed at least once every 1,000 hours. Slitters with automatic hydraulic clamping devices must be verified every 2,000 hours to ensure clamping strength. Eccentric clearance adjustment devices should also be checked every 2000 hours
The electric motor.
Many operators assume that motors, especially AC motors, do not need maintenance. Not right. All motors require some kind of regular maintenance.
For example, keeping dirty filters clean can extend the life of a motor (see Figure 4). If clean air cannot flow freely through the motor, the motor temperature will rise and the performance will decline. Lubricated spindle bearings can also extend the life of the motor. Shaft bearings should be lubricated every 2,000 hours. During this operation, all dirt inside the motor should be removed and damaged seals replaced. All power must be switched off before motor maintenance.
Leading manufacturer of slitting line machine
TX slitting lines meet the highest requirements of machining quality and accuracy. We guarantee the best results for your slitting process and achieve the best slitting quality, slit width tolerances and precise recoil technology with our line.
We will develop, design and provide the best solution according to different requirements: speed, degree of automation, productivity, required surface type, strip thickness, strip width, coil weight, slit number, etc.
If you are looking for a high-performance precious slitting line, feel free to send an inquiry to contact us.
Contact person: Mai(Mr.)