What is your chronotype?
Simplified, your chronotype refers to individual differences in sleep timing and in preferences for a given time of day.
Our bodies go through a 24-hour cycle of functions called our circadian rhythm. Some people (morning types) have the phase of their cycle shifted earlier in the day, while others have their phase shifted later in the day (evening types). While this cycle is influenced by social and environmental factors like light-exposure before bed, your work schedule and lifestyle, the physiological cycles themselves are built into your body.
Understanding your specific chronotype can help you adjust not just your sleep behavior, but also your expectations in achieving a healthy sleep routine.
Evening type spectrum
Most people lie on a spectrum that is broadly categorized into two main types: morning types and evening types. Evening types like to get up and go to bed later, with their main sleep goal being to eliminate sleep debt.
Evening type (Eveningness)
Those who are evening types have later sleep schedules; they stay up late and, given the chance, sleep in later. Evening types were found to sleep in much more on the weekdays than morning people.
Evening types tend to get less sleep on average compared to morning chronotypes. However these types also tend to underestimate their subjective sleepiness. This could be because over time, one gets accustomed to feeling tired at certain times of the day.
Evening types have more difficulty getting in the amount of sleep they need. Some of this could be because they naturally are more prone to staying up late. But with regular work days usually starting early, they’re 3 times more likely to incur a sleep debt over the course of a week than morning types.
The main goal: avoid incurring a sleep debt, and get enough sleep.
- Evening types get less sleep on average than other types
- Evening types sleep in more on the weekends than morning types
- Evening types stay up later and become accustomed to not enough sleep
- Evening types are 3 times more likely to incur a sleep debt
- Evening types feel daytime sleepiness more than morning types do
Recommended for you
The best way to avoid feeling exhausted (and racking up a sleep debt) is to try establishing a consistent bedtime schedule. This helps regulate your body’s cues for sleep and for waking up on time.
Another thing you can do is avoid loud alarms that cause morning grogginess (sleep inertia). Even if you didn’t get enough sleep, making sure you wake up feeling well-rested is essential to your overall quality of sleep.
How VibeRise works for evening types
VibeRise wakes you up gently, and this protects your sleep quality. This helps you avoid morning grogginess and make you feel more well-rested during the day, which is helpful if you’re not able to get a lot of sleep
It also tracks your sleep patterns in detail so you can see your behavior and sleep in the long-term. This gives you the best insights to make actionable improvements and catch bad habits before they even start.
With VibeRise you can establish a consistent bed schedule that works for you & your personal health and needs.