Written by Natálie Budilová
For how to contribute to Library Planet look here: https://libraryplanet.net/contribute/
The National Library of Technology (NTK) is the largest and the oldest library of science and technology literature in the Czech Republic. The library has a collection of over 1.5 million volumes. Its primary function is to provide specialized information resources and services to students, teachers, and researchers in the fields of engineering and applied sciences, as well as to educate members of the general public interested in technical information.
Housed in a modern, ecological building situated in the heart of the Dejvice, Prague 6, engineering and technology campus, NTK provides an ideal environment for studying to students and scholars, with 1,322 places to study and 562 places to relax.
The library offers individual and team study rooms, classrooms, self-service print/scan/copy services, an After Hours Study Room open whenever the library is closed, reference services, and: 600,000 science and technology books, 10,000 journals, including approximately 700 current print titles; more than 70,000 eBooks, Almost 50,000 eJournal titles, dozens of various specialized eResources, 490,000 digitized materials (book pages, journals, historical maps)
In addition, the library serves as a social and cultural center, with frequent lectures, educational tours, events, and exhibitions.
NTK is also a supporter of educational institutions and provides excursions, internships, summer schools, and continuing education courses, among other types of instruction.
The library offers remote access to approximately 18,000 eJournals in the fields of science, technology, and medicine for students, educators, and researchers from more than 70 universities, the Institute of the Czech Academy of Sciences, and other large libraries and research organizations.
The current building opened in 2009 in the heart of the Dejvice engineering and technology campus after two years of construction. It was designed by the Projektil Architekti studio with the environment in mind.
The centerpiece of the award-winning building is a rectangular, five-story open atrium with stairwells and elevators enabling access to all public areas. Over two hundred avant-garde, “comics-style” drawings by Romanian artist Dan Perjovschi (one of the only such permanent installations by the artist) adorn the atrium’s concrete walls.
Our building was recently featured in Eric Baldwin’s Temples of Knowledge: 8 Unique National Libraries Across the World.
Here is a link to the virtual tour: https://www.techlib.cz/en/2755-the-building