Due to its location within a lagoon, the city of Venice has a close relationship with the ocean, and therefore is particularly vulnerable to changes in the coastal environment caused by humans. Data from the Copernicus Marine Service, implemented by Mercator Ocean International, can be used to address two of the biggest problems – water quality and flooding.
Many of us saw the photos of Venice’s canals looking crystal clear following the reduction in boat traffic during the first COVID-19 lockdown. Much of the normal cloudiness of the water is caused by sediment being kicked up from the bottom of the canal.
The condition of water is described by ‘water quality’, one element of which is the amount of material suspended in the water – its turbidity, or cloudiness. Water with higher turbidity blocks more light, which may impact marine ecosystems.
During March 2020, a team from CNR in Italy used images from the Copernicus Sentinel-2 satellite to analyse the change in transparency of the Venice canals before and after the lockdown set in. Even though boat traffic had almost stopped by 11 March 2020, the water still looked cloudy because high wind was blowing the water and causing sediment to move around. By 19 March 2020, winds had dropped and there were no more waves caused by boats, allowing the sediment to settle and remain at the bottom of the water.
Water quality can also be monitored using turbidity information included in a new set of Copernicus Marine Service ocean colour products* developed using data from the Sentinel-2 satellite. These products allow water quality to be monitored almost weekly at a resolution of 100 by 100 metres – information that can be useful for resource managers devising restoration plans for coastal water ecosystems, as well as state regulators in charge of defining water quality standards and implementing environmental directives such as the EU Marine Strategy Framework Directive.
“Although we are not yet using the new ocean colour products, we would be really interested to test their use in the future,” explains Antonello Bruschi from ISPRA. “For example, they could be useful for analysing land-based discharges into the ocean.”
Poor water quality isn’t Venice’s only issue. The city is also often hit by flooding, with a record five exceptional floods during six weeks in late 2019. The flooding is caused by exceptionally high tides known locally as acqua alta, or high water. During acqua alta events, the water level rises by more than 80 cm, above which St Marks’s Square is underwater.
The Venice Institute of Marine Science (ISMAR) has a model to forecast sea level in Venice. This model underestimated the 2019 flooding, mainly due to underestimation and errors in the wind fields over the Adriatic Sea and the Venetian Lagoon.
Copernicus Marine Service satellite and in-situ observations and model-based data provide key information for downstream storm surge forecast models, supporting emergency and safety response missions. The data are also essential for better understanding the main mechanisms involved in such extreme events and improving operational storm surge forecast models.
For more information on the 2019 flooding in Venice and how Copernicus supports flood monitoring and storm surge forecasts, take a look at our dedicated article.
Flooding is expected to become a bigger problem worldwide as sea levels rise and extreme weather events become more frequent. According to a study published by the European Geosciences Union, “Venice’s worse-case scenario for sea level rise by the end of the century is a startling 120 centimetres.”
The data provided by the Copernicus Marine Service – on wind (provided through the Wind Thematic Assembly Centre), on sea level (provided through the Sea Level Thematic Assembly Centre, and on tides (provided through the In Situ Thematic Assembly Centre) – will be extremely useful for countries to predict flooding and adapt to it.
The Copernicus Marine Service also monitors and predicts the state of the Mediterranean Sea overall, and produces forecasts up to ten days in advance, providing crucial information surrounding intense marine events. This information is provided through the Mediterranean Sea Monitoring and Forecasting Centre and can feed higher-resolution models that are used to operationally forecast storm surges.
*The new High-Resolution Ocean Colour (HR-OC) products complement the existing low-resolution Ocean Colour TAC. The HR-OC products include information on chlorophyll-a, total suspended matter, turbidity, spectral particulate backscattering and remote sending reflectance for all six regional seas in Europe (Mediterranean Sea, Black Sea, Baltic Sea, European Northwest Shelves, Iberian-Biscay-Irish seas, and the Arctic Ocean), including a coastal strip up to 20 km from the shore.
These products will support European Directives such as the Marine Strategy Framework Directive, the Water Framework Directive and Marine Spatial Planning, in addition to a variety of downstream applications including offshore operations, coastal engineering, habitat monitoring, aquaculture, harmful algal bloom monitoring, and adaptation and mitigation to climate change. Such high-resolution products will address the need from our environmental, societal, and economical user communities, for market sectors such as ‘Ocean Health’, ‘Policies & Ocean Governance & Mitigation’ and ‘Coastal Services’.
Touring Europe's Coasts series
This article is part three in our 'Touring Europe's Coasts’ series, a set of articles covering a range of hot topics around Europe's coastlines. Releases will showcase how Mercator Ocean International and the Copernicus Marine Service track indicators that affect Europe’s coasts, such as the effects brought on by climate change or direct human activity. The series will focus in particular on the downstream applications of the Copernicus Marine Service ocean data products including new High-Resolution Ocean Colour products, which are based on data from the Copernicus Sentinel-2 satellite.
- Ocean data product: Copernicus Marine Service High-Resolution Ocean Colour product for the Mediterranean Sea, monthly means and interpolated daily observation
- Ocean data product: Copernicus Marine Service High-Resolution Ocean Colour product for the Mediterranean Sea, daily observation
- Article: COVID19 reveals human impact on environment: Example of Venice water transparency seen by Copernicus
- Article: Record Venice Acqua Alta: Copernicus Supports Flood Monitoring and Storm Surge Forecasts