If you’ve looked up at the night sky recently, you might have been surprised to see a train of bright lights moving across from one side to the other. What's going on?
The lights appear in groups of up to 60 in a long line. There have been numerous reports from places like the U.S. and U.K. of people seeing them, with explanations ranging from UFOs to an alien invasion. Of course.
But fear not. These lights are actually satellites, launched into space by the U.S. company SpaceX, run by South African entrepreneur Elon Musk. And they're a bit controversial.
The satellites are part of something called Starlink. This is a project by SpaceX to launch thousands of satellites into orbit, and beam the internet to Earth from space. SpaceX hopes to use this to fund missions to Mars.
Since the first launch in May 2019, SpaceX has launched about 360 of these satellites. Each weighs about 260 kilograms and is roughly the size of a flattened car, with a large solar panel that reflects sunlight.
SpaceX’s ultimate goal is to blanket the space around Earth in these satellites. They plan to operate 12,000 Starlink satellites in orbit, and potentially up to 42,000. This is known as a mega constellation.
The satellites are launched in batches of 60, with SpaceX aiming to launch roughly two batches very month – although they haven’t quite achieved that frequency yet.
Each time the satellites are launched, on the company’s own reusable Falcon 9 rockets, they are placed into orbit about 290 kilometers above the surface of Earth.
The satellites then use their onboard ion engines to raise their altitude up to their operational orbits of between 340 and 550 kilometers. This can take several months to do.
During these months, the satellites can appear very visible in the night sky when they fly over your location because of their reflective surfaces.
After dusk and before dawn, when the Sun has dipped just below the horizon, the satellites reflect the Sun’s light back onto the ground, making them shine quite brightly.
As they pass overhead, they appear like a bright train of lights as the satellites follow one after the other in orbit.
SpaceX’s goal with Starlink is to beam high-speed internet to every single location on Earth, from London to Antarctica. People will then pay a fee to access the service, with speeds estimated to be slower than fibre broadband but faster than existing satellite internet services.
However, people have raised concerns about the number of satellites SpaceX is launching. Today only about 2,000 active satellites orbit Earth; SpaceX will increase this by six times, and possibly by 21 times.
This poses a considerable risk for satellites colliding in Earth orbit. If two satellites collide, they can explode and produce thousands of small pieces of debris. This happened in 2009 between a U.S. and Russian satellite.
Each of these pieces of debris can then also impact other satellites. This could lead to a worst-case scenario where parts of Earth orbit become unusable, known as the “Kessler syndrome”, and popularized in the movie Gravity.
Another concern is that the satellites are very bright, outshining 99 percent of all other satellites in the night sky.
Because of this, astronomers have reported that the satellites are hampering their ability to study the universe. The satellites can appear as bright streaks in telescope images, ruining observations of galaxies and stars.
With many more satellites set to be launched, astronomers have raised concerns about the number of satellites that will be visible in the night sky.
By some estimates, hundreds of Starlink satellites could be constantly visible in the night sky from any location on Earth. This could ruin the natural beauty of the night sky, and make astronomy much more difficult.
Currently there are no laws or regulations that protect the aesthetic of the night sky. But some people are looking to change that, and potentially take legal action against SpaceX.
SpaceX, for its part, says it is addressing these concerns.
Regarding collisions, its says each of its satellites is equipped with an automated system to dodge other satellites. However, in September 2019 this system failed, leading to a close call with a European science satellite.
The company also says it is trying to make the satellites less bright. In January 2020, it launched a Starlink satellite that had been coated in a darkened paint, to try and lower its reflectivity.
Early results suggest that, when it reached its operational orbit, this satellite did appear dimmer than other Starlink satellites. However, it still appeared bright in the months it took to reach this orbit.
The company is also working with astronomy groups to try and figure out ways to lower the impact of Starlink satellites on the work of astronomers. Elon Musk, however, has said he thinks there will be "zero" problems.
So far SpaceX has launched 3% of its initial planned constellation of 12,000 satellites, and 0.9% of the potential 42,000 satellites it might launch.
There are some arguments that many of the problems with the satellites should have been sorted out before SpaceX started launching them.
However, for the time being, there are no rules or regulations stopping SpaceX from launching more and more Starlink satellites into orbit.
Before the coronavirus pandemic emerged, the company planned to launch about 1,500 Starlink satellites by the end of 2020, bringing its service online in the U.S. and Canada first. That may now change.
But for the time being, you will likely continue to see these trains of satellites in the night sky. You can use websites like Find Starlink or this handy tool to see when they will be visible above your location.
SpaceX's next Starlink launch, its seventh, is scheduled for tomorrow, Tuesday, April 22 from Cape Canaveral in Florida.