When left untreated, depression can have serious risks or consequences that can affect every aspect of your life. However, depression is treatable. By seeking help and following your treatment plan, you can prevent these complications.
Thinking of death and suicide are symptoms of a depressed person. If depression is untreated, these thoughts get worse. Sometimes, you or a friend might feel like suicide is the only way out, the only way to escape the pain. But remember, these strange feelings and thoughts are temporary and will pass.
People that undergo depression sometimes turn to self-medicating with substances. The truth is that drugs and alcohol not only worsen symptoms, but they can also increase the chances that you get addicted to these substances. Combining drugs and alcohol with depression is a dangerous mix, which can increase the risk of suicide and further your depression.
Another way to determine people with depression is when they’re self-injuring or inflicting pain upon themselves with methods like cutting or burning.
When people get hopeless, angry or really bad about themselves, they are less likely to take care of themselves and think about the consequences of their actions. Depressed individuals may put themselves in risky situations, with potentially dangerous consequences (e.g., driving drunk, unprotected sex).
Poor School Performance
Untreated depression can make it very difficult for students to go to class and complete assignments. Depression diminishes one’s ability to concentrate, remember things and make decisions.
Consider how your relationships suffer when you’re stressed out. You might lash out at loved ones, stop going to social events or just want to be left alone. Depression leaves people drained emotionally, mentally and physically, so it becomes hard to be there for friends or even family.
Depression can become an unhealthy cycle. People with depression need to take care of themselves to feel better. When we don’t take care of ourselves, it can leave us vulnerable to other illnesses such as flu, or worsen health conditions we already have, such as diabetes.
Remember, depression is treatable and so all of these dangerous consequences of untreated depression can be avoided.
Should you or anyone you know suffer from this psychiatric disorder, please seek help from a behavioral health professional or contact Mid Cities Psychiatry today.