With seven days left until the end of Hanukkah, there is still plenty of time to pick up your favorite chocolate gelt from Wockenfuss Candy! This beloved holiday treat plays an important role in the holiday and is based on traditions that are hundreds of years old. Learn more about the history behind this delicious Hanukkah treat in today’s blog, below.
Chocolate Gelt: The Sweet History of a Hanukkah Favorite
What is Hanukkah gelt and how did it become a tradition?
In both Yiddish and Hebrew, the term “Hanukkah gelt” means “Hanukkah money.” There are a number of theories as to where the tradition came from. One theory attributes it to the 17th century practice among Polish Jews of giving money to their children during Hanukkah to distribute to their teachers. As children began to demand money to keep for themselves, the tradition evolved into giving small sums of money to children.
Another common explanation is that the tradition grew out of the story of the miracle of the oil when the Maccabees triumphed over the Greeks. In order to celebrate their new-found freedom, the Hasmoneans created national coins; Hanukkah gelt is an homage to those coins. A final possibility is that the tradition began in Eastern Europe in the 18th century, when Jews would offer coins to their religious teachers as a token of thanks. Wherever it began, the tradition of giving Hanukkah gelt has been around for centuries.
How did chocolate gelt replace real coins?
Chocolate gelt is an American invention that was created by chocolatiers in the early 20th century. The candy company Loft’s was the first to produce chocolate gelt, which they wrapped in shiny foil and packaged in mesh bags meant to look like money bags.
Since then, the tradition of gifting chocolate gelt has become a beloved holiday tradition. At Wockenfuss Candies we are proud to offer delicious and beautiful milk chocolate gelt!
Visit Wockenfuss Candies for Your Hanukkah Candy!
If you need to stock up on holiday treats like chocolate gelt, stop by Wockenfuss to get started on your planning. If you have any questions about our sweets or need some help choosing the right desserts for your holiday table, please contact Wockenfuss Candies: call 1-800-296-4414 or email email@example.com. When you’re not savoring our sweets, stay satisfied by following us on Facebook, Twitter, Google+, and Pinterest!