Goin to Vegas Baby
Our "Goin to Vegas Baby" video was entered into the 2013 Security
Awareness Video Contest sponsored by the EDUCAUSE/Internet2 Computer and
Network Security Task force and the National Cyber Security Alliance.
Although our students did not win they enjoyed coming up with the idea
and putting the video together. The video skit portrays an individual
getting their identity stolen. Remember you should never leave your
credit card unattended.
Encryption/decryption is nothing new. We just use it differently. In wartime, a cipher was used to keep the enemy from obtaining contents of transmission. Now we use to send transmissions over the internet. We use encryption to protect our sensitive or personal information. Here is more information on encryption.
Mobile Security Tips:
The only way you can truly secure your mobile device, such as a smartphone, is to protect the device, protect the data and the apps. This video skit protrays some of the old funny ways we used to use phones, but there are far more consequences now. Do you know how to secure your device, data and apps? Here are a few tips on protecting your mobile device.
Do you use the same password for all your online accounts? Hopefully Not! This video provides tips on some of the common passwords you certainly should avoid and tips on creating a safe password for your accounts.
Protecting Personal Information:
Identity theft is a common
crime, don't let it be you. To prevent identity theft or disclosure of
your personal information you need to know your privacy rights and how
to protect your personal information.
The premise to social engineering is it's easier to trick people into
providing you sensitive and personal information than to hack into their
computer systems by force. These individuals exploit people's natural
tendency to want to trust and be helpful. They prey on us hoping we
trust them enough to provide them whatever they want. They portray
themselves as helpful in a false crisis.
Social media is the means we use to create, share and/or exchange
information and ideas in a virtual community or network. This video
discusses the impact of posting information on social media.
Security is especially important of WiFi wireless networks. Why?
Because digital thieves can easily intercept and extract information
like passwords and credit card numbers over open air connections. This
video has a short introduction skit and then provides tips on WiFi