As nouns the difference between nerd and bookworm is that nerd is nerd (a person, often very studious, with poor social skills) while bookworm is any of various insects that infest books.
How does reading affect your personality?
Reading books improves your word power, vocabulary, stimulates your thoughts, broadens your perspective simultaneously increases your communication skills by building confidence in you. You become a confident personality and easily able to express your thoughts and vision fluently – both verbally and written.
Can reading improve your IQ?
By adding to that storehouse, reading increases your crystallised intelligence. That explains why some IQ tests include vocabulary words, which generally serve as a reliable proxy of how clever you are. But all of us know people with little “book knowledge” who are nonetheless sharp and insightful.
Can reading a book change your life?
Reading can allow you to see what’s important to you by the kind of books you tend to choose. Reading increases your own creativity, sometimes sparking other ideas in your life. Reading can make you feel not so alone, especially a memoir of someone who’s been through the same thing you have.
Can reading change a person?
It helps us relate to other people and encourages us to be kind and considerate of other people’s feelings. As it turns out, reading can actually help improve empathy. When people read stories about other people’s lives, it helps them develop the skills to understand the world through another person’s perspective.
Can reading change the way you think?
In reading, we can actually physically change our brain structure, become more empathetic, and even trick our brains into thinking we’ve experienced what we’ve only read in novels.
How reading can impact you or your society?
Time and time again, research has shown that people who read books are better informed than people who do not and are consequently better able to hold their own in society. They are more aware of their surroundings and can envisage themselves more easily in other people’s place.
How does reading affect your brain?
READING CAN IMPROVE OUR MEMORY. When you read, you’re engaging more than a few brain functions, such as phonemic awareness, visual and auditory processes, comprehension, fluency, and more. Reading jolts your brain into action, maintains concentration, and allows your mind to process the events happening before you.