Cannabidiol (CBD) is a non-psychoactive cannabinoid found in cannabis. CBD has shown promise as an effective treatment for several medical conditions, including chronic pain and seizures. CBD is usually sold as an oil for these purposes and taken orally, although it can also be taken in other forms such as capsules or topical creams. CBD products stay in your system for up to four hours after consumption. CBD can be detected in the body up to four hours after consumption and is most likely excreted via urine and faeces. It generally takes one to seven days for the body to excrete CBD as waste. While CBD metabolites can stay in the body for a long time, an individual’s tolerance for these compounds should be considered when determining the length of time their system will take to eliminate them.
The body naturally produces some cannabinoids itself. These are called endocannabinoids (ECs), which have been shown to help regulate mood, memory, and sleep. Western medical science considers ECs as the primary mediator of cannabinoid effects. It has also been found that liver enzymes may metabolise some of the cannabinoids in the body, resulting in varying amounts of metabolites being formed during the breakdown process. All these metabolites are considered non-psychoactive since they do not activate cannabinoid receptors (as opposed to taking THC). However, long-term use of synthetic cannabinoids has been shown to result in elevated levels of these metabolites in urine or even blood.
CBD oil is capable of being detected in the body for days or even weeks after it has been ingested. This makes dosing a huge concern, as patients may take too much by accident, mainly if they use a lot of CBD oil.
There are different kinds of CBD oil, each with its own effects and dosing. More specifically, there are different ratio products ranging from 1:1 (equivalent to CBD) to 1:2 (higher doses of THC). It is important to note that the more THC in these products, the longer it will be detectable in your system.