In USA Black Citizen's Successes: Ten Percent Is Not Enough
9-23-14, * -- For almost 150 years the United States has been conducting an experiment; the subjects of the experiment: black people and working-class whites. The hypothesis to be tested: “Can a people taken from the jungles of Africa and forced into slavery be fully integrated as citizens in a majority white population?”
The whites were descendants of Europeans who had created a majestic civilization. The former slaves had been tribal peoples with no written language and virtually no intellectual achievements. In 1863 acting on a policy that was not fair to either group, the government released newly freed black people into a white society that saw them as inferiors and America has struggled with racial discord ever since.
Decade after decade the problems persisted; but the experimenters never gave up insisting that if they could find the right formula the experiment would work! They tried with money, special programs, relaxed standards and endless hand wringing to close the “achievement gap.” Their new laws intruded into people’s lives in ways that would have been otherwise unthinkable concocting program after program and:
<-- There is a Talented Tenth: Black Americans who are talented and educated who have become entrepreneurs, lawyers, doctors and scientists are approximately ten percent of their population. A tenth is not enough.
For the experiment to work, the ten percent has to be followed by a critical mass of people who will attend and graduate from schools, hold jobs and promote social stability. That’s what’s missing. Through the decades too many American cities have failed:
THE “EXPERIMENT” HAS FAILED
The experiment has failed not because of culture, white privilege or racism. The fundamental problem is white people and black people are different and the differences result in a large social incompatibility.
- just how tired their white subjects are with this experiment
- that white people aren’t out to get black people; they are just exhausted with them. They are exhausted by the social pathologies, the violence, the endless complaints, the blind racial solidarity, the bottomless pit of grievances, the excuses and reflexive animosity
- that white people are not racists – they are just frustrated as most of the efforts and attempts to placate and encourage the successes of all black people has resulted in a small percentage being educated and successful ... with still more rioting
 Brookings Percentages: https://www.brookings.edu/articles/black-progress-how-far-weve-come-and-how-far-we-have-to-go/
 The Freedmen’s Bureau: Established in 1865 by Congress to help millions of former black slaves and poor whites in the South in the aftermath of the Civil War.
 Talented Tenth https://www.britannica.com/topic/Talented-Tenth
 Out of wedlock births: In 1990 the rates out of wedlock births was 64 percent for black infants, 18 percent for whites; every year about one million more children are born into fatherless families. https://www.brookings.edu/research/an-analysis-of-out-of-wedlock-births-in-the-united-states/
I always say, we should have never gotten rid of segregation. It only made sense.
Leave a Reply.
1 John 3:9-10, 4:7
GOD'S STRONG DELUSION
2 Thessalonians 2:10-12
Disclaimer: No violation of Copyright Law intended for any images or work presented - with no financial gain.
U.S. Title 17 Code § 107
Section 106A-117 of the U.S. Copyright Law. "Fair Use Notice"
Images and videos on this site may contain copyrighted material. That are made available for educational purposes only.