Environment and Climate
In many places of the world tourism actively contributes the protection of the environment: national parks in many places are financed by the income of tourists and biodiversity becomes an attractive selling point for destinations. Nevertheless: on a global scale, tourism consumes huge amounts of scarce natural resources - like water or energy - and produces mountains of rubbish from plastic bottles and food waste. One long-haul return flight from Frankfurt to New York City alone exhausts more carbon than an average Indian citizen per year. Flying becomes an issue of global justice, since especially the poorest of the poor suffer from the climate crisis, while at the same time cannot afford the luxury of flying. We therefore support a kind of tourism that saves resources-and causes as little climate change as possible.
South Africa: Water Consumption in Tourism
The holiday paradise of South Africa beckons with pools, golf courses and wellness. But the country fails in supplying its population with sufficient water. A problem - also for the future viability of tourism.
Thailand: Avoiding Food Waste, Saving Resources
Sourcing locally, wasting less. Food waste management can help restaurant and catering businesses to save not only resources, but also a lot of money.
India: Air-Conditioners as Climate Killers
Air-conditioners are a typical ‘false solution’ when it comes to adaptation to climate change. Passive cooling offers alternatives – also in tourism.
Tourism and aviation commitments at COP26
On the occasion of the UN Climate Change Conference, the travel and airline sector announced plans for more climate protection.
World Tourism Day 2021
Since 50 years, the international community celebrates World Tourism Day annually on September 27. We have compiled some statements and demands from civil society networks.
No Long-Term Plan for Lakshadweep
A planned tourism project in the Indian Union Territory of Lakshadweep meets with resistance from both local people and the scientific community.
The journey to climate neutrality
The Science Based Targets initiative shows companies, including tour operators how much and how fast they need to reduce their greenhouse gas emissions to limit global warming to 1.5 degrees.
Tourism instead of coal in Romania
Romania is taking the chance for a sustainable transition away from coal - and gives the old coal fields in Jiu Valley a new economic significance through tourism.
Tourism at 48°C
In many destinations, climate change puts the future of tourism at stake. Apart from mitigation, adaptation will be a major challenge.
Publication: "Rethink Single-Use Plastic Products in Travel & Tourism“
The United Nations Environment Programme and the World Travel & Tourism Council assess the impacts of plastic waste and provide implementation recommendations.