Everyone loves chewing gum; they are tasty and fun to chew. However, do you know that chewing sugarless gum offers dental benefits too?
The American Dental Association (ADA) acknowledges that chewing sugarless gum after having food helps prevent tooth decay and cavities.
As per the Oral Health Foundation, chewing sugar-free gum after having food promotes the production of saliva, which helps dilute and clear away sugar and food, rinse away bacteria, strengthen teeth, and neutralize the acid in the mouth that weakens tooth enamel. Chewing sugarless gum can offer multiple benefits:
However, things are not as easy as simply picking up any chewing gum packet from the supermarket rack. Here are a few tips on choosing the right kind of chewing gum that can help clean your mouth.
Before buying chewing gum, it is essential to choose the right type, or else you will be doing more harm than good. Look for the sugar-free option with an ADA seal. Read the package and choose the one with plaque-fighting ingredients like Xylitol.
Chewing sugar-free gum will boost saliva production in the mouth, which will help clean the leftover food, sugar, and acid from the mouth, thus preventing plaque formation. The presence of certain ingredients in the chewing gum, like Xylitol, neutralizes the acid in the mouth and eliminates any leftover food debris in the mouth - especially if you chew gum after finishing a meal. This helps prevent the accumulation of plaque, cavities, and tooth decay and freshens the breath.
Ingredients to look for in chewing gums
Most sugar-free chewing gums contain Xylitol, a naturally-occurring sugar substitute. Xylitol offers several health benefits and helps to keep the mouth clean.
Xylitol prevents the growth of oral bacteria Streptococcus mutans, which cause cavities. When the bacteria come in contact with Xylitol, they lose their ability to adhere to the tooth, thus stopping the cavity-causing process. This benefit, combined with the extra saliva production, can help check the formation of cavities and keep the mouth healthy.
Some chewing gum contains a substance called casein phosphopeptide-amorphous calcium phosphate (CPP-ACP). CPP-ACP or Recaldent can help remineralize and strengthen the teeth, thus slowing down tooth decay.
Call us at (206) 575-1000 or visit our office at Tukwila, WA, to consult our dentist and learn more ways to maintain your oral health.
411 Strander Blvd Suite 105, Tukwila, WA 98188
MON - FRI 7:00 am - 6:00 pm
SAT - SUN Closed
Email: [email protected]
Phone: (206) 575-1000