Islam is a religion, so how do you think it came about. Well because of trade, military conquest, and political order. All of these subjects are why Islam spread so quickly.
The five principles are the guidelines to worship but worship is not limited to those acts. The Islamic religion just like social work promotes a holistic approach. Worship in Islam can be demonstrated in many ways it can be demonstrated by being good to your family, smiling at someone, sharing food with a person, visiting the sick and so on. The essence of strong moral character, good relations with people as well as devoting one’s self to God is the key to attaining a true sense of piece because then and only then will
D. with astonishing similarities to Christianity. Muslims believe that Muhammad was called by Allah (God) to be a messenger of his words, much like the figures of Jesus and Abraham. Islamic culture uses the Qur 'an as Christians and Jews use the Bible and Torah. The literature, architecture, philosophy, artworks, and music that derived from these religions through their civilizations richly reflect the teachings and tradition behind these spiritual views of the world (Sayre). The three major books, the Hebrew Bible, the Christian Bible, and the Qur’an, all contain scripture recorded by followers inspired by
Both Hinduism and Islam are monotheistic, however the Muslim faith is based on revelations received by the Prophet Muhammad in Saudi Arabia. The single most important belief in Islam, and arguably the central theme of the religion, is that there is only one God. The name of God is Allah, which is simply Arabic for "the (al) God (Ilah)." Hinduism believe in the law of karma. Islam believes in God’s reward of good deed and punishment for bad deeds, thus declares the Qu'ran, "Whoever does good deed, he shall be repaid ten-fold; and whoever does evil, he shall be repaid with evil." (5.32). Islam do not recognize other religion whereas Hinduism the pursuit of truth is more important than belief or disbelief in God or particular divinity. The Arabic word Islam means “submission,” reflecting the faith's central tenet of submitting to the will of God. Followers of Islam are called
Despite all of their similarities, the Christian and the Muslim religion have a lot of differences. Christians believe that God Exists in three distinct persons (The Trinity) the Father, the son, and the Holy spirit (Matthew 21:28). While Muslims believe that God (Allah) is not a trinity, and is looked through an Islamic view called strict Monotheism. Another difference that Christians and Muslims have is the book that they follow by. The book that the Muslim religion follow is called the Quran revealed to the prophet Mohammad for over a period of 20 years. The book that the
On September 11, 2001, 19 militants linked with al-Qaeda hijacked four airliners and carried out suicide attacks on different locations in the United States. Roughly 3,000 people were wrongly killed. This tragedy affected Americans all over the country, but one specific religion was attacked twice; first by terrorists, then by their fellow Americans. This religion is known as Sikhism. Followers of Sikhism thrive for justice, equality, and honest conduct and livelihood. They make up the world’s fifth largest religion, but are often misunderstood as Muslim because of their distinct appearance. A Sikh’s features embrace unshorn hair, a beard, and a turban for those who are Amritdhari or Keshdhari.
Even though time has changed but the approach is still suitable until today. For example is the message of Islam conveyed by Prophet Muhammad SAW has been open to all humanity and never been limited to any particular people, nation, tribe, race or social class. The pure essence of the beliefs and teachings were revealed by God to the Prophet Muhammad. Islam is truly unique among the religions of the world because it is addressed to all of mankind. The scripture of Islam, called the Quran, Almighty God is never addressed all human being. Additionally, in the Quran, Almighty God never addressed as the God of a particular people or nation. Since religious truth is eternal and unchanging and mankind is one universal brotherhood, God’s revelations to man have always been consistent and universal. Due to God’s wisdom and because Islam is the final revealed religion, the guidance that God has sent is applicable for all the times and for all the places. This can be seen in the fact that the guidance for some aspects of life is much more broad and flexible than others (Abu Yusuf,
Beliefs of Islam: These entail the 5 basic things one as a muslim should focus on and strive to do – these are known as the 5 pillars of Islam, based on the words and teachings of the Holy Prophet (PBUH). In doing so, and keeping to it, one may consider themselves successful in this world and the Hereafter – a way of achieving closeness to the Creator, and humbling oneself by following the path shown by the Holy Prophet (PBUH). *According to Islamic teachings, all Muslims must say ‘Peace be upon him’ (pbuh or PBUH) upon saying or hearing the Prophet’s name as a form of respect to him.
Islam is a religion of mercy for all people, both Muslims and non-Muslims. It is a religion which lays emphasis on the Unity of God, prophethood and then on righteous living. Muslims are the fastest-growing religious group in the world.
Every year in the 9th month of the Islamic calendar is when the fasting begins. All adults and kids at the age of 10 are obligatory too fast for the 30 days. The kids at age 10 it helps them develop self-control, laziness and overcome selfishness (5 pillars of Islam). The month of Ramadan is to encourage Islam’s to seek nearness to Allah by the less fortunate some people have. During Ramadan Muslims are required sunrise to sunset abstain food, drink and sexual intercourse (5 pillars of Islam). With addition to these also refrain from anger, gossip, violence bad language and other inappropriate actions and thoughts (Islamic path). After the month or the 30 days Muslims celebrate Eid Al-Fitr this is the feast breaking of the fast. The celebration is 3 days this is the time for family reunion and it children favorite holiday because they receive gifts, money and new
Centuries before the Crusades War, in the 3rd Century, the Catholic Kingdom and Byzantine Empire were united through the name of the Roman Empire. However, in 287 CE, the Roman Empire had grown immensely, up to the point where it was absurd for the Emperor to govern all the provinces, only in Rome. Due to this, Diocletian, the Emperor of the Roman Empire divided the empire into two parts: the west and the east. The west of Rome was considered poor, in contrast to the prosperous East, due to the utilization of the Black, Red, Caspian, and Mediterranean Sea. Proceeding to the 11th Century, various strong Germanic Tribes invaded the Roman Empire, leading to the official split of the Roman Empire - into Catholic Western Europe and Eastern Byzantine
Muslims believe that God is one and incomparable and that the purpose of existence is to worship God. Muslims also believe that Islam is the complete and universal version of a primordial faith that was revealed many times before through prophets including Adam, Noah, Abraham, Moses, and Jesus. Although a large majority of Muslims do maintain that the previous messages and revelations have been partially misinterpreted
Islam began in Arabia and was revealed by the Prophet Muhammad (S.A.W) to the humanity. People who follow Islam are called Muslims.
The mosque, or masjid in Arabic, is the Muslim place of worship. A mosque is an important part of the Islamic religion because the people are required to gather every Friday for prayer. Mosques in the middle east each are unique in their own architectural way, although some may look similar. Most mosques in the middle east have common features, but are also formed in different ways. The style and arrangement of a mosque can tell us a lot about the place, when it was built, and the religion.
There are many great religious influences around the course of history that we learn about and practice today. Many religions have teachings and ideas that have influenced and bettered our society and politics. The most influential of all the religious figures in Islam was the Prophet Muhammad, and his achievements influence the modern economy, politics, and society (Rangoonwala, Sy, & Epinoza, 2011).