All you need to know about color blindness
Proven Guide to Support Children With Color Vision Deficiency
The GUIDE is for parents who want to get the best start in life for their child without spending hours and days searching about color blindness on the internet or getting random advice on social networks that might not work for their child.
Click here to start this FREE online course from the beginning.
Part 1: For Parents
3. Do and Don't As A Parent
Most colorblind children will try to hide their condition in fear of being marked out as different and it is therefore very important that classroom practices take account of the needs of colorblind pupils.
Students who are colorblind may:
Be unable to tell the difference between certain colors or shades of similar colors
Have trouble with certain assignments or projects that require them to use colors
Feel self-conscious or frustrated about their color blindness
Be at risk for teasing or bullying because of color blindness
Many children feel embarrassed about not being able to choose the appropriate crayon or color of paint or to accurately describe things around them. They may be slower to follow instructions, because those relating to color may make very little sense. Indeed, they may seem ‘slow’ or ‘hesitant’ in many situations, because they can and will be perplexed by the need to make choices based on something they simply cannot see.
25 Actions to Help your Child
In this video, you can find useful tips to help your child. Each one of these actions is important and it's good to watch this video a couple of times to memorize all the related actions to help your child.
There Are Several Books Related to Color Blindness for Kids Available
#1. "PLAY WITH COLORS"
Best Story for colorblind Children. The story presents color blindness in a GOOD LIGHT.
Fred is Olivia’s best friend at school. He always uses the wrong colors in his drawings, and he is very popular because of his creativity! One day all the students in the class decide to color everything with the wrong colors, like Fred, to see their teacher's reaction. While all the students have fun with their surprise, Their teacher explains that we all see colors differently. Some of us can't see all the colors or see them as another color; for example, purple appears as blue.
#2. "COLOR ME"
Coloring book for colorblind children - coloring with a written guide for colorblind children.
Color has a very close relationship with everyone. For children with color vision deficiency, helping them to identify colors, guiding them to view art correctly, and learning about drawing and coloring are even more important.
Using the wrong colors in the drawing is very common among colorblind people. Colorblind children can find these mistakes very embarrassing and it can affect their confidence, especially in school.
This coloring book is the new method invented by Amir Kosari, a colorblind designer, to guide children with drawing and boost their confidence by seeing the end result in their drawing.
This drawing book will help children to memorize the colors of things such as animals, flowers, and everything around them as well.
This coloring book is the right coloring book for all colorblind children to learn colors and enjoy drawing without feeling embarrassed.
Color Names Stickers, A Simple Solution With A Big Impact
It's very difficult to find products to help colorblind people to use colors correctly.
Color-names stickers are one of the most useful products that I found could have a big impact on colorblind people's lives.
Labeling colors is one of the most common strategies that can help colorblind people at school or at work. It can help them never miss important information and fully understand the subject. For example, teachers can use labels for charts and graphs or use color name stickers for colored pencils/markers for drawing.
To purchase a few of these high quality cheap stickers click here
If parents find colored pencils or crayons with color names on them like in the picture below, it can be a great help for colorblind children. Each time a colorblind child uses the wrong colors in his/her drawing and other children notice it, they feel embarrassed and frustrated. In a long term, it can lead to keeping their color blindness a secret.
Even if you find a colored pencil or crayons with color names on them, some 'color names' are not very clear to colorblind people, e.g. "Burgundy" in the image above.
If your child is red-green colorblind and the dark red color looks like brown to him/her, it's not possible for your child to understand what the color burgundy is.
It's a better solution to use color name stickers on a normal colored pencil, crayons, or watercolor that your child might have already. Instead of 'burgundy', choose names of colors that make more sense, like 'dark red'.
You can also use a white sticker and write on it, but don't make it in big size, please.
I remember my mom wrote the names of colors on my colored pencils, but they were so big that other students were able to notice them and they asked me why I wrote color names on them. I didn't like to share that I can't see some colors.
I really suggest using some of the printed stickers to make it look more natural. These stickers are designed by a colorblind designer for colorblind users. You can find different sizes and shapes, the same as in the image below.
To purchase a few of these high quality cheap stickers click here
*Read the description of each sticker to purchase the right size, eg "Purchase the Medium Size Sticker Only" or "Purchase the EXTRA LARGE Size Sticker Only" for big packages with 72 stickers.**
Stickers are available in three border styles of Glossy, Matte, and Transparent.
Get up to 60% discount with one of the promo codes on this link:
Learn How To Use Color Filters For:
The best color-blind modes allow the player to choose the colors of the most important element. Perhaps the most common way of implementing colorblind accessibility in video games is by including colorblind mode via a whole-screen filter. You can find this option in the setting of the game if they have it.
Each video game has a different setting, and many video games don't have any settings for colorblind people. (some games don't need CVD setting).
If it's hard to see what's on the screen, apply a color filter. Color filters change the color palette on the screen and can help you distinguish between things that differ only by color.
To use a color filter:
Select Start > Settings > Ease of Access > Color filters
Switch on the toggle under Turn on color filters
Then, select a color filter from the menu. Try each filter to see which one suits you best
Note: To get to color filter settings in previous versions of Windows 10, select Start > Settings > Ease of Access > Color & high contrast.
READ MORE: Microsoft.com
If you have color blindness or other vision challenges, you can adjust the view on your Mac, iPad, iPhone, Apple Watch, and Apple TV so it works better for you. Choose from a range of color filters or fine-tune them. And turn on Invert Colors on all your devices to instantly change the values and create more contrast.
Enable accessibility features on Mac.
In the Apple menu, select System Preferences.
Select Accessibility. Then select and turn on the features you want to use.
If you have color blindness or other vision challenges, you can use Color Filters to help you differentiate between colors. Color Filters can change the look of things, like pictures and movies, so you might want to use it only when needed.
Open the Settings app
Accessibility > Display & Text Size > Color Filters
You'll see three examples of color spaces to help you select an option that fits your needs. Swipe left or right on the examples to find a filter that works best for you.
Choose a filter
When you turn on Color Filters, you can choose from four preset filters:
Red/Green for Protanopia
Green/Red for Deuteranopia
Blue/Yellow for Tritanopia
Adjust color intensity
You can adjust the intensity of any of the Color Filters to fit your needs. Use the Intensity slider to customize a filter that's more intense or less intense.
Adjust Color Tint
If you have color or light sensitivity, tap Color Tint to change the hue of the entire display on your iPhone, iPad, or iPod touch. Use the sliders to adjust your display's hue and the intensity of the effect.
RESTRICTION FOR COLORBLIND PEOPLE
When it comes to career, it can be a very broad spectrum, ranging from involving in mixing paint to those that require a person to operate machinery, deal with color-coded wires, or read colored dashboards. So color vision deficiency can have a profound influence on a person’s choice of occupation.
Professions: medicine, industrial engineering, firefighting, navy, military and law enforcement, police, and many more restrict or even ban colorblind people from some positions. We can’t blame them, can we?!
After all, doctors should be able to identify the right diagnosis for patients, designers should be able to create perfect color combinations for their clients, product analyzers must know the psychology behind each color, drivers must react to stoplights, and chefs should know if the food is fully cooked.
In some cases, people who feel they have been wrongly excluded from certain careers or jobs and fight back. They feel color blindness didn’t affect their ability to perform important tasks, so they continue to pursue their dreams.
Read more: What Careers Are Restricted For Colorblind People
In this part, we would suggest you try some game training to understand your child's color blindness with a real example.
Play M&M’s game with your child to see how they differentiate colors. (This part is to inform you about your child's condition. Don't need to correct them or ask them questions. In the next part of the course, we will show different colors on the screen and this is where you will get a chance to ask your child what he/she can see.
Sorting Colored Pencils
Ask your child to sort all the colored pencils as shown in the image below. It will help you understand which shades of certain colors he or she can't see.
Maybe you as a person with normal or common vision get confused by seeing this unusual color sorting, but let me explain how I see it:
For example, I will make a group of colored pencils that contain different shades of green, brown, and red because, to me, they all look the same. I can see the tomato red, but dark red looks like brown to me. It's the same as dark green.
I can make a group with yellow, light green, and orange colors for the same reason. Or a group with purple and blue colors, because I can't see purple at all. (Depending on the type of color blindness, the result would be different).
504 Plan for Colorblind Students
A child with color blindness may be considered to have a special educational need, which means they need additional support and resources from their school, and the 504 plan will provide it for them ( only U.S).
HOW 504 PLAN CAN HELP COLORBLIND STUDENTS?
A 504 plan would set the guidelines for teachers to know how to help students with different needs. There are so many parents that got their children into the 504 plan and they are very happy with the results. Colorblind students can use the 504 plan too.
WHAT IS THE 504 PLAN?
The 504 Plan is a plan developed to ensure that a child who has a disability identified under U.S law and is attending an elementary or secondary educational institution receives accommodations that will ensure their academic success and access to the learning environment.
IS COLOR BLINDNESS CONSIDERED A DISABILITY?
No, the federal Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) does not specifically list color blindness as a disability.
Color blindness is not a disability in the term that a colorblind person is still able to do almost everything normal people are able to do.
WHAT ARE "SUBSTANTIAL LIMITATIONS?
This term is not defined in the Act or the regulations and is left to each agency to define. The Americans with Disabilities Act does suggest that the term "substantially limits" should be interpreted to mean that the student is "unable to perform a major life activity that the average student of approximately the same age can perform, or that the student is significantly restricted as to the condition, manner or duration under which a particular major life activity is performed as compared to the average student of approximately the same age."
Each student's needs are determined individually. Appropriate accommodations should be determined based on the nature of the disabling condition and what the student needs in order to have an equal opportunity to compete when compared to a student without disabilities. The goal is to provide students with the knowledge and compensating skills they will need to be able to function in life after graduation.
There are so many parents with a colorblind child that got the 504 plan for their child, so most probably you can get it too.
5 STEPS TO GET A 504 PLAN FOR COLORBLIND STUDENTS
1. Provide documents
You need to have a medical diagnosis result from the eye doctor.
Make an appointment to see an optician and obtain a formal diagnosis. Most opticians will provide free eye tests for children and children should have regular eye tests anyway, but make sure you ask specifically for color blindness to be tested.
2. Talk with the school’s 504 coordinator
Every public school district must have a staff member who coordinates the 504 plan. Ask for a meeting with any of the counselors the school might have as well.
The 504 meeting must include at least two people who can:
Talk about your child’s abilities and skills. (For example, your child’s teacher or guidance counselor may attend.)
Interpret reports or evaluations. (For example, the school social worker or nurse may attend.)
Share information about the accommodations that may meet your child’s needs. (For example, the 504 Coordinator)
If you would like interpretation services at the 504 meeting, please inform your school's 504 Coordinator.
3. Write a formal request for a 504 plan
You’ll need to make a formal written request for a 504 plan. In your request, be specific about why you’re asking for the plan. For example, you might say: “I would like a 504 plan for my child who is colorblind and needs frequent breaks throughout the day to be able to learn like his peers.
Explain that your child doesn’t need specialized instruction (that would be special education), but needs certain accommodations to access instruction.
Schools can offer black-and-white tests and help teachers know that your child may not be able to do assignments that involve color matching or art to their specifications. Came in handy with chemistry and biology too- mix the wrong colored chemicals and you could have a big problem.
The 504 team will review information that comes from different sources, such as your child’s tests, observations, work samples, report cards, and medical records. This will help the team understand your child’s abilities, achievements, behaviors, and health needs. Parents and school staff may bring any information they believe best describes the child’s abilities and needs.
4. Follow up on your request
Some schools might ask you to wait until 2nd grade when it will become more of an issue on tests. You need to follow up and talk with teachers, communication is key. You always need to talk to the teachers at the beginning of the year, and usually have to remind them every now and then when an assignment comes up that he cannot do.
5. Go through the 504 plan evaluation process.
The school will review your child’s schoolwork, medical records, and other documents. The school will also want to talk with and observe your child, as well as interview you, your child’s teacher, and other school staff.
WE CAN HELP YOU!
If there is any chart, graph, or image in your child's book it's not color-blind friendly, you can send it to us and we will re-design it for your child and share it with others.