About the Program
Courses in the area of Agriculture and Natural Resources utilize the expertise of Cooperative Extension faculty and staff to provide students with knowledge and practical skills for understanding current environmental and resource management issues. These courses are appropriate for students interested in applying this knowledge and skills in a context of public understanding and education, for example through university extension, environmental non-profits, watershed associations, municipal environmental commissions, Sustainable Jersey Green Teams, and boards and commissions concerned with sustainable agriculture.
11:035:200: Quantitative Methods for Program Evaluation (3)
Introduces students to the summary and analysis of evaluation data from community education and outreach programs in environmental, youth development, community health, and agriculture disciplines. Students will develop skills in appropriate data analysis, interpretation of statistics, and presenting this information in written and graphical form.
11:035:215: Spanish Language and Culture for the Agricultural Professional (1.5) Spring Only
Students will engage in beginning, conversational Spanish designed specifically for a supervisor of an agricultural workforce. Students will also explore the cultural diversity of the Spanish-speaking world.
11:035:250: Topics in Digital Photography (2)
This course will help students learn how to properly use an advanced digital camera in order to achieve desired photographic outcomes.
11:035:258: Avian Field Identification for Use in Land Management (1) P/NC
Provides students with the basic foundation for field identification of birds. Sight, sound, habitat, and flight pattern are reviewed. Students learn the fundamentals of bird identification, natural history, preferred habitats, and expected timelines for various species along the Atlantic Flyway in New Jersey, and how bird identification plays into land management decisions.
11:035:268: Issues in Environmental Pollution (2)
Current environmental issues, including pollutants in our air, land, and water. The New Jersey Comparative Risk Assessment Manual and the EPA Tox Town and Scorecard websites are used as starting points for pollution information. Students engage with real world problems with scientific facts in discussion, and investigate the pollutants in their own hometowns, aiming to understand policy issues in depth. Local, state, national, and international impacts are considered vis-à-vis the theme "Think globally; act locally."
11:035:272: River and Stream Ecology (1)
This is a broad introductory course exploring the chemical, physical; and biological processes of rivers and streams. Students will gain an appreciation of these waterbodies as dynamic and constantly evolving ecosystems while acquiring skills to conduct and analyze scientific methods and data related to river and stream management issues.
11:035:274: Organic Farming and Gardening (2)
This course is designed for students interested in organic farming and gardening, considering the perspective of both agricultural professionals and home gardeners. The course covers the planning and design of an organic garden, crop and seed selection, specialty crops, soil building and fertility, composting, history of organic farming, seed starting, plant growth measurements, data collection, pest management, natural landscapes, and rain gardens.
11:035:280: American Lawns and Turfgrass (1.5) P/NC
Explores the environmental, social, and economic aspects of lawns and turfgrass through a variety of readings. Contemporary issues for New Jersey will be investigated, including pollution in Barnegat Bay and the state law regulating fertilizer applications to turf for homeowners and professional landscapers. Students will be responsible for weekly reading assignments, participation in the discussion forum, and a final written assignment that will explore a course topic in more depth.
11:035:288 Edible Gardening for Demonstration and Education (2)
The techniques and materials needed to plant a residential, community, or educational garden of edible plants. Students will develop skills in soil sampling, site selection and preparation, seed germination, and maintenance of an edible garden. Students will be equipped with information and skills for replicating the gardening process with youth and other audiences. The course does not assume prior knowledge in plant science.