Title, A guide to repairing woodwinds. Author, Ronald Saska. Edition, 2, illustrated. Publisher, Roncorp Publications, Original from, the University of . A comprehensive guide to repairing all woodwind musical instruments. Buy Guide to Repairing Woodwinds by Ronald Saska at This comprehensive manual takes you from the basics of woodwind instrument repair right.
Additional information is provided for repairing oboes, flutes, bassoons, saxophones, and harmony clarinets. Citations are based on reference standards. Spiral Bound plastic or metal.
You are responsible for your order once the package arrives at the supplied delivery address. The E-mail Address es you entered is are not in a valid format. Write a review Rate this item: Document, Internet resource Document Type: Most significantly it contains an extensive discussion of ornaments and embellishments of the period. Return to Book Page.
Advanced Search Find a Library. No trivia or quizzes yet. Click on the cover image to view the Table of Contents. The clarinet is the subject of the basic repair instruction.
Ronald Saska Find more information about: This book was originally developed for the woodwind repair courses at the State University of New York, College at Morrisville. It also includes a “Practical Tips” section, which discusses common technical faults and corrections, common problems with sound as well as their causes and solutions to themas well as fingering charts, literature lists study materials, method books, and solosas well as a list of additional resources.
Add a review and share your thoughts with other readers.
To ask other readers questions about A Guide to Repairing Woodwindsplease sign up. Meredith Music,PB, pages. This book focuses on the 50 years from to when woodwind especially flute music was popular and the performance practices for French music were distinctive.
Home About Help Search. Find a copy in the library Finding libraries that hold this item Trivia About A Guide to Repair The three principal subjects are rhythmic inequality, articulation, and ornamentation. About one quarter of this book is a listing of works for two to five dissimilar woodwinds including horn and piano. We endeavour to dispatch all orders which are in stock on the day the order has been placed. Your rating has been recorded.
To see what your friends thought of this book, please woovwinds up. Open Preview See a Problem? English View all editions and formats Rating: Julia rated it liked it Sep 11, Subjects Woodwind instruments — Maintenance and repair. This includes terminology, topics, and concepts associated with each specific instrument, along with teaching suggestions that can be applied in the classroom.
Damiano Campanelli marked it as to-read Oct 29, You already recently rated this item. Cancel Forgot your password? Be the first to ask a question about A Giide to Repairing Woodwinds.
The Mozilla Firefox browser is highly recommended: This books was written because of the author’s dissatisfaction with other repair manuals.
Privacy & Cookies Policy
Necessary cookies are absolutely essential for the website to function properly. This category only includes cookies that ensures basic functionalities and security features of the website. These cookies do not store any personal information.