Snow Globe Winter Alphabet Clip Cards
Your littles will love these winter alphabet clip cards and related worksheets. You’ll appreciate the easy prep of this free printable letter sound activity.
With the festive season just around the corner, I thought I’d share these fun winter alphabet clip cards for your preschool or kindergarten children to enjoy! This is an easy, mess-free, and enjoyable letter recognition activity for the kids to simply clip and dab!
Winter Alphabet Clip Cards Activity
Materials & Preparation
Grab your free printable clip cards from the link at the very bottom of this post. Then just print them out and cut apart the clip cards.
All you need for materials is the following:
- Dot Dabbers (we love Do-a-Dot markers)
- Clothespins (see below for how we decorated ours)
- Crayons and/or pencil for tracing sheet
We’re always searching for mess-free resources to save time and other hassles such as spills and washing up. Therefore, dot dabbers are a great tool as they dry instantly and are fun for children to use.
Students can begin the activity by practicing the alphabet and dabbing each letter as they recognize it.
Encourage children to read the letter aloud, which will give you a good idea of how fluent they are in identifying phonics.
Some children may need assistance or prompting for the more complex letters such as “v” and “x”, as these can get a little tricky!
How to Use the Clip Cards
Students can then move on to using the winter alphabet clip cards. It may take a bit of time, but this is an excellent way for children to review their letter sounds through a more hands-on experience.
- Start by asking the kids to identify the object in the snowglobe.
- Then, see if they can name all the letters on the right side of the card.
- Finally, the children should clip the clothespin on the correct letter – i.e. the one that matches the initial sound of the picture inside the snowglobe.
To develop more fluency, students can identify letters that are not in any particular sequence. This will help them build their confidence which will later contribute to their reading success.
Finally, if you like, you can even use this activity as an observation or assessment to monitor children’s progress.
Letter Tracing Recording Sheet
If you’re looking to extend and challenge the students further, I’ve added an extra recording sheet for you. The children can trace the letters and color the picture as they identify the sounds.
Students can even search by letter and picture to check that they have placed the peg correctly on the clip card. This essentially makes them self-correcting.
Fine Motor Skills
Students can refine their hand-eye coordination as they direct their hands where they have to aim and dab at the paper. They also work great for children struggling with pencil grip as you can hold the dabbers in a fist grip, making it much easier for little hands to hold.
Clothespins and clip cards also make great tools to strengthen children’s fine motor skills and hand-eye coordination. The action of pinching two fingers together to open the clip is excellent for children’s muscle development and fine motor skills.
It may seem difficult for a few children, but this will help them with writing and even tying shoelaces as they get older.
(Disclosure: Books and Giggles is a participant in the Amazon Services LLC Associates Program, an affiliate advertising program designed to provide a means for sites to earn advertising fees by advertising and linking to Amazon.com.)
How to Make Winter Theme Clothespins for Clipcards
Of course, you can just use plain clothespins for this activity. However, I wanted to make it a little more eye-catching for you. It turns out that’s pretty easy!
All I did was paint these with blue acrylic paint, then embellish them with snowflakes from my little paper punch. Finally, I painted over the whole thing with sparkle glaze.
You might also like to paint some ModPodge on top of the snowflake to make it more durable.
Download the Snow Globe Clip Cards
Ready for the free printable clip cards?
To get your very own set, you can sign up right here:
I’ll add you to my weekly-ish newsletter too – it’s full of ideas and more free printables. Of course, you can unsubscribe at any time.
We hope your little ones enjoy these snow globe theme winter alphabet clip cards.
cute cards! I like the sparkly clips too