Gaining healthy teeth requires lifelong care and attention. Even if you have nice teeth, still you have to take good care of your teeth. And in case of any problem regarding your teeth, dental services at dentist Maroochydore are there to help you. In order to avoid any serious dental issues, you need to follow the below mentioned golden rules of dental care.
Keep your diet healthy; it’s good for your dental health
Your eating habits have a deep and direct impact on your dental health. The food you eat may cause tooth decay that is why a healthy diet is vital for your teeth.
A healthy diet comprises of plenty of vegetables and fruit, in addition to starchy foods like potatoes, rice, bread, and pasta. You also need to intake proteins which are found in fish, eggs, meat, beans, and in some dairy products. Try to avoid eating large amounts of foods high in sugar and fats.
Decrease the amount of sugar intake
Restricting the amount of sugar intake is vital to avoid tooth decay. A great amount of sugar is found in foods and drinks such as;
- Chocolates, cakes, sweets, and biscuits
- Milky drinks, sugary drinks, fizzy drinks, and soft drinks
- Fruit pies, buns, and pastries
- Jams, honey, marmalades
- Ice creams and dry fruit
Bacteria in the mouth change sugar into acids and this leads to erosion of the enamel of your teeth and results in tooth decay and cavities. You don’t need to avoid such foods as a whole but it is good to be careful. Sugars exist naturally in milk and fruit and we can’t afford to avoid such type of foods. But if the fruit is blended or juiced, the sugars are liberated from the fruit structure. These released sugars can also damage the teeth; therefore, it is suggested to drink fruit juice at mealtimes. Your fruit juice intake should not exceed 150ml a day.
Eat crunchy vegetables and fruit
Ready-to-eat foods seem convenient, but such foods are not good for your teeth. Eating crunchy, fresh fruit and vegetables not only have more fiber, but it is the best option for your teeth as well. It is a healthy trend to munch fresh fruit rather than consuming processed foods.
Avoid smoking and drinking
Smoking may stain your teeth, induce bad breath, and enhances the danger of gum diseases, further increasing the risk of a lot of other complicated health issues.
Alcohol, too, leads to erosion of outer covering of teeth and may result in loss of enamel. In such a case, you need to obtain dental services for filling your teeth. Dentist Maroochydore provides excellent dental services, therefore, you can trust them regarding your dental health. Excessive drinking is also linked with a greater risk of mouth cancer.
The most significant risk factors concerning mouth cancer are combined impact of drinking and smoking. Cigarette smoke, wine, coffee, and tea cause teeth staining. Take these in limited quantities to prevent your teeth from being stained. You may also seek a professional cleaning of teeth to get reduced the staining.
Brush your teeth before going to bed
There is no argument that the general suggestion is to brush your teeth twice a day. Yet, many among us keep neglecting it and don’t bother to brush our teeth at night. In fact, brushing before going to bed gets us free from germs and it also clears the plaque that gets accumulated during the day.
The proper technique of brushing your teeth matters. The way you do brushing is quite significant. If you poorly brush your teeth, it is almost as if you do not brush at all. Take your time; brush your teeth in a gentle way and circular motions in order to get rid of plaque. If the plaque is not removed properly, it might lead to gum diseases.
Make use of a fluoride toothpaste
When you consider toothpaste for your teeth, there are much more vital factors to take into account than just flavors and whitening power. Whatever you choose, you only have to ensure that it has fluoride in it.
Fluoride provides greater defense against the tooth decay. It functions by fighting germs that cause tooth decay along with providing a protective obstacle for your teeth.
Consider flossing as crucial as brushing
Many of us pay attention to brushing while we neglect the importance of flossing. It is a great way to get your gums stimulated, reduce plaque, and lowering inflammation in gums.
Don’t quit flossing thinking it difficult
Flossing appears to be difficult, particularly for young kids and adults with arthritis. Instead of giving up, get the aid of helping tools. You may also seek ready-to-use dental flossers from medical stores.
Ads make mouthwash vital for oral health, but a lot of people neglect them since they are unaware of how a mouthwash works. Mouthwash works in three ways; it decreases the amount of acid present in the mouth, clears areas around gums that are hard to clean by brush, and provides minerals to teeth. You may ask your dentist to recommend a suitable mouthwash for you.
Drink water a lot
Water stays the best beverage for your entire health as well as oral health. Shwartz, also suggests that you should drink water after every meal. This would help to clear and washing out negative impacts of acidic and sticky foods and drinks between brushes.
Visit your dentist at least twice a year
Your daily habits and routines are vital for your dental and oral health. Despite being a regular brusher and flosser, you need to consult your dentist at least two times a year. A dentist can not only clean calculus and check for cavities, but they would also be able to locate the potential issues and provide treatment solutions.
Alex is fascinated with “understanding” people. It’s actually what drives everything he does. He believes in a thoughtful exploration of how you shape your thoughts, experience of the world.