It wasn”t long after Kat Geiger moved into her Emeryville loft that her green thumb started nagging. With the green space around her limited to easements and storefront plantings, Geiger, who comes from a long line of gardeners, yearned to get her fingers in the dirt.
“My family is really into making things grow and planting things — it”s in my blood.”
Her solution: Bring the outside in. And while raised beds of lettuce weren”t a practical option, an Internet search led her to terrariums. In vogue during the ”60s and ”70s, these self-contained gardens in transparent enclosures have roots as far back as 1831, when someone got the bright idea to stick a fern in a bottle.
There has recently been renewed interest in terrariums, thanks in part to the burgeoning crafts movement and appreciation for green living and indoor gardening. According to Bruce Butterfield, market research director at the National Gardening Association, Americans spend about $1.2 billion annually on indoor plants. Search “terrarium” on YouTube and more than 3,000 tutorials turn up. Garden writer Tovah Martin even released a book called “The New Terrarium” (Clarkson Potter) this year.
“If you don”t have a green space, a terrarium can be your yard, ” says San Franciscan Ric Lopez, creator of Terradome, a Modernist terrarium that he sells at his Glen Park shop, Modernpast.
The plants in terrariums can grow without air circulation and once planted require hardly any attention beyond the occasional watering — definitely part of the appeal.
It”s also an easy afternoon project in which even those with minimal gardening experience can create their own little biospheres in just a few hours.
Terrariums can be open or closed, and are usually made from glass or acrylic. Nearly any transparent vessel can become a terrarium: cookie jars, vases, apothecary jars, mason jars, aquariums, fish bowls and even chemistry beakers.
Among the vessels Geiger uses for her terrariums are recycled chandeliers, globe lights and even glass grapefruit juice containers. Urban Ore, a salvage store in Berkeley, is a favorite source.
Geiger has turned her infatuation with terrariums into a business, and now sells her creations for $25-$135 at local garden and design stores around the Bay Area. The terrariums have a modern aesthetic — she uses glassware with strong, clean lines and creates miniature landscapes with indigenous mosses, plants like ferns, iresine and creeping fig, and even tiny clay houses that she makes herself. Geiger has also played around with adding a skull and a starfish. “It helps create a miniature landscape, and the idea that a terrarium is its own little world.
“A lot of my terrariums are very simple, with moss, one plant and a decoration.”
Though Monique Ramos of San Francisco made plenty of terrariums when she was growing up — her mother owned a plant store — she hadn”t created one in nearly 30 years. But one day, as she was strolling through her favorite flea market just as it was shutting down for the day, inspiration struck.
“I found a huge Pyrex container, and I knew right away I wanted to make a terrarium.”
She took the $5 container home, purchased soil, moss and fernlike plants, and set about creating her very own mini-ecosystem in less than an hour. She documented the process on her blog, at dayataglance. blogspot.com.
Since then, she”s been making terrariums and giving them to friends as housewarming gifts.
“Today”s terrariums are much more streamlined, and a whole lot less fussy,” says author Martin.
There may be no better example than Lopez”s circular Terradome, which clearly nods to midcentury Modern design. The 19-inch-wide acrylic dome resembles the iconic 1950s-era depiction of a flying saucer. And though the Terradome ($85) could easily serve as the centerpiece of any high-design household, Lopez hopes it will also serve as an antidote for city dwellers “living in these tight, compacted tall buildings where people are piled on top of each other.”
In her book, Martin explains the roots of the terrarium: In 1831, when British surgeon Nathaniel Ward picked a fern, stuck it in a bottle and forgot about it. Several months later, the fern was thriving and grass had sprouted in the enclosed container — without any cultivation or watering from Ward. Twenty years later, Ward”s enclosed biosphere was put on display at the 1851 World”s Fair in London, and so-called Wardian cases became a fad.
The inspiration for the Victorians may still be what draws us to terrariums today.
“It”s a fantasy and an opportunity for creativity,” explains Martin, who has more than 20 terrariums in her Connecticut farmhouse, one of which she”s kept going for 20 years.
“Terrariums are a way to bring green into your life.”
How to plant a terrarium The instructions Ric Lopez, the creator of the Terradome, gives out can be adapted to any terrarium. Soil, gravel, charcoal and plants are available at nurseries and garden stores. ·1. Spread a half-inch layer of small gravel in the bottom of a clean container. ·2. Sprinkle a tablespoon of activated charcoal on top. (This is optional.) ·3. Lay a sheet of drain fabric or ¼-inch layer of moss on top. (This prevents most of the soil from falling to the bottom.) ·4. Now add your soil (2 to 2½ inches). Use the appropriate soil for your plants. ·5. Place your plants in the soil, just as you would outdoors, ensuring that the plants don”t touch the glass. Water lightly. Care Place your planted terrarium in a bright area, but out of direct sunlight. Remember to water lightly every few weeks. If the terrarium starts to cloud up with mist, take the lid off for a day. Trim and prune plants when they touch the glass.