Breast Cancers We Treat
We treat cancer with people, combining our research and expertise to deliver compassionate clinical care at every level. Our breast cancer program provides our patients with access to life-changing treatment options.
Find an overview of the breast cancers we treat below and click to read more about each cancer in our health library. If you have any questions, call us at 1-800-CEDARS-1.
Ductal Carcinoma in Situ
Ductal carcinoma in situ is the earliest stage of breast cancer. It is noninvasive and starts in the tubes (ducts) of the breast that carry milk. It doesn’t spread outside of these tubes, meaning the risk of the cancer spreading to lymph nodes and to other parts of the body is much lower.
Lobular Carcinoma in Situ
Lobular carcinoma in situ, also known as lobular neoplasia, is a rare condition in which abnormal cells develop in the milk glands (lobules) in the breast. These abnormal cells are not considered to be breast cancer but do require surgical removal. The condition may increase the risk of breast cancer.
Invasive Ductal Breast Cancer
Invasive ductal breast cancer, also known as infiltrating ductal carcinoma, is the most common form of invasive breast cancer and represents 80 percent of breast cancer cases. The condition begins with abnormal cells forming in the milk ducts of the breast (ductal) and spreading into the surrounding fatty breast tissue (invasive).
Invasive Lobular Breast Cancer
Invasive lobular breast cancer, also known as infiltrating lobular carcinoma, is the second most common form of invasive breast cancer. It makes up 10 to 15 percent of breast cancer cases. The condition begins when abnormal cells develop in the milk gland, known as lobules, in the breast. These cancer cells then spread to other parts of the body.
Inflammatory Breast Cancer
Inflammatory breast cancer is a rare but aggressive form of cancer. It blocks the the lymph vessels in the skin of the breast, causing the breast to appear swollen, red and inflamed.
Paget's Disease of the Breast
Paget's disease of the breast is a rare form of breast cancer that represents less than 5 percent of cases. The condition starts in or around the nipple with redness and mild scaling or flaking of the nipple skin.
Male Breast Cancer
Breast cancer in men is rare. Like women's breast cancer, men's breast cancer can be cured or controlled if found early and treated right away.