The demand for smart consumer electronics has grown strongly in recent years. Ultraviolet lasers are favored by end customers because of their short wavelength, concentrated energy concentration, and high resolution, which are widely used in microelectronics processing and precision processing, and have become the fastest growing part of the industrial laser market.
UV Lasers and Infrared Lasers
The UV laser output wavelength is below 0.4μm. A smaller focused spot enables higher precision and smaller size processing. At the same time, the single-photon energy of ultraviolet laser is large, which can directly destroy the molecular bonds on the surface of many non-metallic materials without heating the periphery. This feature makes UV lasers ideal for processing plastic materials.
The infrared laser wavelength is 1064nm. Due to the small energy of single photon, the wavelength is not easily absorbed by non-metallic materials. Infrared laser exposure can cause excessive carbonization of the plastic, resulting in spots of varying sizes and black depths in the material. Therefore, when infrared laser processing non-metallic materials, the material will be damaged and deformed due to “heat”.
Advantages of UV lasers in microelectronics processing applications
With the development of thin, light and intelligent smart phones, the performance of mobile phones has been significantly improved. People also put forward higher requirements for the overall appearance of mobile phones. As a charger for mobile phones, the quality of the marking effect directly affects the overall appearance. The UV laser cold working method will not deform or damage the material due to “heat”. The marked text and pattern are clearer, the surface is smoother and there will be no obvious uneven surface.
In addition, the advantages of UV laser drilling in flexible circuit boards are also obvious. Circuit board processing has extremely strict requirements on size, accuracy and pass rate. Using UV laser processing can achieve high-precision drilling and less product defect rates.
The advantages of UV laser in processing non-metallic materials are unparalleled. The “cold working” characteristics of short wavelength and high energy determine that it is suitable for ultra-fine processing of non-metallic materials. UV laser marking machine is undoubtedly the first choice for customers who have higher requirements for marking effect.
UV Laser Application Case
Ultraviolet laser adopts advanced folded resonator design and laser control technology, which can achieve excellent beam quality and narrow laser pulse width under high power operation.
Due to its high processing accuracy, narrow line width, high quality, high precision, small heat-affected area and good long-term stability, it can process various irregular graphics and heterosexual patterns.
It mainly used in fine micromachining, high-quality drilling, cutting and grooving. It is the first choice for processing semiconductors, ceramics, plastics, glass and various polymer materials.