This course provides an overview of major events and processes that have shaped the history of the Middle East from the late Ottoman period until the present. It focuses on political, social and economic developments in specific countries and the region as a whole. These include major phenomena such as the end of the Ottoman empire, the impact of Colonialism and the creation of nation states in the region, the rise of political Islam in 20th century, the effects of the end of the Cold War on region, the 2011 Arab uprising and its aftermath. The method of the course rests on comparative historiographies of the region and analysis of primary documents, including legal texts, chronicles, diaries, as well as images, documentary and film excerpts to render these historical developments more tangible to students.
This course seeks to expose students to different methods and intellectual traditions that have shaped our understanding of historical processes, critical junctures and personalities in the Middle East since the 1500s. The principal aim is to empower students in critically engaging with past and current interpretations of social, political, economic dimensions of Middle Eastern societies.
Once available, timetables will be published in the e-Prospectus.
Mode of instruction
MIDTERM PAPER 30%,
FINAL IN-CLASS EXAM 30%
In accordance with article 4.8 of the Course and Examination Regulations (OER), within 30 days after the publication of grades, the instructor will provide students the opportunity to inspect their exams/coursework.
There is a no re-sit policy at Leiden University College.
There will be a Blackboard site available for this course. Students will be enrolled at least one week before the start of classes.
Cleveland, W. and Bunton, M., History of the Modern Middle East. Boulder, CO: Westview Press, 2017 (6th or 7th edition) ISBN: 978-0-8133-4980-0
Other selected material.
This course is open to LUC students and LUC exchange students. Registration is coordinated by the Education Coordinator. Interested non-LUC students should contact firstname.lastname@example.org.