- Vedant Gandhi
Carbon footprint is the amount of CO2 emissions associated with all the activities of an individual, industry, organization, etc. It includes direct emissions, such as those that result from fossil-fuel combustion in manufacturing, heating, and transportation, as well as emissions required to produce the electricity associated with goods and services consumed. In addition, the carbon footprint concept also often includes the emissions of other greenhouse gases, such as methane, nitrous oxide, or chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs).
For example, an individual eats an apple and travels to his/her office from his/her home. The total carbon footprint will be calculated by calculating the CO2 released for transportation from home to office directly, and indirectly by calculating the carbon effluents released for production and transportation of that apple to the individual, etc.
At RecycleX, we aim to cut down the carbon footprint of a city, company, factory, etc. through our recycled products. Now how do we plan to do that? Here is an example:
Concrete is one of the most important construction materials. Concrete is made up of two components – aggregates and pastes. The paste part consists of cement and water.
Cement is manufactured mainly from limestone (calcium carbonate) and some other ingredients. These ingredients are heated in a large kiln to over 1500 ◦C to convert the raw materials to clinker. This clinker is then mixed with other ingredients to produce cement. The most common types of cement contain 92% -95% by weight of clinker.
This results in the generation of a lot of GHG emissions due to the fossil fuel burnt to produce that heat. The calcination process where calcium carbonate is heated and broken down to calcium oxide and CO2 is also responsible for a large number of emissions. GHGs are responsible for global warming and climate change. Further, the mining processes (to get raw materials like limestone) utilize complex machinery which again releases a lot of GHGs. To produce 1 kg of cement, 1 kg of GHG is released into the atmosphere.
RecycleX can help reduce the carbon footprint by replacing cement with industrial waste and/or fly-ash to manufacture bricks, kerbstones, pave stones, etc. This way a large amount of GHG emissions can be prevented. It also helps a company/industry to attain its number of GHGsC & report carbon credits target for the fiscal year.
RecycleX through its durable, sustainable, and cost-effective products not only can help a company, an organization, or an individual cut down on their carbon footprint but also help them contribute towards a reduction in C&D and fly-ash waste generation, global warming, climate change, land pollution, etc. These products are as strong and sturdy as their unrecycled competitors. They are also pretty aesthetic and easy to install. The fly-ash bricks also use less water, contributing to water conservation.