Talking about oral health is often about a beautiful set of white smiles. Too often, we focus too much on the aesthetic and whitening aspects of dental health.
Gum health and the strength of your teeth in my opinion, are the more important parts of a healthy mouth. People who have sensitive teeth or painful gums are likely to complain more than those who have whiter teeth.
Of course, that is not to say that one thing is more important than the other.
Regular visits to the dentist are essential for maintaining strong, healthy teeth. Regular visits to the dentist can be costly and sometimes it is impossible to afford them.
And this folks is why oral hygiene is extremely important.
Maintaining your oral health is key to maintaining your teeth. Regular toothbrush, proper gum care. All these things are crucial for healthy teeth.
Then there is oral probiotics.
For those of you who prefer a more visual experience, here is a video review from Health And Fitness Tips USA YouTube channel. Do check out our article below, however, because it has a comprehensive overview of ProDentim.
Oral Probiotics Oral Probiotics With Xylitol
Probiotics are a mix of beneficial or live bacteria and yeast that naturally exist in your body. That’s right! Not all bacteria is bad. Some bacteria can help your body function effectively and well. Your body’s microbiome is made up of good bacteria.
Probiotics are something that most people have heard of. That said, I am willing to bet that most of these mentions are only about the gut bacteria. This is not surprising. As our body processes food inside the stomach.
The idea of oral probiotics is a rather remarkable one. This is something that most people don’t know about, and many would be uncomfortable with the idea of bacteria living in their mouths.
The mouth has its own unique set of bacteria just like the gut. Oral probiotics contain specific strains that work hard to improve your oral health and maintain a healthy smile. They cultivate good bacteria and prevent the growth of bad bacteria.
Oral probiotics can prevent many conditions, including periodontitis or gingivitis, bad breath, tonsilitis, oral cancer, and some respiratory infections.
Biofilms are also created by the good bacteria found in oral probiotics. These new biofilms support the health of teeth and gums, reduce inflammation, and block bad bacteria from reaching enamel or gum tissue from invading.
Unlike gut probiotics, oral probiotic supplements are usually taken by taking chewable tablets or lozenges. This way, the good bacteria can be delivered directly to your mouth. Tablets are not used as they dissolve in the stomach and not in the mouth and you need the bacteria in your mouth.
ProDentim is one of these probiotic supplements.
ProDentim: An Overview
ProDentim is a dietary supplement that boosts the health of your gums and teeth. This is done by augmenting the oral microbes.
Taking oral supplements are especially good for people who often suffer and struggle from dental problems. Oral supplements can help you maintain your dental health at a lower cost. You don’t have to follow specific procedures, take expensive medications or visit the dentist often.
Supplementary medicines like ProDentim can help in preventing issues that recommended dental routines cannot stop. ProDentim is not recommended if you don’t brush your teeth or use mouthwash regularly.
Probiotics that are included in ProDentim can also benefit the body in its other functions. They can aid in metabolism, fat absorption and breakdown, as well as energy production.
Regular use of the oral supplement also has the added benefit of a brighter and stronger teeth. Even if you have suffered from tooth decay due to age, this oral supplement can help.
While ProDentim mainly focuses on the teeth, this supplement also targets your respiratory system and protects your body from allergies. It can also help promote restful sleep and good digestion.
> > Click Here to Check Out ProDentim < <
ProDentim was specifically designed to support your healthy oral bacteria. As such, with regular intake of ProDentim, you can be sure that your mouth would be healthier than you can possibly imagine.
Each dosage of ProDentin includes around 3.5 billion probiotics that adds diversity in your body’s microfauna inside your mouth. This is highly important as it helps maintain the balance of good and bad bacteria.
The following benefits can be achieved by regular use of ProDentim:
- Improved immune system
- Improved digestive health
- Stronger teeth and gums,
- Fresher breath
- Allergies reduced
- A more visible and white teeth
Ingredients: What’s Inside ProDentim?
When it comes to food supplements, it is always a good practice to check on the ingredients that are used in manufacturing the product. This is because food supplements are not usually prescribed by doctors. Some even add harmful rather than helpful ingredients.
Sometimes, you may wonder why a product isn’t working for you. Or if it has caused you more grief than it helped. These problems may be solved by the ingredients.
Sometimes a product uses an ingredient or ingredients that you are allergic to. Sometimes, the supplement may react poorly with your current medications or diet. Both synthetic and natural products can experience this. Oral Probiotics With Xylitol
It is for these reasons that we provide an ingredient overview of ProDentim, to make sure that you, as a buyer, would be able to judge for yourself if ProDentim would be worth your money.
In the case of ProDentim, it is formulated with around 3.5 strains of good bacteria to reinforce those found in your mouth. Some natural ingredients were also included that have been proven to be beneficial for oral health.
The active ingredients for ProDentim are as follows:
Lactobacillus Reuteri, a probiotic, is well-known for its ability to colonize many mammalian species. In the case of the human body, it can be found in many places including the urinary tract, skin, breast milk, and gastrointestinal tract.
It is a major player in the digestion of food and metabolism. Upsetting the balance of L. Reuteri inside the body can cause many issues including a disruption of the breakdown and absorption of food.
L. Reuteri is also beneficial in dental health for stopping bad bacteria from growing. These bacteria may cause infections and inflammations.
> > Click Here to Check Out ProDentim < <
L. Paracasei can be found in the human intestinal tracts, and in particular in the mouth. It is among the most studied good bacteria because of its benefits towards gut health.
Its main purpose is to help in digestion and boost body immunity. People who are lactose intolerant should consume foods and supplements that include L.Paracasei, such as ProDentim. This is because it can aid in digestion of lactose rich foods, including milk.
L. Paracasei can also keep your sinuses open and keep your gums healthy.
BLIS M-18 and BLIS K-12
These two Streptococcus salicyrius strains support natural immune defenses. They prevent infections of the oral cavity. They protect the teeth, gums and respiratory tract against infectious microbes.
A disturbance in the balance of these strains causes an increased risk of different issues such as allergic reactions, gum disease, as well as respiratory illnesses. Oral Probiotics With Xylitol
B. Lactis (BL-04)
Bifidobacterium lactis Bl-04 is a rod shaped bacterium found mostly in large intestines. Overall, it restores metabolic and digestive processes and overall gut health especially after taking medication or treatment
Antibiotics are one such medicine. They don’t discriminate between good bacteria and bad bacteria. B. Lactis restores this damaged microflora and brings back the balance in the body.
Aside from that, B. Lactis is also known for strengthening the body’s overall immunology and health.
Malic acid is one of the natural ingredients found in ProDentim that is not a probiotic. It is well-known for its ability to heal the skin and increase muscle endurance. It also helps in saliva formation.
Overall, it can be found all throughout the body and maintain the microflora found in them. It even covers the oral cavity and the vaginal cavity.
Inulin is another prebiotic that is found in many common food items. This includes a wide variety of fruits and vegetables. Inulin is also found in herbs like dandelion root. This prebiotic is not absorbed or digested in the stomach, but rather stays in the bowel to aid in the growth of beneficial bacteria.
Inulin also has other benefits, such as weight loss, appetite training, and food control. It is responsible for enhancing a food’s “fullness”. It protects the body against cardiovascular diseases and helps maintain the immune system’s functions.
Dicalcium Phosphate is an ubiquitous chemical and a very flexible ingredient. It can be easily included in a healthy smoothie, ice cream or baked goods.
Dicalciumphosphate is used to increase calcium and phosphorus levels in the body. People with low levels of calcium and phosphorus often recommend dicalcium phosphate. Oral Probiotics With Xylitol
In the case of ProDentim, it was added as it also promotes stronger teeth and can help prevent tooth decay or breakage.
ProDentim contains Spearmint, which is one of the few ingredients that isn’t a probiotic. In this case, it is a minty herb that can be used in various forms. Spearmint oil, tea, or supplement can all be used to increase antioxidants.
Spearmint also can lower blood sugar levels as well as balance hormones. In terms of oral health and hygiene, it helps improve digestion, and can control vomiting, gas, and nausea.
Another ingredient that isn’t a probiotic. Peppermint can also be used in other ways, just like spearmint. For dental purposes, peppermint is widely used as a way to combat bad breath. It prevents the growth of bacteria that could cause halitosis.
Use and Dosage of ProDentim
ProDentim, an oral health supplement is available in a chewable candy form rather than a capsule or tablet. The ingredients found in ProDentim, especially the 3.5 billion strains of probiotics, need to be delivered in the mouth directly.
ProDentim comes in a 30-capsule package. When taking your ProDentim, you should follow the recommended dosage of 1 tablet per day. Failure to follow this instruction might cause a harmful reaction to the body.
You can take one of these capsules, with one drink and any drink at that. It should not be taken with any alcoholic beverages. ProDentim must not be mixed with food, despite its flexibility.
You can take your ProDentim tablet at any time of the day. The morning is the best time to take ProDentim. ProDentim especially works better and faster on an empty stomach as the tablet is also absorbed faster.
Aside from the dosage, another thing to consider before Getting ProDentim is if you are taking other supplements and how many of these supplements are you taking. Although there is a possibility that something bad could happen, it is best to consult your doctor before you do.
The same goes for pregnant women and younger children. A doctor’s advice can save a lot of trouble in the long run.
ProDentim can be used for as long as you wish.
> > Click Here to Check Out ProDentim < <
ProDentim’s effects will be apparent within a few weeks. The huge amount of probiotics present in the formula makes the process faster.
That said, missing a dose could delay and reduce the effectiveness of the supplement. It would be like coming back to square one every dose you miss.
Different effects may also appear at different times. Some benefits might take longer while others appear much earlier. Lifestyle, diet, and other factors can have an impact on ProDentim’s effectiveness and your use of it.
Tip: ProDentim can be used to maximize its benefits. To do this, you need to maintain a healthy oral hygiene routine. This includes but is not limited to:
- Brushing your teeth regularly (twice a day, every day)
- Using the proper toothbrush and brush strokes
- Change your toothbrush every couple of months
- Using a fluoride toothpaste
- Smoking cessation cold turkey or gradually
- Sugary foods should be avoided
- Doing regular dentist visits
- Adding probiotic foods in your diet
Side Effects of ProDentim and Safety Concerns
While ProDentim was carefully made and formulated to use the best natural ingredients to avoid negative effects, it is still possible that some people might have negative effect in some of the ingredients. As such, check with your dentist if you are safe to take ProDentim.
Follow the recommended dosage. Each tablet was formulated to be effective for one dose a day for one adult person. Negative and harmful side effects can be caused by taking more than the recommended amount of capsules. There are no shortcuts when taking this supplement.
Lastly, breastfeeding women, pregnant mothers, or anyone taking any kind of hormonal therapy should avoid taking ProDneitm without the advice of their doctor. Oral Probiotics With Xylitol
ProDentim is only available at their website. You could be scammed if you buy from Amazon, Ebay, or other retail outlets.
ProDentim can be purchased at the following prices:
- 1 bottle (30-day supply) – $69.00
- 3 bottles (90 day supply) – $177 ($59 for each bottle).
- 6 bottles (180 day supply) – $294 ($49/bottle).
Customers who aren’t satisfied with the product can request a 60-day money back guarantee.
Both the pros and cons
- It has 3.5 billion colonies forming units of prebiotics and probiotics, which ensures the formula works faster and is more effective.
- There are no habit-forming or toxic ingredients
- Uses only the best natural and high quality ingredients
- Bad breath can be combated
- Anti-tooth stains
- Probiotic ingredients might help in overall gut health
- Improves oral health
- Helps prevent gum and tooth infections
- You can easily access the website
- A single capsule includes various nutrients
- Affordable price
- Easy to use
- Only on their website
- Cannot be sued by children
- The results may differ from one user to another (this includes the time).
- Limited stock
Last Thoughts Oral Probiotics With Xylitol
I was among the people who did not know about oral probiotics at first. With regular usage of ProDentim, I went from non-believer to telling friends about its benefits and effects.
ProDentim makes my mouth feel clean and fresh every day. ProDentim has changed the way I feel about my mouth. Oral Probiotics With Xylitol
ProDentim also makes my smile brighter and whiter. It came out of nowhere. So I was out one night with my friends, doing our stuff when this girl suddenly went to me and complimented my smile. That surely made my day.
However, I didn’t get her number. Well of course that wasn’t ProDentim’s fault.
Most Frequently Asked Questions
Is ProDentim real?
It is 100% true.
Is ProDentim effective?
Yes, it is.
While I can only speak for myself, I have experienced the effects of ProDentim by feeling my mouth fresher than usual. My teeth appear whiter and I also don’t have problems with indigestion and such.
> > Click Here to Check Out ProDentim < <
Why should I not use ProDentim?
While ProDentim is safe for everyone to use, you should avoid it if you are an expecting or breastfeeding mother, you are undergoing hormonal treatment, or you have a current medical condition.
You can always ask your doctor if it is safe for you to take dietary and oral supplements. ProDentim contains all-natural ingredients. However, certain ingredients may react with other medications.
Also, do not use ProDentim if you have allergies to some of the ingredients used in formulating the product.
ProDentim was formulated for adults. This product is not recommended for children.
Where Can I get my hand on a bottle?
ProDentim can be purchased at the official website.
The product is not available for sale through licensed retailers. Any efforts to sell the product that is not through their website should be seen as a scam.
How can I take ProDentim
One tablet of ProDentim should be taken by an adult once per day.
To see the best results, ProDentim must be taken on a regular basis. ProDentim can be taken anytime of the day, as long as one tablet is consumed per day.
If ProDentim doesn’t work for me, may I return it?
For unsatisfied customers, ProDentim offers a 100% 60-day money back guarantee.
Any bottles you don’t use can be returned without any questions.