Commemoration of the 75th Anniversary of the Liberation of the Nazi Concentration Camps
3 Generations' 75th Anniversary Commemoration Initiative
The Holocaust is fading from living memory. Recent reports indicate that a majority of young adults in the US do not know that the Nazis killed 6 million Jews. To combat this disturbing trend, 3 Generations is commemorating the 75th Anniversary of the liberation of the concentration camps with an initiative inspired by the documentary film German Concentration Camps Factual Survey(GCCFS). We launched it with a Livestream on October 20th, hosted by Roger Cohen, columnist from The New York Times. A Video Contest designed to engage young people in educating their peers will roll out on social media in the coming months. And we will ask donors to sponsor screenings of GCCFS in colleges and communities.
Our commemoration launched with a livestream conversation hosted by The New York Times columnist Roger Cohen. Joining him were Clara Citron, a junior at NYU and the granddaughter of three Holocaust survivors, Stephen Smith, Finci-Viterbi Executive Director of USC Shoah Foundation, UNESCO Chair on Genocide Education, Lina Srivastava, Founder, CIEL | Creative Impact & Experience Lab, and Jane Wells from 3 Generations.
New York Times Journalist
Junior at NYU, the granddaughter of three Holocaust survivors.
Finci-Viterbi Executive Director of USC Shoah Foundation, UNESCO Chair on Genocide Education
Founder, CIEL | Creative Impact & Experience Lab
October 20, 2020
2 pm PST/5 pm EST
3 Generations will hold a video contest for young people aged 18 to 30 years old, with three prizes of $1000 each. Entrants will be asked to respond to German Concentration Camps Factual Survey with videos from 30 seconds to 2 minutes and 20 seconds in length. We will invite film industry leaders to be judges. Acclaimed visual artist, Marilyn Minter, will be the Jury President.
Shortlisted and winning videos will be shared across social media to educate young adults about what happened in the concentration camps. More details will be shared during the livestream and on our website.
Community & College Screenings
To arrange a screening of German Concentration Camps Factual Survey for your college or community please contact: https://www.menemshafilms.com/
To request a scholarship screening or to arrange a Q& A with Jane Wells please contact: email@example.com
Sponsorship & Donations
3 Generations is seeking support for the commemoration of the 75th Anniversary of the liberation of the Nazi concentration camps. Our goal is to make German Concentrations Camps Factual Survey and its message widely available to young audiences. There are unique opportunities to sponsor the livestream, to name the video contest prizes as well as to provide scholarships for screenings of German Concentration Camps Factual Survey at colleges and in communities.
To learn more about becoming a sponsor please email: firstname.lastname@example.org