English Learning Curriculum and Materials
QQEnglish is the biggest English school and it provides English speakers with an English-thinking brain.
Curriculum we are proud of and global quality
for one on one lessons.
Every QQEnglish learning curriculum is specially developed to improve overall English skills, you need to learn 4 skills, namely Reading, Writing, Speaking, and Listening. In addtion to this, we develop learning curricula for one on one lessons to support .
Moreover, we also provide lessons using qualified, authorized textbooks with both quality and compliance, so we can set a global standard.
For over 50 years, the Callan Method Organization from London has been provided all over the world. QQEnglish is a CALLAN authorized school. In CALLAN lessons, students need to respond to teachers’ questions right away. Transparently, by doing this training again and again, your brain doesn’t think in your own mother language when you speak English.
CALLAN Method 1～12
The QQEnglish learning curriculum is originally developed for one on one lessons.
Clearly. this course is best for beginner to intermediate students.
QQE Basics 1～3
QQE Basics 4～5
Comprehension for Reading Strategies
These set of QQEnglish learning curriculum is for utilizing English daily conversation. Thus, we recommend it for those who can listen 70% but can not respond well or hesitate to speak English.
Besides, you can learn basic grammar, lexicon, and phrases by practicing with teachers. In addition, you can also utilize these skills right after the lesson.
For Advanced Students
The lessons in each of this set of QQEnglish learning curriculum is mainly created so that learners can focus on improving your listening skill using a variety of topics such as daily conversation and world wide news. Moreover, you can learn phrases you can use when having conversations in a restaurant, goods introduction, and business talks are also included, so it’s good for those who prepare for TOEIC. In addition, you can also improve your vocabulary skills.
On the other hand, if it’s a difficult topic, speed of recording is adjustable so you can practice again and again in order to get used to listening. These courses are not only good for beginners but also for advanced level learners.
Just like any other courses, this QQEnglish learning curriculum is designed mainly for pronunciation, especially in difficult sounds for Japanese. Furthermore, you can learn phonetic symbols and how to voice them.
This is for beginner to advanced learners. In tongue twisters, you can find your mistake clearly by pronouncing difficult sounds again and again.
Evidently, this curriculum is for improving English communication through discussion with the teacher based on particular topics. Topics range from daily situations to business news, so it’s suitable for beginner to advanced level students. Thus, we also recommend this type of QQEnglish learning curriculum for those who want to express their opinion clearly.
Advanced Topic Conversation
Topic for discussion
These TOEIC textbooks were developed by Yoshito Miyosawa, perfect scorer of TOEIC and English expert. Additionally, teachers have completed special training for TOEIC. Particularly, we cover both TOEIC Speaking, Reading, and Listening.
QQ TOEIC 40days
QQ TOEIC 40days
These series of QQEnglish learning curriculum is made for enhancing your speaking skills for IELTS. It was developed by James, IELTS and linguistic specialist. Moreover, teachers have completed special trainings. In order for you to get a high score on IELTS, qualified teachers support you throughout the process.
For beginners, it's better to focus on building a foundation of English.
For intermediate and advanced levels, you can learn by following the business curricula.
Business English 4
Business English 5〜6
Business English 7
Certainly, these learning curricula are for enhancing your vocabulary and expression skills through discussion and pronunciation check based on chosen news articles. Besides, you can also improve your conversation skill by practicing advanced vocabulary and phrases.
We recommend it for intermediate level or higher.
This type of QQEnglish learning curriculum is for travel preparation. Consequently, by learning this course, you can improve your English skills quickly before going abroad.