The Oakwood Junior Academy academic program focuses on developmentally appropriate practices based on the Michigan Conference recommended curriculum.
Teachers provide many opportunities to engage in hands-on, interactive, and Common Core approaches.
In Language Arts, our young students in kindergarten use the Stepping Stones curriculum which is designed to accomplish sequencing, phonetical awareness, reading, and comprehension of Bible-based literature. The program also motivates students to engage in emergent writing. This modality helps students engage in academic and spiritual skills.
Pathways is the reading curriculum that Oakwood Academy implements for students in grades 1-8. It consists of a balanced approach to reading within cross-curricular themes. Pathways is a journey to excellence through literacy. It is a program about learning and achievement that encourages students to accept God as their personal Savior, to embrace His gift of intellectual potential, and to understand more clearly His desire for each life.
The primary purpose of the Adventist Encounter Bible Curriculum is for our students to have a grounded and personal knowledge of the Bible; to have a relationship with Jesus; and be passionate about the witnessing, testifying, and sharing His love.
Our school uses the Common Core curriculum methodology for instruction. Students in grades K-5 follow the Houghton Mifflin Harcourt Go Math program. This program helps students mature mathematically as they add vocabulary, computation, and problem solving while using hands-on activities.
Students in grades 6-8 continue advancing in their math skills with the Big Ideas math program. The Big Ideas Math program is a research-based curriculum providing a rigorous, focused, and coherent curriculum for middle school and high school students. Those students who meet specific requirements may be allowed to take Algebra 1 for high school credit.
ByDesign is an engaging and developmentally appropriate program that is tailored towards children’s natural curiosity as they explore God’s wonderful Creation through Bible-based concepts. ByDesign addresses Common Core essential questions, big ideas, skills including research, and assessments.
Students at Oakwood Junior Academy are presented the McGraw-Hill Social Studies program. It helps to meet the needs of every learner for an educational experience. It is aligned to the standards and it engages students with interactive resources and stories. It provides differentiated instruction for every learning style.
Oakwood Junior Academy offers Spanish classes that teach language and offer multicultural experiences. The school also provides students with thematic Art classes and general Physical Education classes. Students in grades K-5 experience music through a vocal choir, and students in grades 6-8 participate in a bell choir. Private piano and group violin lessons are offered after-school at an additional cost.