A few days ago, the list of the world’s healthiest countries index was released in 2019, and Spain won the championship in 169 countries and regions. In 2017, it was only ranked sixth. Why are the Spaniards the healthiest in the world? Experts analyze that this has a lot to do with what they can eat and sleep without heart and lungs.
Eat well: the ingredients pay attention to “fresh water”
The Spaniards have a pure Mediterranean diet. This diet encourages the consumption of fresh seasonal fruits and vegetables and local foods. It uses beans and nuts to supply protein. It eats fish and seafood 2 to 3 times a week. Eat less processed foods and desserts and sweet drinks.
Although the Mediterranean diet is good, it is difficult to completely copy it. Here are some suggestions for improvement: keep the current vegetable consumption, increase fruit intake, and eat 1 kg of vegetables and half a catty of fruit per day; increase the amount of sea fish, especially the deep sea. The intake of fish is preferably steamed or stewed.
Can sleep: keep the habit of lunch
The Spaniard has another longevity secret that cannot be ignored: a nap.
People who have been to Spain may notice that between 2 and 5 pm, all Spaniards are taking a nap and the shops are closed. In order to ensure the quality of sleep, parents should not let children go out during this time, and there should be no noise or disturbance in the streets and communities.
Taking a nap every day is the best way to charge your health. In fact, the Chinese have been paying attention to sleeping “mean sensation” since ancient times. Nap is a supplement to the lack of sleep at night, and it also has many benefits for longevity. For example, it can alleviate human fatigue, enhance human immunity, improve human responsiveness, enhance memory, reduce the risk of cardiovascular disease, and maintain emotional stability.
However, it is not recommended to take a nap at the desk and sit and fight. Because this will reduce the blood supply to the head, causing symptoms such as dizziness, vertigo, tinnitus and other cerebral ischemia and hypoxia after waking up. It may cause spinal deformity and lumbar muscle strain after a long time. Some people use the pillow as a pillow to sleep at the table in the morning, which will cause the eyeball to be pressed, and will also press the chest, affecting the breathing, blood circulation and nerve conduction, causing numbness and tingling in the arms and hands.
Growing vegetables and raising chicken: “naturalism” is popular
In Spain, people have long been advocating the return to nature. The Spaniard believes that returning to nature will return to health.
Many Spaniards will use the weekend to walk into the forest, camping, and bathe in the sun and rain of nature. Others go to the countryside to raise chickens and grow vegetables during the holidays, and some even open small vegetable gardens on their own balconies to find the fun of being a farmer.
In terms of travel, the Spaniards prefer to walk or cycle, and some even walk a few blocks to take the bus instead of driving by themselves, which is good for exercising.
The Spaniards are more talkative than the characters of residents of other European countries. Being willing to express makes them feel good and have less trouble. The Spaniards also love to be clean, dressed neatly, cleanly, etc., which helps to socialize and release loneliness.