The bottom layer of Xi'an Great Goose Pagoda has an empty hole and is suspected to be the earth palace. What is hidden in its ground palace? 5 Comments / Uncategorized / By GoodBoy
5 thoughts on “The bottom layer of Xi'an Great Goose Pagoda has an empty hole and is suspected to be the earth palace. What is hidden in its ground palace?”
In May 2008, Wang Yarong, director of the Religious Research Institute of the Shaanxi Provincial Academy of Social Sciences, said that like the Pagoda under the Pagoda of the Famen Temple in Shaanxi, there may also be a thousand -year -old palace under the Great Goose Pagoda of Xi'an. It is speculated that the treasures brought back from India have returned from India to return the scriptures.
In historical records, in the 19th year of Tang Zhenguan (AD 645), Xuan Zang brought back a large number of Buddhist relics, hundreds of Baya Sanskrit, and eight gold and silver Buddha statues after returning from India. In order to worship and treasure the treasures brought back to the Buddhist scriptures, gold and silver Buddha statues, relics and other treasures, Xuan Zang personally presided over the construction of the Big Wild Goose Pagoda. But until now, no one knows where the treasures brought back by Xuan Zang.
Wang Yarong believes that underground of the ancient tower generally has a palace, just like the palace under the pagoda of Famen Temple. The underground palace is definitely hidden in the underground of the Great Wild Goose Pagoda, but the Great Wild Goose Pagoda Palace has not been discovered. It is speculated that the ground palace under the big goose pagoda is likely to be hidden in the Buddhist treasure that Xuan Zang brought back.
The director of the Xi'an Great Wild Goose Pagoda Key Tao introduced that in 2007, the relevant departments had detected the internal structure of the Big Wild Goose Pagoda. The ground radar once detected an empty hole in the underground of the Big Wild Goose Pagoda.
The building structure
The Tang poet Cen Shen once praised in the poem: "The tower is like a surge, and the sky is towering. Run like a ghost. The four corners are in the day, and the seven -layer motorcycle sky. "
The big goose pagoda
The big goose pagoda is a tank -shaped tower with a brick -imitation wood structure, consisting of tower base, tower body, and tower brake. The whole tower is 64.7 meters high, the tower is 4.2 meters high, the north and south are about 48.7 meters long, and the east to west is about 45.7 meters. There are 9 rooms and two floors, there are 7 rooms on the 3rd and 4th floors, and there are five rooms on the 5, 6, 7, and 8 floors.
The inscription on both sides of the south gate on the bottom of the South Gate Cave and the "Preface to the Three Tibetans of the Tang Dynasty" and "The Preface to the Saint Church of the Tang Dynasty" monument, the two monuments were built in the four years of Tang Yonghui (AD 653). "The Preface to the Three Tibetan Tibetans of the Tang Dynasty" was written from right to the left, placed in the west, and the "Preface to the San Tibetan Education of the Tang Dynasty" was written by left to right and placed in the east. The two monuments were written by Tang Taizong Li Shimin and Crown Prince Li Zhi (later Tang Gaozong). The two monuments are the same form. The monument is the head of the round, and there are obvious scores on both sides of the monument body, which presents a trapezoidal of the narrow and width (this is a typical shape of the Tang monument). The height of 337.5 cm, 86 cm width of the monument, 100 cm width.
Because the Xi'an Big Wild Goose Pagoda was a relatively special position in ancient times, it is most likely to hide some valuable items in it.
There are a lot of deeply hidden in the internal level of the earth palace. Gold and jewelry are very valuable, so it is very novel.
The ground palace was found at the bottom of the Great Wild Goose Pagoda, and most of them were hidden in some rare treasures and some rare treasures in the palace.
Let's take a look at Xuanzang. He is proficient in the Buddhist scriptures, laws, and arguments. The Tang Dynasty Li Shimin called him a monk. In translation, he traveled to India in China, stayed in India for 15 years, and when he returned to the Tang Dynasty, he was 46 years old. He translated the scriptures in Changan for 19 years at the end of the year at the end of the year.
The Xuanzang has lived in Ci En Temple for ten years, which means that he has lived in the Great Wild Goose Pagoda for ten years. The current Tibetan Tibetan House of Xuanzang is the world's largest Xuanzang Memorial Hall.
In March of Tang Yonghui in March, Xuan Zang and Emperor Gao Zong discussed that he wanted to build a Tibetan scripture tower in Ci'en Temple. Xuan Zang's own patterns were built with Xuan Zang at the time.
The first tower was only five floors, the tower base was 4 meters high, the tower was 60 meters high, and the inside and outside were square. About the period of Wu Zetian, the tower was destroyed, and the Wu Zetian was rebuilt. It was changed to ten floors. Later, the disaster of the soldiers destroyed the above three floors, leaving only seven floors, and the tower could see Chang'an at a glance.
I think even if there is an empty hole under the big goose pagoda, it is a prefecture palace, that is, put some verses, put some relics, and everything brought back from India. After all, this is historical relics, which cannot be destroyed at all, and the things below are buried.
If said that the emperor's tomb can still have something valuable. If it is under the tower of a temple, what I can think of is the scripture. Then this Xuanzang story should be rewritten.