Eco-driving is a style of driving that is better for the environment. But that’s not the only benefit. Read on to discover the top five benefits of eco-driving.
Fuel consumption is a key concern for fleets globally; especially now that fuel prices are at record highs. Reducing fuel consumption is important for businesses to help manage the bottom line.
By adopting eco-driving techniques, particularly smooth acceleration and braking, drivers can help reduce fuel consumption.
Road transportation represents close to 15% of total global greenhouse emissions. It’s therefore important for businesses to evaluate their own transport activities and act to reduce environmental impact.
Eco-driving has proven to be effective at reducing greenhouse gas emissions. Think smoother acceleration and braking, earlier gear-changing and forward planning.
Companies have both legal and moral responsibilities to manage the safety of those who drive for work purposes. A comprehensive driver risk management program supports not only safety, but sustainability efforts. By its very nature, a program that encourages safe, defensive driving techniques is likely to encourage an eco-friendly style of driving.
Techniques such as smooth driving, effective observation, and anticipation, leaving a safe following distance, and planning, all contribute to safer, cleaner roads.
Vehicle maintenance and repair costs are on the rise, a result of factors such as higher labor rates and material costs. With finances tight for businesses, avoiding unnecessary repairs – and maintaining higher residual values of vehicles – is beneficial.
Cutting down harsh maneuvers by encouraging an eco-friendly style of driving helps to reduce vehicle wear and tear, contributing to fewer breakdowns and safer vehicles for drivers.
Making small changes to driving style can deliver a big difference to driver and passenger comfort. Eco-driving involves smooth use of the accelerator, brakes, gears, and steering, resulting in a more comfortable ride.
Additionally, eco-friendly driving techniques such as route planning, staying 100% focused, and leaving a safe following distance, help to reduce fatigue and stress – helping to improve the overall driving experience.
Encouraging eco-friendly driving techniques is the easy part – measuring it can be more challenging for fleets.
FIA Smart Driving Challenge (FIA SDC), the world’s first challenge that rewards smart, safe, eco-friendly driving, makes it easy for businesses to encourage and measure eco-driving improvements. Each driver is measured by Greater Than’s digital Enerfy platform which evaluates driving in real-time with artificial intelligence and makes eco-friendly driving both measurable and comparable.
The FIA SDC business reporting package provides harmonized data on CO2 emissions, CO2 savings and safety, regardless of vehicle type and geography.
Read more about the challenge here.