National Girl Child Day is celebrated on 24 January ever since, 2008. The day is celebrated in line with the campaigns, programs of the govt like Save the Girl Child, Beti Bachao Beti Padhao. The objective of celebrating this day is to provide equal opportunities as well as to construct a habitable society for females to build a safe society for them. This day also represents the importance of education, physical and mental health, and also spread awareness regarding various issues like sexual abuse, gender inequality. The celebrations of this day are led by the Ministry and Child Development.
The day is celebrated with some events which are based on some of the themes. In 2019, the theme was ‘Empowering Girls for a Brighter Tomorrow’. In 2020 the theme was ‘My voice, our common future’ 2020. In 2021 the theme was ‘Digital Generation, Our Generation’.This year it is celebrated as ‘Umang Rangoli Utsav’ as a part of Azadi Ka Amrit Mahotsav. In conjunction with the event, Rangoli decorations will be made at over 50 locations across the country, according to a press release yesterday.
Rangoli decorations of kilometer-long will be made on the roads and squares named after female freedom fighters or women role models. In addition, Prime Minister Narendra Modi will personally interact and congratulate the Pradhan Mantri Rashtriya Bal Puraskar(PMRBP) awardees on this day, in the presence of the Minister of State Smirti Zubin Irani and Minister of Women and Child Development Munjpara Mahendrapai.
The National Girl Child Day is celebrated nationwide on January 24. However, many states dedicate a week or a month in support of the noble initiative. For example, Punjab declared January 2021 to be the ‘Girl Child Month’. Madhya Pradesh celebrated the ‘Girl Child Week’. The day also falls close to the anniversary of the Beti Bachao Beti Padhao (BBBP) initiative launched on January 22, 2015, by Prime Minister Narendra Modi.
SOME QUOTES ON NATIONAL GIRL CHILD
“Though she be but little, she is fierce.” – William Shakespeare
“If you want something said, ask a man; if you want something done, ask a woman.” – Margaret Thatcher
“When girls are educated, their countries become stronger and more prosperous.” – Michelle Obama
No one can make you feel inferior without your consent.” – Eleanor Roosevelt
“Be that strong girl that everyone knew would make it through the worst, be that fearless girl, the one who would dare to do anything, be that independent girl who didn’t need a man; be that girl who never backed down.”– Taylor Swift
Source: DNA India
Pingback: History, Importance, and Theme of National Voters Day 2022 » Empire Weekly
January 28, 2022 at 8:30 pm
Wow keep it up ☺💯💯