Is Frequent Urination A Sign Of Std
by CourteneyPublished on June 21, 2020Updated on August 28, 2020
Urinary frequency describes the need to urinate more often than normal, although there isnt an increase in the amount of urine. In fact, often the amount of urine is decreased. Urgency is the sudden need to urinate. People with these symptoms may also have burning or pain with urination. Although a urinary tract infection is the most likely cause, sexually transmitted diseases and other illnesses can also cause these symptoms.
Urinary Tract Infection
The urinary tract includes the urethra, bladder, ureters and kidneys. UTIs are usually caused by bacteria, and women are at a higher risk of developing UTIs than men. UTIs are not sexually transmitted, but sexual activity or having a new sexual partner can increase the risk of getting an infection. Although they may be asymptomatic, UTIs can cause discolored urine , bad-smelling urine, burning with urination, a frequent or urgent need to urinate and pelvic pain. They are usually treated with antibiotics.
Protecting Yourself Against Stis:
- Use a condom. However, nothing is 100% safe. If youâre concerned you might have an STI, even after safe sex, check with your doctor.
At the clinic, your doctor may ask you questions like âDid you use a condom?â or âDid you have multiple sexual partners?â It’s not so they can judge you. Itâs so they can organize what further tests you need. So, donât be shy or feel ashamed about your answers.
With a few minor changes, you can take good care of yourself. You can start making better health choices now by
CDC. âUrinary Tract Infection.â Accessed March 2021.
Flores-Mireles, A.L., et al. Nat Rev Microbiol, , doi: 10.1038/nrmicro3432.
Behzadi, P., et al. Maedica , , PMID: 21977133.
Valiquette, L. Can J Urol, , PMID: 11442991.
Is It Possible To Prevent Chlamydia
Since most people who have the infection do not have symptoms and may not be aware they are infected, it is commonly spread, and it can be difficult to prevent the infection. Male condoms can reduce the risk of spreading or acquiring the infection. Having a mutually monogamous relationship with a partner who has been tested or treated also reduces the risk of contracting chlamydia infection.
You May Like: What Type Of Antibiotics Treat Chlamydia
Urine Trouble: What Stds Cause Frequent Urination
Fast, Easy, Affordable. At-Home Testing
8 panel home STD test – just as thorough as going to the clinic.
14 panel STD test – the most comprehensive test ever.
5 panel home STD test – screen for the highest risk factors.
Chlamydia + Gonorrhea are 2 of the top 4 new STIs.
What Is The Fastest Way To Cure Gonorrhea
Gonorrhea is usually super easy to get rid of. Your nurse or doctor will prescribe antibiotics to treat the infection. Some strains of gonorrhea resist the antibiotics and are hard to treat, so your doctor may give you two antibiotics, in shot and pill form. Sometimes you only have to take one pill.
Read Also: Does Garlic Get Rid Of Chlamydia
What Are The Symptoms
80% women and 60% men show no symptoms at all or they are so mild you may not notice them.
Symptoms in men could be pain when passing urine, discharge from the tip of the penis, tingling in the pee-pipe or pain in the testicles .
Symptoms in women may be pain passing urine, increased discharge from the vagina, spotting between periods or after sex, heavier periods and/ or lower abdominal pain.
Why Am I Getting Urinary Tract Infections
Ever since I started having sex I get urinary tract infections a lot. Does that mean there could be something else wrong? Mandy*
If you have burning or pain when you pee, it could be a number of things. One possibility is a urinary tract infection , but others include a sexually transmitted disease , such as chlamydia, or chemical irritation from a spermicide . Its hard to tell the difference without seeing a doctor or .
Urinary tract infections tend to be more common in girls who have sex. Often, they happen because bacteria entered the urethra .
Follow these steps to help decrease your chances of getting UTIs:
- Don’t touch your vagina with anything that has been in contact with your anus . This includes condoms, toilet paper, fingers, etc. Do not go from anal to vaginal sex.
- Wipe front to back after going to the bathroom.
- Pee right before and after sex.
- Drink plenty of liquids, especially water.
STDs can cause symptoms similar to those of a UTI, such as burning, vaginal discharge, belly pain, and irregular bleeding.
Many times, though, STDs have few symptoms, which is why it is important for anyone who has had sex to be tested at least once a year. And always use condoms with any type of sex to help prevent STDs.
In any case, the best thing to do is get checked out ASAP by a health care provider who can look for the reason you’re having symptoms. It’s really important to get the right diagnosis and treatment!
*Names have been changed to protect user privacy.
Don’t Miss: How Do I Tell Someone I Have Chlamydia
What Is An Std
An STD is a sexually-transmitted disease that is transmitted through oral, vaginal or anal sex, intravenous drug use, or through non-sexual contacts such as childbirth or breastfeeding. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention estimates that there are 19 million reported STD cases each year in the United States. STDs are common and it is possible to be infected without being aware, because many STDs do not display obvious symptoms. Getting tested for STDs once or twice every year is recommended for sexually-active people. Regular STD testing is a great way to protect your sexual health as well as the health of your partner.
So, How Do You Get an STD?
STDs can occur in a myriad of ways:
- Having unprotected sex with someone who has also been affected.
- Eating contaminated food that has been contaminated with fecal matter can potentially transfer hepatitis A .
- Skin-to-skin contact with someone who has been affected by HPV or herpes can increase the risk of contracting either infection.
- Sharing sheets, towels, or clothes can increase the chance of spreading Trichomoniasis.
- Sharing needles or even razors, which cause the risk of breaking the skin and mixing blood, can lead to catching, developing, and the passing on of STDs.
Can Chlamydia Kill You
Chlamydia is easily cured with antibiotics. Chlamydia cannot kill you, but in some cases, tubal pregnancies, called ectopic pregnancies, can be fatal. Chlamydia infection can also be passed to the newborn during delivery. Men whose chlamydia infection goes untreated can develop sore, swollen testicles.
Recommended Reading: 4 Pink Pills For Chlamydia
What Stds Cause Frequent Urination
This is a question that many of us have had to ask ourselves and Google. Whether its early childhood programming or anxiety, whenever something is wrong down there, we jump to STDs. In some, this causes panic and embarrassment. This is largely because weve previously associated sexually transmitted diseases with dirty people and people who have unsafe sex. Well, all of those theories have been proved wrong by modern science. We now know that anyone can be at risk for an STD, even if youre only active with one person.
This article is going to look at the STDs that cause frequent urination and the symptoms of each disease. This is a key factor in narrowing down the possibilities. However, STDs are not the only cause of frequent urination. Here is a list of the possible causes:
- Bladder infection
- Urinary tract infection
The items marked with a * are the only STDs on the list. As you can see, STDs are not the majority cause of frequent urination. In fact, the most frequent cause is a urinary tract infection. Of course, you dont want to read everything about all of these possible causes. Instead, lets focus on 5 causes of frequent urination:
Urethritis Due To Gonorrhea Or Chlamydia
You have urethritis. This is an inflammation in the urethra. The urethra is the tube between the bladder and the tip of the penis. Urine drains out of the body through the urethra. There are 2 main types of this condition:
Gonococcal urethritis . This is an infection caused by gonorrhea.
Nongonococcal urethritis . This is an infection that is often caused by chlamydia. Other infections can also be the cause.
Men are more likely to have symptoms, but may not. Symptoms can start within 1 week after exposure to an infection. But they can take a month or more to appear. Or they may not even occur. Some symptoms are:
Burning or pain when urinating
Irritation in the penis
Pus discharge from the penis
Pain and possible swelling in one or both testicles
Infections in the urethra are often caused by a sexually transmitted infection . The most common STIs are gonorrhea, chlamydia, or both.
Gonococcal urethritis is an infection of the urethra. It’s caused by gonorrhea. Gonorrhea is a sexually transmitted infection . Gonorrhea can also be in other areas of the body. This can cause:
Rectal pain and discharge
Without treatment, the infection can get worse and spread to other parts of your body. The infection can cause rashes, arthritis, and infections in your joints, heart, and brain.
Recommended Reading: Over The Counter Chlamydia Treatment Walgreens
Embarrassed Dont Be: It Can Be Dangerous
A lot of people dont visit their doctor due to symptoms because they consider it potentially embarrassing. Dont put it off! Both UTIs and STDs are easy to diagnose and just as easy to cure. Any waiting before you see your doctor has the potential to be more dangerous to you and your sexual partners, and not seeing a doctor at all could mean that your symptoms get worse.
Increasing Worsening Or Changing Symptoms
If any of your symptoms increase, worsen or change from the normal UTI symptoms, it might be an STD instead. If symptoms start to include ones like discharge or smell, its far more likely to be one of the most common STDs instead.
For any repeated urinary tract infections that appear to keep coming back, see your doctor: There are many things that can cause repeated UTIs. The same is true for any symptoms that can point to more than just an STD: Again, see your doctor.
Don’t Miss: How Long Can You Leave Chlamydia Untreated
How Can I Get A Test
Anyone who is sexually active can test for Chlamydia.
If you are under 25, you can get a test as part of the National Chlamydia Screening Programme. This can be done in a clinic or at a screening event if you see the Outreach team out and about or you can request a kit online to be sent home. All your information is keep confidential, this is not routinely shared with any other agencies including your GP. However, if you are under 16 we will need to ask you some further questions about your sexual activity to make sure you are staying safe.
You can request a test online if you are under 25.
Anyone over 25 can currently get a free test at any Sexual Health clinic or with their GP. You can also buy a test online.
We’re Sorry The Page You’re Looking For Can’t Be Found
It is possible that you used an outdated or expired MedicineNet link or you may have typed the address incorrectly.
Please try searching using the search field above. If you’re not sure of the spelling, type the first few letters, followed by an asterisk.
To help you find what you are looking for, these links may help.
Browse our A-Z Lists:
Recommended Reading: When Does Chlamydia Show Up
If You Have Further Questions Contact Your Ob
Don’t have an ob-gyn? Search for doctors near you.
Copyright 2021 by the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. All rights reserved. Read copyright and permissions information.
This information is designed as an educational aid for the public. It offers current information and opinions related to women’s health. It is not intended as a statement of the standard of care. It does not explain all of the proper treatments or methods of care. It is not a substitute for the advice of a physician. Read ACOGs complete disclaimer.
Can A Uti Be Mistaken For Chlamydia
The symptoms The main symptom that chlamydia does not share with UTIs is penile or vaginal discharge. A chlamydial infection can cause a yellowish, strong-smelling vaginal discharge or a watery, milky penile discharge. Urinary tract infections are not known to cause any sort of abnormal genital discharge.
Don’t Miss: Does Chlamydia Make You Poop A Lot
What To Do If You Think You Have A Uti:
- If your symptoms are mild and you donât have a fever, keep well hydrated. Aim for 2â3 liters of water a day, but no need to overdo it.
- If your symptoms persist after 24 hours or you experience fever, chills, or nausea, see your doctor.
- Try not to hold in your pee, even if it hurts.
- Itâs common for people with vaginas to get UTIs now and then, as their urethras are shorter.ref4 But if they occur very frequently or become severe, you should see your doctor.
Similarities And Differences Between Utis And Stds
UTIs share symptoms similar to STDs and are misdiagnosed more often than you may think. According to the American Society for Microbiology, 64 percent of the patients with a sexually transmitted infection were actually diagnosed as having a UTI instead. This is problematic. Not only are women being needlessly prescribed a UTI treatment , but it may also cause an undiagnosed STD to develop into a more serious issue. In the beginning stages, many STDs are treatable, but the further they are allowed to progress, the more complicated and expensive treatment becomes.
Don’t Miss: How Many Mg Of Azithromycin To Treat Chlamydia
Does Trichomoniasis Mean Your Partner Cheated
The bottom line People can have trichomoniasis for months without showing any symptoms. If you or your partner suddenly have symptoms or test positive for it, it doesnt necessarily mean that someones cheating. Either partner may have gotten it in a previous relationship and unknowingly passed it on.
Can Chlamydia Be Cured Naturally
Chlamydia can only be cured with antibiotic treatment. Home remedies for chlamydia cant cure the infection, though some may offer minor relief of symptoms as you complete the entire course of antibiotics. Prompt treatment can help you avoid serious complications.
Also Check: How Long For Symptoms Of Chlamydia To Show Up
Urgent Care Omaha Walk
Our staff works to provide prompt, personal, and professional care for all of our patients. We strive to provide the attention patients need in as quick a time as possible. Urgent Care Clinics in Omaha & Bellevue, Nebraska has three locations in the Omaha metropolitan area. Our three walk-in clinics are:
DisclaimerThe information contained on this webpage is for educational purposes as well as to provide general information and general understanding of the pertinent medical issue only, not to provide a specific diagnosis. This information is not intended to be a substitute for professional medical advice. By using this blog/web site you understand there is no doctor patient relationship between you and the blog/web site publisher. The information included on this site should not be used as a substitute for medical advice from a licensed medical professional in your state. Neither Urgent Care Network, its subsidiaries, affiliates, assignees or successors in interest, nor any other party assume liability for loss or damage due to reliance on content of this blog/web site. If you are experiencing a severe medical issue, you should seek emergency assistance immediately.
PROMPT. PERSONAL. PROFESSIONAL.
How Can You Test For Stds At Home
For home STI testing, you collect a urine sample or an oral or genital swab and then send it to a lab for analysis. Some tests require more than one sample. The benefit of home testing is that youre able to collect the sample in the privacy of your home without the need for a pelvic exam or office visit.
You May Like: Can Bv Cause Positive Chlamydia Test
Doctor’s Notes On Chlamydia In Women
Chlamydia is a bacterium that is a common STD that can infect women . The majority of infected women have no symptoms. When they do develop, signs and symptoms of a chlamydia infection may include cervicitis, vaginal discharge and/or abdominal pain. The organisms can infect the urethra and cause pain when urinating and cause urinary frequency and urgency. In some women, it can progress into the fallopian tubes and infect them and or cause pelvic inflammatory disease with symptoms of fever, pelvic cramping, pain with intercourse and abdominal pains. The disease may make the woman have difficulty getting pregnant or even develop sterility.
The cause of chlamydia infection in women is the transmission of the bacteria to a woman by having vaginal, anal or oral sex with someone who has a chlamydia infection.
Can You Get Std From Toilet Seat
Since bacterial STIs cannot survive outside the environment of mucous membranes in the body, it is essentially impossible to contract one by sitting on public toilet seats. Viral causes of STIs cannot survive for long outside the human body either, so they generally die quickly on surfaces like toilet seats.
Also Check: How Soon Can I Test For Chlamydia