Read Our Latest News and Information
The world is experiencing a rise in temperatures that continue to soar yearly. Arizona is exceptionally famous for its dry and hot summers when temperatures can rise to as much as 120°F. The rising effect of global warming is doing nothing to reduce these temperatures, and Earth continues to face even more hot summers and heat waves.
In these times, it is essential to make your house as eco-friendly as possible and do whatever it takes to protect yourselves and your families from these scorching heat waves.
The most effective step we can take in this direction is to make our residential and commercial properties as energy efficient as possible. This means we should cut down on our energy use and seek alternate ways to do our work without harming the environment.
Another benefit of energy efficiency is lower bills, which will benefit you in the long run by saving you money that you can use for other purposes to enhance the luxuries of your life.
Here are some possible steps that you can take to make your house more energy efficient.
Clean Your Large Appliances and Run Them in the EveningYour refrigerator may consume more energy when the vent behind it is dirty and clogged. The same goes for your air conditioners and exhaust fans. Cleaning your appliances with a brush, or vacuuming them, will benefit you in the long run as the machines would not have to work harder to produce their results. Also, try to run the appliances that take up a lot of electricity in the evening, such as dryers, washing machines, and dishwashers.
Insulation of Your HouseInsulation of your home will provide a barrier that would check the heat flow into or out of your house. It will keep your homes warm in winters and cool in summers. A well-insulated home is designed to reduce the need for electricity to run appliances like air conditioners or heaters, thus reducing bills and consuming less energy. Fiberglass, wool, and cotton insulation are the most common materials used in this technique.
Windows SunscreensWindows sunscreens are made of fiberglass or metal wire mesh, designed as a framework that can be installed temporarily or permanently on your windows. They are placed on windows to cut back harmful sunrays and UV radiations that penetrate your standard windows and ensure that the occupants of the building remain healthy and free of risks of skin diseases. Installation of sunscreens also helps conserve electricity and lower your bills and is an effective and affordable solution to make your house more energy efficient.
Scottsdale Sunscreens provide you with a reliable and high-quality windows sunscreens installation service. Soon you will notice the difference these sunscreens bring to your house, making it more comfortable to live in. Click here for an estimate, or call us at (480) 568 – 2635 to get more information.
Your comment will be posted after it is approved.
Leave a Reply.
9326 E Windrose Drive
Scottsdale, AZ 85260
THE LOCATION ABOVE IS NOT A STORE FRONT. WE ONLY OFFER ON SITE ESTIMATES.
'Scottsdale Sunscreens' operates under the business name:
Arizona Screen Techs, LLC
Licensed, Bonded, Insured
Monday: 8am - 8pm
Tuesday: 8am - 8pm
Wednesday: 8am - 8pm
Thursday: 8am - 8pm
Friday: 8am - 8pm
Saturday: 8am - 8pm
Sunday: 8am - 8pm