The Patent Problem
Today is the World Day to Stop Software Patents. Software patents attempt to offer protection to a company for particular computer programs. One common example is the Amazon One-Click Shopping Patent. Amazon attempted to patent their one-click shopping method. Doing so makes any other online store using one-click shopping a patent violator and in danger of legal action.
These patents typically protect large corporations who patent what are usually common, well-known programs (e.g., clicking to purchase books). The patents are often used offensively to bring legal action against smaller companies also using these methods, thereby pushing them out of the market. Generally, these patents limit innovation by providing this chilling effect on small companies that would be unable to defend themselves against such legal action.
Thankfully, the US Patent Office overturned Amazon’s request for the one-click patent, but many other examples still pose problems for computer programmers.
The Free Software Solution
Groups like the Free Software Foundation (FSF) have been working against software patents. They have filed amicus briefs in court cases and have been pro-active in developing software free of patents. In doing so they further the freedoms that they outlined in this article:
- The freedom to run the program, for any purpose (freedom 0).
- The freedom to study how the program works, and adapt it to your needs (freedom 1).
- The freedom to redistribute copies so you can help your neighbor (freedom 2).
- The freedom to improve the program, and release your improvements to the public, so that the whole community benefits (freedom 3).
Patenting software inhibits all of these freedoms. As a result the aims of free software encourage basic moral precepts like the love and help of neighbor and improving the world around you for its own sake.
Prayer Book Parallels
The Christian concept of liturgy isn’t too different from a computer program. Both are prescribed and carefully designed. Both offer an abstract method that is given life in its praying/running. Both promise concrete changes in finite time. Both have parts that are variable and parts that are unchanging.
The Episcopal Church’s Book of Common Prayer is free from copyright and patent. As a result, all of the four freedoms above apply. Anyone can access its contents and use it. Anyone can study it openly, without permission. Anyone can duplicate copies–this is frequently done in making worship booklets.
Importantly, anyone can alter it and re-publish their changes. The Episcopal Church did this with its revisions in 1789, 1892, 1928 and 1979. WIthout the ability to do this, they would not have been able to adapt the 1662 prayer book to their situation in a free America. Independent of the British Crown, the first Episcopalians needed to remove prayers for the monarch and oaths to the king and replace them.
The Roman Catholic Church has adapted the current Book of Common Prayer for their own use as the Book of Divine Worship. A parish in Rosemont, PA has adapted it as the Anglican Service Book. The Anglican Mission in the Americas has used sections of it in developing their own prayer book. All of these “forks” were made possible because there is no patent, no copyright on the existing BCP–it is simple free for use.
Having litrugy and religious texts free of patent and copyright is a Christian principle that is widely regarded as offering more opportunity for prayer, for evangelism and for churches that take their surrounding culture seriously. The same principles hold when it comes to software: sharing, studying and adapting software is an act of love of neighbor. Having software patents acts against basic Christian witness.