You might have a practically undetectable enemy if you notice twisted, yellow leaflets, tiny spiders, or sickly plants.
Mites are difficult to spot with the naked eye, but they can be detected using sticky cards or just shaking the plant over a piece of white paper.
Those small black or red spots are sucking insects that can harm trees, foodstuffs, ornamentals, and even some herbs. There are numerous different varieties of mites, each with its own set of plant hosts.
In this article, we are going to discuss a type of mite which is the cyclamen mite, and how best we can confirm these mites.
- How to Get Rid of Spider Mites on Fiddle Leaf Fig
- How to Get Rid Of Spider Mites on Plants [Indoors + Outdoors]
- 12 Predators That Eat Spider Mites
The most common mite found on cyclamen is Tarsonemus pallidus.
Its reproductive cycle is quite quick, especially during the summer, when glasshouse infestations cause the most havoc.
It keeps hidden in the wettest sections of the plant due to its physiological requirements. The pest develops swiftly, even when the plants are young, and there are no visible symptoms on the outside at first.
Cyclamen mites life cycle
Cyclamen mites are very minute and cannot be seen with the naked eye. Adults are oval, measuring between 0.2 and 0.25 mm in length. They have the appearance of little spiders.
The males are squat, with distinctive rear legs that culminate in a hook. The look of the sexes is vastly different.
Cyclamen mites hibernate in plant matter, never in the soil, in conditions that are unsuitable for the adult female.
From April onwards, these females lay little glassy white eggs measuring about 100 mm in diameter.
In her lifetime, a female can deposit up to thirty eggs, each of which hatches into a young larva 4 to 8 days after laying.
Milky white, transparent, and segmented, the juvenile larvae are milky white. They only have one moult. Adults have a lifespan of 10 to 30 days.
Diagnosis and Symptoms
The mites are usually not discovered until they have caused extensive harm, and then only using a dissecting microscope.
Hand lenses are generally insufficient to notice these tiny mites. Mites and spiders are closely related, and both have four pairs of legs. Larvae, on the other hand, only have three pairs.
Cyclamen mites are typically greenish and translucent, with a size of less than 1 mm. Their eggs are smooth and are more likely to be found buried in plant tissue folds.
They prefer to hide in buds or new growth points. They hate bright light and prefer high humidity and cool temperatures (60 degrees F.).
Their feeding stunts the growth of the plants, causing the leaves to curl upward.
This pest can be found year-round in glasshouses. Both larvae and adults eat and destroy the environment.
The mites penetrate the plant tissue on the underside of leaves, emptying the surface layers of their contents and secreting chemicals that put the plant cells’ growth regulation out of whack. The undersides of the leaves develop a chestnut-brown, corky growth as a result.
The curling up of juvenile leaf margins, which get crisper and harder as cyclamen mite infestation progresses; flowers become crisper, develop asymmetrically, and have difficulties opening; they barely rise above the leaves.
A cyclamen mite assault causes the leaf stalks and leaves to distort. In severe situations, the leaves turn a dark green colour.
The flower stalk is deformed as a result of the infestation; buds do not develop and become wizened and dry.
Flowers are malformed and may be discoloured, with a kind of black marbling and oily patches; blooms do not last, petals fall prematurely; flowers are deformed and may be discoloured, with a kind of black marbling and oily patches.
The blooms frequently open beneath the foliage as a result of this infestation. The piercing, combined with the toxicity caused by saliva, resulted in the termination of growth.
Since the mite must only enter soft tissue with their piercing and feeding mouthparts, the plant’s immature portions and young plants are the most susceptible.
The spread of cyclamen mites
The adult mite can only move about a small amount on its legs. As a result, attacks are focused. Adults prefer to remain on the flower bud, flower, or leaf from whence they arose, only migrating when there is a major overpopulation.
Contact and various human operations on the cyclamen in the course of managing them result in transfer from one plant to another. Wind and draughts can potentially spread Cyclamen mites.
Prevention and Control
Cyclamen mites can be found in all stages of the plant life cycle, from seedlings to flowering plants. Regular inspection of the plants will allow the grower to quickly eliminate any that are suspected of being infected.
As a precaution, one can take the following steps:
To keep the environment unfriendly to the attacking mite, lower humidity to 60-75 percent.
Maintain a temperature range of 20 to 25 degrees Celsius.
Avoid using too much nitrogenous or potassium manure, as this will encourage the mites to reproduce and live longer.
The use of predator mites can help to reduce mite infestations biologically. Predators like these are usually smaller than their prey. They have no negative impact on the plant.
Phytoseiulus persimilis and Amblyseius californicus are two predatory mites that feed on these pests.
They don’t eat Tarsonemus pallidus or Polyphagotarsonemus latus, but they do eat other mites like Tetranychus sp.
Under glass, it’s impossible to avoid using specialized anti-mite chemicals as a preventative measure: infestations are rarely all of the same kind.
We are unable to add updated information on homologations due to the ongoing evolution of rules and homologations for phytosanitary treatment products, as well as changes in regulations between countries.
To get the most up-to-date information on rules and the usage of phytosanitary agents, each producer will need to contact his or her local plant protection bureau.
We strongly recommend conducting preliminary testing on a plant sample to determine the chemical’s activity (dose) and potential plant effects (plant poisoning).
Integrated Pest Management (IPM)
- Get rid of the infested plants. Because these mites are tough to control and proliferate quickly, it’s generally a good idea to get rid of afflicted plants.
- The use of heat Heat-sensitive cyclamen and wide mites can be killed by submerging them in 110°F water for 30 minutes
- In the spring, inspect newly purchased plants for curled or malformed tips and shoots, which could indicate mite infestation.
- Apply insecticidal soap or horticultural oil to the affected area. To be successful, the spray must thoroughly cover the insects, so use a lot of it and make sure it gets beneath the leaves and into the shoot tips, where the mites hide.
- These temperatures are generally safe for most plants, but the water temperature must be adequately maintained and the entire plant, pot and all, must be immersed. This process may be aided by removing severely infested shoots initially.
In conclusion, getting rid of cyclamen mites can be difficult at times, but when the right and proper procedures are taken, they can be controlled successfully.
Do you have opinions you would like to share with us?