What is the difference between leavened and unleavened bread?
The difference between leavened and unleavened bread is found in the word itself - leaven. Leaven is what is placed in bread dough to make the bread rise. It is placed in the dough and spreads throughout the entire lump.
Who are the sons of God in the book of Job?
Almost every reference in the Bible to "sons of God" refers to men who live in harmony with the will of God. However, I believe the three instances of the sons of God found in Job (Job 1:6; Job 2;1; Job 38:7) refer to angels.
What Is The Meaning Of Faith, Substance, Hope, Evidence in Hebrew 11:1?
Many, both in the religious world and otherwise, have a gross misunderstanding of what constitutes faith. Contrary to scripture, many believe that faith is necessary to "fill in the gaps" in the absence of real, tangible evidence.
What did Jacob take when he took Esau’s birthright?
The birthright was the natural privilege of the firstborn son. Receiving the birthright, the firstborn would become the head of the family, and would have charge of the family, including the family property.
What is the middle verse of the Bible?
The KJV has an even number of verses (31,102) and, thus, does not have a single middle verse. The "middle verses" are Psalm 103:1-2, with 15,550 verses before and after.
Is it wrong to celebrate Christmas?
What does the Bible have to say about Christmas? Should we celebrate the birth of Jesus? What is the origin of Christmas? These are some of the many questions we hope to answer in this study.
What does it mean for a minister to be ordained?
Most of our religious world puts great stress on the proper ordination of ministers, but when we turn to the Bible, we find that it says very little on the subject.
Can we be saved like the thief on the cross?
The thief on the cross didn't get baptized, so how did Jesus say he would be with Him in paradise? First, the thief on the cross was saved because Jesus spoke his sins forgiven (Luke...
Why Do Bad Things Happen?
The most commonly asked question about God—which has been called the “Achilles Heel” of Christianity—is, “Why does a loving, all-powerful God allow suffering in His world?”
Was Jesus born in a house, as Matthew says, or in a stable, as...
Critics of the historical accuracy of the Bible often find what they believe are contradictions among the writers of the gospel accounts because there are differences. Remember however, that a difference is not necessarily...