Alcohol addiction is very common and can be extremely harmful. The condition does not only affect a single person who is constantly turning to alcohol, but also tend to affect those around them. The latest National Survey on Drug Use and Health reported that 86.4% of the American adult population had an alcoholic beverage before, with at least 56% of the adult population drinking alcoholic beverages once or more every month. The survey also found that 26.9% of the adults in the United States engage in binge drinking frequently, and about 7% of the population are heavy alcohol users.
AA meetings are often the preferred method for helping people overcome alcohol use disorder and similar addiction problems, but does not yield long-term success in many cases. One publication report that about 40% of people who are entering an Alcoholics Anonymous program would not attend a second meeting. The success rate of AA in terms of long-term sobriety is also low, ranging from 5% to 12% in reality.
Alternative options have been presented. Bioresonance is a holistic treatment option that, together with a series of other modifications in the patient’s life, might make it easier to eliminate alcohol from their lives and to start living a sober lifestyle.
What Is Alcohol Use Disorder?
Having an alcoholic beverage now-and-then is certainly not harmful. Some types of alcohol, such as wine, has benefits that may be contributed to the body. Wine, for example, is known to contain a rich amount of antioxidants, it may help the immune system, and wine has also been suggested to be beneficial for cardiovascular disease.
When a person starts to enjoy alcohol too frequently, and they are unable to control themselves when they decide to have a drink, then problems may start to develop. Binge drinking is generally defined as having more than five drinks within a short period of time. Some publications also explain that binge drinking is defined as more than four drinks for women during a single occasion. Heavy alcohol use is defined as binge drinking on five days or more during a single month.
Dangers Of Alcohol Abuse
While certain kinds of alcoholic beverages may produce beneficial effects on the human body, excessive use of alcohol can be harmful to a person’s health. Alcohol can affect numerous parts of the human body and lead to damaging effects. Some of the possible effects that alcohol can have in the body, especially with heavy use, include:
- The brain’s structure may be adversely affected, leading to adverse changes to behavior, as well as mood-related problems.
- Alcohol can deal damage to the heart, which may lead to cardiomyopathy, arrhythmias, an increase in blood pressure levels, and raise a person’s risk of having a stroke.
- The liver can greatly suffer from excessive alcohol usage, causing problems such as cirrhosis, fatty liver diseases, alcoholic hepatitis, and fibrosis.
Additionally, some studies have found that excessive alcohol use has a link to some forms of cancer. In particular, the National Cancer Institute reports that alcohol may raise the risk of developing cancer in the head and neck regions, as well as esophageal cancer. Breast cancer and liver cancer are also more prevalent among individuals who are heavy alcohol users.
How Bioresonance Therapy Could Be Useful In Alcohol Addiction Treatment
For patients who are struggling to overcome their addiction to alcohol, the use of Bioresonance therapy may be helpful. Bioresonance therapy is used to read the natural electromagnetic waves that the body emits. The device utilized during this therapeutic procedure can then detect “unhealthy” waves in the body and pinpoint their locations. With this in mind, the apparatus can be used to help identify areas in the body where toxins have built up and specify the regions that have been affected by the excessive consumption of alcohol.
The “unhealthy” waveforms are then inverted and sent back into the body. The idea is to help improve the body’s natural ability to detoxify and heal – thus getting rid of alcohol in the system and possibly easing the transition toward a sober lifestyle.
Bioresonance therapy should ideally be combined with other strategies, such as a dietary detox plan. This may include a series of juices with vegetables that are known to flush the body of built-up toxins. An increase in water intake is also advised during the period in which Bioresonance therapy is used to assist in the cessation of alcohol.
Alcohol abuse harms the body internally, causes mental health issues, and can cause problems in a relationship and family. The condition affects millions of people. Traditional strategies, such as attending AA meetings, are often viewed as unsuccessful, as a large number of men decide to drop out of these programs or experience a relapse shorting after completion of the program. By combining Bioresonance therapy sessions with dietary detoxification, along with some other strategies, long-term sobriety can be achieved successfully.