Inspiration occurs in unexpected places.
As I was riding the Underground in London, I frequently heard a recording that said, "Mind the gap." The gap is the space between the train door and the station platform.
When people don't mind the gap, they trip and fall as they get on and off trains. If you don't mind the gap, bad things happen.
Minding the gap isn't optional if you want to live your dreams.
The most important gap in our lives is the one between what we say and do.
When it's all been said and done, will we have said more than we have done?
The gap between what we say and do is sometimes wider than the Grand Canyon.
Talk is cheap, fast, and easy. Doing is hard, expensive, and takes lots of time.
The difference between saying and doing is the difference between heaven and hell, the difference between bogging down in Nowhere Land and sailing on the ocean of our dreams.
We spend our lives exploring the gap between saying and doing.
Some people make the gap their home and never go anywhere.
Others narrow the gap and step over it making their dreams come true.
If you are going to live your dreams, you will have to mind the gap between what you say and do. You will have to connect all the dots of your dreams until they actually come true.
Minding the gap and connecting the dots is simply living as if your dreams are possible and working each day to make them happen.
There's not much talking, and there's lots of doing when you mind the gap and connect the dots.
The fastest and most certain method of closing the gap between saying and doing is summarized in a single word: - COMMITMENT
W. H. Murray (Scottish Himalaya Expedition 1959) said it better than anyone.
Until one is committed, there is hesitancy, the chance to draw back.. Concerning all acts of initiative and creation, there is one elementary truth the ignorance of which kills countless ideas and splendid plans: that the moment one definitely commits oneself, then providence moves too... Whatever you can do or dream you can, begin it. Boldness has genius, power and magic in it. Begin it now.
Maxing Out Expeditions is about minding the the gap and connecting the dots of our dreams.
Every day that we work on our dreams we are minding the gap and connecting the dots.
Sometimes we mind the gap for years before we actually connect the dots.
It required eleven years to connect the dots sailing around the world.
For more than thirty years, I have been minding the gap, but I still have not connected all the dots on my driving trip around the world.
For more than fifty years, I have been minding the gap and connecting the dots on positive thinking expeditions as I circumnavigate the inner world called my mind.
Maxing Out Expeditions chronicles the three great expeditions of my life.
1. Sailing around the world on my catamaran Exit Only.
2. Driving around the world in Land Rover Defenders.
3. Positive Thinking Expeditions exploring the landscape of the human mind.
If you are ready to close the gap between saying and doing, and if you want to connect the dots of your dreams, then Maxing Out Expeditions is a great place to start.
Sailing and driving around the world are even better when you have a Positive Thinking Expedition along the way.
Although I like the feel of a paper book in my hand, I love trees even more. When people purchase an eBook, they actually save trees and save money as well. Ebooks are less expensive and have no negative impact on the environment. All of Dr. Dave's books are available at Save A Tree Bookstore. Visit the bookstore today and start putting good things into your mind. It's easy to fill your mind with positive things using eBooks. No matter where you are or what you are doing, you can pull out your smart phone or tablet and start reading. You can even use electronic highlighters and make annotations in your eBooks just like paper books.