Whether you catch the sniffles or something much worse, it is never a good time when you feel sick. Usually, it means you have to miss work or a fun outing with your friends, and while nothing is foolproof, there are ways to strengthen your immune system.
Of course, it’s always important to get your annual check-ups with your primary care doctor to make sure your body is in tip-top shape. However, there are other immune-boosting strategies you should be practicing as well. Ready to get healthy? Start with our tips below.
Eat Your Fruits and Vegetables
This may sound trivial, but if you aren’t getting the proper nutrients through your diet, then you may be putting yourself at a higher risk for illness. Fruits and vegetables aren’t always fun to eat, but there are ways to sneak them into your food so that you don’t notice them as much. Nutrients like beta carotene and Vitamin C are found in fruits and vegetables and can help boost your immune system to fight off nasty colds and help you to stay healthy.
Get Enough Sleep
That’s right, it’s time to stop the scrolling on your phone and put it on your nightstand so you can catch some Zs! When you sleep, your body releases cytokines, which help fight diseases that infect your body. So, if you’re not sleeping enough, that means your body is not creating enough cytokines to help boost your immune system. One of the best tips for getting enough sleep is to stick to a schedule. Set your alarm at the same time every morning, and make sure you will be getting at least seven hours of sleep.
It can be challenging to find time to exercise with such a busy schedule, but it’s important to move your body to increase blood flow and strengthen antibodies, which can help boost immunity. According to the CDC, you should get at least 150 minutes of moderate exercise per week. Not sure where to start? Try taking a walk around the block or following along with a yoga video. What seems like just a small amount of exercise can make all the difference!
Manage Stress Levels
High-stress levels increase cortisol, and increased amounts of cortisol can lead to inflammation and a weakened immune system. So, how can you manage your stress when there is so much going on in your life? A few things you can try are meditating, journaling, and exercising. Avoid drinking alcohol when you can, eat well, and prioritize your needs to eliminate triggers. If you need additional support, perhaps consider reaching out to a mental health expert. Sometimes, talking to someone who is unbiased about any issues you are having can help you feel more equipped to handle stress.