Car accidents are an unfortunate experience of driving on roadways. While drivers in Montana are aware of the rules of the road, some drivers fail to uphold their duty of care to drive safely while behind the wheel. The negligence of a driver is often the cause of a crash; therefore, had it not been for their negligence, a fatal accident could have been avoided.
What are the most common causes of fatal crashes? The dangers of drinking and driving are well known, making it one of the largest contributors for fatal collisions on the roadways. According to the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, it is estimated that every 30 minutes an individual dies from an alcohol-related accident. The best way to reduce these crashes is avoiding getting behind the wheel of a vehicle while under the influence of alcohol.
Distracted driving is a growing cause of fatal crashes in the U.S. Because there are so many types of distractions that could take the drivers mind, eyes and hands away from the primary task of driving, it is likely that there are multiple forms of distractions every time a driver gets behind the wheel. Knowing these distractions, such as texting or talking on the phone, could help drivers remove these distractions.
Driving while fatigued or tired is also a dangerous situation and it causes many accidents. A drowsy driver is not able to react fast enough. Additionally, this often causes a driver to drift into another lane or off of the road. Being alert and awake behind the wheel is imperative no matter what time of day it is.
Because speed limits serve a safety purpose, it is no wonder that speeding is a common cause for fatal crashes. Driving too fast for road conditions or during a curve in the road could cause a vehicle to lose control. Following posted speed limits is important for all drivers.
Lastly, running red lights often contribute to fatal crashes. Traffic lights help to increase the safety of an intersection and control the traffic. When a driver fails to slow down for a yellow light and travels through a red light, this could cause a collision.
While this list is not exhaustive, the above information highlights some of the common causes of fatal crashes. Additionally, it helps victims and their loved ones assess fault and liability. Understanding cause could be very helpful for those pursuing a wrongful death suit following a fatal crash.