Gwendolyn Elizabeth Brooks most important legacy was her poetry that she gave to the world and her teachings to college students in Chicago. When Brooks was only thirteen she wrote a poem that was published in a magazine. This was the start of a beautiful career that made her a legend. Her stories of her experiences and about urban lives led her to reach heights such as writing entire volumes of poetry. From all of this, she has won many awards for her work. To spread her love for poetry and literature to others, she taught college students the clarity of writing poetry. With this, her legacy will continue on through this as several have gone on to write poetry using her skills and ideas. Through all of her achievements, she was able to obtain
If The Fair Gwen had not judged Max Freak and Max would not have become friends. On page 20 the narrator states, “... she’s scared of me” (Philbrick 20). This shows that The Fair Gwen is scared of Max because of his demeanor. However if The Fair Gwen had not judged Max, she would not have felt bad about judging him by his size, she would not have invited Max over to dinner to apologize about her behavior. Because The Fair Gwen realized that judging a person by their demeanor was wrong Freak and Max bonded which lead to them becoming best friends.
In the novel Saving Francesca, the author Melina Marchetta thoroughly portrays the toll that depression can take on a family as a whole as well on an individual; whilst accurately depicting the complexities of what it means to be a teenager dealing with those around you with mental illness. Saving Francesca exposes the reader with themes such as identity, transition, change, friendships, family and perception; and confronts the reader with the reality of depression, showing how unexpected the illness can be and not as much trying to fix it; but live amidst it.
Gwendolyn Brooks employs the use of capitalization and pronouns in her poem “A Bronzeville Mother Loiters in Mississippi. Meanwhile a Mississippi Mother Burns Bacon” as a way to demonstrate the tensions between white femininity and black masculinity in the south during the era directly preceding the Civil Rights Movement. During this time, the white man was afforded the ability to dominate over the word of white women and black men. Throughout this poem, Brooks portrays the complex dimensions that race and gender played in the murder of Emmett Till.
The dramatic coming-of-age film Dead Poet’s Society follows a group of young as they attend Welton Academy, an ultra conservative all-boys preparatory school, in 1959. Enthralled and inspired by the unconventional musings of their new English teacher, Mr. Keating, each of the students embark on a powerful journey of self-discovery, reflecting core transcendental themes of civil disobedience, non-conformity, and self-reliance. Heeding the mantra of their eccentric professor, the film’s characters learn they must rebel against societal conformity and willingly accept the consequences to truly seize the day and make life extraordinary.
Growing up I was always raised in a nice environment. Dinner at our kitchen table, trips to Reno, Six Flags to see the cute dolphins, we had a great bond between our family. When I was in elementary school, my friends and I talked about our families and what we were going to do during the weekend. My classmate told me that he was not able to do anything for the weekend because his parents would always be fighting. Quickly I began to have sympathy for a kid that I knew was a trouble maker. Sandra Cisneros does a great job of revealing the theme of the poem,”My Wicked,Wicked Ways” to the reader 's mind by using connotations and
“Like, when I step outside myself kinda, and when I, when I look at myself, you know? And I see me and I don’t like what I see, I really don’t.” Anthony Michael Hall played the role of the brainiac, Brian Johnson, in The Breakfast Club. Likewise, Brian is portrayed as the typical “nerd” in high school; he strives to do his best and please his parent’s. Similarly, I can relate to Brian because my parent’s expect as much from me as his do. They are always encouraging me to strive to do my best and never settle; nonetheless, I now push myself to try and accomplish anything I set my mind to. Although Brian Johnson is very successful in his school work he struggles deep beneath his skin with being accepted by society.
Throughout the years, pop culture has imposed a large amount of trends and shaped the lifestyle of its closer followers. It has achieved this impact because people have always been in contact with the different pop culture expressions and they often enjoy this type of entertainment. Moreover, according to Gerald Graff in his article “Hidden Intellectualism” pop culture or how he calls it “being a street smart” goes beyond entertainment and it is another type of intellectualism. Although pop culture can somehow promote critical thinking, its advantages in the long run should not be overestimated nor should the school knowledge be undermined.
When thinking of personal experiences, “The Mother” by Gwendolyn Brooks touches on the emotional topic of abortion. Even though this poem was published decades ago, it can still be seen very relevant to this day. Accepting abortion and the outcome can indeed be a challenging task for many, while others seem to adapt to it without much of a problem. Gwendolyn Brooks’ writing lets us take a look at the mothers view point of abortion and how a mother responds to her new situation. Throughout the poem, the speaker shows signs of grieving concern of the topic of abortion and its outcomes by presenting emotions of regret and memories, shame and guilt, and contradicting herself to almost justify what she has done.
“Speech to the Young” by Gwendolyn Brooks is a poem advising young people to stay focused, be ready for failure and show resilience. Without these components, the fluency and tone of the poem could be completely different. These components give this poem its identity, and they make it unique. What would it be without the “self-soilers”, “sun-slappers” or “harmony-hushers”? What would it be without the metaphorical commands at the end? These are testaments to how audience, rhetorical devices and effective message conveyance create a unique
The film, The Perks of Being a Wallflower, follows the story of Charlie as he braves through the challenges of freshman year. Throughout his first year, Charlies experiences friendship, alienation, love, mistakes, depression, acceptance of past events and newfound motivation. With the help of his love interest Sam, her stepbrother Patrick, and other likeminded individuals, Charlie is able to gain a sense of belonging and a boost of confidence that ensures his survival for the high school years yet to come (Halfon, Chbosky, 2012). This essay will delve into an in-depth analysis of adolescence from a socio-cultural perspective, using events from the film to provide examples and further enhance arguments. Furthermore, topics highlighting what I believe to be the most crucial aspects of adolescence will be discussed. The analysis of hegemonic masculinity, age induced frustration and restrictions, and the discourse of innocence will be defined and elaborated on. Finally, a comparison between the socio-cultural and developmental lenses of youth analysis, the unique view they each offer and my personal experience using the socio-cultural lens, will be discussed.
After the lost of both of her parents, 16 year old, Hattie Brooks has been handed down from one set of relatives to the next. When Hattie gets the opportunity to move on, she jumps. She has got the opportunity to take over her decided uncle’s property. Hattie moves to Montana and faces many challenges. She must learn how to cook, bake, wash, quilt, and find a way to fit into the community. She also learns how to run a 320 acre farm, such as setting 480 rods for fencing and growing a crop. Hattie finds herself helping on of her best friends when she is due with her child. Had becomes very grateful for friends that are willing to help her through the hard times. In the book, hattie finds leadership, learns the importance and meaning
In her rhetorical essay “From Fly-Girls to Bitches and Hos” (1999), Wesleyan University graduate and feminist Joan Morgan claims that if a man cannot love himself, than he is incapable of loving women in a healthy matter, and it is up to women of color and the African American community to change these threads. Morgan supports her claim using ethos by questioning artists such as B.I.G and their aggressive lyrics, with logos by providing statistics from the U.S Census Bureau in regards to the decrease of the number of black two parent household, and also with pathos by providing a personal example of her family friend. Morgan is hoping to improve the music industry by examining hip hop and rap lyrics in order to raise awareness instead of censoring the industry. Morgan's tone is disdainful, concerned and disappointed in order to establish credibility with her audience, which consist of women of color, feminist, and hip hop artist.
To create a strong argument, creative techniques must be employed in any piece of writing. Two common techniques are methods of development and rhetorical devices. In Elizabeth Kolbert’s writing of “The Terrible Teens”, she effectively proves her argument with the use of these techniques. Specifically, Kolbert uses examples, appeal to authority, and, inside the latter, metaphors to further support the argument. Using these strategies she successfully proves that neurology can help us understand why teens do unwise things, and that we are unsure what to do about it.