By Ranthilini Vithanage
What is robotics engineering?
Robotics is an interdisciplinary field that spans across engineering and computer science. Robotic engineering is a field where the main focus is on building machines that can replace human labor, to put it in the simplest of terms. This field borrows from math, electrical engineering, mechanical engineering and computer science. Exploring the intersections of said fields, professionals work on automated machines like robots, electro-mechanical devices, etc. Usually, the work of robotics engineers benefits multiple fields such as the mining industry, pharmaceuticals, manufacturing and many more.
What does a robotic engineer do?
A robotics engineer is someone who is versatile and well-versed in many fields. His job involves designing, building, and maintaining the robot or the automated device.
To explain it further, the first task a robotic engineer is handed with when he gets a new project is understanding the scope of the project. He has to collaborate with other parties such as developers and clients to define the parameters of the automated machine, and to confirm what requirements are to be fulfilled by the robot to be built.
After that, he has to conceptualize the project, to determine what will be done, how it will be done and to serve what purpose. Robotic engineers usually use CAD or Computer-Aided Design. What follows is drafting blueprints and related documents to demonstrate their ideas. Then, after a vigorous amount of modifying, they get down to business, to actually build the robot.
Here, the robotics engineer has to develop prototypes, construct the actual project, configure, test and debug robotic systems.
Even after the building phase of the project is over and the robotic engineer presents a robot, his job is not yet done. In fact, his job description involves installing, operating and repairing too.
How much does a robotic engineer earn?
Robotics engineering is a high-end job with the fat cheque coming for you at the end of the month. In the US, a robotics engineer generally earns around $102,281 per year. If you break it down, it is $52.45 per hour.
In India, a robotics engineer salary is somewhere around ₹ 1.8 Lakhs to ₹ 7.5 Lakhs with an average annual salary of ₹ 3.5 Lakhs. Keep in mind that this can vary depending on the years of experience you have, your employer, and many other facts. For example, if you have 0-1 years of work experience, you will receive a salary of ₹ 1.8 – 2 Lakhs. On the other hand, with 10-11 years of experience in the field, you can earn around ₹ 4.7 lakhs. (source: ambition Box)
So, no matter where you go, robotics engineering seems to be a rather lucrative career.
How to become a robotics engineer?
And the next big question is, how to become a robotic engineer?
To become a robotics engineer, you have to have an aptitude in math and science, to start with the simplest. And if you feel like you are up for the job, you can follow a bachelors in robotics engineering. However, it is not mandatory that you follow a degree in robotic engineering. You can also opt for another degree from a related field such as B. Tech (Bachelor in Technology) in electrical, mechanical or computer science fields after the 12th grade. And with that, you can choose what field you want to specialize in.
And here is a list of top robotics engineering colleges in India.
Indian Institute Of Technology, Kanpur
Indian Institute of Technology, Madras
Manipal Institute of Technology
Indian Institute of Information Technology, Allahabad
Dr Vishwanath Karad MIT World Peace University, Pune
Ajeenkya DY Patil University, Pune
University College of Engineering, Osmania University, Hyderabad
Ambalika Institute of Management & Technology, Lucknow
Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore
Lovely Professional University
SRM Engineering College, Kanchipuram
You can further enhance your knowledge and career opportunities by following post-graduate courses too.And, if you want to hone your skills, we suggest that you take a course such as the C programming course offered by Growth Central. It will get you started!