The inlingua method
During our classes, the main focus is the spoken language. The inlingua Method focuses on your oral skills first, followed by improving your reading, listening and writing skills. You will learn the language by speaking it – all according to your personal needs.
Read more about the three components of the inlingua Method:
1. Communication first
During class, only the target language will be used. You will learn the meaning of words through their context. Another important inlingua training principle is the focus of the course on speaking and listening instead of putting you through long grammar classes. You will learn new words and grammar through active examples instead of dull explanations. Our specialized training consists of these three stages:
During the first stage, your language teacher will introduce new topics and new vocabulary with examples and involve you in the learning process.
Practice, practice and more practice: By using your newly gained knowledge, you will learn how to form correct sentences while gaining confidence in your language and vocabulary skills – all with the help of your trainer.
This is the moment when you can use the language in a creative way by acting out everyday situations, fun role play scenarios and interesting presentations – giving the language an exciting new meaning.
The presentation stage should be short. At this stage, the teacher is the one who directs and focuses the attention. The aim is to present new language content to students, clarifying its meaning and providing examples of its use.
Emphasis is placed on correct pronunciation and intonation. The teacher asks questions in order for the students to participate in the process.
At this stage, the students are guided by the teacher and orally practice the linguistic contents introduced in the presentation stage.
The goal is for them to construct correct sentences in the language they are studying. The teacher's job is to encourage and guide them to speak, correcting all mistakes made.
We try to ensure that all students are able to express themselves in the new language automatically, with as few errors and doubts as possible.
Once students have mastered the structure of the language they are studying and are able to use it competently, it is time to start the production stage. Here the activities give more control to the student, about what he / she says and how he / she says it.
The production stage allows you to use the language more creatively: combining new elements with previous elements, talking about your own experiences, representing situations, expressing opinions, solving problems, etc. In this case, the emphasis is on the conscious use of language and not on mere repetition.