In this guide, we will answer the following question: When do Chihuahuas stop growing? We will also discuss how to train a Chihuahua dog since it is a puppy since we believe this is one of the most important topics concerning Chihuahuas.
When do Chihuahuas stop growing?
Chihuahuas stop growing at the age of 10 or 12 months, once they reach an optimate weight and size. However, more important than simply knowing at what age a Chihuahua stops growing is to know how much a Chihuahua should weigh once it has fully developed.
Chihuahuas must weigh at least 1.5 kg. However, this weight is a standard and it is possible that a dog of this breed could weigh less. Regarding the maximum weight of the Chihuahua, we can differentiate whether your dog is a competition dog or not:
- Exhibition Chihuahuas: maximum weight of 3 kg.
- Chihuahua pets: they can weigh up to 4 kg.
At what age does a Chihuahua reach its adult size?
The greatest growth spurt a dog experience occurs when he is a puppy. Usually, when they reach adulthood, they have almost completely gained the standard weight. However, slight changes can occur in adulthood such as muscle mass gain.
The duration of the so-called “puppy” stage may vary depending on the size of the dog. In the case of small dogs like the Chihuahua, the transition to the adult stage is between 9 and 12 months.
A chihuahua can grow until it is 7 to 8 months old. Afterward, other changes in the structure of his organism will occur during the remaining months to reach the age of one or one and a half years:
Male: muscle mass gain and torso enlargement.
Female: muscle mass gain and hips widening.
Contrary to what many people consider, the different varieties of Chihuahuas are distinguished not by the weight they can attain, but by the type of coat. You can tell the difference between those with long hair and those with short hair.
Moreover, in order to ensure the good development of the chihuahua puppy, it is essential to offer him the best care as well as to offer him quality food that covers all his needs.
How do you know if your Chihuahua has a growth disorder?
Many problems can produce alterations in the puppy’s growth. They can manifest themselves through the following symptoms:
- Dermatological disorders
- Weight Loss
- Intolerance to exercise
- Abdominal pain
- Difficulty moving
Behind these symptoms can be hidden endocrine, metabolic and skeletal disorders that affect the proper development of the dog’s organism. It is for this reason that, if you notice them in your pet, do not hesitate to go to the vet as soon as possible.
We also recommend that you read the following article about Chihuahua trembles so that you are informed.
How to train a Chihuahua dog
Do you want your Chihuahua to listen to you? We give you the keys to educate a Chihuahua dog and learn to sit, walk by your side, or relieve himself outside the home.
The Chihuahua breed, despite being the smallest breed in the world, is characterized by being dominant and possessive, and we must not forget that they are very capricious and intelligent dogs and will not stop until they get what they set out to do.
That is why we must take care of the attitude with which we give orders to our Chihuahuas. The most advisable thing is to show a firm attitude but without being aggressive since we can get scared, especially if it is still a puppy.
Socializing a Chihuahua dog
Socialization is a very important aspect of the education of our dog since it will mark part of his personality in the future. Normally we tend to overprotect our Chihuahuas and make them surly with other dogs or people who are not from our environment, so we must address this issue since they are puppies.
How to socialize a puppy?
Next, we are going to tell you how to properly socialize your dog:
- The first contact with socialization should be in a calm and relaxed environment in which our puppy feels safe at all times.
- We must try to make the first contact with other dogs productive, so we will choose pets that are well educated to reinforce good behavior.
- Chihuahuas, despite being very small, also have to interact with breeds of dogs that are larger than them, since if they do not, it can cause them to adopt provocative or aggressive attitudes every time they coincide with one of them.
- Another very important part is socializing with children. Since a bad experience with them as a puppy can mark their behavior and become aggressive. For that we have to make the little ones aware that puppies are not a toy and at first they have to be a bit patient even though inside they want to cuddle them.
Correct misbehavior of Chihuahuas
When training a Chihuahua we have to be firm and sure about it, whenever it does something that is not right we will say “NO”. We should never hit or yell at him, a simple NO when he does not comply with the rules will be enough. Having this firm and confident attitude in its puppy stage is essential in the education of our pet.
When a puppy comes home, it is advisable to have a conversation with the whole family and set some collective guidelines so that we all maintain the same position before him, since when it comes to educating a Chihuahua there is no use for one punishing him for bad behavior and the other when seeing it does not do it. In this way, our chihuahua will understand what is right and what is wrong every day.
How to train a Chihuahua puppy to relieve himself at home
As we have said on more than one occasion, we must create a habit since it is a puppy, for that the best thing is to start by placing newspaper or training soakers in the place that we want so that our chihuahua can relieve himself.
We will be watching when you eat or drink and after a few minutes, we will take you to the chosen place and wait until you do. Once you urinate or defecate, we will congratulate you and give you a “reward” to associate with good behavior. If you do not do it in the right place, we will take it delicately and place it in the chosen place so that it relates to where you should do it.
When removing stained newspapers or soaked pads, it is advisable to rub the new ones with the remains of our chihuahua’s urine so that the next time he knows where to go. In this way, in a few days, our puppy will get used to relieving himself in the same place always.
How to train a Chihuahua puppy to relieve himself outside the home
Before we talk about how to teach our Chihuahua to relieve himself at home, now we have to know how to do the same – but on the street.
In the same way as before, we have to be aware of when they eat or drink water. Remember that being a small breed in just 15/20 minutes they will want to urinate or defecate. At that moment we will take our Chihuahua out to the street and wait for him to relieve himself. Once done, we will congratulate our dog by giving him some caresses or offering him a prize in a way that recognizes that he has done well.
It may be the case that our chihuahua does not want to pee in the street, in that case, we recommend taking him to a park where we know that many dogs go and due to the territorial nature of the chihuahua he will end up urinating without any doubt.
When our dog has assimilated this training, we can set predetermined times at the same time every day to regulate its body and that it can endure without doing it at home.
Teach a Chihuahua to walk next to you
As we have already said on many occasions, Chihuahuas are very stubborn and stubborn dogs and will go their own way if it is not remedied.
At the time of the walk, it is as simple as putting on your favorite harness, a leash and seeing how it acts. If we see that he begins to pull and overtakes us, we will stop short and we will not resume the walk until he stops pulling on the leash.
Every time our chihuahua walks with us we will say the word “TOGETHER” and we will give him a treat, as our dog learns we will reduce the treats until he fully understands what that command means.
This practice is highly recommended not only for Chihuahuas but for all breeds of dogs since the fact that our dog goes by our side is very important for their safety since we can avoid possible accidents with cars, bicycles, or people who walk and step on them unintentionally.
Teach a Chihuahua how to sit
It is a very practical order for those times when we want our dog to be calm with us when we are, for example, on a terrace or in a public place.
We can try first by pressing the part of his butt down and saying the word “SIT” or “FEEL.” Every time we get him to sit down, we will give him a treat and we will reduce the prizes as he strengthens his knowledge.
Another way that is also effective would be to take a treat and show it in front of its nose and move it up to the command of “SIT” until the little dog, following the trail, ends up sitting down. And as always, as soon as he does, give him his well-deserved reward.
After 8 months, the Chihuahua can already be considered an adult, and it is a good time to change to an appropriate feed for its current age. Also, within the different food ranges, there is a special feed for adults.
Monitor your Chihuahua’s diet constantly, and above all, do not let him pick at the food that is not his own. If he is overweight, go immediately to your veterinarian to adjust his diet, because he will start to feel a lot of joint discomforts.
We suggest that you train your puppy to avoid behaviors that you do not want as an adult. Always respectfully show him who’s in charge. This little dog can get his quota of daily activity just by playing around and following his family around the house.
If you have any comments or questions on the content, please let us know.
FAQ on When do Chihuahuas stop growing?
How big do Chihuahuas get full grown?
Full-grown Chihuahuas weigh 3 to 6 pounds. However, this weight is a standard and it is possible that a dog of this breed could weigh less.
Are Chihuahuas dogs or rodents?
The Chihuahuas are dogs, not rodents. This is a breed of dog who feels at home in the handbag of Madonna, Britney Spears, or even Paris Hilton. But this Mexican-born dog breed is much more than a premium pocket animal!
How much food should a Chihuahua puppy eat?
Chihuahuas puppies are simply adorable, although very fragile due to their size. It is important to choose a diet that is specific for a small-breed dog, so the size of the kibble will be adapted to its mouth.
How many times should a Chihuahua eat a day?
Chihuahua puppies should eat between three and four meals a day. Adult dogs: three daily feedings, and elderly dogs two or three servings per day.