1. Hair Loss: A Common Problem
By the time they are 50, about 85% of men will have a lot of hair loss. Some guys start to lose their before they turn 21.
Can wearing a baseball cap make you go bald? Nope. Even running your fingers through your hair won’t do it. Combing, brushing, twisting, or styling won’t help either. Just be careful not to break any of the strands.
There is a definite correlation between lighting up and the rate at which male-pattern baldness progresses. So, if you need another incentive to quit, add premature hair loss to the list.
Hair loss, or alopecia as doctors refer to it, does not always indicate a medical concern. It also has no negative effects on your health. However, it is typical to be concerned about how it may influence your appearance.
Almost all hair loss in men is caused by male-pattern baldness, a genetic characteristic inherited from your parents. Other causes include some drugs, an excess of vitamin A, or a lack of protein. Illness or stress can cause telogen effluvium, or sudden, profuse shedding. The good news is that hair loss that isn’t caused by male-pattern baldness generally reverses itself.
It’s easier to keep your hair than it is to replace it once it’s gone. But be cautious while you consider your possibilities. The majority of “miracle” items and cures are deceptions. When in doubt, consult your doctor or a dermatologist.
Male-pattern baldness can’t be cured, but some medicines can slow it down. Minoxidil is a treatment for hair loss that you can buy without a prescription and put on your scalp. It slows down how fast hair falls out and helps some men grow new hair. But hair loss comes back as soon as you stop using it.
Male pattern baldness is the most common form of hair loss and is related to both genes and male hormones. It can start in your twenties but by the age of 50, most men have some form of it. Also called male androgenetic alopecia, it can start as either a receding hairline, thinning of the hair or a bald spot that develops on the crown of the skull.
In male-pattern baldness, hair follicles get smaller because of a hormone called DHT. They get so small that hair can no longer grow in them.
The way your body makes DHT is slowed down by this pill. Some men who used it were able to grow new hair. Many experts say it works better than minoxidil. Women who are pregnant shouldn’t use the drug because it can make boys born with birth defects. Just like minoxidil, it only works as long as you use it.
They’ve been through a lot. Finding the right one takes time and research, though, because prices and quality vary a lot. And hairpieces need to be taken care of regularly, which can cost anywhere from $60 to $300 per month. When you’re looking for one, try to find one that matches the color, thickness, and curl of your own hair.
A doctor will move healthy hair from the back and side of your head to the top. The process can be costly, and you may need to do it a few times before it works. After 2 months, you’ll shed most of what the doctor moved, but new strands will grow back. It’ll start to look normal within 6 months.
Hair loss can be less noticeable if you know how to style it. Cut short hair that is getting thin so you don’t get a comb-over. Some shampoos, conditioners, and hairstyling products can make the hair you already have fuller. Also, eat a healthy diet and be gentle with your hair.
The man is not defined by his hair. Remind yourself of all the other things you have to offer. Or focus on things you can control, such as remaining in shape. It is OK to seek assistance from others. If you need some inspiration, consider bald men or people with shaved heads who exude confidence, such as The Rock, Vin Diesel, and Pitbull. Consider yourself fortunate to be in good company.