How to prepare your Dog for a Radiograph in Mandeville, LA?
You’re probably quite familiar with X-rays, or radiographs, which are a two-dimensional black, white, and grey image that gives us an internal view of the body. X-rays can provide pictures of tissues, organs, bones, and foreign objects like swallowed items or bladder stones, this helps veterinarians to see the internal working of your dog to make accurate diagnostics of their health. If your dog has an injury, falls ill, or displays unusual symptoms, an x-ray may be taken to help identify the problem. Read on to learn more about how to prepare your dog for a radiograph in Mandeville, LA.
BEFORE THE X-RAY APPOINTMENT
Overall you don’t need to do something specific when your dog undergoes a radiograph, but some things like scheduling an appointment if your dog is not in a critical state are very recommended. Another thing can be making sure you know all the information your veterinarian might ask you like the behavior of your furry friend the last days, their eating habits and in case you think your dog might feel anxious during the trip to the vet and the waiting room bring some of his toys and have them on a leash secured.
When you and your pet arrive at the veterinarian’s office, the doctor will do a medical test on your dog, decide if an x-ray is needed to make a diagnosis, and then take you through the process and what they are looking for.
THE MOST COMMON TYPES OF DOG X-RAYS INCLUDE:
- Abdominal X-rays
- X-rays of the limbs
- Dental X-rays
- Chest X-rays
- Joint X-rays
WHAT DO X-RAYS HELP WITH?
An x-ray will spot a foreign object in the stomach or abdomen and locate the source of intestinal obstruction, detect bladder stones, detect tumors in the chest or abdomen, display pregnancy (once the mother dog is six weeks pregnant), and even measure the number of puppies. In addition, chest x-rays will detect symptoms of cancer spreading to the lungs or other tissues, aid in the diagnosis of possible heart or lung disease, and show hip dysplasia, elbow dysplasia, and a variety of other orthopedic disorders. An x-ray is very useful in ruling out hidden rib fractures or the presence of air in the chest cavity as pets sustain complications from severe trauma, such as being struck by a vehicle.
DURING THE X-RAY
Your dog will be taken into the X-ray area, where a team member will place your pet for the best possible view. Positioning is important for a clear and precise image. It is important that your dog remains still during the x-ray, but in some cases, such as when dogs are uncooperative due to new environments, foreign smells, being temporarily removed from their people, or being treated by strangers, the dog may need to be sedated, so sedation with injectable drugs during the radiography increases patient safety and decreases anxiety.
Our professional veterinarians will use this reasonably easy and affordable screening instrument to diagnose a wide range of conditions. Furthermore, x-rays are non-invasive and healthy for your dog. A radiograph can help your pet enjoy a long and stable life by ensuring that they receive the best possible care. If you have any questions about this treatment, please make an appointment with the veterinarian to discuss them.
The vets at Lakeshore Veterinary Hospital use x-rays to diagnose and treat numerous conditions in all pets, principally dogs and cats. If your pet needs urgent care or if you have more questions about X Rays, we recommend you call us immediately.