Armagh cameras catch unexpected outburst of meteors
A surprise flurry of meteors or "shooting stars" caught the eye of several casual observers in Western Europe on the night of 9–10 September. The meteors were apparently quite fast, with some bright enough to qualify as fireballs. They were recorded by the Armagh Observatory’s meteor patrol cameras, which have been operating continuously at the Observatory since 2005. The event was quite unexpected, since no major meteor shower is active in mid-September. Its occurrence provides astronomers with interesting new data about the hidden trails of meteoroids — small bodies ranging in size from fine dust particles to objects of marble-size and larger — in the solar system and their supposed sources: comets and asteroids passing through the inner solar system.
Three cameras operating from the Armagh Observatory and one camera operated by amateur astronomer Robert Cobain in Bangor, Co Antrim, recorded this "outburst" as too did observers in England and Northern Ireland who reported their observations to the Observatory’s fireball database. Between 11pm and 1 am BST approximately 20 meteors were recorded by the Armagh station’s cameras, a very significantly higher rate of detection than the 2–3 meteors expected from normal meteor activity around this time of year.
The phenomenon of a "shooting star" refers to the light given off by pieces of cosmic dust as they enter the Earth's atmosphere at high velocity and burn up at altitudes of 80–100 km. These cosmic dust particles, called "meteoroids", are understood mostly to come from comets. The tiny dust particles are carried away from the ice-and-dust cometary nucleus during the comet’s passage through the inner solar system. As the comet approaches the Sun, the ices on the surface of the nucleus get warmed by solar radiation and leave the comet as dusty streams of gas. Whereas the gas is eventually blown out by the solar wind to produce the straight, highly structured gas or ion tail of the comet, the larger dust particles eventually produce trails of dust in roughly the same region of space as that pursued by the cometary nucleus in its orbit around the Sun. These larger dust grains thus become independent bodies orbiting the Sun, possibly remaining close to the orbit of their parent comet for many thousands of years, forming meteoroid streams. When the Earth passes through such a stream, an increase of meteor activity known as a meteor shower results.
It is thought that this particular event is related to a previously known, but only weakly active, meteor shower called the September Epsilon Perseids or September Perseids (SPE) for short. Not to be confused with the famous August Perseids, the SPE would normally produce less than five meteors per hour in a given year.
The particular comet that created the September Perseids is unknown. Measurements of the orbits of SPE meteoroids from meteor observations suggest that it belongs to the class of long-period comets. These objects spend most of their time much further away than the planets of the solar system and only approach the Sun once every several hundred, or sometimes every several thousand or tens of thousands of years, or more. For that reason, they are usually discovered only a few months or years before they enter the inner solar system.
A positive and negative image of one of the bright September Perseid meteors captured by the Armagh Observatory’s South-East pointing meteor patrol camera, at 23:25 BST on the 9th of September. The meteor, which travelled for about 30 degrees across the sky between the Square of Pegasus and Cygnus, is somewhat brighter than the planet Venus. Credit: Armagh Observatory
It is interesting to note that the September Perseids produced a similar outburst in 2008. This might indicate that the parent comet is now approaching the inner solar system. If so, these outbursts provide advance warning of bodies that intersect the orbit of the Earth and can potentially hit it with little or no warning. Observations of this mid-September meteor shower in the coming years, combined with direct telescopic searches for the parent comet, will help determine if this is the case.
Source: Armagh Observatory
Featured image credit: Armagh Observatory
If you value what we do here, create your ad-free account and support our journalism.
Your support makes a difference
Dear valued reader,
We hope that our website has been a valuable resource for you.
The reality is that it takes a lot of time, effort, and resources to maintain and grow this website. We rely on the support of readers like you to keep providing high-quality content.
If you have found our website to be helpful, please consider making a contribution to help us continue to bring you the information you need. Your support means the world to us and helps us to keep doing what we love.
Support us by choosing your support level – Silver, Gold or Platinum. Other support options include Patreon pledges and sending us a one-off payment using PayPal.
Thank you for your consideration. Your support is greatly appreciated.
Commenting rules and guidelines
We value the thoughts and opinions of our readers and welcome healthy discussions on our website. In order to maintain a respectful and positive community, we ask that all commenters follow these rules:
We reserve the right to remove any comments that violate these rules. By commenting on our website, you agree to abide by these guidelines. Thank you for helping to create a positive and welcoming environment for all.
So I'm curious. This may be a stupid question, but does that mean that in future Septembers we may encounter more of these?
It was around this date that I too saw some of this type of meteorite activity, which caught me by surprise. There was cloud around that night, but in a large gap between such, I saw several of these fast moving 'shooting stars' travelling together in an east to west direction. I am in outer Melbourne, Australia, near the Dandenong Ranges mountains.