So we just completed another Stream of this Course about 2 weeks ago. As always, watching the project defence is always the highlight of the Course. It is always amazing seeing different designers developing fashion collections from just an idea – same theme, different interpretations! And this particular one was just as exciting as the others!
Running this Course has always proven something over and over again. Creativity may not be in-built but it can be nurtured and learnt. Some people have been sketching right from the minute they were born, others have to learn it from scratch! But one thing is certain. Everyone has an innate creative ability. We just have to know how to tap into it! And that is what this Course is about!
Our Design, Fashion Illustration & Computer-Aided Design Course is literally 3 courses in 1. It teaches how to develop design ideas from scratch, how to draw these ideas out and how to edit the illustrations using a software.
– have no idea how fashion designers operate and develop fashion collections, OR
– you want to be creative, OR
– you find yourself always having to copy people’s designs without any knowledge of how to create concept boards, mood boards, story boards OR
– you do not have a portfolio for use during client consultations or for fashion competitions or admissions, OR WORSE
– you dream these designs but you do not know how to sketch them out on paper much less bring them to life…
Then you definitely need this course.
What the Course entails:
The 3 parts to the Course are:
Part 1: Design & Concept Development
Part 2: Manual Illustration; and
Part 3: Digital Illustration
In Part 1, students are taught how to create a fashion collection from an idea. How to build upon those ideas using the tools in the design process and are given a theme for their project, which they are expected to build on and defend at the end of the Course. They learn how to create storyboards, mood boards, concept boards, design briefs, technical drawings, etc through taught modules and a series of assignments and research to enable them discover who they truly are as designers.
In Part 2 they are taught how to sketch manually – LITERALLY from scratch using circles and straight lines, how to draw fashion figures and how to draw different design and clothing details n order to properly communicate their ideas to third parties.
In Part 3, students learn how edit their manually drawn illustrations using a software which enables them convert their illustrations from okay to fab! Take this picture for example.
It’s the exact same face in 3 different skin tones, without having to draw out the same face 3 times! And you can make slight edits to your foundation to make it look truly unique! I am still torn on which skin tone is my favourite! 😀
Fees & Duration:
The full Course lasts 8 weeks and there is a weekday and a weekend option available. The weekday option is on Tuesdays & Thursdays from 10am – 2pm while the weekend option is on Saturdays only from 10am – 6pm.
The fees for the full course are N90,000 and this includes all your training materials and drawing kit. You, however, need an IOS or Android-enabled tablet and/or smartphone and a capacitive stylus (don’t worry these are really cheap).
There are options to the full Course though… for example if you are a fab illustrator who just wants to learn digital illustration, you can sign up for just that. Here are the variations.
Part 1 only: N35,000
Parts 2 & 3 only : N75,000
Part 2 OR Part 3 only: N60,000
Parts 1 & Part 2 OR Part 3 only: N70,000
To register for the option of your choice, simply pay the fees by cash or online transfer into:
Martwayne Limited, 023 710 3843, GTBank
All classes take place at our Training Centre, off Alhaji Masha Road, in Surulere Lagos – about 2 minutes from the National Stadium.
For more details, you can contact us on via telephone on: 0818 395 8856 or simply click on any of the link to:
Excellent! We look forward to you joining us! Enjoy more pictures from our students in the last class! And remember…
This could also be YOU! It’s time to #liveyourfashiondreams and become the fashion designer you were destined to be!
And we were live on Facebook :-D Enjoy the live feed of Martwayne on 98.9 Kiss FM Lagos on 7 July 2017
Yes we were! Actually to be honest, this is the 2nd week we have been live on both Facebook and Instagram. I haven’t posted the one that happened 2 weeks ago. I’ll do that sometime this week.
Why did we decide on live feeds?! Well we realized people may not be able to tune into the show on 98.9 Kiss FM perhaps because of work or the fact that they may be outside Lagos so we brought the show to them through other means! And I kid you not, the response has been great! So soon enough, we will also be live on Youtube once I get the settings right! 😀
SO what did we discuss last week?!
Work from @ms_ellysha, a student in the last stream…
So we were talking about the upcoming course this month at Martwayne – the Design, Fashion Illustration & Computer-Aided Design Course. It is not news that we had some great courses coming up and this one has been one of our most popular Courses.
Last week, we went live again on Facebook showcasing a student’s work as she was defending her project based on the theme “Back to the Future” and what she presented was incredible! The picture above was part of her capsule collection I was blown away! The story behind the designs, the concept, the actual designs all from the theme “Back to the Future” was incredible. And the best part is, she learnt everything FROM SCRATCH! Here is the actual storyboard:
As I have said several times int he past, fashion goes beyond sewing. There is nothing that gives a designer more joy than seeing his/her designs which they developed from scratch on a customer. That really is what makes you a fashion designer and sets you apart from the rest! And that is what this course teaches.
About the Course:
It was developed to build your inner creativity. If you love fashion – which we know you do… and you want to build on that talent, then this Course is for you! It is literally 3 courses in 1 and it is packed full of what will definitely turn you into a pro! We teach FROM SCRATCH so don’t worry if you can’t draw or anything like that. That is what the Course is for!
The 3 parts to the Course are as follows:
Part 1: Concept Development (Developing a Fashion Collection) & Portfolio Presentation
Part 2: Manual Illustration
Part 3: Digital Illustration using CAD
There is a weekend option for busy professionals which starts on the 15th of July (Saturdays only from 10am – 6pm) and a weekday option which starts on the 18th of July, 2017 (Tuesdays & Thursdays from 10am – 2pm).
There are also different variants to the course which you can opt for based on your time, finances and level of skill:
Option 1: Full Course – N80,000
Option 2: Parts 2 & 3 only – N65,000
Option 3: a) Part 2 OR b) Part 3 only – N50,000
Option 4: a) Parts 1 & 2 only OR b) Parts 1 & 3 only – N60,000
Option 5: Part 1 only – N35,000
So if, for example, you draw very well but have difficulty coming up with your own designs and are fed up of copying people’s work, then you can choose Option 4b i.e. Parts 1 & 3 only.
All fees include your training materials and drawing kits where applicable but for the CAD options, you need your tablet.
Duration is 8 weeks for the full course. The other options have their own timetables as well but all fall within the 8 weeks depending on if you are running the weekday or the weekend option.
How to Register:
Registration is easy! Simply pay the fees of your choice by bank or online transfer into Martwayne Limited, 023 710 3843 at any GTBank branch.
If you want to visit us ahead of time or if you have questions, please contact us on:
Tel: 0818 395 8856, WhatsApp: 0809 787 6075; Blackberry: D8E9802C or via email: email@example.com
Trust me when I say you will ENJOY this Course to the hilt!
Remember the Course starts this week so you need to register now! Don’t procrastinate! We need to prepare for you!
Okies…. now for the video. Here is the one of the radio show. If you can’t see the embedded video, simply click on this link. It will take you straight to the page. I’ll embed the one of @ms_ellysha defending her project in another post!
Have a great week everyone! We can’t wait to have you on the Course! 😀 For more in-depth details about it, please click on this link.
This is not a Sewing Course. If you are interested in a Sewing Course, please click on this link.
Want to cut your production time in half? Then ditch the paper and pencils and go digital!
This picture made me laugh when I saw it! But yes! We tailors now use laptops! 😀 I spoke about it on our radio show on 98.9 Kiss FM on Friday and you should watch it! I tell you this is the way to go!
Ok… so I realized that whilst promoting this Course (and I must confess, I don’t think I really promoted it that much), I never really spoke about the benefits of the Course. So you are probably thinking… “why go digital when I can use my pencil and paper” right?
Ok… check out this scenario…
Example of a Digital Pattern and the Sewn Outfit
You make clothes for people and draft your patterns manually. Imagine if you could do this on the system just once! And next time someone else comes, you input their measurements and voila, the pattern comes out in their own size!
OR you run an in-house clothing production unit creating clothes in standard sizes. Oh… imagine the torture of having to grade each pattern one by one when with just a few strokes, your work is done!
I can safely speak for myself when I say I have to be physically and psychologically prepared for pattern-making! Having to search for paper, pencils, erasers and all what not or WORSE discover that I am out of paper is like the worst thing! But now… you can simply work on your dining table in front of the TV. Life does not have to be so tough anymore! 😀
And this is just a SNAP SHOT of what this course has to offer! You can work across international boundaries as well. I have 2 people who have reached out to me asking me to create patterns for them. So this is you starting a new career as a pattern maker!
Okies so ditch the pencils and paper and switch to digital patterns on your laptop! And save yourself the headache and backache as well! Register for our Pattern-Making & Grading with Computer-Aided Design.
|Please click on this link to watch the video about me talking about this Course. It starts from 1:20|
SO details about the Course?! I’ll give it to you just now!
The course begins on Tuesday 4th of July 2017 and it will hold on Tuesdays and Thursdays from 10am – 2pm. It is in 2 parts:
Part 1 is the Pattern Making bit. It lasts for 5 weeks and costs N80,000 including your training materials except, of course, your laptop. That you need to come with.
Part 2 is the Pattern Grading bit which is where you increase or reduce in size. This will last an extra 3 weeks and costs N40,000 if you registered for Part 1.
If you want just this part of the Course, it will cost N50,000 and it includes your training materials. But to be honest, this limits you to just the manual grading portion because we can’t start teaching you about the digital workspace in Part 1. Please bring your laptop. Oh… if you use a Mac please contact us before you register.
And that’s it really! Easy peasy! Trust me you will love this Course!
Registration is easy! Simply pay the fees by bank or online transfer into the Martwayne Limited 023 710 3843 account in any GTBank OR
you can simply click on any of these links to register. It takes you to our Paystack payment portal 😀
Excellent! This tech age is making life so much easier! 😀
If you have questions, please reach out to us on 0818 395 8856, WhatsApp: 08097876075, E-Mail: firstname.lastname@example.org or email@example.com or via Blackberry: D8E9802C
Oh. PS. You need to be familiar with Pattern-making to register for this Course. If you are a beginner, you can register for any of our sewing courses. They all include pattern making.
Fabulous! Please tell everyone to tell everyone!
I look forward to you joining us!
Have a great day ahead!
Watch out for details of our other courses:
– Design & Fashion Illustration with Computer-Aided Design
– Basic Fashion Course for Juniors (ages 9-16)
– Short Course in Childrenswear.
Counting Down to Pattern Making with Computer Aided Design Course
Just think about the appeal of saving yourself half the time spent on manual patterns by doing them digitally. And better still, work across international boundaries. All you need is your laptop and you are good to go! Save the paper, minimize your errors, correct your mistakes without getting overwhelmed! Learn all this and more in our new Course Pattern-Making & Grading with Computer Aided Design. Trust me, it will be well worth your while!
Corsetry Course, Weekend Option comes up 10 June 2017. Register now!
So we had a great class when we launched our Corsetry Course in March. You have seen the pictures already but just in case… here they are:
Yes! You know a well-built corset when it stays on its own without any support! 😀
Well… weekend students, which are of course our busy professionals and others who work during the week, were not happy they could not attend the class so this time, so of course we had to make a weekend option available! SO! Weekend students, this one is just for you! 😀
It’s the same great course and the same content! Learn how to build your own corsets from scratch! And this course is perfect for bridal wear designers and those who want to start their own waist cinching businesses! Yes! Why buy one in the market when you can easily create yours and sell to your customers! In fact you can even create corsets for sale in a ready to wear line as an accessory in the form of a waist corset! The possibilities are endless really!! And it costs next to nothing!
Fees are only N50,000 and this includes your toolkit! Classes are on Saturdays only from 10am to 4pm for 6 weeks. To be honest, you can be done in a shorter period of time but we are giving enough time for those who may not be so familiar with pattern making.
The Course includes learning how to make 2 types of corsets: the paneled corset and the corset with a cup – AND also includes lace moulding!
To register is easy! Simply pay the fees in cash or online transfer into our GTBank account, “Martwayne Limited”, 023 710 3843 and you are good to go! Just show up on the day! Easy peasy!
For more details, please contact us on 0818 395 8856 / 0903 498 5877; via WhatsApp on 0809 787 6075, via Blackberry on D8E9802C or via e-mail: firstname.lastname@example.org
Please note that you have to be able to sew to attend this class. Complete beginners have to attend our Beginners Course first to learn how to sew before they can attend this class! Current Martwayne students need not apply as this is already part of your Bodices 3 course. Except you want to to register for this now and get the fees deducted from Part 3 when it’s time. Let us know so we can make a plan.
Great! That’s it! We look forward to having you! Tell others as well and let’s make this Stream a really fun one!
Have a great week!
BY FAR my favourite picture of the day! Stop the excuses! Make the move now! Learn Fashion at Martwayne!
I was going to write about something else today until I saw this picture and I just FELL IN LOVE with it! So apt! So to the point! So ruthless!
Of course it leads me to this:
Why keep putting it off till tomorrow?! The tomorrow that never comes?! The clock is ticking….. Make that move now! Let us help you LIVE YOUR DREAM of becoming a fashion designer and earn that second income!
Look Good . Live Life . Love Fashion . Learn Fashion @ Martwayne