People across the Nation to be careful & watchful as India is all set to experience very hot summer and heat wave, warns the weather experts. The coming 3 months are very crucial and by 31st May majority of the regions across the country are going to experience unprecedented heat wave, according to S C Bhan, who works as Senior Scientist at the Indian Meteorological Department. He also told that the demand for electricity is already on the high at majority of places in the midst of heat wave already lashing out at its best.
The effects of these conditions are affecting the majority of the crops like Wheat. In March 2022, India had a severe summer season. Experts opine that after the year 1901, this February is the hottest one. It is predicted that probably this summer season also may badly affect the Wheat farming industry and the produce as well.
India is the second largest producer of wheat and only China is ahead of us. The government has put on restrictions on exports of various food produce outside India based on the severe changes in the weather conditions of the country. Year on year, heat waves, heavy rains, floods and draught-like scenarios were the root cause for loss of produce of different crops, malfunctioning of hydel power projects in addition to the heavy death toll of farmers running into thousands. The list of heavily affected states have increased from the year 2015 and by the year 2020, the number stands at 23.
The month of February has severely affected the northern states of the country once again as it’s one of the hottest seasons in the history of the past 122 years. Thanks to the effects of climate change, there was a significant upsurge in the recorded temperatures across several states of the country. According to estimates, there was an increase in the day to day temperatures to the tune of 1.73 degree Celsius. In the meantime, majority of the states of the country are experiencing heavy rains, floods and other natural calamities affecting the day to day life of the common man.