|Chapter 3||The Eternal Duties of a Human Beings||Verse 15|
Rudra Vaisnava Sampradaya:
So it is explained very clearly that actions originate from the prescribed instructions of the Vedic injunctions and these actions put forth to accomplish these actions are called yagna or worship and appeasement. Brahman clearly refers to the Vedas here and the Vedas come from the Supreme Brahman, the imperishable source of Brahman, the Supreme Lord Krishna. The Brihad II.IV.X states that the Rig Veda, Yajur Veda, Sama Veda etc. are the infinite breath of the Supreme. So comprehending this, the knowledge found within the Vedas and the performance of the injunctions and instructions is certainly for humanities highest good. As the Supreme is attained by yagna it is known to rest in yagna. Therefore it should be understood that the imperishable Supreme Brahman although all-pervading, eternally, always resides in yagna. Also as action is the basis of the worlds revolving therefore Brahman known through the Vedas although all pervading, by the use of mantras chanted by brahmins and Vaisnavas with explanations of Vedic scriptures as well as historical examples; it can be clearly perceived that yagna is connected to all events of the past that originated and reached maturity and fulfilment by worship or appeasement as well as all existing things in the present that flourish and prosper whether for short or long duration. All these things were successful only due to yagna or worship and appeasement. So the idea here is that the injunctions of the Vedas are mandatory for the benefit of all living entities and that yagna should always be performed everyday of ones life.
Brahma Vaisnava Sampradaya:
Sri Vaisnava Sampradaya:
Kumara Vaisnava Sampradaya:
It should be known that actions have its origins in the Brahman meaning the Vedas. Lord Krishna by stating the Brahman wants to emphasise the all-pervading substratum of all existence that is revealed by the Vedas and transforming from the mantras of the Vedas, the actions prescribed by the Vedas, the forces of nature, sun and clouds and rain, food and living beings. Although nature is seen as a force of action actually it is supported fully by the underlying energy of the Supreme Brahman. Actions though appearing to have a force of their own are only manifested through the instrument of matter in humans it is the physcial body. The Vedas as has been described earlier emanated from the imperishable Supreme Brahman, Lord Krishna. The words sarva-gatam means all-pervading or indestructible. This is indicative of the Supreme Brahman as well as the soul within every living entity. The soul is known to be indestructible and all pervading. Through the auspices of the soul the physical body through the manifestations of nature partakes of food and gains strength becoming fit for performing actions authorised by the Vedas. The word udbhavan meaning originates from is used to illustrate that this fitness comes from the source from which one manifests from. Even nature is only able to operate from the substratum through the utilisation of sun, rain, wind, fire etc. and by no other means. Therefore the all pervading and indestructible atma or soul utilises a physical body which is its substratum in the same way as the material nature to perform actions and that without a physical body performing the activities prescribed in the Vedas, then yagna or worship is not possible.