Biology: Chemistry in Biology: 01: Atoms - Medical Animation
MEDICAL ANIMATION TRANSCRIPT: In this video, we'll discuss what atoms are. The chemistry of life begins with understanding the properties of matter. Of course, matter is everything that has mass and takes up space. It includes both nonliving things as well as all living organisms. And atoms are the basic units of all matter, both living and nonliving. They're so small that you could fit billions of them on the head of a pin. But what are atoms made of? First, let's look at the inner central region called the nucleus. Nucleus means center. However, the atomic nucleus isn't the same thing as the nucleus in a cell. A cell's nucleus is its control center, containing instructions that control cell functions. An atomic nucleus is made up of one or more subatomic particles called protons and neutrons. If the nucleus has only one particle, it must be a proton. Each proton and neutron has an atomic mass unit of one. Together, these nuclear particles contain virtually the entire mass of an atom, but they take up less than 1% of the volume. In addition to mass, some subatomic particles also have an electrical charge. A proton carries a positive charge of plus one. As its name indicates, a neutron is electrically neutral, which means it has no charge. Outside the nucleus are subatomic particles called electrons. While electrons contribute almost nothing to the mass of an atom, each of them carries a negative electrical charge of minus one. And even though electrons are always outside the nucleus, they're found in layers called energy levels, or shells, around the nucleus. Each electron shell or energy level has a maximum number of electrons it can hold. For simplicity, diagrams of atoms often show electrons within these shells while orbiting the nucleus. However, since we can only know the probability of where they might be located, electrons are sometimes depicted as smeared out and fuzzy. This fuzzy view of electrons is called an electron cloud. Notice that neutral atoms contain equal numbers of protons and electrons. This means that the positive charge of the protons balances out the negative charge of the electrons, making the atom electrically neutral. In summary, an atom has three main subatomic particles: protons and neutrons in the nucleus, and electrons in shells outside the nucleus. The sum of the protons and neutrons in the nucleus makes up almost the entire mass of the atom. Protons have a positive electrical charge. Electrons have a negative electrical charge, and neutrons have no charge at all. Electrically neutral atoms have an equal number of protons and electrons. [music]
"There is nothing like a great graphic depicting the real nature and
extent of a victim's injuries to get full value for your client. I use
Medical Legal Art for mediations as well as trial."
Greene, Broillet, Panish & Wheeler
Santa Monica, CA
"I thought you might want to know that after we sent a copy of your
illustration to the defendants, with a copy to
the insurance company, they increased their offer by an additional million
dollars and the case was settled for $1,900,000.00.
I appreciate your help!"
O. Fayrell Furr, Jr.
Furr, Henshaw & Ohanesian
Myrtle Beach, SC
"I wanted to take some time out to let you know what a wonderful job you did
with the 'collapsed lung/fractured rib' illustrations. They were both
detailed and accurate. My medical expert was comfortable working with them
and he spent at least an hour explaining to the jury the anatomy of the
lungs, the ribs and the injuries depicted in the illustrations. Needless to
say, the jury was riveted to the doctor during his testimony.
The jury returned a verdict for $800,000.00 and I'm sure we would not have
done so well if not for the visualizations we were able to put forth with
your assistance. Lastly, my special thanks to Alice [Senior Medical
Illustrator] who stayed late on Friday night and patiently dealt with my
last minute revisions."
Daniel J. Costello
Proner & Proner
New York, NY
"[Your staff] was extremely efficient, cooperative and gracious and [their]
efforts produced a demonstrative exhibit that we used effectively throughout
our trial. The jury verdict of $3,165,000.00 was, in no small measure, due
to the impact of the demonstrative evidence. You may be sure that we will
David J. Dean
Sullivan Papain Block McGrath & Cannavo, P.C.
New York, NY
Medical Legal Art creates medical demonstrative evidence (medical
illustrations, drawings, pictures, graphics, charts, medical animations,
anatomical models, and interactive presentations) for use during legal
proceedings, including research, demand letters, client conferences,
depositions, arbitrations, mediations, settlement conferences, mock jury
trials and for use in the courtroom. We do not provide legal or medical
advice. If you have legal questions, you should find a lawyer with whom you
can discuss your case issues. If you have medical questions, you should seek the advice of a healthcare provider.