The proposed project tackles a wide spectrum of applications in the HPC field. Over 90% of the HPC applications in the different NASA areas use software libraries that can be accelerated with different compression techniques. Developing a tool that enables compression in a transparent manner, such as it is proposed in this SBIR, has the potential to impact all disciplines. Some of the most representative areas include the following: - Aerospace/automotive industries, computational fluid dynamics (CFD), defense, weather and climate research, computational molecular dynamics, combustion, computational electromagnetics, and weather forecasting. Nowhere is the role of supercomputing more important than at NASA. Given the magnitude of NASA's broad-based computer applications, where large-scale simulations are required ubiquitously, this organization has traditionally been at the vanguard of supercomputing advances. The proposed technology enables a significant leap in performance for applications at the core of NASA's mission, and we expect the commercial opportunities that arise from this project to be large and impacting. Several HPC applications in industry and other Government Agencies apart from NASA also have the potential to be accelerated through novel compression techniques such as the ones proposed in this SBIR project. This is a reduced list of some of the most relevant disciplines that can be benefited directly by the proposed technology: - energy, finance, economic forecasting, computational chemistry, molecular biology, computational physics, civil and environmental engineering, digital content creation, digital media electronics, gaming, geophysics, image processing, information services, life sciences, media, medicine, semiconductors, and telecommunications. It is clear that the potential economical benefits of having such a tool readily available for the HPC industry are enormous. Several HPC application developers will grow an interest for such a product, which will give us the opportunity to have a viral penetration in industry and develop a successfully commercial product.