Liberty, equality and fraternity from French Revolution
Q. Which of the following sentences is/are true?
1) Liberty provided by the preamble is qualified
2) Preamble says ‘Equality, Social, Economic and Political,…’
3) Integrity of the nation is a territorial concept
4) Justice in preamble is inspired from the Russian Revolution- Published on 15 Feb 17
a. Only 1, 3 and 4
b. Only 1, 2 and 3
c. Only 2, 3 and 4
d. All of the above
ANSWER: Only 1, 3 and 4
The text of the Preamble reads as ‘…EQUALITY of status and of opportunity…’
- Justice-The feature of Justice - social, economic and political has been taken from Russian Revolution, 1917.
1. Fundamental Rights and Directive Principles provide justice.
2. Social justice means equal treatment of all citizens without any social distinction.
3. Economic justice means non-discrimination between people based on economic factors and elimination of in-equalities in wealth.
4. Social justice plus economic justice is known as ‘distributive justice’.
5. Political justice means that all citizens should have equal political rights, equal access to all political offices and equal voice in the government.
- Liberty-It means providing individual freedom and opportunities to develop oneself.
1. Liberty, equality and fraternity are taken from French Revolution (1789-1799).
2. Liberty in preamble is qualified (having restrictions) and not absolute.
3. Preamble denotes liberty of thought, expression, belief, faith and worship.
- Equality-It means to treat all of them same with no privileges to any person or group.
1. Civic (Article 14 to 18), political (Article 325 and 326) and economic equality (Articles 39, etc.) are guaranteed by Fundamental Rights and Directive Principles.
- Fraternity-it is sense of brotherhood, family, oneness
1. As per Fundamental Duties (Article 51-A) we all must promote harmony and the spirit of common brotherhood.
2. Fraternity has two parts - dignity of the individual and the unity and integrity of the nation.
3. The word ‘integrity’ has been added to the preamble by the 42nd Constitutional Amendment of 1976.
4. Dignity means material development of life as well as personality development.
5. Unity is moral and psychological aspect and integrity is territorial aspect.
6. Integrity aims at countering secessionism and separation.
7. Unity is aimed at being united in spirit and having common brotherhood.