A primitive root (compare H1933
); to exist
, that is, be
, come to pass
(always emphatic, and not a mere copula or auxiliary).
A negative particle (akin to H3808
(the qualified negation, used as a deprecative); once (Job 24:25) as a noun, nothing
contracted; concretely a witness
; abstractly testimony
; specifically a recorder
, that is, prince
against thy neighbour
; an associate
(more or less close).
, that is, devoid of cost, reason or advantage.
A primitive root; to open
, that is, be
; usually figuratively (in a mental or moral sense) to be
or (in a sinister way) delude
Stem - Piel (See H8840
Mood - Perfect (See H8816
Count - 2121
] with thy lips.
(The second form is in dual and plural); Probably from H5595
through the idea of termination
); the lip
(as a natural boundary); by implication language
; by analogy a margin
(of a vessel, water, cloth, etc.).
_ _ Do not speak even truth needlessly against any, and never falsehood.
_ _ We are here forbidden to be in any thing injurious to our neighbour, particularly in and by the forms of law, either, 1. As a witness: “Never bear a testimony against any man without cause, unless what thou sayest thou knowest to be punctually true and thou hast a clear call to testify it. Never bear a false testimony against any one;” for it follows, “Deceive not with thy lips; deceive not the judge and jury, deceive not those whom thou conversest with, into an ill opinion of thy neighbour. When thou speakest of thy neighbour do not only speak that which is true, but take heed lest, in the manner of thy speaking, thou insinuate any thing that is otherwise and so shouldst deceive by innuendos or hyperboles.” Or, 2. As a plaintiff or prosecutor. If there be occasion to bring an action or information against thy neighbour, let it not be from a spirit of revenge. “Say not, I am resolved I will be even with him: I will do so to him as he had done to me.” Even a righteous cause becomes unrighteous when it is thus prosecuted with malice. Say not, I will render to the man according to his work, and make him pay dearly for it; for it is God's prerogative to do so, and we must leave it to him, and not step into his throne, or take his work out of his hands. If we will needs be our own carvers, and judges in our own cause, we forfeit the benefit of an appeal to God's tribunal; therefore we must not avenge ourselves, because he has said, Vengeance is mine.
Proverbs 14:5 A faithful witness will not lie: but a false witness will utter lies.
Proverbs 19:5 A false witness shall not be unpunished, and [he that] speaketh lies shall not escape.
Proverbs 19:9 A false witness shall not be unpunished, and [he that] speaketh lies shall perish.
Proverbs 21:28 A false witness shall perish: but the man that heareth speaketh constantly.
Exodus 20:16 Thou shalt not bear false witness against thy neighbour.
Exodus 23:1 Thou shalt not raise a false report: put not thine hand with the wicked to be an unrighteous witness.
1 Samuel 22:9-10 Then answered Doeg the Edomite, which was set over the servants of Saul, and said, I saw the son of Jesse coming to Nob, to Ahimelech the son of Ahitub. ... And he enquired of the LORD for him, and gave him victuals, and gave him the sword of Goliath the Philistine.
1 Kings 21:9-13 And she wrote in the letters, saying, Proclaim a fast, and set Naboth on high among the people: ... And there came in two men, children of Belial, and sat before him: and the men of Belial witnessed against him, [even] against Naboth, in the presence of the people, saying, Naboth did blaspheme God and the king. Then they carried him forth out of the city, and stoned him with stones, that he died.
Job 2:3 And the LORD said unto Satan, Hast thou considered my servant Job, that [there is] none like him in the earth, a perfect and an upright man, one that feareth God, and escheweth evil? and still he holdeth fast his integrity, although thou movedst me against him, to destroy him without cause.
Psalms 35:7 For without cause have they hid for me their net [in] a pit, [which] without cause they have digged for my soul.
Psalms 35:11 False witnesses did rise up; they laid to my charge [things] that I knew not.
Psalms 52:1 [[To the chief Musician, Maschil, [A Psalm] of David, when Doeg the Edomite came and told Saul, and said unto him, David is come to the house of Ahimelech.]] Why boastest thou thyself in mischief, O mighty man? the goodness of God [endureth] continually.
Matthew 26:59-60 Now the chief priests, and elders, and all the council, sought false witness against Jesus, to put him to death; ... But found none: yea, though many false witnesses came, [yet] found they none. At the last came two false witnesses,
Matthew 27:23 And the governor said, Why, what evil hath he done? But they cried out the more, saying, Let him be crucified.
John 15:25 But [this cometh to pass], that the word might be fulfilled that is written in their law, They hated me without a cause.
Ephesians 4:25 Wherefore putting away lying, speak every man truth with his neighbour: for we are members one of another.
Colossians 3:9 Lie not one to another, seeing that ye have put off the old man with his deeds;
Revelation 21:8 But the fearful, and unbelieving, and the abominable, and murderers, and whoremongers, and sorcerers, and idolaters, and all liars, shall have their part in the lake which burneth with fire and brimstone: which is the second death.
Revelation 22:15 For without [are] dogs, and sorcerers, and whoremongers, and murderers, and idolaters, and whosoever loveth and maketh a lie.
WWW Chat Bible Commentary
User-Posted Comments on Proverbs 24:28