Within the depth of the great Thar desert, Jodhpur city is located on a land tract that is covered with sand hills. The city of Jodhpur is called the Sun City and is famous for its forts and palaces.
As the second-largest city in the Indian state of Rajasthan, Jodhpur served as one of the historical capitals of the Kingdom of Marwar with some of the most famous historical heritage in India.
Referred to as the Blue City or Sun City among the locals, it shares some of Rajasthan's rich culture, right from food to music.
This location serves as one of the most proficient tourist destinations, with palaces, forts and temples providing picturesque sites for photography.
Jodhpur is famous for its blue houses, Mehrangarh fort and not forgetting the delicious snacks and sweets. Here, you will come across hundreds of shops, eating joints and the Sardar Market where you can pick souvenir for future references.
The Jodhpur city came to existence in 1459 formed by Rao Jodha, a Rajput chief from the clan Rathore. Initially, the town of Mandore served as the capital of Marwar. However, Jodhpur took over, thanks to its central location that enabled trading of Opium copper, dates and many other goods. It also served as a link between Delhi and Gujarat.
During the British colonial period, Jodhpur had the largest land area in Rajputana. The land prospered with peace and grew in population. The merchants in the area also flourished with their trade dominating the rest of India.
When India found independence in 1947, the state merged into the union of India becoming the second largest city of Rajasthan.
Well known for its mouthwatering food, Jodhpur sweets are spread all over India. Some of the food stuffs that identify the area's culture are Mirch Bada and Mawa Kachori, which you will find very delicious. Moreover, Indian cuisine is said to have originated from Jodhpur.
As a coastal region of Thar Desert, most nomadic tribes dominate the area, and that's why the Gypsy group settled in some parts of the city. Luckily, Jodhpur has done well by preserving its culture hence tourists can visit Sadar Bazar for a beautiful cultural experience.
Regarding the people, Jodhpuri people are one of the most hospitable people in India. They speak Marwari accent. The main languages spoken here are Hindi, Marwari and Rajasthani.The lifestyle in Jodhpur city is quite captivating.
For fashion, the people of the city wear nice multi-colored costumes. The famous Marwar festival is a good presentation of the festive spirit of the city people. As for women specifically, they wear wide gathered skirts and a hip length jackets with three-quarter length sleeves. In addition, women in whole India tend to wear a lot of pieces of jewelry on many of their body parts. They do not only wear jewelry on earrings, wrists, or necks, but they also wear jewelry on their nose, feet, head, forehead, arms, and waist. Men also have a fashion trend; they wear colorful turbans. The horse riding trousers called “Jodhpurs” are very popular. They took their name from the city only.
Dance and music are important parts of Jodhpur culture, especially folk dances and music. The people of the city perform folk dances during festivals, celebrations, and religious occasions. Two of the most famous dances are “Chari dance” and “Ghoomar.”
Concerning Jodhpur climate, it is of an extreme type. In other words, the temperature range in the city is very high. The weather is typical desert weather, hot and dry. Throughout the whole year, the city is bright and sunny, so it is called the Sun City. The best time to visit the city is between the months of October and March; the climate conditions are the best during that time.
Places you must visit in Jodhpur
Jodhpur flocks with tourist year after year, thanks to the breathtaking sites the location has to offer. Some of the sites include Mehrangarh Fort, Ghanta Ghar and Clock Tower. Moreover, Jodhpur is rich in history, sharing centuries of art and architecture.
1- The Mehrangarh Fort
Known as the largest and most famous forts in India, The Mehrangarh Fort is an impressive description of preserved heritage. Presently serving as a lucrative museum, it blossoms with 15,000 items right from Maharaja Gaj Singh II's collection. There are cultural performances that happen daily inside the fort where you can enjoy music, folk art and many more.
2- The Jaswant Thada
Built-in 1899, the Jaswant Thada is an intricately crafted cenotaph created in the memory of Maharaja Jaswant Singh. The structure shines with white marble, lattice screens and portraits of Rathore rulers. Here, you will experience a peaceful environment while enjoying the gleaming view of the city.
3- The Umaid Bhawan Palace
In 1944 the palace was completed serving as one of the last grand palaces in India. Up to now, the royal family occupies a section of it, with most of the palace converted to a luxurious palace hotel. However, spending the night inside the hotel can cost you more than $550, which is relatively pricy, but you can still catch a glimpse of the hotel. Inside the hotel, you will find world-class restaurants and a magnificent museum. Here, you will get old photos of the Maharaja and his family and a vintage collection of cars.
It may cost you a lot, but the experience is worth it.
4- The streets of the Blue city
If you are looking for beautiful backgrounds to take outstanding photographs, then visit the Streets of the blue city. Known as Navchokiya, the location is a lovely site for tourists. Here, you can spend your time strolling along the streets, and you may also choose to get a guide to help you find your way through the chaotic streets.
5- Gulab Sagar
Traditionally, this 18th-century Lake had a significant impact on Jodhpur's water management system. The Lake offers a beautiful site to take outstanding photographs with the Mehrangarh Fort in the background.
The Lake guides you through several exciting temples which are hidden around it.
6- The Rao Jodha Desert Rock Park
Your trip won't be complete without a stroll in the Rao Jodha Desert Rock Park. Developed back in 2006, the park extends 200acres fitted with foliage that vary throughout the year. Here, you will come across 80 different native species of plants from the Thar Desert. It's fantastic to know what lies inside the living desert.