Work by Dr Defne Saatci (Nuffield Department of Primary Care Health Sciences) and colleagues suggests that COVID-19 has had a detrimental effect on early diagnosis of cancer in children and young people. Their research, presented at the NCRI Festival, also shows that children who were diagnosed with cancer during the first wave of the pandemic were more likely to have been admitted to intensive care prior to their diagnosis.
Spotting cancer early and starting treatment promptly gives children and young people the best chance of surviving. We already know that the COVID-19 pandemic led to worrying delays in diagnosis and treatment for many adults with cancer, so we wanted to understand how the pandemic affected children’s cancer services.
- Dr Defne Saatci
Dr Saatci and her colleagues used the general practice database QResearch to study the numbers of different cancers diagnosed in children and young adults up to the age of 25 in the first wave of the pandemic, between 1st February and 15th August 2020. They compared this with diagnoses during the same time period in the three preceding pre-pandemic years. They also looked at the amount of time between diagnosis and the start of treatment and whether patients were diagnosed after being admitted to intensive care.
During the first wave, the researchers found that 380 patients were diagnosed with a brain tumour, lymphoma, leukaemia, sarcoma or renal tumour. This is approximately 17% lower than in previous years.
They found that the average time between diagnosis and the start of treatment was slightly shorter during the first COVID-19 wave but that children were more than twice as likely to be admitted to intensive care before their cancer was diagnosed.
We found that more children were admitted to intensive care prior to their cancer diagnosis during the pandemic. A possible explanation is that these children waited longer to see a doctor and therefore may have been more unwell at the time of their diagnosis. Together with the lower numbers of cancer diagnoses in the first wave, this study suggests COVID-19 has had a serious impact on early diagnosis in this group of patients.
As we recover from the pandemic, it’s vital that we get diagnosis of cancer in children and young people back on track as quickly as possible. - Lead researcher, Professor Julia Hippisley-Cox
Dr Saatci and her colleagues will now go on to study the impact of the subsequent waves of COVID-19 on diagnosis of childhood cancer in England.
See the full press release on the NCRI website.
This work is published in the Archives of Diseases in Childhood journal.