Introduce the concept of philanthropy and guide the learners to be philanthropists who take volunteer action for the common good.
Filter by subjects:
Filter by audience:
Filter by unit » issue area:
find a lesson
Unit: Philanthropy—A Day at the Beach
Unit: Civic Virtue in Modern American Democracy
The learners analyze examples from history of civic virtue and then select the characteristics they believe are most important for enduring citizen engagement....
Unit: Respecting the Environment (Private-Religious)
This lesson will teach the basic Biblical laws of Tza’ar Ba’alei Chaim (the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals) the rationale that supports these laws, and practical applications of these laws in today’s world. The learner will participate in a class project aimed to assist community...
Unit: Global Health: Food Around the World
Participants view pictures of families around the world with the food they eat in a week. Through awareness and discussion, they view cultural and regional differences. They discuss the health, cost, and distribution of food around the world.
Unit: Be the Change: Homelessness
The learners examine their preconceptions about homelessness and build understanding of people who are homeless.
Unit: Nonprofits are Necessary (6-8)
Students will recognize different job opportunities available in the nonprofit sector and identify people in the community who have positions in nonprofit organizations.
Unit: Generosity of Spirit Folktales
Sometimes it is wise to follow the advice of others and at other times it will only bring disaster. This lesson examines stories from South Africa, Morocco, and Nigeria and character traits valued in those cultures.
Unit: Humans and Nature Flourishing Together
What does it mean to live philanthropically with our “treasure”? In what ways do we impact nature through purchasing decisions? Participants will develop their understanding of philanthropy and corporate social responsibility. Through researching the ways companies engage in corporate social...
Unit: My Water, Our Water
Participants identify the impact of humans on lakes and rivers. They explore ways to take responsibility to protect the waterways.
Unit: Watch Me Grow
Through a story in which a child inspires her neighborhood to improve a vacant lot, young people recognize that they can have a positive impact on others. They brainstorm a philanthropic project to benefit the school or larger community.