ACADEMIC AND CAREER PLANNING
WHAT IS ACP?
Academic and Career Planning, or ACP, is a student-driven, adult-supported process. Students create and cultivate their own unique and information-based visions for post secondary success. This is obtained through self-exploration, career exploration, and the development of career management and planning skills over the course of the 6th-12th grade experience.
DEVELOPING AN ACADEMIC CAREER PLAN (ACP)
Developing an academic career plan ensures that a student is ready for college and a career. All students in the Delavan Darien School District will experience a dynamic Academic Career Plan. This plan will evolve from 6th-12th grade learning experiences, both in and out of school that support employability skills,
career awareness, exploration, planning and training.
The ACP Model is broken down into four parts. These include:
Know (Who am I?)
Explore (What do I want to do?)
Plan (How do I get there?)
Go (Do it!)
All four aspects of academic and career planning are addressed starting in 6th grade.
The ACP Components Table below provides a more detailed outline of the different elements that make up academic and career planning. Counselors and teachers implement components of ACP during homeroom and in it is embedded in various courses 6th-12th grade. Career Cruising, a software program provided by DPI, will be used to explore interests, learning styles, and a variety of careers that link to student interests. Students are able to access different components of ACP through:
Self Awareness: Know
What interests me? What are my strongest skills? What is my preferred learning style? What skills would I like to develop before I graduate?
What careers am I most interested in and why? What type of degree or certificate do I need to support my post secondary goals? Will this career choice support what I want for my financial future, where I want to live and family life?What volunteer and extracurricular activities will support my interests?
Career Planning: Plan
What will I need to provide a competitive application for my preferred school or job? What internal and eternal courses can I take to continue to explore my interests? What schools offer a degree in my areas of interest? What ACT scores or other assessments are required for preferred school, job or internship admission? What scholarships are available?
Students are active participants in their academic and career planning process by reviewing/modifying course selections and personal goals and conferencing with counselors, teachers, community members and parents.