Computer spyware is a malicious program created and distributed for collecting information about the Internet behavior of the internet user. Spyware collects the data about the website visits, page views and time spend on a particular site by the user and transfers the date to the author or the distributor of the spyware. These data is then analyzed to determine the interests of the user and to run targeted online advertising and spamming. This is an unethical practice that exposes your internet usage without your knowledge and permission. Spywares also make your system and internet connection slower as they use the system resource of your computer to collect and store data about your internet practices. They also utilize the bandwidth of your internet connection to send the data.
There are some computer spyware that are also used to collect email addresses from the hard disk and browser of the infected computer. These email addresses are then used for sending unsolicited emails or spam. Spywares are also used by the hackers and crackers to steal confidential information from your computer. The programs can collect your bank account numbers, credit card numbers and passwords by logging the keystrokes when you enter this information into the online forms. So even if you are using an encrypted form and secure server your confidential data is not safe from hackers. These data is transferred to the hackers who use the information for fund transfers, financial frauds and other criminal activities.
These are just some of the malicious actions that a spyware can perform. It is quite obvious that you would not like your computer to be vulnerable to these threats. But there is no sure-fire way that can ensure spyware protection other than anti spyware software. As the computer spyware is different from the usual computer virus, it is not detected by the regular anti virus software. Moreover, if your computer is having a spyware there is increased chance that your PC will get further infection from other spywares. Therefore, spyware removal is very much important if you want to keep your online transaction secure and ensure online privacy.
A spyware cleaner can give you complete protection from the computer spyware. It will scan the PC for spywares and remove the traces of spyware if it finds one. Moreover the online protection will also ensure that you do not get further infection from new spywares.