Summer Safety Tips for the Whole Family
The sun is shining, the weather is warm, and the whole family is ready to jump in on the summer fun! Whether swimming at the beach or playing in the park, there are a few health and safety tips that every family should keep in mind as they spend time together this season.
In light of National Safety Month, here are a few of the Gemini Urgent Care team's tips to keep the whole family safe while having fun in the sun!
One of the most important things to keep in mind during the summer is hydration. It can be easy to get caught up in all the fun and forget to drink water, but it is crucial, especially in hot weather. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) recommends drinking at least eight glasses of water per day and even more when you're sweating or spending time in the heat.
So, if you're running out for a quick errand or spending a few minutes outside with the kids, be sure everyone has a water bottle and keeps sipping throughout the day!
It is also important to keep an eye out for symptoms of dehydration, including dizziness, headaches, nausea, thirst, and fatigue. If your symptoms worsen, seek medical attention as soon as possible.
Be Wary of Heat Exhaustion and Heat Stroke
Another vital safety tip is to be aware of heat exhaustion and heat stroke signs. Heat exhaustion can happen when your body gets too hot and sweats excessively, leading to dehydration.
Heat stroke can occur when the body's temperature rises to 104 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. Symptoms include confusion, difficulty speaking, seizure, and loss of consciousness. If you or someone you are with starts to experience these symptoms, call 911 immediately.
While heat exhaustion and heat stroke are both severe conditions, there are a few things you can do to help prevent them. The CDC recommends wearing loose-fitting, lightweight clothing, staying in air-conditioned buildings as much as possible, and taking frequent breaks if you are outside in the heat.
If you do find yourself outside in the heat, be sure to take breaks in the shade and drink lots of water! And, if possible, try to avoid being outside during the hottest hours of the day, typically between 11 a.m. and
Take Safety Precautions
Even if you are careful to stay hydrated and avoid overheating, accidents can happen. Bumps, bruises, scrapes, sprains, and fractures are common, especially if you have young ones running around! However, there are certain precautions you can take to help avoid injuries this season.
- When at the pool, remember:
- Swim with a buddy.
- Walk, don't run around the pool.
- Supervise swimming children at all times.
- No diving in the shallow end.
- No roughhousing.
When at the park, encourage your children to use the playground equipment as intended to play safely and carefully.
Helmets are an essential piece of safety equipment for all ages. If you're taking a bike or scooter ride in the driveway or around the neighborhood this summer, be sure every family member has their helmet on and buckled!
Houston Urgent Care
By making smart safety decisions and following the tips above, you will have a safe and fun summer! As your Clear Lake urgent care center, we're here to help you and your family when you need us most. From minor injuries to fractures to pain management, visit us today or give us a call at (281) 572-5505.