Understanding Network Administration
Network administration is an essential role that involves a variety of vital tasks required for networks to function smoothly and efficiently. Network administration is essential for smooth operation of any organization’s small- to large-scale network operations.
The network administrator is responsible for:
Design, installation, and evaluation of the network
Regular backups must be performed and managed
Create accurate technical documentation including network diagrams, cabling documents and many other things
Provisioning the strict authentication for network resource access by users
Provision of assistance for troubleshooting
Administration of network security and intrusion detection
Network Administration as a Career
Network administration is a great career choice for IT professionals who are looking for a rewarding, but challenging job. Potential network administrators need to have the technical knowledge necessary to manage, support, and install networks that allow for continuous information flow. According to the Bureau of Labor Statistics, network and systems administration is growing at a faster rate than other IT careers. This field is expected to grow at the same rate through 2024. There is a large talent gap in this field as the number qualified technicians entering this job does not meet the demand for professionals with the necessary skills. This creates huge career opportunities for those with the technical skills gained through professional training.
The Career Path
Network administration requires a deep understanding of hardware and software, network troubleshooting, security, as well as the various standards that must be followed to ensure high availability and outstanding performance of the network. To help you gain a deep understanding of network administration, renowned training vendors offer a wide range of training and certification courses. To validate your technical skills, professional trainings are mapped with a variety of internationally accepted and recognized credentials.
You must first be certified to become a leader in network administration. This guide will help you understand the different certifications that are available to you in order to succeed.
CompTIA+: CompTIA+ is a comprehensive certification designed for those who are just starting out in IT. This certification requires that you pass two exams. It explains basic IT concepts to help you get into a technical role as a desktop support or help desk technician within an organization. CompTIA A+ is designed to teach you the basics of hardware, networking, software and Windows OS. It also covers security, operational procedures and troubleshooting system and software issues.
CompTIA Network+: CompTIA Network+ certification is the next step in a career path that will lead to success. Network+ is a broad certification that teaches you the essentials of networking. Professionals in network support must take the CompTIA Network+ exam to gain globally recognized and valued Network+ credentials to begin a career in network administration.CompTIA Network+ demonstrates network configuration, wired and wireless network devices, unified communications, cloud and virtualization technologies, and other network competencies.
CCNA: Cisco Certified Network Associate is a highly-regarded certification that Cisco has created. This certification is a leader in network technologies and offers a variety of services for network administrators. It also provides extensive training with internationally renowned credentials. Two qualifying exams must be passed in order to earn CCNA certification. These exams can take anywhere from two to six months. Although this certification does not require any prerequisites you must pass two qualifying exams over the course of two to six months.
MCSA: The Microsoft Certified Solutions Associate (MCSA), is a broad range of Microsoft specializations that span from the Cloud to web apps. Network administrators who want to pursue a career as network administrators should concentrate on the Windows Server aspect. The MCSA: Windows Server 2016 certification and training course aims to equip professionals with the technical skills necessary to operate Microsoft Windows.
Understanding Network Administration