Outside Danny’s big living room window sat a shaggy old pine bush. Inside its gnarled branches sat a mother cardinal on a nest of twigs covering two speckled little eggs. Danny watched from afar as she carefully tended to her clutch, keeping the eggs warm and safe. The days dragged on, and the brilliant red father cardinal continued to bring bugs and other little snacks to the mother so that she wouldn’t have to move from their blessed clutch. Their patience and dedication were rewarded when the eggs hatched into tiny, fluffy chicks. Springing into action, the mother cardinal struck out to find the insects and seeds her hungry brood needed to grow big. 

Then one day, Danny’s hungry cat Zoe escaped the house and started to prowl the backyard in search of a snack. The old cat’s sharp eyes soon found the cardinal's nest. The mother cardinal was no fool. She’d seen cats before and quickly changed her focus from finding food to defending her young from the nefarious predator.

With the fierce determination of a mother, she swooped down darting towards the cat to ward it off. She fluttered her wings and chirped in the cat’s ear. Zoe was startled by the sudden attack, and backed away, feeling momentarily intimidated. The mother cardinal knew the cat’s resolve would soon return, so she continued to defend her nest, flying back and forth, trying to frighten the cat. She was determined not to let her chicks fall victim to Zoe’s insatiable hunger. Startled by the bird’s bravado, Zoe gave up and retreated, defeated by the mother cardinal's fierce determination. Seeing what had happened, Danny rushed out to retrieve his mischievous cat before it could do any real harm. 

Day after day, Danny watched the babies grow through his binoculars. Each morning, it seemed they were changing. Growing feathers, opening their eyes, and getting ready for flight. All the while, Danny kept cantankerous Zoe trapped in the house. 
By the ninth day, the chicks had grown into full-fledged cardinals, ready to take flight and begin their own lives. Once the temptation was gone, Zoe was once again set free to wander the yard in search of her next quarry.
