I can do that! Here are five classic supernatural creatures you might want to incorporate into your story.

1: Vampires: Vampires have been used in mythology and stories for centuries, and there have been many iterations of them. Their lore tends to be that they are undead creatures of the night, with long fangs used to drink blood, and they can often turn into bats. Some versions of vampires created for stories or present in mythology are allergic to garlic, burned by sunlight, and can only be killed by a crucifix. 
2. Werewolves: Another classic supernatural creature often presented as a mortal enemy of the vampire is the werewolf. The werewolf is a creature that presents as human most of the time but, on a full moon, turns into a wolf. Depending on the story, this may be a classic version of a wolf or it may be a more monstrous version. Legends often say that if someone is bitten by a werewolf on the full moon, they will then turn into one.
3. Ghosts: Ghosts are also supernatural creatures and subjects of many stories, and are typically humans who did not pass onto the afterlife, leaving a form of them stuck wandering the earth. Ghosts may be friendly to humans or not. There are many other names for ghosts, such as specters, spirits, and poltergeists (who are usually evil ghosts).
4. Mages: Mages are humans who have been gifted with the ability of magic, also called witches, wizards, and sorcerers. Mages may be good, evil, or inherently neither in a story, and the magic they can do may vary. Sometimes, mages are not separate creatures at all but humans who have learned to do magic. They may also have animal familiars, though this is typically for witches.
5. Demons: Born from religion, demons are also supernatural creatures that are sometimes used in fictional stories. They are creatures who have come from Hell, and may or may not have been human a long time ago, depending on the iteration of them. They are there to cause chaos and even harm to humans and usually make good villains in a story.
