Promoting your art can be hard. It's much more than simply selling art. Many creatives have trouble building the courage to put something they make online. Creatives need a thick skin when showing off something they created with love. That being said, it doesn't need to be difficult. Posting online is a great first step, so congratulations! When you think about marketing yourself online, selling things should be the last thing on your mind. Connect with enough people, and the rest will fall into place. There are many websites to help you do this, so here are a few suggestions.

1. Instagram - Instagram is a wonderful tool for organically reaching a wide group of people. It is an image and video social media platform on which you can share fully finished works or even progress updates. Some artists even record themselves working and make videos played at faster speeds to show a full beginning to end in a short digestible video.
2. Reddit (Related Subreddits) - Reddit can be a great place to submit your art, provided you go to the right sections. There are dozens of subreddits that can be beneficial to an up-and-coming artist. The community is moderated, but because it is an open forum, you might run into some trolls.
3. Deviant Art - If you are into concept art and digital art, Deviant Art is the place to be. It has a huge community where you can follow other artists and comment on each other's work. An artist's Deviant Art page often also acts as their portfolio when applying for jobs. 
4. Pinterest - Pinterest is more of a visual search engine than a portfolio or social media page. If you put your work up on Pinterest, then others can pin it so they can add the post to their collection. They can even re-pin it so it reaches even more people.
5. Wetcanvas Forums - Wetcanvas is an art-specific forum. While Reddit is a forum with thousands of different topics, Wetcanvas is a place solely for creative art. It is a wonderful place to connect with like-minded artists, get feedback on recent work, or ask for advice on anything you may be stuck on.
