Barry pushed aside the leaves covering the cave entrance. He was drenched in sweat both from the effort of the journey and the humid climate. His clothes were stuck to his skin, but upon opening the cave entrance, he was met with a cool rush of wind. The distant sound of an underground river met his ears as he pressed on deeper into the opening. He scanned the ceiling for anything that might be lurking above. 

As he explored, the beam of his flashlight uncovered a massive cave. A thick layer of dust hung in the air and drifted across the beam of his light. Massive pillars connected the floor and the ceiling, clearly the work of an architect. All of a sudden, the cave began to tremble, and Barry saw a pair of vertical pupils appear from the darkness. Behind him, a massive snake coiled lazily in front of the door. Before he could process what he was seeing, he was trapped. 

A massive face appeared before him, golden teeth glimmering in the flashlight's glow. Barry looked behind him. The dragon's tail was half-blocking the entrance, almost as a dare. He had no doubt that the dragon would squash him flat if he tried to escape.
"Well, another adventurer come to grace me with his presence. How serendipitous." The dragon's voice was eloquent, rich, and conniving. He loved company almost as much as he loved eating trespassers.
"You've caught me at a bad time, I'm afraid." The dragon cooed in a disappointed voice. "I was about to take my nap, but I suppose I can entertain a guest like the good host I am."
"What do you want, dragon?" It was only when Barry spoke that he realized just how much the dragon's voice filled the room. His paled by comparison.
"Well, I'm going to eat you," the dragon said, baring his teeth as he pronounced the 't' in eat. "But if you can ask me two questions I can't answer, I will free you." Barry thought for a moment, then responded.
"What is a question you can't answer?" The dragon looked shocked, realizing the trap he was in. To answer the question would be to allow Barry to ask a question he couldn't answer. Without a word, his tail lifted, and Barry raced out of the cave.
