Jeff watched as his father got under the hood of the family sedan: a 15-year-old 4-door vehicle that had been with the family as long as he could remember. Jeff's father, a proud man in his 50s, looked intently at the complex machinery under the hood as if examining a complicated puzzle.

Jeff stood next to his father and leaned over to see what his father was seeing. "What's wrong with it, Dad?" he asked him.

"Not sure," he replied, "but I think it has something to do with the engine. There's no reason why it should just stop like that unless it were the engine. Do me a favor and get in the driver's seat and try starting it."

Jeff, eager to start learning to drive, jumped into the driver's seat of the sedan and turned the key in the ignition. Nothing. He tried again. Nothing. Jeff exited the vehicle and walked back to his dad. "What do you think it is?" he asked.

Jeff's father began touching things on the engine, seemingly actively investigating the source of the vehicle's problems. He pulled on some hoses and checked the fluid levels in all the fluid-containing reservoirs, then sighed. "Hmm," he began a bit puzzled, "This is interesting."

"What is it?" Jeff asked, thinking his father had identified the problem. His father, without missing a beat, replied, "The windshield washer fluid is low." Confused by the reply, Jeff wondered what the connection was between the windshield washer fluid being low and the engine not turning over.

Jeff's father felt defeated and decided to call the nearest tow truck to get the vehicle towed back home. When the tow truck driver arrived, he looked at the vehicle and Jeff's father peering under the hood. "Can you try turning the engine over please?" he asked Jeff's father. "We tried that," he replied but obliged the driver anyway.

"Okay," the driver said unamused, "Did you make sure there was gas in the tank?" Jeff looked up at his dad in amazement. "Did you get gas yesterday after work like Mom told you to?" he asked incredulously. Jeff's father, now with a look of realization on his face, looked at the driver and shook his head. "Oh my god," he said in shock. The driver laughed uncontrollably.
