There was a light wind gently shoving leaves about, and It was a warm day in May. The park was full of people playing chess, having picnics, and throwing footballs and frisbees around. The sun peaked through the tall oak trees that were scattered about the park. Dogs were chasing after each other, and the owners were chatting together. There were a few white and fluffy clouds slowly advancing in the sky. Every once in a while, they would smother the raging sun. The branches of the oak trees depressed when small birds landed on them and bounced upright when they flew away. Some kids shouted playfully at each other as they played tag. The park was teeming with life.

Jesse had been observing the scene around him more often than the game of chess he was involved in. His opponent captured a rook because of his negligence. However, Jesse did not care about the outcome of the game; he was here on a mission. He was an undercover agent sent here to take down a crime boss. This was an exceptionally dangerous mission, as there were many civilians around. Jesse had to break into an office and be discreet about it. After surveying the area for quite some time, he was sure that nobody was watching him. His chess opponent declared checkmate, and Jesse stood up and shook hands before walking towards the office adjacent to the park. His partner, Juan, had already disabled the cameras at the front entrance. Jesse walked straight through the doors and looked inside. There were no civilians. This meant that the plan was ready to go. Jesse gave Juan the signal through his earpiece and deployed a smoke grenade inside the office. Jesse locked himself in a side room and covered the bottom crack of the doorway. Juan backed the van he was waiting in towards the office doors, blocking them. The back of the van burst open, and six agents burst out wearing tactical gear and masks. The crime boss and his men were overwhelmed and surrendered immediately. The agents gave Jesse a mask, and everyone was escorted from the office. The mission was a success, there were no casualties, and the crime boss will no longer cause any harm to the area. It was just another day for the top secret undercover agent, Jesse.
