"Hello! Thank you for taking the time to do this interview! With all the things happening in between classes, you must be busy." The nice, dainty lady says to me. I accepted this interview because I needed a little money, but I didn't think it would be so involved. There were multiple cameras and a whole crew here gathering folks to interview about the recent events that happened here. It was starting to be a little bit of a hassle, but I remind myself that I can get a nice meal after this. After saying that to myself, it was my turn at the interview table.

"Hello, this is Angela Mae from Telo 6 News and I am here today at A-Loge University interviewing college students about the good and bad events happening here at the University. Today I have here a young lady! Miss, would you like to introduce yourself?" 

I try to put on my best fake smile. "Hello, my name is Farah; this is my second year here at A-Loge University." 

"Now, Farah, let's start with the good news. Recently there was a festival going on here at A-Loge, would you mind filling us in on what it was about?"

How was I supposed to know? What a random question. "Of course. A couple of days ago we held a small celebration within the school for one of our competition teams. It was a way to cheer them on before their next match in the playoff bracket. I'm not sure 100% who we're sending but it felt like a lot of people were there so it was a nice celebration." I lied through my teeth. I knew that a celebration was happening, but I had no idea what it was about. I just didn't want to look like a clown on local TV.

"Ok, ok, well, good luck to them! Now for the second question. There has been a string of robberies that have been happening here at night. These robbers have been stealing anything of value, including schoolbags, jewelry, and much more. How safe do you feel going to this school?"

Another question I know nothing about. My classes are late, yes, but I never heard of a string of robberies. Well, here we go again.
