Application of Cadmium Sulfide CDS Powder
Cadmium Sulfide CDS Powder Overview
Cadmium sulfide is an inorganic substance with the chemical formula CDS. There are two kinds of crystals, α type is lemon yellow powder, β type is orange-red powder. Slightly soluble in water, soluble in acid, slightly soluble in ammonia. Cadmium sulfide is a yellow solid. There are two different crystal structures in nature, the rare minerals clinopyroxene and leucite, but are more commonly used as impurity substituents in the structurally similar zincites sphalerite and wurtzite, while the zincites sphalerite and wurtzite are more commonly used as impurity substituents. Wurtzite is the main economic source of cadmium. As an easily isolated and purified compound, it is a major source of cadmium in all commercial applications. Its bright yellow color made it used as a pigment in the yellow paint "Cadmium Yellow" in the 18th century.
Like zinc sulfide, cadmium sulfide also has two crystal forms. More stable hexagonal wurtzite structures (found in Greenockite minerals) and cubic zinc hybrid structures (found in Hawleyite minerals). In both forms, the cadmium and sulfur atoms have four coordinates. There is also a high-pressure form with the NaCl rock-salt structure.
Cadmium sulfide is a direct bandgap semiconductor (2.42 eV energy gap). Its band gap is close to the wavelength of visible light, giving it its colorful appearance.
Both polymorphs are piezoelectric, while the hexagon is also pyroelectric.
CDS crystals can be used as gain media for solid-state lasers.
For certain types of solar cells, CDS can be used in combination with other layers in the form of thin films. CDS was also one of the first semiconductor materials used in thin film transistors (TFTs).
CDS films can be piezoelectric films and have been used as transducers that can operate in the GHZ range. If you want to buy cadmium sulfide CDS powder in bulk, please feel free to send an inquiry to get the latest price.
Application of Cadmium Sulfide CDS Powder
Cadmium sulfide, known as cadmium yellow, is used to color enamels, glass, ceramics, plastics, and paints.
Nickel Yellow is suitable for coloring almost all resins and is translucent in plastics. There is a light-colored cadmium yellow containing zinc sulfide in polyethylene. Since zinc sulfide will promote the decomposition of polyethylene plastic and make it green, the molding processing time should be appropriately extended. Cadmium yellow should not be mixed with pigments containing copper or copper salts to avoid the formation of black copper sulfide or green copper sulfate. Cadmium yellow and blue pigments can be mixed together to get green.
Cadmium sulfide is mainly used as a pigment because of its good thermal stability, light and weather resistance, chemical resistance, and high opacity.
Other applications of cadmium sulfide are as follows:
thin film transistor
Cadmium sulfide CDS powder price
The price of cadmium sulfide CDS powder will vary randomly with the production cost, transportation cost, international situation, exchange rate, and the supply and demand of the cadmium sulfide CDS powder market. Tanki New Materials Co., Ltd. aims to help various industries and chemical wholesalers find high-quality, low-cost nanomaterials and chemicals by providing a full range of customized services. If you are looking for cadmium sulfide CDS powder, please feel free to send an inquiry to get the latest price of cadmium sulfide CDS powder.
Cadmium Sulfide CDS Powder Supplier
As a global supplier of cadmium sulfide CDS powder, Tanki New Materials Ltd. has extensive experience in the performance, application and cost-effective manufacturing of advanced and engineered materials. The company has successfully developed a series of powder materials (including oxides, carbides, nitrides, single metals, etc.), high-purity targets, and functional materials. Ceramic and structural equipment, and provide OEM services.
|Cadmium Sulfide Properties|
|Other Names||cadmium sulphide, orange cadmium, cadmium orange,|
|cadmium yellow, CdS powder|
|Solubility in H2O||N/A|
|Cadmium Sulfide Health & Safety Information|
|Transport Information||UN 3077 9/PG 3|