September 1955 Popular Electronics
Table of Contents
Wax nostalgic about and learn from the history of early electronics. See articles
published October 1954 - April 1985. All copyrights are hereby acknowledged.
In his usual
manner, John T. Frye uses tech-savvy teenage experimenters Carl Anderson
and Jerry Bishop to teach a lesson
while writing a compelling saga. In this case Jerry gets "bitten" by house
current while fiddling with a receiver chassis. Before certain safety measures
were required by law, many electrical devices - radios, televisions, vacuum
cleaners, shop tools, kitchen appliances, etc. - were sold with with either
existing shock hazards or the potential for (no pun intended) a shock hazard in
certain usage or failure modes. Before the advent of polarized two-pronged plugs
and grounded 3-prong plugs, some devices presented hazardous voltage levels to
the user by virtue of a direct connection to exposed conductive (metal)
surfaces. In this instance, under normal operational conditions with the chassis
installed in its wooden case and plastic or phenolic control knobs on the front
panel the house voltage (or possibly higher from the high voltage vacuum tube
plate supply) the users would be sufficiently isolated from danger.
BTW, while a UL
(Underwriters Laboratories) certification is not required, a certification from
some approved facility is. They need to verify compliance with
NEC, and other standards in order to place their "mark" on a
Smart technicians take every precaution against electrical shock; Jerry finds
out the hard way.
By John T. Frye
August had been a pretty hot month and now September was starting out the same
way. Even down in Jerry Bishop's basement laboratory it was warm, and the youth
puttering at his workbench was barefooted and wearing only a shirt and shorts. His
pal, Carl Anderson, was seated on the bench swinging his long legs idly back and
forth as he watched his chubby friend working on a radio receiver.
"The shielded loop antenna fastened to the back of this set is really directional,"
Jerry remarked, as he picked up the chassis and stepped away from the bench so that
he could turn the playing receiver about. "Wups!" he said, as the tangle-shortened
line cord pulled from the wall socket. He set the receiver down on the bench, untangled
the cord, replaced the plug in the wall socket, picked up the set, and once more
stepped away from the bench.
Suddenly his body gave a convulsive jerk and then became rigid. A low moan forced
its way between his clenched teeth. The cords in his neck and in his quivering wrists
stood out tautly beneath the skin. His staring eyes looked agonizingly at his friend
and then shifted imploringly over to the receiver a.c. plug in the wall socket.
Carl, whose widening eyes had been staring
through his horn-rimmed glasses at the strange behavior of his companions finally
realized what was wrong; and in a single motion he leaped from the bench and tore
the receiver line cord from the wall socket. In that same instant, Jerry dropped
the chassis to the concrete floor with a resounding crash, tottered backward and
collapsed on the leather -covered couch along the wall.
"Hey, Jer, are you all right ?" Carl asked anxiously, as he bent over his friend.
"What was wrong? Were you getting a shock from that set? Want me to get your folks
or call a doctor? Hey, why don't you answer me ?"
"Gimme a chance!" Jerry gasped, as he panted for breath through a wide-open
mouth. "I'll be all right, I think, but that was mighty close."
For a few minutes he continued to gasp for breath, but gradually he began to
breathe more easily and color started to return to his dead-white face. Carl, who
had been watching him narrowly all the while, relaxed a little and returned to the
chaffing way of talking that normally prevailed between the two fast friends.
"Heck!" he drawled, "I was hoping I might get a chance to use that new method
of artificial respiration I've been practicing down at CD headquarters. Maybe,"
he said hopefully, "I ought to give you a little of it anyway. It won't hurt. I
just sort of play you gently like an accordion."
"Keep your greasy paws off me!" Jerry warned, as he struggled to a sitting position
and ruefully examined the seared white welts burned across the inside of his fingers
where they had been in contact with the edges of the charged chassis. "Man, do those
fingers feel hot! They must have a real fever in them. There's a nasty odor of burned
flesh about 'em, too," he remarked, wrinkling his nose in distaste.
"Just wait a couple of hours until they begin to get sore," Carl encouraged.
"Well," Jerry said as he stood up rather shakily, "let's see if we can find out
where I goofed. This whole thing was a shocking surprise to me, if you will allow
a poor sick man a pun. I thought I was taking every precaution."
Carl set the receiver back on the bench, and the boys looked it over. Fortunately,
it had landed on a corner that had doubled under and absorbed most of the shock.
When a couple of tubes that had been jarred from their sockets were replaced, and
the set was gingerly plugged in, it played normally.
"Pull the plug and let's see if we can reconstruct the accident," Jerry suggested.
"Until we find out what went wrong, I'll be afraid to touch another electrical device
of any kind. In some way the 117-volt line current must be reaching the chassis;
although, in a transformer set like this, it shouldn't. Some a.c.-d.c. receivers
have one side of the line connected directly to the chassis; but this is never done
with transformer sets. Hm-m-m," he broke off as he reached for the ohmmeter probes,
"I'll bet that's it."
"What's it ?" Carl demanded. "Stop trying to sound like a pill-pusher with those
knowing 'hm-m-m's of yours."
"Each side of the line is bypassed to the chassis through a .05-μfd. capacitor,"
Jerry explained. "I'm thinking that one of them may be short-circuited."
Sure enough, as the probes were touched to the leads of one of the capacitors,
the meter pointer indicated zero resistance. "That explains everything," Jerry said
contentedly, as he tossed the probes back on the bench.
"To you, maybe; but not to me," Carl denied. "Only one side of the line was shorted
to the chassis that both of your hands were holding. I thought you had to have a
complete circuit path before electrical current would flow. Just touching one wire
doesn't complete a circuit. You can't fool me. I've seen a bird roosting on a high-tension wire carrying thousands of volts."
"You're forgetting something. One side of the line coming into the house is grounded
right out at the transformer. This is true of all two-wire services. For that matter,
one wire of a three-wire service is grounded, too. The current was going from the
ungrounded or 'hot' wire through the shorted capacitor to the chassis, then through
my body and bare feet in contact with the damp cement floor, and finally back through
the earth to the pole transformer out in the alley."
"You mean all you need to get a strong current flow is one wire and a good ground
"Sure; I'll show you." As he said this, Jerry picked up a short extension cord
with a light bulb in its socket and removed the plug from the end of the twisted
leads. Separating these leads, he connected a battery clamp to the end of each one.
Then one clamp was clipped to the brass valve handle of a water faucet at one side
of the basement, and the other was fastened to the end of a test lead. Jerry thrust
the probe end of the test lead into one of the openings in the wall receptacle.
Nothing happened. "That's the grounded side," Jerry remarked as he removed the test
prod and thrust it into the other side of the receptacle. Instantly, the lamp in
the socket glowed with normal brilliance.
"Convinced ?" Jerry asked.
"Of that part," Carl admitted cautiously, "but there're still some things I don't
understand. Why didn't you get a shock as soon as you touched the chassis ?"
"I was standing on this long strip of rubber carpet I put in front of the bench
just to avoid having contact with the earth while handling electrical equipment;
but you'll recall that I stepped backward off the rubber mat just before the jolt
"But you were off the mat the first time before the plug pulled out. Why didn't
you get a shock then ?"
"Because the plug happened to be in the socket in such a manner that the side
of the line shorted to the chassis through the capacitor was the grounded side.
When I straightened out the cord and replaced the plug, I must have reversed the
position of the plug prongs so that the hot side of the line was the one shorted
to the chassis. Then all that protected me from shock was the rubber mat, and when
I stepped off that -"
"You began to shake, rattle, and roll," Carl finished.
"You can say that again. I felt just as though my whole body was clamped in a
huge vise that was squeezing tighter and tighter. You'll never know how desperately
I was trying to yell at you to jerk that cord, but I couldn't get out a mumbling
"Have you figured out what you did wrong ?"
"There's quite a list. First, standing barefooted
on a damp cement floor while handling electrical equipment of any kind is just asking
for trouble. Second, I should have realized that only the capacitor stood between
me and a possible fatal shock; and I've replaced enough shorted capacitors to know
how easily they can fail. My basic error was in not using my imagination to picture
what could happen and then taking precautions to see that it didn't."
"Such as wearing shoes, Nature Boy ?"
"Ordinary shoes would not insure safety. What I should have done, and will do
immediately, is buy an isolation transformer that we'll use consistently. This is
basically a simple two-winding transformer. The primary winding goes to the line,
and the secondary winding feeds the device being tested. Since the secondary has
no connection to the ground, there is no danger of being shocked through contact
with the ground. The only way you can get shocked while using such a transformer
is to contact both secondary leads simultaneously. In addition to providing this
safety, the ordinary isolation transformer has tapped windings so that secondary
voltages slightly above, equal to, and slightly below the line voltage can be had
from the isolated secondary."
"I didn't realize you could get such a jolt from 117 volts. I always knew such
a voltage would make you jump, but I didn't realize it was really dangerous."
"Don't you believe it! I'll bet more people are electrocuted with the 117-volt
line current than with any other potential, simply because it's so easy to contact
and because it is treated with so little respect. A scientist once told me that
if the skin resistance were reduced to zero a person could be killed by only six
volts. Ordinarily, the oily skin provides ample protection against such low potentials,
but when the skin is wet with salty perspiration as mine was, the skin resistance
drops sharply; and once the current starts to burn, it quickly drops the skin resistance
"Then you think those smart alecks who stick their fingers into light sockets
to show how much juice they can take are not being very bright."
"That's putting it mildly! Only a jerk or a real square would do a stupid thing
like that. Electricity makes a wonderful friend and servant, but it can become a
vicious, lightning-fast killer if you treat it carelessly. A smart technician takes
every possible precaution against getting even mild shocks, for under the right
circumstances they can be fatal."
"How's that ?"
"Doctors say that occasionally a comparatively mild shock can trigger the heart
into quivering in a manner that interferes with its normal functioning. They believe
this accounts for the deaths that sometimes occur from low- current shocks."
"Maybe that's why it's a good idea always to use only one hand when working on
equipment where there's a possibility of shock."
"Check. Keeping one hand in your pocket under such circumstances is a strictly
professional procedure. It avoids the possibility that a dangerous current can enter
one hand and go out the other, and pass through the vulnerable chest cavity on the
For a little while, there was a silence, while both boys thought about the near
tragedy that had just taken place; then Jerry spoke up:
"Carl, I want you to show me how to do that new artificial respiration business
you were talking about. In case of shock, artificial respiration immediately applied
is the best possible first-aid treatment to use until a doctor can be reached.
Getting started with the treatment just as soon as the body is freed from the current
is the important factor. A delay of only a few seconds in beginning artificial respiration
may spell the difference between life and death."
"Fine!" Carl agreed; "and that gives me an idea. Let's hold regular surprise
drills right here in the basement. After I've shown you how the artificial respiration
is done, every few days one of us will fake being shocked. All he will have to do
is touch a piece of electrical equipment that is plugged in and become rigid, just
as you did. Then the other fellow will free the `actor' from the 'hot' object, taking
care not to be shocked himself. This will be done either by pulling the plug as
I did or by opening that master switch that cuts off the whole bench and all its
outlets. Then, the guy doing the acting will collapse on the floor, making himself
as limp as possible. The other fellow will straighten him out and start artificial
respiration just as quickly as he can, and keep it up for at least a couple of minutes.
If we keep doing this, well soon be prepared to handle a real case of shock almost
automatically. Constant drilling is the best insurance against getting rattled in
"Truer words were never spoken!" Jerry applauded. "If we use our heads and take
the precautions we should, the chances are that neither of us will ever have to
use first aid here in the basement; but it will be mighty comforting to know both
of us can, and you never know when we may have a chance to save a life somewhere
else. Working with electricity and not knowing how to apply artificial respiration
is about as foolish as it would be for an explorer to start into the South American
jungle without a snakebite kit."
Posted April 8, 2019
Carl Anderson and Jerry Bishop were two teenage boys whose
love of electronics, Ham radio, and all things technical afforded them ample opportunities
to satisfy their own curiosities, assist law enforcement and neighbors with solving
problems, and impressing – and sometimes toying with - friends based on their proclivity
for serious undertakings as well as fun.
Carl & Jerry, by John T. Frye
Carl and Jerry Frye were fictional characters in a series of short stories that
were published in Popular Electronics magazine from the late 1950s to the early
1970s. The stories were written by John T. Frye, who used the pseudonym "John T.
Carroll," and they followed the adventures of two teenage boys, Carl Anderson and
Jerry Bishop, who were interested in electronics and amateur radio.
In each story, Carl and Jerry would encounter a problem or challenge related
to electronics, and they would use their knowledge and ingenuity to solve it. The
stories were notable for their accurate descriptions of electronic circuits and
devices, and they were popular with both amateur radio enthusiasts and young people
interested in science and technology.
The Carl and Jerry stories were also notable for their emphasis on safety and
responsible behavior when working with electronics. Each story included a cautionary
note reminding readers to follow proper procedures and safety guidelines when handling
Although the Carl and Jerry stories were fictional, they were based on the experiences
of the author and his own sons, who were also interested in electronics and amateur
radio. The stories continue to be popular among amateur radio enthusiasts and electronics
hobbyists, and they are considered an important part of the history of electronics
and technology education.
- Going Up
- March 1955
Shock - September 1955
- A Low Blow
- March 1961
- The Black
Beast - May 1960
Electronik, September 1958
- Pi in
the Sky and Big Twist, February 1964
Bell Bull Session, December 1961
Boogie, August 1958
- TV Picture,
Eraser, August 1962
Trap, March 1956
at Work, June 1956
Aweigh, July 1956
Has His Day, August 1956
- The Hand
of Selene, November 1960
or Not?, October 1956
Electronic Beach Buggy, September 1956
Extra Sensory Perception, December 1956
in a Chimney, January 1956
Performance, November 1958
of Judas, July 1961
- The Sucker,
New Year, January 1963
Snow Machine, December 1960
Extracurricular Education, July 1963
Slow Motion for Quick Action, April 1963
Sleuthing, August 1963
- TV Antennas,
a Soroban, March 1963
Fair --", September 1963
Worm Warming, May 1961
Operation Startled Starling - January 1955
- A Light
Subject - November 1954
Teaches Boy - February 1959
- Too Lucky
- August 1961
and Jeopardy - December 1963
Santa's Little Helpers - December 1955
Tough Customers - June 1960
Pocket Radio, TV Receivers
Yagi Antennas, May 1955
Stomping, March 1962
- The Blubber
Banisher, July 1959
- The Sparkling
Light, May 1962
Research Rewarded, June 1962
- A Hot Idea, March
- The Hot Dog
Case, December 1954
New Company is Launched, October 1956
the Mistletoe, December 1958
Eraser, August 1962
- "BBI", May 1959
Sound Waves, July 1955
- The River
Sniffer, July 1962
- Ham Radio,
Torero Electronico, April 1960
Wireless, January 1962
Electronic Shadow, September 1957
Induction, June 1963
- He Went
Detective, February 1958
an Instinct, December 1962
- Two Detectors,
with a Tachometer, July 1960
and the Pirates, April 1961
The Crazy Clock Caper, October 1960
Carl & Jerry: Their Complete Adventures is
now available. "From 1954 through 1964, Popular Electronics published 119 adventures
of Carl Anderson and Jerry Bishop, two teen boys with a passion for electronics
and a knack for getting into and out of trouble with haywire lash-ups built in Jerry's
basement. Better still, the boys explained how it all worked, and in doing so, launched
countless young people into careers in science and technology. Now, for the first
time ever, the full run of Carl and Jerry yarns by John T. Frye are available again,
in five authorized anthologies that include the full text and all illustrations."