All content is free for everyone to browse, download and share.
Tips for how to search on AER: type keywords into the search box or use the filtering options below to find the content relevant for you – including peer-reviewed journal articles and non-peer reviewed grey literature.
Member contents are currently categorised as ‘Miscellaneous’ while we work on an update.
Showing 218 results
The implementation of the Water Framework Directive requires EU member states to establish and harmonize ecological status class boundaries for biolog...Read more
Improved water quality, through a reduction in diffuse pollution from agricultural sources, is an expected benefit of agri-environment schemes, but th...Read more
The EU 'Nitrates Directive' (Directive 91/676/EEC) and the WFD (Water Framework Directive 2000/60/EEC) introduced a series of measures designed to red...Read more
Globally important chalk streams in England are in poor ecological health, in part due to inadequate water quality. Addressing this issue requires an ...Read more
Atlantic white cedar (Chamaecyparis thyoides) wetlands in the New Jersey pinelands were studied at 18 sites along a gradient of suburban development d...Read more
1. Freshwater is vital to much life on Earth and is an essential resource for humans. Climate change,however, dramatically changes freshwater systems ...Read more
This report aims to provide an indication of the potential scale and nature of the problem of small discharges ofphosphorus (P) for designated sites a...Read more
Dissolved selenium is a contaminant of concern in the lower Gunnison River Basin, Colorado. Selenium is naturally present in the Cretaceous Mancos Sha...Read more
Watershed management issues are among the many challenges facing natural resource managers in British Columbia, Canada. The B.C. Ministry of Forests, ...Read more
Water availability and use are closely connected with energy development and use. Water cannot be delivered to homes, businesses, and industries witho...Read more