Given the numbers and data at our fingertips in this digital age, mathematical and digital literacy skills are imperative when it comes to understanding natural and social phenomena and making good decisions. As teachers we are responsible for helping students make sense of this information
Sherri L. Martinie
Laura R. Van Zoest, Shari L. Stockero, Blake E. Peterson, and Keith R. Leatham
Learn why collecting, clarifying, and revoicing—great teaching moves—do not always work.
Karen C. Fuson and Steve Leinwand
The power of Number Talks and extensions that can build to an equitable Math Talk Classroom
David B. Custer and Ksenija Simic-Muller
We reflect on recent presentations at the NCTM annual conference and articles in MTLT that address statistics, data modeling, and data science. We observe that such presentations and articles are increasingly common, and encourage readers to use them in their teaching and write about their own adventures with data.
Students create clever mathematical Valentine’s Day cards.
Margaret Rathouz, Nesrin Cengiz-Phillips, and Angela S. Krebs
Issues of equity in mathematics classrooms existed prior to COVID-19. For many students, however, meaningful participation in mathematical discussions became nearly impossible in online settings during the pandemic. In this study, we note the diversity in and nature of participation in mathematical discourse in an online course for preservice teachers (PSTs). We investigate the influence of implementing two support strategies for discussion: (a) establishing a “rough-draft/revision” orientation to mathematical tasks; and (b) providing time and structure (tasks and prompts) in an online discussion board for PSTs to post their initial thoughts, react to peers’ solutions, and collectively revise their ideas. In this article, we highlight several benefits of these support strategies to equitable PST participation in a unit on number theory. For example, as compared with oral discussions where only a few PSTs offered their ideas, the written discussion format encouraged every PST to post their ideas. Using a rough-draft/revision stance in the prompts fostered sharing and revealed diverse mathematical approaches, perspectives, and ideas. We argue that giving students opportunities to interact with one another and the mathematics in a variety of ways promotes equitable participation.
Kathryn Early, K. Elizabeth Hammonds, Brea Ratliff, Mariya Rosenhammer, and W. Gary Martin
A high-leverage strategy first discussed more than 50 years ago, wait time has many benefits for both teachers and students yet is not used to its full potential. See how it can enhance your students’ mathematical discourse.
Chepina Rumsey, Jody Guarino, and Michelle Sperling
We describe how mathematical argumentation supports curiosity and exploration by sharing a first-grade lesson in which students explored decomposition with subtraction. We also reflect on the conditions that supported the inclusion of mathematical argumentation.
Ethan P. Smith, Jennifer Kelly, Susan Sappington, Kareemah Warren, and Amanda Jansen
Language is a conduit for communicating and understanding mathematical ideas. This article explores how we can use judicious telling to attend to students’ written and spoken literacy in mathematics.
Sam Rhodes, Alesia Mickle Moldavan, Montana Smithey, and Allison DePiro
Interrogate deficit-based thinking and suggest asset-based language to develop mathematical identities, understandings, and consciousness.