Stay in the Loop
Get notifications and updates in your inbox.
Learn about what the Conservation Toolkit is and how you can use it to identify opportunities for land conservation →
Learn how to find potential conservation programs for agricultural parcels →
Learn how to use the conservation index for planning potential conservation activities →
The Conservation Incentive Toolkit at https://map.wrmcalliance.com is designed to identify opportunities for land conservation in the communities that neighbor Crane and Lake Glendora.
The toolkit includes an interactive web-based map that informs landowners and partners about conservation programs for agriculture parcels, and also provides an avenue for the public to connect directly with the WRMCA with questions and concerns.
It includes tools targeted for Landowners, Conservation Partners, and the public.
For more, watch the webinar.
Landowners can use this tool to find potential conservation programs their agriculture parcel might be eligible for. Using one the of three methods described below, you can view parcel information and a list of potential conservation programs. Each program listed includes a summary and link that you can use to learn more.
Within the Incentive Programs tab in the left panel, landowners can identify conservation programs in three ways.
1) Zoom in and pan around the map, then select your desired parcel. All the green parcels have been matched with conservation programs they could potentially be eligible for.
The Conservation index tool was designed primarily for partner agencies and researchers, but anyone can use it. This tab shows a regional view of agriculture parcels shaded by their “conservation index.” The index is a weighted score calculated to provide a starting point to identity parcels and areas in the WRMCA region for planning potential conservation activities. We created the index using four criteria and assign points to each criteria. This is very subjective index and was created using basic criteria selected only to provide a starting point for assessing conservation activities. It does not include specific program eligibility rules nor does it indicate with certainty the conservation eligibility of any parcel.
The four criteria used to create the index include:
The total scores were then normalized to a 1 to 100 scale and mapped using four class breaks, with the darkest colors indicating the highest index.
Within the Feedback tab in the left panel, you can select a pin to add either a ‘General Comment,’ a ‘Noise Complaint,’ or a ‘Land Use Issue.’