How Can I Help My Child
Your emotional support is an important part of helping your child get to a healthy weight. Overweight kids can have low self-esteem or feel guilty. Try to stay positive and talk about being “healthy” rather than use terms like “fat” or “thin.” Help your child understand that all healthy people need to actively manage their weight even you.
And remember that kids pick up on parental attitudes and actions about weight and eating after all, you buy the food and cook the meals. By buying healthy foods and cooking nutritious meals, you provide the tools your child needs to get to a healthy weight.
Losing Weight With Type 2 Diabetes: 3 Reasons People Struggle
Approximately 90% of people with type 2 diabetes are overweight or obese.Â¹ While obesity often contributes to the development of diabetes, the bigger driver of weight gain is the high insulin levels that are found well before the diagnosis of diabetes.There are some good reasons why the standard advice of âeat less, exercise moreâ doesnât deliver results for people living with type 2 diabetes.
Write It When You Bite It
Writing down what you eat is the single best predictor of weight loss success. But most people dont do it because they think it will be too time-consuming. Guess how long it takes ? Less than 15 minutes a day on average. You dont need to add lots of detail, but aim for at least 3 entries each day and do it consistently day after day for the best results. Use this handy food diary pdf icon to get started.
You May Like: Normal Glucose Range For Diabetics
Why Can Diabetes Cause Weight Loss
Insulin is a hormone that allows your body to use glucose for energy.
If you have Type 2 diabetes, your body doesnt use insulin effectively and cant transport the glucose to your cells. Instead, it builds up in your blood.
When the glucose doesnt arrive in your cells, your body thinks its starving and finds a way to compensate. It creates energy by burning fat and muscle at a rapid pace. This causes unexplained weight loss, explains Cotey.
Your kidneys also begin working overtime to eliminate the excess sugars in your blood. This uses additional energy and can cause damage to your kidneys.
Type 1 diabetes has a similar pattern, but instead of being unable to use insulin, your body stops producing it altogether.
Unexplained weight loss can occur in people who have Type 2 diabetes, but its more commonly found in people with Type 1. Parents are often the first to notice unusual weight loss in a child with Type 1 diabetes.
Even If You Regain The Weight Keep Trying
Yo-yoing? Thats okay. Keep at it.
There is clear evidence that there is longer remission and better glucose control in people with type 2 diabetes who have lost weight and regained it compared to those who have never lost.
In short, it is better to have lost and regained than to have never lost at all.
Read Also: Fastest Way To Get Rid Of Diabetes
Committing To Weight Management Is For Life
- American Diabetes Association. Standards of Medical Care in Diabetes2009. Diabetes Care. 2009 32:S13-61.
- Becker G. Type 2 Diabetes: An Essential Guide for the newly Diagnosed. 2nd ed. New York, NY: Marlowe & Company 2007.
- McCulloch D. Patient information: Diabetes type 2: Overview. UpToDate Web site. January 30, 2009. Available at: http://www.uptodate.com/patients/content/topic.do?topicKey=~n0K0MIfI1iZs.& selectedTitle=5~150& source=search_result. Accessed April 20, 2009.
- McCulloch D. Patient information: Diabetes mellitus type 2: Overview. UpToDate Web site. December 4, 2008. Available at: http://www.uptodate.com/patients/content/topic.do?topicKey=~X0jjLnBn4._ko& selectedTitle=4~150& source=search_result. Accessed April 20, 2009.
How To Make The Most Of His Healthy Weight
People who are overweight or obese have a higher risk of developing type 2 diabetes. In fact, obesity is the number one risk factor for developing type 2 diabetes. This means that people who are overweight or obese actually have a better chance of avoiding diabetes than people who are in good health.
This is because fat cells gain energy from sugar and other nutrients, which can lead to weight gain, diabetes, and other problems. Thats why it is so important to lose weight before you develop type 2 diabetes.
To help you achieve your goal of losing weight, there are some things you should do right away:
- Eat smaller portions · Limit your portion sizes · Choose low-fat options · Keep track of calories and macronutrients · Avoid unhealthy snacks and drinks
If you want to lose weight, follow these steps:
You May Like: Signs Of Diabetes In Toddler Girl
More Weight Loss More Diabetes Remission
The scientists found that the more weight lost, the greater the likelihood of diabetes remission:
Among those who gained weight: 0% achieved remission of diabetes
- For those who lost 0 to 11 pounds: 7% achieved remission
- For those who lost 11 to 22 pounds: 34% achieved remission
- For those who lost 22 to 33 pounds: 57% achieved remission
- For those who lost more than 33 pounds: 86% achieved remission
Support Instead Of Sabotage
Once youve set your sights on losing weight, dont set traps for yourself, says Blumer, who has also written Diabetes Cookbook for Canadians for Dummies. One example: Dont stock your kitchen with the wrong kinds of snacks. A lot of people have kids, and keep cookies and ice cream in the house, he notes. This may act as a temptation for the person living with diabetes. But dont put such tight limits on treats that you feel deprived. Youll let loose and eat five pieces of cake. When youre hungry between meals, choose healthy snacks like fresh fruit, multigrain toast or veggie sticks with low-fat cream cheese, and allow yourself other goodies in moderation.
Recommended Reading: How To Get Rid Of Diabetes Stomach Fat
Diabetes: What You Need To Know
- People with diabetes have an increased risk of strokes, heart attacks, high-blood pressure, kidney disease and blindness.
- If you are obese, you can reduce your risk of developing diabetes by eating a low-fat, low-sugar diet and exercising regularly.
- If you can lose 5-10 percent of your body weight, you will lower your risk of developing diabetes by 58 percent.
- Johns Hopkins can help you lose this weight with our weight loss services, including behavior modification, nutritional counseling and a new, special endoscopic procedure. Learn more about our weight loss services.
Diabetes And Weight Loss
People who have type 1 diabetes may experience weight loss. In type 1 diabetes, the pancreas does not produce insulin. Because of this, the sugar cannot enter body cells. When the body does not have sugar for energy it starts using fat for energy. And if the body uses fat from body muscles it results in weight loss. If you are losing weight suddenly, You should consult to doctor immediately.
So, these are the causes why our weight fluctuates in diabetes.
Recommended Reading: How To Lower Blood Sugar Immediately Without Insulin
Diabetes And Weight Gain
If we go back to history, we will understand the cause of weight gain or obesity and the fastly increasing number of diabetes. It is well known that our lifestyles were way more active before industrialization. And now the world has gone digital, people dont have to go anywhere to even buy groceries. All these facilities have made our lives almost static leading to inactiveness. And lack of physical activity develops the accumulation of fat in your body and makes us obese.
Another factor for increasing obesity is high carbohydrate food. Earlier the food that was more in trend was seafood and whole grains full of fibers and other nutrients. But now those food items come in a more refined form and eventually in an artificial form. Many recipes that have high carb amounts like cookies, pasta, and cuisine of different countries have been globalized. So these are the causes of obesity.
Tricks That Improve Long
Find cookbooks or search the web for recipes that will inspire you to make-over your favorite dishes.
Work with a registered dietitian who specializes in diabetes to help you set reasonable goals, and to develop an eating plan that fits your schedule, makes sense for your family, recognizes your likes and dislikes, and feels right.
And remember, weight loss is a temporary process the real challenge, as you likely know from past experience, is keeping off the lost weight. To achieve this goal, you must embrace a new way of eating, one that is agreeable but meets the healthy view of the new you.
Physical activity is probably the best strategy to help keep you from regaining the lost weight, and in the article on exercising when you have type 2 diabetes, you can learn about how to start an exercise plan.
You May Like: Grams Of Sugar Per Day For Diabetic
How To Lose Weight With Diabetes And Hypothyroidism
Diabetes and hypothyroidism are problems associated with your endocrine system, a network of glands that plays a role in many important body functions. And its important to keep at your healthy weight-scale if you are a diabetic or/and have under-active thyroid. Fortunately, there are plenty of options to lose weight and keep it off.
Exercising For Diabetes And Weight Loss
Exercise is a key part of any weight loss plan, and for diabetics it offers multiple health benefits:
- Improves blood sugar levels and insulin sensitivity
- Some types of exercise can help burn extra glucose in the body and also decrease resistance to insulin
- Lowers your risk for heart disease
- Improves circulation
- Reduces stress
Before you exercise, make sure your glucose level is not too low or you could risk low blood sugar . You should also be cautious if your blood sugar is too high, because exercise can sometimes raise blood sugar. Check with your doctor before beginning an exercise program.
Don’t Miss: When Is Insulin Needed For Diabetes
What Causes Unintentional Weight Loss In Diabetes
While intentional weight loss in people with diabetes is usually a goodthing, unintentional weight loss is not. If blood sugars are very high,patients with diabetes tend to urinate a lot, and this results indehydration as a possible cause of weight loss.Also, muscle breakdown canoccur if sugars are too high, causing an unhealthy weight loss. Actually,many patients with diabetes present for the first time to their doctor’soffice because of unexplained loss of weight. In addition to diabetes, thereare other concerning causes of unexpected weight loss which should beexplored such as thyroid disease and cancers.
In summary, a supervised attempt to lose weight in people who can exercisewithout risk is usually of benefit. However in certain cases such as ifblood sugars are too high or too low or if heart disease is present, it canbe dangerous. This is why all exercise and weight loss programs should bestarted only after discussion with a physician. Any unexplained weight loss,in patients with or without known diabetes may be a sign of high bloodsugars or another serious illness. It is absolutely necessary to see aphysician and undergo a complete evaluation in these cases.
What If Im Worried About My Weight Loss
Keep in mind that metformin is a relatively safe drug with side effects that usually go away over time. Any weight loss you may have while taking it should be gradual and minimal and should not cause alarm. But if youre concerned about the amount of weight youve lost while taking metformin, talk to your doctor. He or she can help determine whats causing your weight loss and if anything needs to be done about it.
Whether or not you take metformin, you should call your doctor if youre losing weight rapidly and have no energy or appetite. You should also call your doctor if youve lost more than 10 pounds in the last six to 12 months and dont know why. In general, you should feel free to call any time you have questions or concerns about your health or your weight.
Don’t Miss: The Effects Of Diabetes On Your Body
Does Obesity Cause Diabetes
There is clearly a link between Type 2 diabetes and obesity, and researchers around the world are working to solve the puzzle of how the two are connected. Some scientists think there is a connection between body fat and hormones that regulate appetite and insulin levels. When you lose weight, and reduce your body fat, you may have better control over your diabetes.
Being Overweight Increases The Risk Of Developing Major Health Problems
Controlling your weight is very important for your overall health. Eating healthily and exercising can lead to a healthy weight and reduce any risk of developing other major health problems, such as heart disease, strokes and depression. You will also have more energy to spend with your loved ones and you will be able to better manage your Diabetes. Here are a few tips on how to lose weight and keep it off.
Recommended Reading: Can You Control Diabetes With Diet And Exercise
How Can I Lower My Chances Of Developing Type 2 Diabetes
Research such as the Diabetes Prevention Program shows that you can do a lot to reduce your chances of developing type 2 diabetes. Here are some things you can change to lower your risk:
- Lose weight and keep it off. You may be able to prevent or delay diabetes by losing 5 to 7 percent of your starting weight.1 For instance, if you weigh 200 pounds, your goal would be to lose about 10 to 14 pounds.
- Move more. Get at least 30 minutes of physical activity 5 days a week. If you have not been active, talk with your health care professional about which activities are best. Start slowly to build up to your goal.
- Eat healthy foods most of the time. Eat smaller portions to reduce the amount of calories you eat each day and help you lose weight. Choosing foods with less fat is another way to reduce calories. Drink water instead of sweetened beverages.
Ask your health care professional about what other changes you can make to prevent or delay type 2 diabetes.
Most often, your best chance for preventing type 2 diabetes is to make lifestyle changes that work for you long term. Get started with Your Game Plan to Prevent Type 2 Diabetes.
Will My Doctor Prescribe Metformin For Weight Loss
If you have type 2 diabetes or prediabetes and are overweight or obese, your doctor may prescribe metformin to help you manage your diabetes or lower your risk of diabetes, and to see if it can help you to lose weight. In fact, your doctor might prescribe metformin for weight loss even if you dont have diabetes or prediabetes.
This use of metformin is called an off-label use. That means that the FDA has not approved metformin as a weight-loss aid. As a result, there is less information about how effective it is for this purpose.
Read Also: Why Are Insulin Prices So High
When To See A Doctor
According to the Cleveland Clinic, you should talk to a doctor if you have an unexplained weight loss of 10 or more pounds, as this may be a sign of diabetes.
If you experience other symptoms particularly excessive urination, thirst or hunger also be sure to inform your doctor as soon as possible.
Losing Weight And Insulin Resistance
Insulin is the hormone that regulates blood sugar levels in the body and helps your cells convert blood sugar into energy. In some people with diabetes, however, blood sugar levels are high for a sustained period of time, causing the pancreas to produce more and more insulin. Eventually, the cells stop responding to that insulinbecoming insulin resistant. Losing weight with insulin resistance is more difficult because your body converts blood sugar into fat instead of energy.
The solution? For a start, reducing the sugar and processed carbohydrates in your diet while increasing healthy fats along with vegetables and whole grains. Even a small improvement can make a big difference. Studies show that a weight loss of just 57 percent is enough to reduce the risk of diabetes by 58 percent in a person who has a high risk of the condition.
Also Check: Symptoms Of Low Blood Sugar In Type 2 Diabetes
Check Check Then Check Again
As you change your diet, increase your physical activity level and start shedding pounds, you should also keep better track of your blood sugar. Thats because changes such as increased exercise, meal differences and stress can cause your sugar levels to shift. If youre controlling your blood sugar through lifestyle alone, its not a concern. But if youre losing weight and youre on blood-glucose lowering medication, you may need to check your blood glucose levels more often, to determine if your medication needs changing Blumer says.
What Should You Eat
If you have diabetes, you should focus on eating lean protein, high-fiber, less processed carbs, fruits, and vegetables, low-fat dairy, and healthy vegetable-based fats such as avocado, nuts, canola oil, or olive oil. You should also manage your carbohydrate intake. Have your doctor or dietitian provide you with a target carb number for meals and snacks. Generally, women should aim for about 45 grams of carb per meal while men should aim for 60. Ideally, these would come from complex carbs, fruits, and vegetables.
The American Diabetes Association offers a comprehensive list of the best foods for those with diabetes. Their recommendations include:
You May Like: Protein Shake For Diabetic Patients