World Tourism Day 2022 – This year’s topic, ‘Rethinking Tourism,’ with a goal of increasing awareness of tourism’s significance in the global community, re-imagining the sector’s expansion, both in terms of size and importance, Indonesia is conducting World Tourism Day on Sept 27, 2022 at Bali.
It is to be noted that the International Union of Official Tourism Organizations (IUOTO) conducted a special conference in Mexico City on Sept 27, 1970, and adopted the World Tourism Organization’s Statutes.
“Rethinking Tourism” aims to inspire the debate around rethinking tourism for development, including through education and jobs, and tourism’s impact on the planet and opportunities to grow more sustainably.
It also aims to mobilize political will and cooperation to ensure tourism is a central part of policy making.
UNWTO Secretary-General Zurab Pololikashvili says: “The potential of tourism is enormous, and we have a shared responsibility to make sure it is fully realized”.
The UN World Tourism Organisation (UNWTO) was established five years after the adoption of the Statutes of the Organization in 1970, paving the way for UNWTO’s founding.
Here is the link to download a brochure, of general-information-note-WTD-2022
World Tourism Day 2022 will bring together stakeholders from every part of tourism’s uniquely broad value chain.
What’s India’s Global Tourism Position? See In Visuals
India was ranked 54th in a worldwide travel and tourism development index on Tuesday, down from 46th in 2019, but still ranked first in South Asia. – download this image
Japan has topped the global rankings, with the United States, Spain, France, Germany, Switzerland, Australia, the United Kingdom, Singapore, and Italy rounding out the top 10.
World Tourism Day: History
The UNWTO then resolved to institute World Tourism Day at the end of September 1979. However, It was originally celebrated on Sept 27, 1980.
Why To Celebrate World Tourism Day?
World Tourism Day brings people to focus on many economic, social and cultural activities. It encourages people to create many ideas and plans to maintain and develop their skills.
It is very useful for people to have a better idea of how to manage all tourism facilities and services.
In India, there are many tourist shops that every people go to register for the place they want to visit.
It is very important to get all the information on weather conditions, food, water, place of residence, means of transport and many other things about places where people have never been.
Today, tourists are growing and improving in many countries, such as India, the United States, Europe, London, Bangalore, etc. It is very important to know the weather conditions, the food and the people who live in the area so that people can know the exact ideas of this place.