What are the worst consequences of not brushing your teeth regularly?
Our smile is one of the most valuable assets that you have. But still most of us fail to take good care of our dental health. There are many who fail to floss every day and there are even those who fail to brush twice daily. But skipping these steps can actually lead to a number of detrimental issues for your health.
Not brushing on a regular basis implies that your mouth is harbouring a lot more bacteria and if your body is already affected by the illness then that means that your immunity is even weaker than the other normal people.
Brushing teeth twice daily on a regular basis can actually help you to restore good oral hygiene, bestow on you a million dollar smile, freshen up your breath and even is capable of saving your life.
Though it may seem a bit exaggerated, but it’s not. Here are a few reasons that can be obtained by not having a clean mouth.
Tooth Decay and Loss
Tartar that is unbridled can lead to serious issues on your oral health. Tartar and plaque can work together for eating away at your gums and teeth. This way the more harmful bacteria gain better access of your gums. Teeth that have extensive contact with tartar will get weakened and decayed. This will eventually lead to cavities and finally loss of teeth.
There are many people who still do not realise this that it is not normal for gums to bleed at the time of brushing your teeth. If you do, you possibly have gingivitis which is a bit milder form of gum disease. Your gums get swollen, red and bleed easily as the plaque builds up between your gums and teeth. This occurs in response to the plaque building up between the gums and teeth. With the spread of plaque, the response of immunity increases further and it can destroy the bones and tissues in mouth as a result of which pockets are formed in between the teeth that can get infected. This is the severe form of gum disease known as periodontitis and if you do not get more vigilant about your oral health then this condition can become chronic.
Diabetes can occur if you do not take care of your oral health. The risk of pre diabetes or insulin resistance enhances because of an upsurge in inflammation. While it is a known fact that diabetes can increase the risk of gum disease or periodontitis, recent research has revealed that not brushing the teeth on a regular basis can also give rise to blood sugar or diabetes.
Risk of Dementia
An extensive research has brought to light the fact that there can be a relation between dementia and poor dental health although people who maintain better oral hygiene had greater chance of maintaining better overall health. Studies have revealed that people brush twice or thrice daily have about 22-65 percent less dementia risk than those who do not brush the teeth. It has also come to light that Alzheimer patients have more bacteria linked with periodontitis than those who are relatively healthy.
Excessive bacteria in the mouth can lead to heart disease, strokes and heart attacks. Pathogens enter the body when you allow the bacteria to multiply in the body and plaque build-up can occur in the arteries. Anything clogging the artery poses a major threat to the heart.
The above are just some of the detrimental effects that a deteriorating oral hygiene can inflict in you. These are the reasons why you need to maintain a good oral health by brushing twice daily, flossing regularly and going for professional teeth clean-up time and again. In fact, dentists advise that even before you go for a teeth whitening treatment you should opt for professional teeth cleaning so that you have a clean and beautiful mouth that will not only make you look great but also help you to lead a healthy life.