Science subject and location tags
Articles, documents and multimedia from ABC Science
Friday, 29 February 2008
Biological organisms play a surprisingly large role in how rain and snow forms, a new study shows.
Monday, 25 February 2008
An Arctic 'doomsday vault' filled with samples of the world's most important crop seeds will be opened this week.
Friday, 15 February 2008
Bottles tossed into the sea for research nearly half a century ago may help people fight the spread of coastal weeds in Australia.
Wednesday, 12 December 2007
Banana and mint are the two unlikely candidates for the next generation of novel insecticides, scientists say.
Tuesday, 27 November 2007
A microscopic lens, inspired by a Venus flytrap's ability to trap insects in a split second, can pop instantly between convex and concave when triggered, scientists say.
Wednesday, 21 November 2007
Carnivorous pitcher plants that feed on insects in the tropics may be smarter than they look.
Thursday, 12 July 2007
Great Moments in Science The potato is forever associated with Ireland, yet the tale of the potato is a twisted one. As you will discover with Dr Karl following the curls.
Thursday, 1 February 2007 575K
Lesson Plan This fascinating, cheap and very reliable experiment clearly demonstrates the damaging effects of salinity (salt) on seed germination.
Thursday, 26 October 2006
Great Moments in Science I am lucky enough to have a chippie (carpenter) for a brother-in-law, and over the years, he has taught me a lot.
Thursday, 28 September 2006
Great Moments in Science Dr Karl investigates how lucky the 'lucky' four-leaf clover might be.
Thursday, 11 August 2005
Scribbly Gum Across Australia, mosses and lichens are starting to reproduce and spread themselves around. Lichen are the termites of the plant world, but also used to be the source of the colour purple! Mosses, on the other hand, are a garden's friend, holding soil together and keeping in moisture.
Friday, 5 March 2004
Scribbly Gum Are mistletoes friend or foe? They provide food and shelter to a vast range of birds, mammals and insects, yet now infest trees in plague proportions in some parts of Australia.
Thursday, 3 July 2003
Scribbly Gum Feature Why do some wattles bloom in winter while so many other plants hunker down for the cold weather?
Friday, 2 August 2002
Western Australia has one of the most spectacular displays of wildflowers anywhere in the world. At least 12,000 plant species live across the state, with more discovered every year. Yet the soils here are among the most barren in the world, and it hardly ever rains. What's going on?
Thursday, 6 June 2002
Scribbly Gum Feature If you suddenly catch a whiff of bubblegum or peanut butter when you go for a bushwalk, don't be surprised if there's a native truffle lurking nearby. As winter approaches, these fungi form fat and fruiting bodies just below the soil surface, where they wait to be dug up and devoured by native animals.