A guide for those involved in the design, construction, management and operation of a commercial or industrial facility.
On this page
When developing a commercial or industrial facility, you should create a waste management plan to submit to council with your planning application.
This guide is created for those involved in the design, construction, management and operation of:
If you’re planning a mixed-use development, use our multi-unit development guide.
Local government areas may have different requirements and guidelines for developing a waste management plan. Use this guide alongside local government requirements for your site.
This should include:
Provide a full set of scaled drawings showing where waste is disposed of and collected.
The drawings must include:
Waste and recycling needs can vary depending on the size of your business, development and use of your facility.
The following tools can help estimate the amount of waste your facility may generate:
Waste generation estimates are your responsibility. Consider commissioning an external consultant to calculate the waste volumes and help you prepare your waste management plan.
You are also responsible for providing adequate space for potential waste generation and storage. Consider this early in the design stage.
Details of your waste system must be provided. This can include:
Make sure separation, storage and collection for each type of material is easy for future building occupants to use and understand.
Check appropriate types of waste systems with the local government requirements for your site.
Make sure your bin quantity and size is appropriate for your facility. The type and volume of waste, recycling and potentially organics will be impacted by the:
Bins must be separated according to local government requirements.
Storage areas should be designed:
Make sure collection areas:
Keep in mind certain waste streams require separate storage areas, such as:
User facility areas such as employees or visitors to the site, should be considered.
Design any food preparation area with sufficient, dedicated space to collect and recycle food, plastics and glass waste, including:
Design any kitchens and lunch room areas with sufficient, dedicated space to collect and recycle:
Make sure office areas have space to store recyclable products, such as:
Determine what waste stream collection services council offers for businesses and how often.
Consider if you need a private collection service for some or all of your waste streams.
The frequency of the collection and services offered will influence your storage requirements.
Collection points should:
Collection points shouldn’t restrict or be restricted by the following:
Identify potential occupational health and safety risks associated with the proposed services and design layout by conducting a preliminary risk and hazard assessment.
Read WorkSafe’s guide to non-hazardous waste and recyclable materials.
Include in the plan if the design has been modified to eliminate or minimise any identified risks.
Install signage with instructions on how to use specific facilities, including:
Outline how you’ve considered and mitigated:
Include in your plan if there’s a need to allocate tasks to staff or employ a building manager or caretaker.
Also include if collection contractors have been hired to maximise resource recovery, including reporting and continuous improvement.
We created a checklist you can print and fill out and submit with your planning application.
Local government planners may also use this checklist to assess a waste management plan.