Find How to Keep Healthy - What should you eat?
What should you eat?
You should eat a mixture of different kinds of food to keep healthy. You should try to include carbohydrates, such as pasta, rice or bread, at every meal and eat at least five different fruits and vegetables each day. You also need a small amount of protein, such as cheese or meat, two or three times a day. Fats, oils and sugars are useful foods, but you should only eat small amounts of these.
Why is water good for you?
Water is good for you because your body needs water to work properly. There is water in your brain, blood, joints and many other places. You lose water every day, for example, through sweating or going to the toilet. You need to take in more water to make up for this loss. You can do this by drinking water and eating foods that contain water, such as fruit, vegetables and soup.
How does exercise help?
Exercise helps in many different ways. It makes your growing bones and muscles strong. Exercise that makes you breathe harder, such as cycling, also strengthens your heart and lungs. Exercise makes you feel filter and helps you to relax and sleep better. It can also make you feel happier, and it is a good way to make new friends. It does not matter what kind of exercise you do as long as you enjoy it. Swimming is an excellent form of Exercise. It keeps your heart and lungs healthy and also helps strengthen your muscles and bones.
When should you go to bed?
When you should go to bed depends on how much sleep you need. Babies need to sleep upto 16 hours a day, but old people may need only about 6 hours sleep. Most children need at least 10 hours sleep to keep healthy. When you sleep, your body rests and your brain sorts through the new information you have taken in during the day.
Did you know?
Eating carrots really can help our eyesight. Carrots and other foods, such as apricots, milk and asparagus, contain lots of vitamin A, which helps us see.
Thank you! It seems very practical and good health information is contained.