The Vrir'ied are a highly intelligent alien species that live on the gaseous planet Mides 1IG in the Proxima Capella galaxy. Their society emphasizes harmony above all, both with their environments and with each other. While they are not a hivemind, they do have a group consciousness that every member of the species can tap into. This desire for harmony is reflected in their amorphous physical form, which changes state when interacting with their surroundings and with each other. For example, on their home planet, which is a gas giant, they generally stay in gaseous forms to more easily travel to different places by varying their elemental heaviness. Social interactions are done by changing their innate elements to produce the desired chemical reactions. More intense interactions, such as mating, will produce more intense reactions, while simpler interactions, like a passing conversation will barely produce a spark. The most spectacular reactions will occur when the Vrir'ied's group consciousness recognizes a need for reproduction. At that time, members of the Vrir'ied will come together into groups of 5-10 and form intricate chain reactions that result in the birth of a new Vrir'ied. There are currently 50 different clans among the Vrir'ied, and each family has its own special chemical formula used to produce offspring.

Although the Vrir'ied are generally most comfortable in gaseous form, their adaptiveness as a species has seen them take on solid and liquid forms as well when they engage in interstellar travel and diplomacy. The Vrir'ied who are on planet Earth generally take on solid forms, shapeshifting to imitate the native life forms on the planet. Meanwhile, the Vrir'ied who are on the ocean planet Kepler take on liquid forms. There have not yet been any records of Vrir'ied reproducing while in liquid or solid forms, but several new clans have arisen on these planets that are currently developing potential formulas for reproduction using their new forms. Already known for their peacefulness and adaptability, if any Vrir'ied clan succeeds in this new reproductive formula, there will surely be a great rise in their population that will catapult them into the top choice for diplomacy in the future.
