Write 8 page essay on the topic Theories of society.
Early socialization is an essential step in the building of an individual’s character and personality. This is the first form of human contact and interaction that the individual encounters during the first stages of his or her life. Therefore, the first lesson one learns through early socialization is how to relate to other individuals. It is essential that the process of early interaction is done in a conducive environment around individuals who will not have a negative impact on the mindset of the child. Individuals who have the first socialization with a child can have a positive or negative impact. I learnt many messages from early socialization. One of the things that a human learns in this phase of development is empathy and that one should always relate to others the way he or she wishes to be treated. Despite the fact that some empathetic aspects of humans are innate, the environment has a role in shaping the presentation of these factors and the future character of an individual. Another message that can be learnt from early socialization is discipline. In this stage of development, an individual is able to learn the consequences of his or her actions. Hence, the approach taken by the parents in discipline their children is very important in shaping the way they develop as adults. For example, some parents scold and beat their children as a disciplinary measure. These children have been found to develop at different rates to parents who take a proactive approach.
Delivering a high-quality product at a reasonable price is not enough anymore.
That’s why we have developed 5 beneficial guarantees that will make your experience with our service enjoyable, easy, and safe.
You have to be 100% sure of the quality of your product to give a money-back guarantee. This describes us perfectly. Make sure that this guarantee is totally transparent.Read more
Each paper is composed from scratch, according to your instructions. It is then checked by our plagiarism-detection software. There is no gap where plagiarism could squeeze in.Read more
Thanks to our free revisions, there is no way for you to be unsatisfied. We will work on your paper until you are completely happy with the result.Read more
Your email is safe, as we store it according to international data protection rules. Your bank details are secure, as we use only reliable payment systems.Read more
By sending us your money, you buy the service we provide. Check out our terms and conditions if you prefer business talks to be laid out in official language.Read more