Community work is an essential part of social work. It has been defined as “the process of assisting people to improve their own communities by undertaking autonomous collective actions.”(Twelvetrees, 2001) It entails getting the support of communities members to undertake projects or tasks that would be beneficial for the community. In community work, workers “operate as facilitators with people in relation to what those people decide to become involved with.”(Twelvetrees, 2001) It takes special skills to work within communities especially if the community is not very open to suggestions and the issue to be addressed is sensitive. To be effective in community work, it takes a collaborative effort and partnership to bring about changes and advance the community. When working with communities, the planned change model as developed by Kirst-Ashman & Hull (2009) is a tool that can be utilized.
Members of the treatment centre do not only have trouble with substance abuse but may have another problem along with it such as depression. Due to this, the therapeutic community model is the main model used because it is holistic. This model is also the main model used because the program not only focuses on helping individuals recover from substance abuse but also help them be able to become employed or go back to school when they set back out into the world. According to Mr. Jurawan, the centre wants to ensure individuals are able to get back up on their feet and have a better life.
Developing a plan to take schools in the right direction and improve our education system is easier said than done. The initial challenge is recognizing underlying problems keeping students from learning. This challenge, in part, is due to the fact that the issues may change significantly depending on who is labelling them, whether it is educators, parents, lawmakers and students. In this paper the writer will address bullying and how it challenges student, teachers, administrators, parents and the community at Lakewood Elementary School. In 2012 a bully incident ended up taking the life of a fourth grader at Lakewood Elementary. This incident shocked the school and community. Principal Kidd started Positive Behavior Support
2:1 Compare the strengths and limitations of assessments of a range of assessment methods with reference to the needs of individual learners.
Fellowship, neighbors, and solidarity are just a few of the words that come to mind when thinking about community. Communities thrive on togetherness and support, and the best way to ensure the flourishing of these concepts is to get involved within the neighborhoods, towns, or communities that we live in. In his writing, “Bowling Alone: America’s Declining Social Capital”, Robert Putnam discusses the connection between social capital and community engagement. Putnam defines social capital as, “…features of social organization such as networks, norms, and social trust that facilitate coordination and cooperation for mutual benefits” (Putnam 182). He addresses the idea that community engagement is vital in increasing
Successful home-school-community partnerships involve all stakeholders and give them an equal voice in the decision-making process.
Community accountability and community based approaches challenge us to seriously address violence and intimate harms without reproducing the technologies of individualization, pathology, penality, protection under the authority of heteropatriarchy and white supremacy, and criminalisation, all of which continually deny and subvert our notions of safety and justice. We are asked to consider recover and build the potential of community while recognizing and disengaging from strategies that undermine the possibility of community formation. Community accountability is any strategy to address violence, abuse, or harm that creates safety, justice, reparations, and healing without relying on police, prisons, child protection services, or any other state
This assessment has outlined the community and stakeholders for the DAH, and briefly described their function and their information needs. Included in the discussion is an in-depth analysis of the demographics of the community served for this position, including age group, education level, socioeconomic level, and a brief description of the area served. This assessment includes a 5-year report that can help for planning purposes for demographics for the (DAH), and the information on the report seemed to be aligned and corroborate with information gathered from online research. This assessment would have benefitted from an interview with key figures at DAH, in lieu of which is attached one of two addendums/supplements that illustrates questions to be asked in an interview survey. The other supplement is a generated report of a sample survey from Social Explorer, as previously mentioned. As per best practices, as budgets, resources, and time allow, the Stakeholder Assessment and Community Analysis process should be conducted and reviewed a minimum of once a year if
ESSAY ONE (minimum 300 words) -Community can be defined as a number of people living in the same area and linked by common values, practices, and goals (Spitzberg & Thorndike, 1992). Describe an experience in which you made a positive difference in a community you are a member of. What did you learn about the concept of “communities” from this experience, and how do you see these lessons playing out when forming a community in Honors Housing?
The Santa Clara Vietnamese population is the second largest community in the nation. From 1980, the population grew from over 11,000 Vietnamese residents to over 134,000 in 2010. At almost 8%, the Vietnamese population is the second largest Asian group, only surpassed by Orange County. The Vietnamese community experiences many social disparities. The 2011 Santa Clara County Vietnamese Community Assessment provides an extensive report on the health status of the Vietnamese America residents.
1. What is the nature of community? How do you define neighborhood? What are the differences between community and neighborhood?
An example of a diverse society is Singapore. The definition of a diverse society is to have different types of people, who do not share the same race, culture, ethnicity, beliefs, practices, race, tradition, et cetera, to ‘come together’ and form a community. Living in a diverse society has its advantages. One of the advantages is that it can increase one’s knowledge, awareness and understanding about others culture, ethnicity, beliefs, practices, customs, tradition, et cetera. Despite that fact that living in a diverse society has its advantages, it also has its disadvantages. The disadvantages are that it is hard to preserve their own cultural identity. Another disadvantage is that it can result in disagreements, conflicts and fights between the different people who are living together.
This section provides a review of the relevant literature that underpins this study. As argued in the previous paragraph, the concept of community policing, its drivers and purposes can be considered as key unresolved issues in the literature. In this sense, two background questions have guided this literature review section – these being: i) what is community policing; and ii) what are the key drivers for the development and application of community policing?
Community Policing is the system of allocating police officers to areas so that they become familiar with local inhabitants. It is used to change the way police departments interact with the public, focusing on community concerns, including crimes. The idea of community policing is to work together to improve the life and quality in their neighborhoods. Community Policing emerged in the 1970’s with the goal to eliminate public disenchantment with police services and the criticisms of the lack of police professionalism (Fagin pg. 114). They identify and resolve issues which potentially affect the way neighborhoods live. Community Policing stresses prevention, early identification, and timely intervention to deal with issues before they become
Rural development is as important as urban development. Alleviating the hardships of the rural people is fundamental to rural development. Efforts at developing the rural areas are aimed at creating industries and employment opportunities. Any initiative towards this end would be welcomed with open arms in Nepal. This would also reduce the population density in the cities. They would be able to prosper in the village itself without having to think about migrating somewhere for their livelihood.