With more people using technology in this modern era, there are some who not only use but also abuse it. They not only spy on our activities but steal our data as well, which is they sometimes share them with third parties – in order to increase their financial gain at the expense of other people’s lives. To secure the network and data of the business and of the users, all of these factors have increased the demand for cyber security experts in almost every area of this technological world. Know about some of the best cyber security programs to choose from after 12th grade.
B.Tech. In Cyber Security and Computer Science
Basically, a four-year undergraduate degree that emphasizes developing IT skills needed to protect the servers and network from malicious attacks These graduates are employed by a number of IT and tech companies to safeguard their organization’s data and information.
B.Tech. In Quick Heal and Computer Science Engineering
The four-year undergraduate program’s main goal is to improve the IT skills needed to protect the servers and the network from malicious attacks. Many software development companies hire applicants with this degree.
B.Tech. In Forensics, Engineering, and Computer Science
Another four-year undergraduate degree program that places a strong emphasis on technology and its methods for protecting networks, programs, and devices’ data and information from attacks and unauthorized access.
B.Tech. In Computer Science
It is a four-year undergraduate degree-based course that develops the computer programming skills and technical language needed to safeguard data from online attacks. Such candidates are hired by IT consultants to protect their information and data.
Engineering in Networking and Cyber Security
Additionally, it is a four-year undergraduate course that emphasizes system operations as well as the vulnerability of the same. Employing candidates with such a degree helps IT and tech companies protect their customers’ data and information.
IT Bachelor’s degree
It is a degree-based undergraduate program that typically takes three to five years to understand and become familiar with IT-based programs and their various fields. These candidates are in high demand by companies or firms that manage cyber security.
BSc. in Cyber Security and IT management
The three-year undergraduate program emphasizes the practical skills needed to safeguard data, information, and devices from harmful cyber attacks. Such candidates receive the highest pay among all other kinds of Cyber Security jobs and are hired directly and immediately by IT companies.
BSc. in Cyber Security
Once more, this is a three-year degree-based undergraduate course that primarily focuses on the networking fundamentals and privacy needed to protect the server and a network from other unnecessary and malicious cyber attacks. These candidates are typically hired by large software and tech companies to safeguard both their own servers and those of their clients.
BCA in Cybersecurity and Microsoft Cloud Computing
It is a three-year undergraduate degree program that focuses on studying cloud-based software that uses remote servers while also dealing with cloud-related issues (cloud computing, cloud integration, and cloud storage). These days, there is a big demand for this course. Every tech company and other IT businesses look for such candidates to guarantee the security of their data and information.
Cybersecurity with a BCA honors
It is a three-year, full-time undergraduate program that aids in cyber forensics development and ethical hacking skills are needed for this. Such candidates are sought after by large IT companies so that they can hire them to secure their company’s data and network.