What reason about Importance of English Paragraph
Do you know about the importance of English language?
Friends Let’s go know about the importance of English as a language. The English language is most widely used for communicating around the world. It is the Language of International Communication. It is the most common second language in the world. English is the official language in 53 countries. It is spoken as the first language in many countries.
English is spoken as a first language by around 400 million people worldwide. English is playing an important role in many sections of education, like medicine, engineering and business. It is the first language which used in computer and internet. There are many reasons that make English is the most important language in the world
Q.N.1 Using the following input, produce a write-up on ‘The Importance of English’ in about 150-200 words
(1) International Language, (2) Invention of the Internet, (3) Language of Trade, (4) Commerce higher technical and scientific studies communication around the globe, (5) Means for earning a livelihood.
Importance of English as a language
English is an international language. It is spoken all over the world. With the invention of the internet, no country can depend upon its local language. We can communicate with other countries only when we know English. A vast store of knowledge of almost all subjects is available in English. English is easy to learn. It is the medium of understanding and study of science and technology.
In Trade, commerce, higher technical and scientific studies it is widely used as communication around the globe. With knowledge, a person can earn his livelihood. In spite of the irregularities in grammar and pronunciation, English is one of the most effective instruments of expression.
There is no language in the world which has a richer vocabulary than English. Perl Buck has said that Indians have put to good use the benefits of English. Their pronunciation is pure and exquisite.
Q.N.2 -Using the following input, produce a write-up on ‘why English is important in our life’ in about 150-200 words:
International Language, Invention of Internet, Language of Trade, Commerce higher technical and scientific studies communication around the globe, means for earning livelihood.
Why English is important in our life
None can deny that English has today become an international language. It is the most popular language in the world. It is the language which is spoken and understood by the greatest number of people in the world. For trade and for diplomatic purposes, India will
have to depend on English for a long time to come. The most important point in favour of English is that it is the key to world wisdom.
The western countries are far ahead of us in most of the branches of knowledge particularly science and technology. This knowledge is accessible to us only through English. To throw away English would mean to throw out the vast treasure of knowledge that we can get through this language. Knowing English is also necessary for international trade and in Creasing our exports.
- 60Importance of English language Essay 150 words Importance of English Language English language has become one of the most important and widely spoken languages in the world. It is a language of international communication and has become the global lingua franca. The significance of English language can be seen in…
- 50Republic day celebration essay: Why republic day celebration Why the republic day celebration? India became free on 15th August 1947. But the constitution came into force from 26th January 1950. Our constitution declared our Country a Republic. So we celebrate 26th January every year as Republic Day. Our first President…
- 31The miracle of language essay in English 5oo Words The miracle of language essay-When several million years ago human children were born to subhuman parents who reared them up, these first human beings had no language. Today if a human child does not hear a human speech from its earliest…