Please follow instructions. follow rubric. write 800-1000 words.
Write an 800-1,000 word essay on your personal worldview. Briefly discuss the various possible meanings of the term “spirituality,” and your understanding of the concepts of pluralism, scientism, and postmodernism. Primarily, address the following seven basic worldview questions:
- What is prime reality?
- What is the nature of the world around you?
- What is a human being?
- What happens to a person at death?
- Why is it possible to know anything at all?
- How do people know what is right or wrong?
- What is the meaning of human history?
Prepare this assignment according to the APA guidelines found in the APA Style Guide, located in the Student Success Center. An abstract is not required.
This assignment uses a rubric. Please review the rubric prior to beginning the assignment to become familiar with the expectations for successful completion.
You are required to submit this assignment to Turnitin. Please refer to the directions in the Student Success Center.
Comprehension of Pertinent Terms
Several possible definitions of the term spirituality, including from the text, are clearly articulated and distinguished. Description of how spirituality is broadly defined in the context of scientism and postmodernism is provided and clearly demonstrates a grasp of the meaning of these concepts.
Personal Worldview Analysis
The analysis answers all seven questions thoughtfully and in a detailed manner. The analysis thoroughly explains the interconnection of the questions and their implications.
Thesis Development and Purpose
Thesis and/or main claim are comprehensive. The essence of the paper is contained within the thesis. Thesis statement makes the purpose of the paper clear.
Argument Logic and Construction
Clear and convincing argument presents a persuasive claim in a distinctive and compelling manner. All sources are authoritative.
Mechanics of Writing (includes spelling, punctuation, grammar, language use)
Writer is clearly in command of standard, written, academic English.
Paper Format (use of appropriate style for the major and assignment)
All format elements are correct.
Documentation of Sources (citations, footnotes, references, bibliography, etc., as appropriate to assignment and style)
Sources are completely and correctly documented, as appropriate to assignment and style, and format is free of error.