Science subject and location tags
Articles, documents and multimedia from ABC Science
Thursday, 28 March 2013
New cancer treatments and better methods for cancer screening could emerge from a huge new international study that has revealed more of the genetic underpinnings of breast, prostate and ovarian cancers.
Monday, 27 August 2012
Children exposed to blue asbestos may face more wide-ranging health problems in adulthood than mesothelioma and lung cancer, according to an Australian study.
Tuesday, 22 May 2012
News analysis An expert taskforce has caused a stir by recommending against the use of the PSA test to screen for prostate cancer in men.
Tuesday, 22 March 2011
Counting the number of cancer cells circulating in a patient's blood could help determine how aggressive a cancer is and predict the best treatment to use, say British scientists.
Thursday, 3 March 2011
A newly identified mechanism that helps explain why some tumours are resistant to specific anti-cancer drugs could help improve patient care and drug design.
Monday, 14 December 2009
Scientists have developed a nanosensor for the quick detection of cancers through a simple blood test.
Wednesday, 4 November 2009 6
Great Moments in Science Dr Karl continues his look at epigenetics and how the latest research into DNA is helping fight cancer.
Wednesday, 9 September 2009
A virus known to cause cancer in animals has been found in some prostate tumours and might be a cause of prostate cancer, according to US researchers.
Thursday, 19 March 2009
Two large studies looking at the benefits of a common screening test for prostate cancer produced conflicting results about whether it saves lives.
Tuesday, 7 October 2008
Great Moments in Science The prostate gland is little understood by most men. Why this is so is a matter Dr Karl can't quite put his finger on.
Tuesday, 10 June 2008
Researchers believe they have found a compound produced by aggressive prostate tumours that could be used to develop a new urine test.
Monday, 21 May 2007
Eating lycopene-rich tomatoes offers no protection against prostate cancer, according to the latest research, contrary to the findings of some past studies.