Once upon a time, there was a wizard named Malvin who lived alone in a castle at the far edge of a kingdom. Malvin had once been a member of the king’s court, but after being humiliated one too many times by his rival, Demelza, Malvin threw a hissy fit and swore to all the members of the court that they would rue the day they underestimated him. He threw an optical illusion spell at the floor, a cloud of black smoke enveloped him, and he snuck out the back door before anyone could catch wise to the trick.

Unfortunately, he couldn't seem to make good on his threat no matter how he tried. He’d cast a spell to make it rain frogs on the kingdom, but it wasn’t long before the commoners discovered how tasty frog legs could be if fried up in butter, and they counted themselves lucky to have so many of the creatures at their disposal. Malvin then brewed a potion and poured it into the river so all the people who drank from it would be cursed with blood-red eyes and gravelly voices. This only proved beneficial to the soldiers at war with the neighboring kingdom, though, as it made them more intimidating and led them to a quick and decisive victory. So he cast yet another spell to make all the cows in the kingdom give purple milk, but unwittingly made this purple milk as delicious as the milk at the end of a bowl of Lucky Charms, so the kingdom began exporting their purple milk as a high-priced specialty beverage and farmers throughout the land prospered.

At his wit's end, Malvin confronted Demelza, screaming, “None of this would be happening if you had just refrained from humiliating me in court! Fie on you!”

Demelza wrinkled her nose and said, “I’m sorry Malvin, I never meant to humiliate you. I was actually just trying to impress you because I have an enormous crush on you.”

That was the last thing Malvin expected to hear. His cheeks went red, but Demelza flashed him a smile and from that moment, he was a goner. The two of them fell quickly in love and married, and the king invited Malvin back to court as one of his two royal wizards. Malvin and Demelza worked together from then on.
