Bible Pathways 03/12/2003
- Sign Up for Email? Sign Up for Email Delivery?
- 2003 Mar 12
Read Deuteronomy 32 -- 34
In Today 's Reading:
The song of Moses; Moses blessed the 12 tribes; death of Moses on Mount Nebo; Joshua succeeds Moses
The Israelites were to proclaim greatness to our God. . . . for all His ways are just; a faithful God . . . righteous and upright. The almighty Rock will never forsake the faithful. The Rock, His work is perfect, for all His ways are . . . without injustice, He is righteous (Deuteronomy 32:3-4). Moses foretold of the blessings and happiness that could be theirs if they would live in obedience to the word of God (33:6-29).
After conferring spiritual blessings upon each of the tribes, Moses concluded with praise to God: The Eternal God is a dwelling-place, and underneath are the everlasting arms. He drives the enemy from before you (33:27). Although it is written: No other prophet like Moses has arisen in Israel, whom the LORD knew face to face (34:10), Moses forfeited the privilege of leading Israel into Canaan because of his sin (32:48-52; compare Numbers 20:1-13). Thus Moses became an example for all Israel that God is holy and cannot allow His law to be broken without consequences. Moses' life had been almost perfect. However, even though he had been the Lord's lawgiver, he had also broken the law once, and the law did not permit exceptions. Moses is last seen alone, climbing one of the most prominent mountain peaks in Moab from which he was allowed to view the promised land, though he could not enter it. Moses' penalty illustrates that even forgiveness of sin does not remove its earthly consequences (James 2:10).
Centuries later, Moses, symbolizing God's law, stood on Mount Hermon in the promised land with Elijah, who symbolized the prophets of God. Together they talked with Jesus as He was transformed in front of them, and His face shone like the sun. Even His clothes became as white as the light . . . .While he was still speaking, suddenly a bright cloud covered them, and a voice from the cloud said: This is My beloved Son. I take delight in Him. Listen to Him! (Matthew 17:2,5).
As our Rock (Deuteronomy 32:31). Christ was that spiritual Rock that followed them (I Corinthians 10:4).
Government Official: Sen. Kent Conrad (ND) · Country: Sri Lanka (formerly Ceylon) (19 million) an island in the Indian Ocean off the southeastern tip of India · Major languages: Sinhala and Tamil · Christianity suppressed · 67% Buddhist; 15% Hindu; 8% Roman Catholic; 7% Muslim; .75% Protestant · Prayer Suggestion: Pray and praise God with a spirit of thankfulness for His goodness (Psalms 107:1,21).
Optional Reading: John 3
Memory Verse for the Week: Matthew 5:14