Table of Contents
A staggering one in eight people in the U.S. has hearing loss in both ears, according to the National Institute on Deafness and Other Communication Disorders—underscoring just how common the serious medical condition is. While just 2% of Americans ages 45 to 54 have disabling hearing loss, that number climbs to 8.5% for those ages 55 to 64, growing again to 25% for those ages 65 to 74. By age 75, a full 50% of people experience disabling hearing loss.
Because presbycusis—or age-related hearing loss—typically comes on slowly, it may go unnoticed for years. But early diagnosis and treatment are important, as treatment can reverse cognitive decline. There are multiple types and causes of hearing loss, and identifying the root cause can help determine treatment.
Types and Causes of Hearing Loss
Losing the ability to hear sound and to understand speech isn’t just an inconvenience. It can lead to social isolation, depression, cognitive decline and may even increase the risk of falling.
“Hearing loss has widespread implications,” says Oliver Adunka, M.D., director of otology, neurotology and cranial base surgery at Ohio State University Wexner Medical Center and professor in the department of otolaryngology at Ohio State University College of Medicine. “The consequences are worse than people think. It’s an isolating problem, so depression goes along with it.”
Below, we explain the main types of hearing loss.
Conductive Hearing Loss
Conductive hearing loss involves the outer and middle ear, that is, the part of the ear we can see, and what lies just beyond it inside the skull. The middle ear contains the eardrum (tympanic membrane) and three small bones that amplify the vibration of the eardrum caused by sound waves.
Conductive hearing loss can be caused by:
- Earwax buildup. If there’s too much earwax in the ear canal, sound waves can’t travel into the middle ear. If the buildup is mild, you can try a home remedy. (But skip the dangerous ones, such as probing with a cotton swab or other instrument that can embed the earwax further or even rupture the eardrum.) Instead, put a few drops of baby oil or mineral oil into the problem ear and let it soak in, then rinse it out gently with warm water the next day or two. If after a few tries the wax doesn’t dislodge, see a medical professional who can clean the outer ear canal and make sure this is the only issue. This is one of the simpler ear problems.
- Ear infection. Chronic ear infections can lead to permanent hearing loss by damaging the eardrum or other parts of the middle ear and should be treated promptly. This can occur in one or both ears.
- Otosclerosis. Both genetic and environmental factors (such as viral infections) can cause the three tiny bones in the middle ear to deform so they no longer conduct sound well to the inner ear. This condition may be repairable with surgery.
- Ruptured eardrum(s). A tympanic membrane perforation can be due to an infection in the middle ear (acute otitis media) or a traumatic injury (such as a very loud explosion) or direct contact (such as poking the ear with a cotton swab, a frequent cause). Or it may occur spontaneously. The eardrum can usually heal itself, but surgery may be needed. This may be one-sided with just one ear affected, or both ears.
Sensorineural Hearing Loss
Even if the middle ear is healthy and amplifying and transmitting sound waves properly, problems can occur in the inner ear where the snail shell-shaped cochleas translate those sound waves into electrical signals that travel via the auditory nerves to the brain. This is known as sensorineural hearing loss.
The cochlea is filled with fluid where tiny sensory hairs are attached to nerve cells. When the hair cells become damaged, they aren’t able to transmit all the information received. “We’re born with one set of hair cells and pretty much immediately we start to lose them,” says Dr. Adunka.
Causes of sensorineural hearing loss can include:
- Aging. “We’re all losing our hearing,” says Richard S. Tyler, Ph.D., professor and director of audiology in the department of otolaryngology and department of communication sciences and disorders at the University of Iowa. “For some, it starts at 50; for some, it starts at 70.” Genetics play a strong role in how susceptible you are to losing your hearing and the pace at which you lose it. “Some people are genetically predisposed to lose hearing,” says Dr. Adunka.
- Loud or chronic noise exposure. Chronic noise exposure is related to aging, since the longer you live, the more likely it is that frequent workplace or recreational noise exposure will cause cumulative damage to the hair cells in the inner ear and result in a noticeable hearing deficit. However, even a single exposure to a very loud sound can cause hearing loss. Among adults ages 20 to 69 who said they had had five or more years of exposure to very loud noise at work, about 18% showed speech-frequency hearing loss in both ears, compared to just 5.5% of adults with the same condition who reported no occupational noise exposure.
- Medications. Both over-the-counter and prescription drugs can damage your hearing. Known as ototoxic drugs, these include quinine-based antimalarials, high doses of aspirin, certain types of antibiotics, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatories (NSAIDs), some chemotherapy agents and loop diuretics. As in the case of loud noise, ototoxicity has a greater impact on some people than others, so make sure your doctor is monitoring the possible effects on your hearing if you are taking any of these medications.
- Illness. A wide variety of diseases and conditions can have a negative effect on hearing. These include childhood illnesses like mumps and meningitis. Other conditions and diseases that can contribute to hearing loss include autoimmune diseases, diabetes, high blood pressure, HIV/AIDS, iron-deficient anemia, migraines, multiple sclerosis (MS) and thyroid problems. One of the newest diseases to come under scrutiny as a possible cause of hearing loss is Covid-19 because it can infect the brainstem, although researchers have not reached any firm conclusions yet.
- Autoimmune inner ear disease (AIED). AIED is not a common condition, but when it occurs, it is the body’s own immune response that causes damage to both inner ears and possibly parts of the middle ears, leading to hearing loss. It may be in conjunction with a systemic autoimmune disease, but it can also appear on its own.
- Meniere’s disease. This rare disorder that has no known cause can lead to hearing loss over time. It affects the inner ear and symptoms include episodes of vertigo or dizziness and ringing in the ears (tinnitus), as well as feeling pressure in the ear.
Mixed Hearing Loss
It’s possible for hearing loss to be caused by both conductive and sensorineural factors. When that’s the case, it’s called mixed hearing loss.
Causes of mixed hearing loss include:
- Otosclerosis. In about one-third of cases where the three small bones that conduct sound in the middle ear deform, there is also sensorineural hearing loss. This is due to the condition extending into the inner ear and affecting the cochlea and associated ligament.
- Head and/or brain injury. Which part of the ear is damaged depends on the nature of the injury. Many traumatic brain injuries (TBIs) suffered in the military are the result of explosions that damage the inner ear, but may also harm auditory processing, blood flow, muscles or nerves in the head and neck. It’s also possible for extremely loud explosions to rupture the eardrum, which is part of the middle ear, although this is rare.
What Causes Hearing Loss in One Ear?
If you experience one-sided (known as unilateral) hearing loss with no obvious cause (such as a ruptured eardrum), take it seriously because it can be a symptom of a medical condition that needs immediate attention. “Asymmetry is a red flag,” says Dr. Adunka. “When that’s the case, we need an MRI to look at the brain.” He notes that one-sided hearing loss is uncommon: “For the vast majority, both ears are typically affected.”
Causes of unilateral hearing loss include:
- Abnormal growths. Tumors and cysts can form in the ear canal, just as they can in other parts of the body. If the growth is large enough to cause hearing loss in the ear where it’s located, it needs to be treated.
- Acoustic neuroma. Although rare, this type of benign tumor that presses on one of the cranial nerves produces hearing loss in one ear for 90% of the people who develop them.
- Meningiomas. Like acoustic neuromas, meningiomas are rare. These tumors are normally benign but they can cause one-sided hearing loss.
What Decibel Level Causes Hearing Loss?
The Centers for Disease Control (CDC) defines an average of 85 decibels over an eight-hour period as the level of noise that poses a threat. As a guideline, the federal Occupational Health and Safety Administration states, “If you need to raise your voice to speak to someone three feet away, noise levels might be over 85 decibels.”
A common form of hearing loss is from chronic occupational noise exposure, according to Dr. Adunka.
The CDC estimates that 22 million workers a year are exposed to occupational noise loud enough to potentially damage their hearing. Employers are federally required to protect employees with a hearing conservation program (which includes monitoring employees’ hearing through testing and providing ear protection on the job) when workplace noise averages 85 decibels over an eight-hour period.
For perspective on what different noise levels sound like, imagine a freight train passing by about 100 feet from you: That’s 80 decibels. By contrast, a whisper from 5 feet away is about 40 decibels. A construction site or a nightclub both weigh in around 100 decibels, while gunshots, fireworks and explosions range from 120 to 165 decibels—loud enough to cause immediate hearing damage if you’re close to the source.
An Online Hearing Test That Is Quick, Easy, And Convenient? Say No More.
Jabra's online hearing test is free, quick, and backed by audiologists. Get personalized results and information on your hearing from the comfort of your home.
On Jabra Enhance's Website
Quick Statistics about Hearing. National Institute on Deafness and Other Communication Disorders. Accessed 5/29/2021.
Panza F, Lozupone M, Sardone R, Battista P, Piccininni M, Dibello V, et al. Sensorial frailty: age-related hearing loss and the risk of cognitive impairment and dementia in later life Therapeutic Advances in Chronic Disease. 2018.
Abrams H. Hearing Loss and Associated Comorbidities: What Do We Know?. The Hearing Review. 2017.
Quesnel AM, Ishai R, McKenna MJ. Otosclerosis Temporal Bone Pathology. Otolaryngolgic Clinics of North America. 2018:291-303.
Noise-Induced Hearing Loss. National Institute on Deafness and Other Communication Disorders. Accessed 6/6/2021.
Dolhi N, Weimer, AD. Tympanic membrane perforations. StatPearls. 2020.
Ciorba A, Corazzi V, Bianchini C, Aimoni C, Pelucchi S, Skarzynski PH, et al. Autoimmune inner ear disease (AIED): A diagnostic challenge. International Journal of Immunopathology and Pharmacology. 2018;32:2058738418808680.
Au A, Stuyt JG, Chen D, Alagramam K. Ups and Downs of Viagra: Revisiting Ototoxicity in the Mouse Model. PLoS ONE. 2013;8(11):e79226.
Sriwijitalai W, Wiwanitkit V. Hearing loss and COVID-19: A note. American Journal of Otolaryngology. 2020:102473.
Acoustic Neuroma. National Organization for Rare Disorders. Accessed 5/30/2021.
Meningioma. National Organization for Rare Disorders. Accessed 5/30/2021.
Occupational Noise Exposure. United States Department of Labor. Accessed 6/4/2021.