Preschools Reduce Early Academic-Achievement Gaps: A Longitudinal Twin Approach
Study by Elliot M. Tucker-Drob, published by the Association for Psychological Science
Access to Full-Day Kindergarten: Pay Attention to the Details (2010)
Article by First Call's Adrienne Montani in the BC Teachers' Federation's Newsmagazine.
Care Advocacy Forum Archive (1999-2010)
The Child Care Advocacy Forum of BC has brought closure to their work. Download an archive of all of their publications.
Childhood Education and Care: Next Steps (2009)
Report from the Senate Standing Committee on Social Affairs, Science and Technology.
Childhood Development in BC: First Call's Framework for Action (Revised
This paper highlights the research, policy and advocacy links to Early Childhood Development and describes the five components of First Call's ECD basket framework.
Overview of Initiatives Affecting Early Childhood Development (Updates Sept 2008)
This compilation provides an overview of recent major initiatives that are affecting Early Childhood Development (ECD) in British Columbia, Canada. Most comments are excerpts from the relevant web sites. This is a work in progress as the initiatives are continually changing.
Inclusion for At-Risk Children and Their Families
A partnership between the Human Early Learning Partnership and Infant Development Program of BC, this project aims to better understand the early childhood developmen of at-risk children.
Context for Child Care in the Face of Corporate Intrusions and Government
First Call Provincial Coordinator Adrienne Montani's speaking notes from her presentation at the Coalition of Child Care Advocates of BC's Annual General Meeting.
Childhood Education Staffing Survey Results (2008)
In October/November 2007, First Call conducted a survey of Early Childhood Educators in BC. The results of this survey demonstrate that services to young children and families will continue to be in crisis until both levels of government recognize the need, and commit to building an integrated, planned and adequately funded system for early learning and child care in BC.
• Media Release
the One Time Only Funding Grants (Updated July 2007)
First Call has compiled a summary of one time funding grants from the Ministry of Children and Family Development and Ministry of Education for 2006/2007.
Cuts to Child Care: Impacts and Actions (January 2007)
This document is a compilation of resources and advocacy materials from First Call and our partners in response to the massive cuts to child care funding.
Early Childhood Development Presentation Toolkit
This presentation and meeting kit has been developed to assist you when speaking to decision-makers and other influential groups and individuals about the importance of the early years and the need for community-based family and early childhood education and care services that are supported by effective social and fiscal policies. Available to download as a zip file, or contact First Call to receive a hard copy.
Taking stock of ECD in BC – Just the Facts (2006)
On June 28, 2006 First Call hosted a forum called “Taking Stock of ECD in BC – Just the Facts.” The forum featured presentations on federal and provincial ECD spending and the state of key programs and services for young children and families. Participants at the forum posed a list of outstanding questions and discussed advocacy priorities and strategies.
Open Letter to the Education Community: End the Divide Between Early Learning and Child Care (2005).
Position Statement on Publicly Funded Child Care (2005)
Parent Programs in BC: A Profile (2005)
This profile establishes a baseline of the existing young parent programs combining educational and child care components that allow young parents to continue with school while their children attend child care on-site or nearby.
Everyone Counts Campaign - Child Care (2004)
Everyone Counts is a public awareness campaign and poster series launched in 2004. The general theme of all the posters is “everyone counts,” a not-so-subtle reminder that democratically elected governments are supposed to serve all their constituents – not just a chosen few.
Child Care Backgrounder and Press Release (2004)
The EDI (Early Development Instrument) Impact Study (2004)
Report from the Human Early Learning Partnership.
Healthy Child BC Forum Working Group Discussions (2004)
For more resources on early childhood development, visit the web sites of our coalition partners.