About 4% of US homes are currently powered by solar energy. That number is expected to triple in the next ten years.
As more Americans are going solar, it’s important for homeowners and office owners to understand the basics. Keep reading to learn everything you need to know before going solar.
Solar Panel Location
Your roof is one of the first things you need to think about before going solar. Since solar panels are usually installed on the roof, it needs to be in the condition to support them. Depending on the age of your roof, you may need some work done before installing solar panels.
If your roof isn’t a viable option for the panels, it’s possible to install them in the yard. Regardless of where they’re installed, it’s important that they’re facing the optimal direction. Southern-facing solar panels are the most efficient in the northern hemisphere.
Different Types of Solar Panels
There are different types of solar panels to choose from. You can choose between photovoltaics solar panels and solar thermal panels. Photovoltaics are the most popular and most commonly used for homes.
Not all solar panels are equal. You should think about things like efficiency, longevity, and warranty before making a purchase. Make sure to do research and read reviews before making a decision.
While solar panels will save you money over time, you need to consider the upfront and long-term costs. Based on the size of your home and your needs, you can figure out the cost of the panels and installation. There are financing options if you can’t pay the expense outright.
Depending on your location, you might be required to pay a permit fee. You also need to consider maintenance costs for the panels.
Using Solar Power Energy
You can choose how to use solar power energy in your home. If you choose an on-grid solar system, your home is still connected to your city’s power grid. This ensures that you’ll have power even if your panels don’t produce enough.
In this scenario, you can take advantage of net metering. If you produce more electricity than you need, you can sell it back to the grid and receive a credit on your electricity bill.
You can also choose to live off the grid and rely solely on solar energy. To do this you need a battery to store energy. Choosing an experienced company, like Blue Raven Solar installers, is important if you decide to go this route.
Is Going Solar Right for You?
Now that you know what you need to think about before going solar, are you ready to make the switch? From choosing the type of panels to thinking through the costs, these considerations will help you choose the right solar system for you.
If you’re interested in more articles like this, check out the rest of our blog!