Does a B12 Deficiency Cause Joint Pain?
When you are young, it can be challenging for you to become aware of your joints, but you will have to deal with it as you age. This is because painful joints will affect your mobility, fitness, and as time goes by, your independence. There are so many causes of joint pains. Do you think that B12 deficiency is one of them? If you want to get the answer to this article, read this article since it explores different types of topics you need to know about B12 deficiency and answer the question, "Does b12 deficiency cause joint pain?"
What is Vitamin B12?
Vitamin B12 is also known as Cobalamin. It's an essential and water-soluble vitamin which role in cell metabolism is indispensable. For your nervous system to be healthy, Vitamin B12 is necessary and helps your body produce more red blood cells.
There are so many types of foods that will provide you with the vitaminB12. Some of these foods include fish, meat, and dairy products like cheese and milk. Also, some breakfast cereals may contain some Vitamin B12. Vitamin B12 can also be in supplement forms like multivitamins or injections, and therefore, there are many ways to provide your body with these essential types of vitamins.
Is vitamin B12 common?
Most people do not have a deficiency in vitaminB12 since there is plenty in so many foods. However, different groups of people have a danger of having vitaminB12. Vegans and older adults are among these groups which are deficient in vitaminB12.
The main reason vegans are deficient in this type of vitamin is that it's mainly abundant in meat, dairy products, and fish. If you are a vegan, you will agree that you consume none or very little of the meat, dairy products, or meat. For this reason, you do not provide your body with the vitaminB12 that I require. In case you skip breakfast cereals, vegan milk alternatives, and vitaminB12 supplements, you will have a deficiency of vitaminB12, which will result in so many issues.
The older people are the other group of people who are likely to have a deficiency of vitaminB12. The deficit is mainly brought about by diseases or illnesses that result in the malabsorption of vitaminB12, which does not sound good. This group of people's diet has sources of vitaminB12, but their bodies cannot absorb them during digestion. Like the vegans, the older people can have supplementation to prevent the malabsorption of vitaminB12, but one has to get medical intervention.
Causes of vitaminB12: Pernicious Anemia
This is the primary cause of vitaminB12. It's an autoimmune disease affecting the stomach leading to malabsorption of these vitamins. The condition cannot be treated with supplements but instead, vitaminB12 injections. Most of the older people who are having a deficiency of vitaminB12 suffer from pernicious anemia. In case you have an older person experiencing the symptoms described after this section, you should seek medical help to find out whether they have this disease.
The symptoms of vitaminB12 deficiency
It can be challenging to spot that you have a deficiency of vitamin B12 unless you know what to look for. This is because the symptoms are so many, and they may vary. However, most people become fatigued and lethargic at all times. The muscles also become weak, which are the primary reasons for becoming fatigued. VitaminB12 deficiency affects your cognition, vision and leads to depression.
Paraesthesia anemia is also another well-known symptom of B12 deficiency, which is pins and needles. This is a hazardous condition if you are experiencing it. Being deficiency in B12 is very dangerous, and therefore you have to ensure that you supply your body with adequate vitaminB12
Does b12 deficiency cause joint pain?
Joint pain can be caused by several reasons and is very common among older people. Therefore, it may be very difficult to know whether a vitamin B12 deficiency can result in joint pain or even whether they relate in a way. Many people believe that deficiency in B12 can lead to joint pains due to several reasons, and homocysteine with its correlation with B12 is among them.
Homocysteine and B12
People believe that 12 deficiencies can lead to joint pain because low levels of bb 12 appear to have a relationship with high levels of homocysteine. When you have healthy levels of b12, they lower homocysteine or amino acids. This means that if the body has a deficiency of B12, then the levels of homocysteine rise, which results in inflammation and after causing joint pain.
What are the common causes of joint pain?
So many things can cause joint pain, and therefore, you must find out the cause of the pain before you get treatment. Arthritis, gout, and injury are the leading causes of joint pains. However, age is also a factor that can lead to joint pain.
Does vitamin B12 supplementation help with joint pains?
Many people think that because they have heard that deficiency in b12 can lead to joint pain, supplements will help cure the pain. However, this should not be the first step that you take. In case it's an older person, chances are there is a deficiency of b12 in the body, and therefore, you should look out for signs that show that one is having the symptoms of vitamin b12 deficiency. In case pernicious anemia is not among the symptoms, then you should not think of taking supplements. However, a vegan who has symptoms of deficiency in b12 supplements could be sensible.
Even though increased homocysteine levels may not be the cause of joint pains, it can lead to an increased risk of diseases like cardiovascular disease and fractures. If you are pregnant, b12 is essential since it lowers the chances of you bay betting acute lymphoblastic leukemia. This is why most of the supplements for pregnant women contain b12.
In conclusion, if you have been taking foods rich in vitamin b12 because you are suffering from acute joint pain, then you have been doing the wrong thing. This is because supplying your body with the b12 does not cure or prevent joint pains. Instead, you should seek medical help to help you treat the pain you are experiencing.