Category Archives: Australia Day
Why Australia Day is celebrated on January 26
By Brett Boston.
The truth of Australia Day….
This is information that all Australians need to know. Especially those that believe it has to do with how anybody was treated.
People should learn the true facts before opening their mouth to spew falsehood.
This information was authored by Peter Lee – it should be taught to all Australians.
‘Below is the reason Australia day is celebrated on 26 January
Here are the Facts about Australia Day but don’t expect the media to educate you with these facts as it is not part of their agenda
- Australia Day does not celebrate the arrival of the first fleet or the invasion of anything
- Captain Cook did not arrive in Australia on the 26th January. The landing of Captain Cook in Sydney happened on the 28th April 1770 – not on 26th January.
- The first fleet arrived in Botany Bay on 18th January. The 26th was chosen as Australia Day for a very different and important reason.
- The 26th of January is the day Australians received their independence from British Rule. However, Captain Cook’s landing was included in Australian bi-centenary celebrations of 1988 when Sydney-siders decided Captain Cook’s landing should become the focus of the Australia Day commemoration.
- Sadly the importance of this date for all Australians has begun to fade and now a generation later, it is all but lost. The media as usual is happy to twist the truth for the sake of controversy.
Captain Cook didn’t land on the 26th January, so changing the date of any celebration of Captain Cook’s landing would not have any impact on Australia Day, but maybe it would clear the way for the truth about Australia Day.
- Australians of today abhor what was done under British governance to the Aborigines, the Irish and many other cultures around the world. So after the horrors of WW11, we decided to try and fix it. We became our own people.On 26th January 1949, the Australian nationality came into existence when the Nationality and Citizenship Act 1948 was enacted. That was the day we were first called Australians and allowed to travel with passports as Australians and NOT British subjects.
- In 1949 therefore, we all became Australian citizens under the Nationality and Citizenship Act 1948.
Before that special date, all people living in Australia, including Aborigines, were called ‘British Subjects’ and forced to travel on British passports and fight in British wars.
- This is why we celebrate Australia Day on the 26th January. This was the day Australians became free to make our own decisions about which wars we would fight and how our citizens would be treated. It was the day we were all declared Australians.
- Until this date,Aborigines were not protected by law For the first time since Captain Cook’s landing this new Act gave Aboriginal Australians the full protection of Australian Law.
- This is why 26th January is the day new Australians receive their citizenship It is a day which celebrates the implementation of the Nationality of Citizenship Act of 1948 –The Act which gave freedom and protection to the first Australians and gives all Australians, old and new, the right to live under the protection of the Australian Law”, united as one nation.
- What was achieved that day is something for which all Australians can be proud.
- Isn’t it time therefore that all Australians were taught the real reason we celebrate Australia Day on 26th January? In one way or another, we are ALL descendants of Australia ALL OF US. So we should ALL be celebrating and giving thanks for the freedoms, the lifestyles and opportunities that we currently enjoy, thanks to the strengths and battles of our ancestors.’
Forget “Invasion Day” – my neighbours are more worried about home invasions, Alice Springs is falling apart
by Senator Jacinta Price
As you and I were celebrating our wonderful country with family and friends, the inner-city elites were marching in the streets, setting Australian flags on fire, demanding we cancel Australia Day.In stark contrast, Alice Springs – my home town – was on fire with crime and violence.Forget “Invasion Day” – my neighbours are more worried about home invasions.
“Genocidal colonialism” is usually the last thing on your mind when a gang of machete-wielding thugs bursts into your house in the middle of the night.That didn’t stop the woke elitists taking to the streets in Sydney and Melbourne and Canberra, though.You and I have heard their arguments before.
The activists scream about reparations while trouble-free white Teal voters feel good about themselves for standing up for ‘justice’ (before heading off to their beach holiday retreat for the long weekend).But this time there’s a sinister undertone to their protests.While the professional activists and white managerial strivers shout to the wind about the injustices of Australia Day, Alice Springs is falling apart.While they will go home and sleep soundly, Indigenous women and children are scared in their beds as alcohol fuelled violence rages around them.It’s gotten so bad Albo finally realised he had no choice but to turn up.I’ve been calling on the Prime Minister for months to take a break from his overseas trips, visit the Territory and take some real action.
This week – after months of avoiding us – Albo finally got on the private jet to Alice Springs.But so far all we’ve heard from him is talk.He doesn’t have the courage to take REAL action in a way that will actually curb the violence and chaos.To make matters worse, Minister for Indigenous Australians Linda Burney has rolled up to complain that if only we had a Voice to Parliament we could have stopped this earlier.What a crock.Let me tell you, Linda, I am Indigenous.I’m from the Northern Territory.I have a voice.I am literally in the Parliament.And you didn’t listen.I told you abolishing cashless debit cards and opening the floodgates of alcohol would cause absolute chaos and it has.
The alcohol bans have to come back, not just for a week, but fully and properly.I have put forward a law in the Senate that will help fix these issues.Albo and Linda need to come to the table and get it passed.Forget the Voice. Forget all the activist rubbish. The safety of Indigenous women and children has to come first.This Australia Day, it’s time Albo gets serious and stops talking about problems and starts fixing them.
Aborigines want you to pay them rent on your home for evermore, on top of an annual $35 billion government handout
Letter to the Editor
Momentum is building for a campaign that would call on Australian property owners to pay a percentage of their income to traditional land owners out of respect for their ancestral land claims.
The scheme, Pay the Rent, would work as a voluntary weekly payment to a body led by Aboriginal elders and managed without interference from the government.
The program has been operating quietly in Victoria, with veteran Aboriginal rights activist from Melbourne Robbie Thorpe – who organised a similar scheme in Fitzroy in the 1990s – suggesting non-Indigenous Australians give up one per cent of their weekly wage.
Decisions about the distribution of money paid into this fund will be made exclusively by a Sovereign Body, composed of Aboriginal people from a range of clans and nations,” the Pay The Rent website states.
This initiative operates on the understanding that Aboriginal people should have control of any rent received.
Paying the Rent is about non-Indigenous people honouring the Sovereignty of Aboriginal people; it is a somewhat more just way of living on this stolen land,” the scheme states on its website.”
Cara Peek, a Yawuru/Bunuba woman and lawyer who co-founded Cultural IQ, an organisation providing culturally appropriate training in Australian businesses, said Australia was ready to have conversations about financial reparation.
“People are often looking to find a way to support Indigenous communities and acknowledge the historical nature of our lived experiences as first peoples,” Ms Peek told news.com.au.
“A Pay the Rent scheme is also quite poignant in that owning property is a privilege in this country, and as much as people may struggle with mortgages, many people can’t even get a mortgage or bank loan. That is the case for many Indigenous Australians.”
“In response to an common argument that non-Indigenous Australians had just as much right to land because they were born in Australia, Ms Peek strongly suggested education as the answer.
“If you can afford property, you are well above in terms of privilege and opportunity than most Indigenous Australians,” she said, describing it a “moot point”.
“If you want to know why you should consider that [paying the rent] then you need to educate yourself.”
Ms Peek suggested the Cultural IQ educational program she co-founded with her sister and that is set to launch on January 26.
“That helps people understand and unpack their cultural bias and where they’ve come from, and also how to meet first peoples in the middle,” she said.
from Website: https://www.news.com.au/finance/real-estate/campaign-calls-on-weekly-rent-payment-to-indigenous-people/news-story/c1261e085f6409d0cbc60b2327cc9c10?rsf=syn:news:nca:dt:spa
from Bliskitt, Queensland
Editor: The Aboriginal industry gets $35 billion from the federal government every year, and now they want you to pay them rent on your land for which you worked for a lifetime.
The vast majority of blackfellas sit on their arses for most of their lives collecting money to do so and still they want more. Tell the sycophantic Labor PM Albanese NO. The militant Murris should remember they would not exist in any capacity if the Japs had got into Australia. They should shut up and be thankful for Captain Cook, the ADF and everything that followed for their benefit.
Just remember most Australian state school curricula teaches kids Australia Day is ” ïnvasion day.”
Welcome to Country is divisive, patronising and promotes racial tension
by Cairns News contributors
Red flags are being raised over Prime Minister Albanese’s pledge to hold a referendum to include Aborigines in the Commonwealth Constitution of Australia.
Already indigenous bodies are drawing battle lines between supporters and those against a token gesture by the socialists of the Labor Party when Aborigines already are included in the Preamble of the Constitution:
“WHEREAS the people of New South Wales, Victoria, South Australia, Queensland, and Tasmania, humbly relying on the blessing of Almighty God, have agreed to unite in one indissoluble Federal Commonwealth under the Crown of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland, and under the Constitution hereby established:
And whereas it is expedient to provide for the admission into the Commonwealth of other Australasian Colonies and possessions of the Queen:
Be it therefore enacted by the Queen’s most Excellent Majesty, by and with the advice and consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons, in this present Parliament assembled, and by the authority of the same, as follows:”
by Pauline Hanson
A great deal has been said this week about my leaving the Senate chamber as the ‘acknowledgement of country’ was recited.
A lot of it was predictable nonsense from the usual suspects. A lot of it was very supportive.
Like many Australians, I’ve had enough of token gestures and symbolic nods to Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people which do nothing to address the real disadvantages they continue to face. I’m sick and tired of being welcomed to my own country.
We’re all Australians, indigenous and otherwise, and we all share sovereign ownership of this country equally.
And like many Australians, I think these useless gestures only perpetuate racial division in our country. This week’s move to display the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander flags in Parliament was a step too far, and what prompted me to take a stand and leave the chamber that morning.
We are one people living in one nation under one flag – the Australian national flag. It’s the only flag which should be displayed in the seat of our democracy.
I’m never going to sit still in Parliament for an ‘acknowledgement of country’ again. I’m not going to recognise foreign flags displayed in Parliament. I’m never going to support an indigenous ‘voice to Parliament’ being enshrined in the Constitution. I will never support any idea or proposal which seeks to divide Australia on racial lines once again. That sort of thing was rightly consigned to the dustbin of history decades ago.
What I will do is continue to work with all Australians, especially Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people, on the solutions which will end violence and poverty in indigenous communities and empower indigenous people to fully participate in the opportunities which come with living, learning and working in this great nation.
Watch Senator Hanson’s video on the acknowledgment of country protest…
Australia Day – let us reflect on 2021
Celebrate Australia Day – Share what it means to be living in Australia and reflect on 2021 with words from the Prime Minister.
Cook and Australia Day
Letter to the Editor
Australia/New Holland/NSW Invasionday
………..The first time that the name Australia appears to have been officially used was in a despatch to Lord Bathurst of 4 April 1817 in which Governor Lachlan Macquarie acknowledges the receipt of Capt. Flinders’ charts of Australia. On 12 December 1817, Macquarie recommended to the Colonial Office that it be formally adopted. In 1824, the Admiralty agreed that the continent should be known officially as Australia. ………..
In one of those peculiarities of history, New South Wales was only officially named and had its boundaries declared in 2001, two hundred and thirty one years after James Cook first uttered the name in 1770 when taking possession of an area covering most of eastern Australia. The reason why this peculiarity arose relates to the territorial evolution of Australia. So after James Cook, the colony of New South Wales was established and named by way of imperial proclamation in 1788 by the then Governor in Chief of New South Wales, the Royal Navy officer Arthur Phillip. At this time, New South Wales was defined (by Britain) as covering approximately half of the Australian continent. New South Wales was further increased in size to around two-thirds of the Australian continent in 1828……………….”
I would say that Cooks expedition was at the behest of Jewish interests.
South Wales moved to the New South Wales
from Kev Crisscross
Editor: We would never class Cook’s arrival as invasion Day. Only the political left of the media and rabid, militant blackfellas or those posing as a blackfella in the cities coin this term. Today’s pampered and bloated black bureaucracies and their homespun Antifa mob should thank their lucky stars and God for the arrival of Cook and colonisation. To publish the words of a well known and respected proper Aboriginal elder of Cape York 20 years ago: “If Australian soldiers (including blackfellas) had not bottled up the Japs in New Guinea any of us left today would be speaking Japanese.”
Whitefella author Bruce Pascoe needs a DNA test
Bruce Pascoe’s attempt at rewriting Aboriginal history has drawn the ire of historians, anthropologists and archaeologists. He has dared to suggest early blackfellas tilled the ground, grew crops and used irrigation.
Unfortunately for Bruce no early explorers ever recorded such a myth. In fact botanist Joseph Banks’ descriptive accounts of encounters with blackfellas in 1770 would suggest just the opposite.
State education departments have had the audacity to distribute this false news throughout schools in most states to further indoctrinate primary school kids about the $34Billion ‘poor blackfella me’ industry. -Editor
Go to: https://wp.me/p2dFb5-2Kk
Letter to the Editor
I challenge Bruce Pasco’s aboriginality and fairyland interpretation of history, he is white, all my aboriginal mates are black with specific facial features, Pasco is not black he is white with no aboriginal facial features, explain that Mr Pasco — White Emu.
How does a white man became and aboriginal, maybe the Minister could give Australia a legal definition of aboriginality and what other races need to do to become aboriginal like Pasco, get aboriginal status and funding – over to you Mr Minister please explain, because we do not understand how it works, we need Ministerial and aboriginal transparency.
The Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology in Leipzig, Germany, studied female mitochondria reported evidence of substantial gene flow between India and Australia 141 generations ago, about 4,230 years ago, reporting there appeared several waves of Indian migration. Likely into Indonesia where they brought the Sulawesi dingo with them.
There is a very simple solution to Mr Pasco’s claim of aboriginality and everyone else as well, have a DNA test and if your Indian or other you are out. We do know the original homo inhabitants were sparsely populated and overrun by the pre-Dravidian Indians, dispossessed of their land and starved into extinction.
A few ancient lineage true aboriginals remained inland and survived in isolation (like our egg laying mammals), until the severe drought forced them to surrender their nomadic Stone Age lifestyles in the 1960s. The DNA is still available of these original people and must be ‘The Official Measure Of Aboriginality’, all others are out.
The Aboriginal industry costs $34 billion from taxpayers, remove the fraudsters who do not carry genes of the original people. You are not immune from scrutiny.
G J May
ALP hijacks Anzac ceremony
from Robert J Lee
Paying homage to non-existent blackfellas for ‘allowing an Anzac ceremony to be held on their land’ by the ALP Member for Cook, Cynthia Lui has upset RSL members and a part of the Mareeba audience.
Cairns News was contacted by ex-servicemen and an audience member attacking Mrs Lui and a Mareeba Shire Councillor for politicising what should have been a speech about those fallen soldiers, sailors and airmen who were being commemorated.
One returned serviceman, who did not wish to be named after ABC Radio beat up a story about a wrong wreath being placed on the cenotaph by Member for Kennedy Bob Katter, said he did not want to be harassed or misrepresented by ABC reporters.
“I am very upset about the local member and a councillor talking about thanking blackfellas for the use of their land who have no bearing upon this ceremony,” the ex-serviceman said.
“Since when is it their land?
“How dare the lunatic left of the Labor Party try to hijack an Anzac ceremony.”ends
Invasion or settlement, no land rights for militant Aborigines
by Sherry Sufi
January is here and gone and the invasion versus settlement debate is back making news headlines.The Prime Minister wants to keep Australia Day as it is while the Greens are calling for the date to be changed.
We’ve all heard the generic talking points.
Team ‘Invasion Day’ says 26 January is offensive to some Australians. Team ‘Australia Day’ says 26 January is a day for all Australians regardless.
Yet there is a fundamental point which goes to the heart of this debate that literally no one, to date, seems to have picked up on. Hence, this article.
Native title can only exist if Australia was settled, not invaded.
Why? Because international law recognises all territories acquired through invasion and annexation by force, prior to World War II, as lawful conquests.
This ‘Right of Conquest’ doctrine was first conceived by the International Law Commission of the United Nations and later adopted as UN General Assembly Resolution 3314.
Provided that all citizens of a lawfully conquered territory are granted equal rights by the local law, international law doesn’t consider the descendants of the conqueror and the conquered as two separate peoples.
This in turn invalidates any claims to separate land rights under the same jurisdiction. As one of the 193 member states of the United Nations, Australia is not exempt from this doctrine.
Yet we do recognise separate land rights because the historic Mabo Decision in 1992 rested on the correct presumption that Australia was settled, not invaded.
In their ruling, Justices Brennan, Deane, Gaudron, Toohey, Mason and McHugh acknowledged that native title could have been intentionally extinguished by the use of government powers, but wasn’t.
They proceeded to reject the ‘terra nullius’ doctrine without overturning the traditional view that the Australian landmass had in fact been settled.
Had Australia actually been invaded, the descendants of its native population would be classified as a conquered people and their land rights would be abolished under UN Resolution 3314.
Greens leader Richard Di Natale might like to explain to the Australian people why he is attempting to undermine native title by implying that Australia was invaded and conquered.
On 26 January 1788, there was no sovereign state on the landmass we today call Australia. The land was sparsely populated with disparate nomadic tribes without a written language and a central government.
Captain Arthur Phillip’s arrival with his group of disease-stricken poorly-fed convicts in their new prison colony, on territory claimed for the British Crown seventeen years earlier by explorer James Cook, does not constitute an “invasion”.
Far from the brutal instincts of actual invaders like Napoleon or Hitler, early British settlers built a colony that was surprisingly harmonious and committed to justice.
As the first Governor of New South Wales, Phillip developed a fondness for the native Eora people in his new colony at Port Botany.
He befriended native man Woollarawarre Bennelong who became the first native Australian to be escorted to England to meet King George III.
The federal seat of Bennelong held by former Prime Minister John Howard for 33 years is named after him.
Phillip once forgave a native for stealing his shovel because he understood that in native culture people shared what they had and there was no concept of exclusive personal belongings. Hardly the attitude of an invader.
In 1816, Governor Lachlan Macquarie appointed native leaders to act as conduits between settlers and natives. He welcomed the natives who aspired to be part of the new colony. Hardly the attitude of an invader.
Violent clashes were the exception, not the norm.
At Myall Creek in 1838, some 30 natives were killed by 10 settlers and an African in Bingara, New South Wales. The perpetrators were trialled, 7 of the 11 involved were found guilty of murder, and hanged.
The rule of law prevailed. Hardly what happens in invaded countries.
Whether Australia’s colonisation by the British Empire should be classified as an invasion or settlement is not a question of mere semantics. It’s a question that holds serious legal and political consequences for our country.
For most Australians, this debate is as settled as Australia itself on 26 January 1788.
American President Abraham Lincoln once said “a house divided against itself cannot stand.”
Let’s unite to recognise that 26 January is a celebration of a democratic story that would be incomplete without the Mabo Decision.
Let’s never again disparage native title by referring to our settlement as an invasion. Happy Australia Day 2018.
Sherry Sufi is Chairman of the WA Liberal Party’s Policy Committee. He holds a Bachelor of Arts in Philosophy, a Master of Arts in Politics and International Studies, and a Master of History. The views expressed in this column are his own.
Follow SherrySufi on Twitter
This story can be found at: http://www.watoday.com.au/wa-news/inconvenient-fact-native-title-can-only-exist-if-australia-was-settled-not-invaded-20180119-h0l9hb.html