Worker’s compensation has been around for more than 100 years. Despite its history, compensation and how it applies across the country is often misunderstood.
Did you know that there is no federal worker's compensation?
The Government Employees Compensation Act (GECA) provides compensation for the loss of earnings, medical care and other related benefits to federal employees injured in the course of their employment or disabled by reasons of an industrial disease due to the nature of their employment. GECA provides coverage through Provincial Workers Compensation Boards (WCB), including the Commission de la santé et sécurité du travail (CSST) in Quebec, for all federal government employees except members of the Regular Force of the Canadian Forces. Compensation amounts vary from province to province.
Did you know that worker's compensation can cover more than just lost wages?
Workers may be covered for a wide variety of injury or illness-related expenses, including:
- lost income
- medical expenses, like devices
- treatments and prescriptions
- rehabilitation and auxiliary care
- as well as payments to cover a physical disability
Did you know that not everyone is covered by worker's compensation?
Who is covered by workers’ compensation varies based on the provincial-territorial rules.
Did you know that you can’t be denied claims because of “fault”?
Workplace injuries are compensated, regardless of fault.
Did you know that you should file worker's compensation paperwork when you get injured at work (and should not use up your sick days before filing)?
Employers often try to encourage workers to use sick days to avoid dealing with workers’ compensation, but you should not be asked to pay for your injury. If you are injured at work, always file with your province or territory’s compensation agency.
Workers compensation and issues around work-related injuries and diseases can be complicated, and answers to questions will often depend on the rules in your province/territory as well as your individual case.
You can find information on Duty of Accommodate and Return to Work on the PSAC website.