Ego is a powerful energy that we all have. Ego is built into our DNA and develops over time for every person. Ego has many synonyms according to the dictionary: self-esteem, self-importance, self-worth, self-respect, self-image, self-confidence. The same dictionary defines ego from a psychoanalytical viewpoint: The part of the mind that mediates between the conscious and unconscious and is responsible for reality testing and a sense of personal identity.
Like any energy, ego can be utilized with positive or negative consequences. Some very prominent teachings state that the ego stands in the way of spiritual development. The negative aspects of a person with limited self-love or limited self-esteem generate terms like egotism, egotistical, and narcissism. For an individual to give up their ego because they believe it is always a negative force means they limit their feelings of self-worth, self-respect, and self-esteem.
Terms often associated with negative ego lead to racism, deviance, and bullying. The misuse of ego hurts the individual and everyone around them. If you carefully observe people that are constantly putting others down, you will see a person with limited self-love that leads to many negative behaviors that are then lumped into terms like egotism and narcissism.
Positive ego is an energy that creates greater self-love, which in turn creates a greater love of everyone and everything around them. Positive ego is the energy that puts the Golden Rule in action. The constant putting down of ego as a negative force creates a hostile environment against a positive view of loving one’s self. If all feelings of ego were considered bad, we promote a negative concept that any identification of our self is bad. It isn’t true. Ego provides the energy for the Soul to progress on its Spirit Path.
When Jesus’ words were interpreted in the Bible about His most important teachings, He stated that we must love God, and love our neighbor as we love our self. There is an implicit underlying statement that we must first love our self before we can love anyone else. Those that truly love their self don’t need to put others down or to state that they love their self. Those that show their unconditional love for their neighbors are proving their love of the Creator and the creation.
Love is proven by the actions done with others and to their self. The actions speak louder than words when it comes to showing the nature of our ego, whether positive or negative. Love yourself. Love your neighbor as you love yourself. Use your ego to do good things in the Universe.
The following Affirmation for Living was given to me by Spirit to encourage everyone to recognize their place in the Universe.
Affirmation for Living
I am a child of the Creator.
I am worthy of all good things.
I am grateful for God’s love.
Thank you, God, for everything.
It is not egotistical to say that you are a child of the Creator. Everyone is a child of the Creator. Your positive view of your self-worth helps you accept your worthiness of all good things. Gratefulness for what you have leads to self-confidence that you have all you need. Thanking God for everything is acceptance that there is a divine plan, and you are part of it. All things work for good in the broadest sense.
Go with grace and peace. Accept your place in the creation, and do not let anyone tell you that it is a mistake that you are here. You are here for a purpose. Find that purpose and fulfill it to the best of your ability.
© Copyright 2018
Rev. Jim Hetzer
One thought on “Ego is energy that can be used for good or evil”
I really enjoyed that, it truly validated me. I had told my husband, who is habitually negative, from a family upbringing, saying: you can’t love anything until you truly know that you love yourself. You can’t supply anyone if your are not supplied. You can’t keep someone fed if you are unfed…etc.
But HOW can I get him to break his broken record of negativity, it is literally stunting his growth. Thank you and God Bless You and your days.