tuzor Posted January 29, 2012 Share Posted January 29, 2012 The other day I started a thread asking what people read other than TWTM as a how to teach/organize the subjects they will teach. One of the books that came up was The Seven Laws of Teaching by John Milton Gregory. I downloaded it to my Nook and have been reading it. Here are the seven laws in our modern day tongue: 1. Know thoroughtly and familiarly the lesson you wish to teach--teach from a full mind and a clear understanding. 2. Gain and keep the attention and interest of the pupils upon the lesson. Do not try to teach without attention. 3. Use words understood in the same way by the pupils and yourself--language clear and vivid to both. 4. Begin with what is already well known to the pupil upon the subject and with what he has himeself experienced--and proceed to the new material by single, easy and natural steps, letting the known explain the unknown. 5. Stimulate the pupil's own mind to action. Keep his thought as much as possible ahead of your expression, placing him in the attitude of a discoverer, an anticipator. 6. Require the pupil to reproduce in thought the lesson he is learning-- thinking it out in its various phases and applications till he can express it in his own language. 7. Review, Review, Review, reproducing the old, deepening its impression with new thought, linking it with added meanings, finding new applications, correcting any false views and completing the true. So far what I have read is very motivating. I have a question for you. The essence of Rule one is that the Teacher mus KNOW the lesson he is about to teach so that the knowledge can be transferred. How do you KNOW all the material that you teach at home? Do you just read ahead and really study out and become comfortable with the material prior to teaching? Or do you outsource what you don't feel comfortable teaching. Quote Link to comment Share on other sites More sharing options...
Join the conversation
You can post now and register later. If you have an account, sign in now to post with your account.