With a staggeringly large population of over a billion people, Republic India is the world’s largest democracy. We have people of various religions, castes, cultures, and ethnicities amongst our citizens – and governing such a myriad population is an extremely difficult task. Since Independence, we’ve observed many changes in social, economical, and even technological aspects, and the key function that opens doors to all these facets is the political system in India.
Governments change with time and power slips from one political party to another, but as the public say, they are all just the same. We’ve not seen any evolution in the political system itself, and it’s high time that we hand over the reins to our youth.
Approximately half of the population of our country is under the age of 35 years, then why is it that a majority of our leaders are more than 60 years old? Don’t you find it ironic that an experienced politician’s career reaches its apex just as common man is preparing to line up outside the pension office?
Politics is a noble profession – it is one of the most significant ways in which we can make a real difference in the lives of people. And youth have much to contribute to this profession. They are not only enthusiastic and energetic, but they have a creative mind to come up with fresh, new ideas for development. They are open minded and they have the intellectual strength to face the nations problems head on.
Given the chance to rise and act, youth have the dynamism to generate a huge transformation in society. Being involved in politics does not mean rallying or striking – it means being politically aware – it means that when you open the newspaper, you read about what is going on around you rather than just skipping over to the cinema gossip or sports columns.
The most potent power lies in the hands of common man, the power to vote. And by extension, that includes the power to question wrongdoings and demand justice, and I believe that youth can wield this power to its maximum by making their voice heard.
Change is the only constant in this world – and we need drastic change in our political system. 69 years of independence, and India is still tagged a “developing” nation. When will we have the fortune to change its designation as a “developed” country – when we open the gates and invite youth into the political arena. Then only can we bring about major changes in the society and push the nation towards advancement. I don’t say that it will be easy, but it will be worth it. After all, today’s youth are tomorrow’s leaders.Recommend0 recommendationsPublished in News, Politics, Relationships