Mint needs full sun, but it also does well in partial shade. In fact, it’s the most widely-grown plant in the world. However, it can’t tolerate direct sunlight and will grow poorly if you place it in direct sunlight. It can survive in a shady spot or even partial shade, but it prefers indirect sunlight. If you’re planting mint outdoors, place it in a shady spot, but make sure it gets enough indirect sunlight.
Can mint grow in shady areas?
One of the questions you may have is, “Can mint grow in shady areas?” The answer depends on the type of area your mint is growing in. The best spot for mint is full sun, but it will also grow in part shade. It is tolerant of some shade, and will grow and thrive in it. In shady areas, you might want to consider placing it near a fence or a neighbor’s house.
Mint can grow in shady areas if it has adequate moisture and good drainage. The best soil for mint is rich, medium, and well-drained. Ideally, the soil should have a pH of 6-7. Organic matter, such as compost, can also help. Once established, Mint will need fertilizer, usually every four to six weeks. While it can thrive with less fertilizer, it will benefit from it.
While most herbs prefer full sun, a few thrive in partial shade. Parsley, chives, and chervil are good choices for gardens with partial shade. Mint will grow taller if it is allowed to grow in the shade, but regular harvesting will keep it compact. Mint grows well in pots and is low-maintenance, making it a good choice for a shady area.
Can mint grow in full sun?
Mint needs 6 hours of direct sunlight each day and does better in part shade than in full sun. It is best to plant mint in a south-facing location away from trees, but it can also tolerate partial shade. In hot climates, it is best to plant it in the east or west for better results. It does not like being in direct sun, so it’s best to plant it in partial shade. It does best in soil that drains well.
Because mint grows so rapidly, you should be prepared to spend a considerable amount of time weeding and harvesting. If you prune your mint plants regularly, it will recover in about a week. Mint is also a good plant for preserving. You can dry them and use them in teas or in casseroles. Mint can even be used as a dry rub for lamb. It is best to grow mint in containers, as it does not grow as well as the plants grown in the ground.
If you grow mint in full sun, it will benefit from morning watering. This will help minimize wilt, and it will bounce back overnight. However, mint that grows in full sun can suffer from sunburn. To protect your mint plant from sunburn, you should remove damaged leaves with garden secateurs or scissors. This will allow the plant to recover and new leaves will grow in two to three weeks. It will be a beautiful plant in your garden.
Can mint grow in partial shade?
If you want a perennial that will thrive in part shade, you can plant lemon balm. It will not flower in partial shade, but it can survive in moist soil. Lemon balm is closely related to mint, and its scented leaves add a lemony, tart flavor to salads and other dishes. Lemon balm grows well in shade, but it must be deadheaded after harvesting to avoid the plants from becoming overgrown.
There are several varieties of mint. These include American pennyroyal and Corsican mint. Both are shade-loving plants, but the American pennyroyal has a tendency to grow upright. Other varieties include orange mint and doublemint, which grow best in sunny spots. Some varieties are aggressive, but others are non-aggressive, such as the Maryland dittany. They also look nice next to wild ginger and sweet woodruff.
When planting mint in the shade, remember that it will grow much more slowly and be less productive. While the full-grown plant will thrive in a sunny location, a partially shaded plant will struggle to send out new shoots. During the hottest part of the day, the plant will not thrive in a sunny area. However, mint can tolerate partial shade and will produce lots of delicious, fresh mint. For these reasons, mint is a great choice for gardens.