Post-harvest sanitation may be time consuming, but will yield dividends
We have officially seen the end to our growing season with several overnight low temperatures recorded in the mid 20s. These hard freezes lead to an abrupt stop of any production that may have still been lingering on into the fall.
Once these cold temperatures arrive, our annual crops are winter killed and hay fields, orchard trees, grape vines and small fruit shrubs begin to go dormant until next spring. After a busy season of managing crops, it can be easy to feel ready to call it a year and look ahead to 2022, however, there are still some important considerations to evaluate with regard to integrated pest management.
For farmers and gardeners alike, there are some steps to take to help prevent diseases and insects from overwintering and impacting next year’s crops. Regardless of size or scale of operation, or style of production, there is always a risk of over wintering diseases and insects on alternative host plants or in crop residue post-harvest.
BEEF IT UP:Here is the skinny on the fat
Determine where risk exist, then mitigate
Realizing where these risks exist, and the challenges associated with allowing insects and diseases to overwinter, can help you make decisions to mitigate such risks. One of the first steps to take to reduce the likelihood of diseases and insects overwintering is residue management.
In systems like orchards and agronomic crop fields, residues are prime material for overwintering to occur. In an agronomic system, using tillage tools to incorporate residue, or at least reducing the size of the plant material and encouraging soil contact or coverage can reduce the amount of time needed for breakdown of the residue.
In situations where a fruit or vegetable is involved, making sure to not allow any whole fruit to overwinter is very important to the overall sanitation of the operation. This can be especially challenging in orchards where diseases easily overwinter on cankers on the branches or mummy fruit left hanging in the trees. These are perfect inoculum sources that would promote reinfection next year.
MILK WOES:Low prices, volatility have some Ohio dairy farmers demanding changes
It is important to collect all diseased fruit and plant material and have them either burned, buried or disposed of off the property. Composting does not eliminate the risk of reinfection.
While this is time consuming and may feel like pointless work, a change like this in your management tactics can prove to provide positive outcomes. Reducing disease inoculum and insect populations consistently over several years can provide a great benefit in reducing the amount of pressure on the crops for the subsequent growing seasons.
FIFTH-GRADE FARM TOUR:Holmes County Soil and Water fifth-grade farm tour a multi-faceted learning opportunity
Check out field edges, ditches, waterways
Next in the process, you will want to widen the scope of your efforts, looking at field edges, nearby ditches and waterways or any other location that may be suitable to serve as an alternative overwintering host for diseases and insects.
Many of our common weeds fill this role and allow for diseases and insects to survive the winter and cause problems next year. Once you have taken action to reduce the favorable habitats for diseases and insect pests to over winter, now it is important to look ahead to next year.
For agronomic farmers, vegetable growers and gardeners, crop rotation is a best management practice that will provide an opportunity to break a pest or disease cycle. Breaking these cycles, or greatly reducing the amount of successful cycles will result in fewer opportunities for the insect pests and diseases to cause significant damage.
Being aggressive with your efforts is recommended and provides an opportunity to help save money in the long run. Using integrated pest management strategies and standards in addition to reducing over wintering diseases and insect pests will reduce the cost associated with chemical applications as fewer applications should be needed.
Less infection means greater crop yields
Additionally, less infection or damage in the crop means higher yields and an improvement in the quality of the harvest. It is important to realize the true benefit of post-harvest sanitation may not be realized for several growing seasons. There may be some rapid improvements, but have patience when implementing the practices.
Small, yet impactful integrated pest management decisions are all part of making your farm or garden more sustainable and your production goals attainable.
Frank Becker is an OSU Extension Agriculture & Natural Resources Integrated Pest Management Program coordinator and may be reached at 330-264-8722.