Dengue virus cannot be transmitted from a person to person. It can be transmitted to humans only through the bites of infected Aedes Aegypti mosquitoes.
The mosquitoes become infected when they bite and sucks blood from an infected person. Now, these Aedes mosquitoes become the carriers of dengue virus. When the infected mosquito bites a healthy person then the virus from the mosquito enters into human blood, from then the infection starts.
I will explain the entire transmission process in a step by step manner.
Step 1: A healthy mosquito (Aedes Aegypti) bites and draws blood from the dengue infected person. The viruses enter into the mosquito along with the blood of the infected person.
Now the mosquito is infected and serves as a carrier of dengue viruses. After about one week, this mosquito can be able to transmit the viruses to humans through its bites.
Step 2: When the carrier mosquito or we can say an infected mosquito bites a healthy person, then the viruses get transmitted to humans through the saliva of the mosquito.
Step 3: The viruses inside the human body get multiplied into millions and infect the white blood cells and lymphatic tissues. Thereby the symptoms slowly start appearing with which dengue can be diagnosed.
Step 4: Now, when this infected person bitten by a fresh healthy mosquito, viruses get transmitted into the mosquito through the bloodstream. Thus the healthy mosquito gets infected by dengue viruses.
Now the fresh cycle of transmission starts from the Aedes Aegypti mosquito.
Few points you have to remember about Aedes Aegypti mosquitoes:
- These mosquitoes are daytime feeders. Their feeding time is early morning hours and evening hours before dusk.
- These mosquitoes can fly up to 400 meters in search of water-filled containers to lay their eggs.
- These mosquitoes bite more than one person during their feeding time.
- These mosquitoes are evolved into intermittent biters which made them highly efficient epidemic vector mosquitoes.
This is all about the transmission of dengue virus and fever. Share it if you found this information worthy.