Zambia is South Africa and is a biodiversity and former colony of the United Kingdom. Zambia also the country that was once known as Northern Rhodesia. What also distinguishes Zambia are extensive savannas, plateaus, the central highlands with the 2,300 m high Mafinga, the Muchina Mountains, the Victoria Falls, the Zambezi, whose headwaters are in the western part of the country, numerous other rivers, inland waters, parts of the Lake Tanganyika, large swamps, dry forests, rainforests and… almost 20 national parks, in which all wild animals of Africa can be observed and the extensive safari can be experienced. Nevertheless, Zambia is still not a classic holiday destination; So far, there is only a well-developed tourist infrastructure in the capital Lusaka and Livingstone. Lusaka is located in the central south of Zambia at an altitude of 1,200 m and is still a relatively young city and the urban center of the country. Worth seeing are, for example, the National Museum, the Political Museum, the Zambian Statue of Liberty, a large botanical garden and the Kabwata cultural village, which serves to preserve old handicraft traditions. Livingstone, also called maramba, is much smaller. A visit here offers a natural history museum or the Livingstone museum with archaeological finds; Above all, however, the city is a good starting point for an excursion to the Victoria Falls, where the Zambezi falls over a width of 2.5 km 110 m. Also not far from Livingstone is the Mosi-oa-Tunya National Park, where some of the extremely rare white rhinos still live. In the Kafue National Park – one of the best nature reserves in Africa – you will encounter around 600 species of birds. There is also a colorful world of birds in the Lochinvar National Park, and in North Luangwa you are in one of the most spectacular national parks in Africa. And finally, Zambia’s nature is still historically interesting, because rock paintings can be found all over the country.
a unique natural spectacle
fed by the Zambezi River, located in the border area between Zambia and Zimbabwe, are an incomparable natural spectacle and a tourist highlight of any trip to the black continent. Depending on the season, enormous masses of water plunge into the depth over a width of around 1700 meters. When it hits the rocky basalt subsoil, a cloud of finely atomized spray forms, which can still be seen at a distance of 30 kilometers and which can occasionally rise to a height of 300 meters. Less spectacular, but still worth seeing, are the Victoria Falls in the summer, in the months from October to November. During this phase the Zambezi carries very little water and the otherwise impressive waterfalls wither into a trickle. However, there is the opportunity
Soft tourism in the UNESCO world natural heritage
The Victoria Falls, surrounded by rainforest, have been a UNESCO World Heritage Site since 1989 and are part of the Mosi-oa-Tunya National Park, which is quite small by African standards. Numerous species of wild animals such as elephants, zebras and rhinos can therefore be observed without any problems and also make the region attractive as a study trip. Those who decide to pay a visit to the Victoria Falls will find numerous hotels, lodges and overnight accommodations in the vicinity. The waterfalls are among the most important sights in Africa and are by no means as shaped and overrun by tourism as, for example, the North American Niagara Falls.
Zambia’s dynamic capital
Hardly any other African city changes its appearance with such speed as Lusaka. The capital of Zambia has an almost magnetic effect on the surrounding area and is now bursting at the seams. It is a melting pot of diverse ethnic groups and has now grown to more than 1.4 million inhabitants. Lusaka serves many tourists as a starting point for varied trips through a fascinating country.
A chief as namesake
It was settlers from Europe who founded a small village in the south of the country at an altitude of around 1,200 meters above sea level in the early part of the last century. This was followed by a station on the railway line, the establishment of a Christian mission and some business. In particular, it was the Boers who established themselves and traded there. The later metropolis of the British crown colony Rhodesia was named after a chief. The mild climate of Lusaka played an important role in the history of Zambia, because when the British left their colonial role, Lusaka took the place of Livingstone as the capital.
A 125,000 year old skull
Anyone visiting the National Museum is taking a walk through the history of Zambia. In addition, insights into the religions and healing methods that have been practiced for generations are provided there. The skull of the so-called “Brocken Hill Man” is particularly interesting in the museum. Its age is estimated to be 125,000 years. A visit to the Chilenje House, where the former Zambian President Kenneth Kaunda resided, is also very interesting. The Namwandwe Art Gallery is dedicated to contemporary art.
Broken chains of bondage
To commemorate the colonial era, the Freedom Statue was erected in front of the UNIP headquarters in Lusaka. It shows a man who breaks the chains of bondage. One of the optical highlights of the city is the Cathedral of the Holy Cross. It was built between 1957 and 1962. Since 1964, Lusaka has been a university town with around 8,500 students.