Smartphones and mobile devices are inevitable part of our daily life. According to statistics, there are 5 billion mobile subscribers (2017 data) in the world. It shows majority of the world population owns a smartphone or any kind of mobile devices.
Despite the fact that smartphones provides greater convenience in our daily life, it could also cause serious health issue due to long term exposure of electromagnetic radiation. Let’s see how to use smartphones and mobile devices safely.
1. Avoid long conversation
Long conversation without using proper headphones cause heating effect on brain cells due to electromagnetic radiation. Radio Frequency radiation could penetrate human cells and damage tissues in our body over time. Long term exposure of high power RF signals could harm our brain cells, skin, ear etc…
The short-term effect of EM radiation in individuals are different; some feel headache, tiredness and dizziness etc…
During cell phone conversation, reduce movement as little as possible.
2. Use headsets or speakerphone option
Use of good wired or wireless headsets reduce the risk of electromagnetic radiation to brain cells. Make use of speakerphone options whenever possible.
Bluetooth technology uses very low power for transmission and considered as safe way (moderate use) to use with mobile devices.
3. Keep mobile devices away from your body
All transmitting devices should keep away from your body. Avoid any direct contact with body and keep it inside bag or a pouch if possible. While sleeping, keep your mobile devices away from your bed and switch off mobile data and Wi-Fi options.
Cell towers continuously send ping signals to mobile devices to keep track of them whether the UE are still under cell circle. Make sure your cell phone has safe SAR rating by manufacturer.
4. Turn off Cellular data and Wi-Fi
Turn off your phone’s cellular data, Wi-Fi option and bluetooth when not in use. Before sleep, turn off all wireless transmitting devices like wireless routers using a timer or manually.
Mobile devices are always connected to wireless data at home and office. Applications on mobile devices are continuously running in the background; turn off the data and Wi-Fi option to stop communicating.
4. Avoid calls at places with low signal reception
In order to keep connected with mobile tower, mobile devices increase transmission power if the signal reception is poor. Avoid places where signal reception from mobile tower is very poor. Try to avoid basements, underground parking stations and in elevators due to poor signal reception.
Avoid phone calls while travelling on a vehicle. Cell phones continuously send signals to maintain contact with cell towers and it could cause the mobile device to transmit high power radiation than idle condition.
5. Fewer calls More Text
Sending text messages takes shorter transmission time and safe compared to long conversations. Use text messages or email messages whenever possible to avoid mobile phone calls.
Texting allows keeping the cell phone away from body and shorter duration of transmission is much safer compared to longer calls.
6. Use landline telephones
Calls using landline telephones are safest way to reduce use of mobile phone and cordless phones. Make use of landline phones at office and home for long conversations. Professionals could choose landline number as a proffered medium for business calls instead of mobile numbers.
7. Keep cell phone away from children
Children are more sensitive to RF radiation due to smaller head circumference and brain size. Studies shows that, cell phone radiation affects bone density especially in kids below age of 10 years old. Do not allow children use mobile devices unless really necessary and make sure the call length is as short as possible.
Radiation protection accessories
There are many products in the market with claims of electromagnetic radiation protection up to 75 percent and 90 percent etc… In reality, these are not effective as advertised since transmission of electromagnetic waves are inevitable for devices to maintain communication to cells base stations.
The best solution to avoid health risk is practicing moderate use of smartphones and other mobile devices.
Use original chargers provided by phone manufacturers to avoid hazard of electrical shock. Avoid use of phone and wired headset while charging. There have been some reports about accidents happening during charging.
Fast charging solutions in the market may not be a good idea unless recommended by the device manufacturers.
Desktop alternatives for favorite applications
Most of our favorite mobile applications are now offers desktop version as well. Switch to desktop version whenever possible, especially for long video or voice calls.
PCs use LAN connection or WiFi to connect with internet. This is much safer options than holding a smartphone for long conversations.
Change your smartphone setting to automatically detect WiFi signals when you enter within a network vicinity. WiFi signals are safer than mobile data transmission from your device.
Furthermore, using WiFi network will help to save significant amount of battery life.
Advancement in any technologies are aimed to make our convenience and safety. It is our responsibility to make sure the use of technology will not harm humans and nature. Practicing of safety procedures are significant for a healthy lifestyle and protect other living organisms.
Moumita Mallick says
Its easy to tell adult. But what about kids, who gets addicted? This harmful radiation attack them easily..
Arram Anand says
Thank you, good information…… 👍