The gallbladder is a small, pear-shaped sac that stores bile, which is produced by the liver. Bile helps to break down fats in the intestines.
When the gallbladder becomes inflamed, it is called cholecystitis. If stones block the ducts that lead from the gallbladder, it is called cholelithiasis. Treatment for these conditions may include antibiotics, pain relief, and surgery.
Gallstones are the most common condition affecting the gallbladder. They are hardened deposits of bile that can form in the gallbladder. Stones can be as small as a grain of sand or as large as a golf ball.
Most people with gallstones do not have any symptoms. However, if a stone lodges in the ducts that lead from the gallbladder, it can cause pain in the abdomen, nausea, vomiting, and jaundice. Treatment for symptomatic gallstones typically includes surgery to remove the gallbladder.
Cholecystitis is an inflammation of the gallbladder that can be caused by a viral or bacterial infection, gallstones, or other conditions. Symptoms of cholecystitis include pain in the right upper abdomen, fever, nausea, and vomiting. Treatment for cholecystitis typically includes antibiotics and pain relief.
Books discussing Gallbladder
Save Your Gallbladder and what to do if you've already lost itSep 03, 2013 | 117 PagesIf you are experiencing gallbladder issues, this book will provide the answers regardless of whether or not you have had yours removed. With its comprehensive advice and guidance, it will help you manage your situation more effectively. Gallbladder disease can be alarming and disheartening, so it's no wonder that some people rush to have their...Learn more about Save Your Gallbladder and what to do if you've already lost it
Experts discussing Gallbladder
Dr. Sandra Cabot, MDFor over four decades, a renowned medical doctor has authored more than thirty bestselling books on health, one of them being the critically acclaimed "Liver Cleansing Diet" book.As the Medical and Executive Director of the Australian Women’s Health Advisory Service, Dr. Cabot provides a valuable service to people everywhere - offering free advice via phone and online. With a distinguished Academic record, Dr. Cabot excelled in medicine and surgery from the University of Adelaide with an...Learn more about Dr. Sandra Cabot, MD
Dr. Margaret Jasinska, NDAn author, a naturopath specializing in gut health, thyroid conditions, autoimmune disease, fatty liver, and diabetes.With over two decades of clinical knowledge, Margaret Jasinska has established herself as an expert in the field of naturopathy. She is also a co-author of several publications focused on digestive health and wellness. She expertly manages her time between tending to patients at Dr. Cabot's clinic, writing, and...Learn more about Dr. Margaret Jasinska, ND