How to Grow Bougainvillea Starts
Bougainvillea charms gardeners with its vigorous climbing growth habit and brightly colored flower bracts in shades of pink, red, orange and white. It thrives in warm, dry areas with limited frost and mild winters, so it is appropriate for most coastal and inland areas of California. Bougainvillea grows best in Sunset's Climate Zones 22 to 24, as well as H1 and H2. It will also survive within Zones 12 to 17, 19 and 21 if you give it some protection from frost. Bougainvillea will propagate reliably from starts, or young stem cuttings, taken in spring as new growth begins to emerge.
Fill a 4-inch pot with a mixture of half perlite and half coarse sand. Shake the pot gently to settle the mixture. Pour water into the pot until it drains freely from the drainage holes at the bottom.
Cut a 4-inch-long piece from the tip of a young, vigorous bougainvillea vine. Select a cutting with a pliant stem, plenty of young foliage and no flowers or buds. Sever the cutting just below a set of leaves using clean, sharp pruning shears.
Strip off and discard the leaves from the bottom half of the cutting. Dab the severed end of the cutting with a cotton ball dipped in rooting hormone powder. Avoid getting the rooting hormone on the rest of the stem.
Insert the bougainvillea cutting into the pot. Push it in until the lowest remaining set of leaves rests 1/4 inch above the surface of the perlite and sand mixture. Shake the pot to settle the mixture around the stem.
Place the potted bougainvillea start inside a greenhouse or indoors near a very large window that provides bright but indirect sunlight for six to 10 hours daily. Supplement the available light with a fluorescent grow lamp if you don't have a large, sunny window.
Heat the bottom of the pot with a warming mat set to 75 degrees Fahrenheit. Keep the warming mat on all day and night to promote faster, more even rooting. Remove the pot from the mat only after the bougainvillea start successfully roots.
Drizzle water onto the perlite and sand mixture whenever it feels dry 1 inch below the surface. Add water until it trickles from the drainage holes at the bottom of the pot.
Mist the foliage twice daily using a spray bottle or place the potted bougainvillea starts on a greenhouse bench with an intermittent misting system. Increase misting during hot, dry weather or if the edges of the bougainvillea leaves appear slightly crisp.
Check for roots in approximately one month. Tug gently on the base of the bougainvillea start and feel for resistance to the movement, which indicates root formation.
Transplant the rooted bougainvillea start into a 6-inch container filled with potting soil, three weeks after it roots. Keep it under moist, greenhouse-like conditions. Pinch off the soft growth at the tip of the cutting to promote a bushier growth habit.
Samantha McMullen began writing professionally in 2001. Her nearly 20 years of experience in horticulture informs her work, which has appeared in publications such as Mother Earth News.