Every one of us wants to be known as eloquent, intelligent, and credible whether it’s through emails, phone calls, meetings, or interviews. Daily we are given the opportunity to support these goals or detract from them. In order to ensure that you are being perceived the right way, you need to start eliminating a few of the words from your professional vocabulary to sound more confident and eloquent at work.
The following are a few to keep in mind:
We are very much used to incorporating this word into every other sentence. We use it as a filler word but it adds nothing to our statements and makes us sound more unprofessional. This is something that should be eliminated from your professional vocabulary.
This seemingly simple word is used very often but rarely needed in our conversation. it is because it detracts us from our credibility and undermines the actual importance of our message. Once you eliminate it, it will create a big difference as a result.
It is a word that is mostly used by job seekers to kick off an interview answer. But it gives the impression to the hiring managers that statements you have given before are not honest.
Using the word “stuff” makes you look immature. Therefore use the actual words that describe a situation or a topic instead of using the word stuff.
This is the word that needs to be avoided at all costs because there is rarely anything that ALWAYS happens. So, avoid using it as it can hurt you in the later years of your profession.
6- Am I making sense?
By using this statement, it looks like the person is not even qualified to be giving an explanation. Therefore, do not doubt yourself and if the other person does not understand, try explaining in a different manner instead of using this term.
7- Saying sorry:
We say this word so many times during a conversation but there is nothing more irritating like it. It is because when the word sorry is used more than it is required, it loses its importance. If there is an actual need to be sorry then use the word “apologize” because it makes a much stronger impact.