At TIS Primary School, we believe that education must extend beyond the intellectual to include socially responsible attitudes, thoughtfulness and appropriate action. An explicit expectation of the IB PYP is that successful inquiry will lead to responsible action initiated by the student due to the learning process. This action will extend the student’s learning, or it may have a wider social impact and will look different within each age range.
Our units of inquiry are designed to offer all learners the opportunity and the power to choose to act, decide on their actions, and reflect on these actions to make a difference in the world. Teachers in K1 to Grade 6 create opportunities that fosters student-initiated action throughout each unit of inquiry. The teachers acknowledge that action should be seen as a voluntary demonstration of students’ empowerment in the context of the expectations laid down in the IB PYP program.
Furthermore, the teachers recognize that today’s complex issues do not often suggest simple or self-evident solutions and that inaction is also a legitimate choice. Therefore, the teachers believe that every student, every year, has the right and should have the opportunity to be involved in an action. Action at the Primary School Campus is about giving back to the community which is done through students learning. Students at the Primary School Campus take individual and collective action and they come to understand the responsibilities associated with being internationally minded.
Below are incredible reflections of Opal students taking action and using their knowledge from inquiry to make an impact in their community. In their reflections, they exhibited participation, advocacy, social justice and social entrepreneurship.
After learning about keeping my environment safe for living things to survive, I plan to make a bin for the school cafeteria to keep recyclable material to be used in the art class to avoid waste. ~ Nana Adwoa – Grade 4
We need to reuse, reduce and recycle to protect our natural resources. I will make a song to educate my community on the importance of the 3Rs. ~ Eliel Amekugee – Grade 3
I will help save endangered animals in my community by establishing a company to protect animals and take care of endangered ones. ~ Ama Darko – Grade 3
It was great learning about role models. I learnt that I can also be a role model by showing good examples to people around me. I will be a good example for people in my school and my neighborhood. ~ Kadmiel Essel Annan – Grade 3
I have been researching on trees and how they make the environment safe for other living things. I will not cut down trees and I will build trees at home and in my community. ~ Michelle Tieku – Grade 4
I want to be a good role model for everyone around me. I can be a good example by following the learner profile attributes. ~ Raymond Tettey-Amlalo – Grade 3
Learning about living things and their adaptations makes me knowledgeable about the importance of protecting animals. I will make a song on the importance of protecting animals and send it on my YouTube channel to educate the public. ~ Kwasi Ayisi – Grade 4
I want to be a good citizen of Ghana. I will learn to be a great person with a lot of money in future so that I can help protect people in my community. ~ Elikem Amoo – Grade 4
I have learnt about trees as an important natural resource for living things. I will make a poster to educate people in my community not to cut down trees. ~ Kwabena Osei-Amoako – Grade 3
I love to rap and Sarkodie is my role model. After learning about reducing, reusing and recycling waste to protect our natural resources, I will create a rap to educate my community not to pollute the environment with waste. ~ Kwame Kudah – Grade 3
I have learnt that deforestation is cutting down trees without replacing them and afforestation is planting new trees. I will plant new trees at home. ~ Edem Amo Grade 3
I will advise people in my community not to pollute the environment with waste so that our natural resources will be protected. ~Emmanuel Osroagbo Grade 3
I have learnt about living things and I have been researching the adaptation of ants. I will make an artwork on the life of an ant explaining the importance of ants and educating people not to harm them. ~ Israel Borlabie Grade 4
I have learnt about natural resources and the need to protect them. I will make a video on different natural resources to educate my community to take care of them. ~ Nana Kwame Wiafe-Akenten Grade 3
Opal class exhibited responsible, thoughtful and meaningful action through music production. Click on the link below to watch their amazing song.