(1884?–1965), U.S. activist. Daisy Lampkin used her considerable skills as a speaker, organizer, and fund-raiser to advance a variety of causes, especially ones devoted to helping women and minorities. She was best known for her ability to rally fellow African Americans to join and contribute to the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP).
She was born Daisy Elizabeth Adams sometime during the 1880s. Details about her early life remain sketchy, and accounts vary as to whether she was born in 1884 in the District of Columbia or in 1888 in Reading, Pa. After attending high school in Reading, she moved to Pittsburgh in 1909 and married William Lampkin in 1912. In the following year, she used the monetary prize she received for selling the most subscriptions to the Pittsburgh Courier to make the first of her many investments in the company’s stock. In 1929 she was named vice-president of the publishing corporation, a post that she held until her death.
One of the first causes in which Lampkin became involved was the women’s suffrage movement, and she became president of the Negro Women’s Franchise League in 1915. After women obtained the right to vote, she became active in the Republican party, though she later supported Franklin D. Roosevelt and some other Democrats. In 1930 her political influence helped thwart the reelection bid of Ohio senator Roscoe McCullough, who had supported a Supreme Court nominee known to oppose black suffrage.
Lampkin’s work with the National Association of Colored Women (NACW) and other organizations led her to be appointed to the posts of NAACP regional field secretary in 1930 and national field secretary in 1935. In addition to her extraordinary success at recruiting new members, she was admired for keeping operating costs low, starting a youth division of the organization, and lobbying for integration and anti-lynching legislation. In recognition of her accomplishments, she was named the NAACP’s woman of the year in 1945. Health problems forced her to resign from field duties in 1947, but she remained active as a member of the board of directors.
Delta Sigma Theta made Lampkin an honorary member in 1947, and she led a campaign drive to build a national headquarters for the sorority in 1952. In 1964 Lampkin was selected to be the first recipient of the National Council of Negro Women’s Eleanor Roosevelt–Mary McLeod Bethune Award but was too ill to attend the ceremony. She died on March 10, 1965. In 1983 the Pennsylvania Historical and Museum Commission placed a historical marker in front of her Webster Avenue home, making her the first African American woman in the state’s history to receive the honor.