Activity › Discussion › Essay › Essay on balanced diet › Reply To: Essay on balanced diet
SakchiMemberMay 26, 2021 at 11:28 am::
For being alive we need food , water and oxygen . These are the primary requirements of our body. Other secondary items are necessary but these are the elements that makes us healthy . So a balance diet contains a proper amount of carbohydrates , proteins , fats , vitamins and minerals . All these elements can be obtained from a proper meal only. It is in our mind what is the importance of this balanced diet:-
Balanced diet maintain our body . Through balance diet we eat a proper required meal for our body . Eating more and eating less both are wrong. So if we are taking proper balanced diet we are getting everything in equal amount.
Balance diet also modifies our antibodies and thus increase our capacity to fight from infection or diseases.
Now let’s we talk about each of them:-
Carbohydrates is an essential nutritive components of food. Carbohydrates acts like a fuel in our body. Carbohydrates proves us energy and it is also required for the formation of fats . People who indulge in hard works , need maximum amount of carbohydrates. Lack of carbohydrates in the body reduces weight and skin become lean and thin.
Sources:- generally, carbohydrates is found in rice ,, maize ,jowar , bajra, pulses , potatoes , banana , Gur , sugar etc.
Proteins are also called nitrogenous food . Proteins are responsible for growth and development of the body. Proteins promotes cell growth and repair the worn out tissue . Apart from this proteins also plays a important role in mental development as it is known as building blocks of life.
Lack of protein causes retardation in growth and development of the body.
Sources:- eggs , milk , milk products , meat ,fish , soyabean , mustard green peas , nuts , dry fruits and food grains.
Fat is also a essential nutrients. It provides us heat and energy . It also helps in regulation of body temperature. It is helpful in making the body soft and smooth and protect our body from extreme climatic conditions.
Sources:- ghee, butter, curd , fish oil , meat , eggs , sweet potatoes , coconut , mustard oil , cotton seeds etc.
Vitamins play a vital role for a healthy life. Vitamins protect us from various types of disease and also increases our immunity . It also contribute in the general development of body .
If we lacks vitamins in our body , we may suffer from different deficiency diseases .
They are helpful for general development of body , proper functioning of muscles , formation of teeth , clotting of blood and in maintaining the balance of acid and bases in our body.
Balance diet means eating a right amount of foods from all groups .
Hope you will be satisfied with my answer.