October 3, 2017
Grandparents Day is this week!
We've been working hard on our reports in class. We can't wait for them to show off their writing skills! We will finish them up just in time for Grandparent's Day on Friday, October 7 at 11 am. Our celebration will be in the MPR so we can fit everyone. The kids will be serving grandparents snacks, singing songs from the "olden days," sharing their reports and other fun things. Our celebration will end around 12. Students may be checked out by you or grandparents after our party. If you havent' already, see the Sign Up Genius that Kristy Lico created (BTW...thanks, Kristy!) to see how you can help/contribute to Grandparent's Day.
Everyone did so well on their first spelling test last week! You will find the student's new spelling words in their homework folder on Monday. We gave the wrong username/password info last week. The Spelling City username is their first name, first letter of their last name and acs (jessicawacs) and their password is their first name (jessica). The Homework menu will be the same as last week. I'm hoping to add some variety to the math packets this week and in the future. The worksheets will continue to compliment the math we are doing in class as well as review previous learned skills. I'll also be including some other game ideas that will go with what we are working on in class. Remember, these are all just options. See more about math below...
We are continuing to work on different subtraction strategies in math this week. We will wrap up this chapter this week and will have a test early next week. You will find the Chapter 1 and 2 test in your student's Monday Folder. As you know, tests give us an idea of what concepts and skills need to be worked on. One thing that would benefit most students is quickly recalling simple math facts by memory. Flashcards would be a great way to practice (and can be used as a homework activity). We suggest starting with a few math facts and once they have those memorized, add a few more. Take it slow and build confidence. You can start with +1 math facts (1+1...10+1), doubles (1+1...10+10), doubles +1 (2+3...8+9), and so on. If you need suggestions, feel free to connect with us. Overall, the students are doing great and will continue to build on these skills throughout the year.
In the future we are hoping to do all Scholastic book orders online. We'd like to do a trial run this month. The book orders will be in the Monday Folders. Check out the books and if you want to order, follow these instructions:
Go to Scholastic.com
Click on the "Shop" tab
Select "Reading Club"
Select "First Time Parents"
Follow the prompts to create an account. Our classroom code is MHNCP.
Please let us know if this is easy enough or if we should continue the way we've been doing things.
I had a great parent question last week about games students were playing linked to our class website. The games linked are great! Sugar, sugar and piksels are really cool. However, I haven't checked out all of the other games listed on those sites. At school students are only allowed to play games linked to my website. If you are at home, you will want to make sure you know what they are looking at. In other words, I have only verified the games, not the entire sites. Be sure to talk to your kids about online behavior! More resources to come.
September 26, 2016
Hello families! Sorry there was no newsletter or updates on our website last week. We are so proud of the second graders! They are hard workers and are adjusting well to second grade work. Last week we introduced a typing program to them. They will be given class time to practice their typing skills and will be given the opportunity to type their reports in second grade. They are welcome to practice at home, but it's not necessary. They typing program can be accessed through this website under the Typing Club tab at the top.
This week we will start our spelling words. Each student has been assessed and given a list of words based on their level. Spelling in second grade is self paced and will allow students to progress at their level. Every Friday we will be taking a spelling test in the morning. If the student passes his/her test with 80% or higher, they will move on to the next list. If the student doesn't pass, they will have another week to study the words and try again. We will be practicing our spelling in the classroom with the Spelling City program/app. Working on spelling at home will be up to you as a family. See Star Homework section for more information.
We have been working on addition strategies and will be taking a test this week after some review. Next we will be working on subtraction strategies. If you are curious to these strategies, take a peek at the math worksheets sent home for homework this week.
This week we have included a spelling activity for one of the nightly homework options. In your student's Monday/Homework folder you will find a Spelling Tic Tac Toe worksheet. This activity is meant for students to practice their spelling words in a variety of ways. If you choose to do spelling for homework, you only need to choose one activity from the paper per night. Just know that if they complete three activities in a row they will be getting a variety of practice.
Another option for spelling homework is to complete a game or activity on Spelling City. You can access this program from home by clicking on the Quick Links tab at the top of this website. The student's email address is their full name @acmsrocks.org. Their password is their last name 2016 (first letter is uppercase, no spaces). Just know that we will be using this program in the class as well.
The homework menu still includes reading for 20 minutes, reading for an extra 10 minutes and a math game/worksheet.
We are so excited to host our annual Grandparent's Day! The students made invitaions for Grandparent's Day, Friday, October 7, and will be in the Monday folders. Can you please be sure the grandparents receive that information? Our celebration will begin at 11 and will end around 12. Grandparents may check students out early if that is helpful for you. During our celebration the students will sing, share their reports and spend time with their grandparents. We would also like to have some refreshments and drinks that the students can serve. Please let us know if this is something you would like to help organize. We would like to keep it sweet and simple. Also, we realize not every grandparent is able to attend. We will make sure that every student is a part of making Grandparent's Day special. We can also talk beforehand about skyping/facetiming or other ideas for our long-distance grandparents. If you would like to make that happen, please talk to one of us earlier in the week.