Proper function of the motor unit is dependent upon the correct development of dendrites and axons. motor axon defects experienced significant deficits in motor output. We also show that SMN is required earlier for motoneuron development than for survival. These 1227633-49-9 manufacture data support that SMN is needed early in development of motoneuron dendrites and axons to develop normally and that this is essential for proper connectivity and movement. INTRODUCTION The disease spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is usually clinically characterized by proximal muscle mass weakness and atrophy due to motoneuron dysfunction and eventual loss. Infants with a severe form of the disease exhibit a very low motor unit number estimation (MUNE) measurements indicating that motor units, that is the motoneuron and all of the muscle fibers it innervates, are compromised. Children with a less severe form of the disease pre-symptomatically have near normal MUNE, but then show decreased MUNE when the disease manifests (1). Interestingly, patients show an upfront manifestation where the most severe symptoms happen in a short amount of time followed by a protracted loss of function over time (2). One explanation for these clinical manifestations is that 1227633-49-9 manufacture the motoneurons and perhaps other components of the motor circuit 1227633-49-9 manufacture do not develop properly under conditions of low survival motor neuron (SMN) protein leading to their 1227633-49-9 manufacture early dysfunction. The best way to test this hypothesis is usually to analyze motoneurons at the cellular level as they develop under conditions of low SMN. Analysis of various SMA animal models has revealed problems with the motor unit. Neuromuscular junction defects and movement deficits are seen in the mouse, zebrafish and with low SMN (3C9). Transient depletion of SMN in zebrafish and Xenopus prospects to motor axon defects (10C12), and presynaptic inputs onto motoneurons are decreased in severe SMA mouse models (13,14). Analysis of SMA mice has revealed that spinal motoneurons are given birth to and lengthen normally into the periphery (15). However, in the most severe SMA mouse model, cranial nerve X does not form correctly and truncations are observed in lumbar spinal nerves (16). In addition, motoneurons and retinal neurons cultured from severe SMA mice have decreased neurite length (17,18). Also, in severe SMA mouse models, the neuromuscular junction does not form correctly and you will find axonal swellings that are positive for neurofilament (3,4,15,19). Thus, while SMA mouse models do not show such a striking motor axonal defect as in zebrafish, there is an indication that motoneuron development is usually affected in SMA mice. It remains unclear, however, how these phenotypes arise and whether defects occur during development or after the motor unit has created. The best way to assess this is to analyze motoneuron development in live embryos in real time. Due to the convenience and strength of this phenotype in zebrafish, we can use this system to determine what is needed for motoneurons to develop properly and the role of SMN in this process. Here, we combine genetic models, imaging and functional analysis to address this issue. To this end, we examined motoneuron development under conditions of low SMN and used a conditional SMN allele to determine when SMN is needed during motoneuron development for proper motor function and survival. Our findings show that motoneuron development including motor axon outgrowth, filopodial dynamics as well as dendrite formation are compromised when Smn levels are low. Moreover, these defects cause motor behavior deficits that can be rescued by adding Smn back early in development well before 1227633-49-9 manufacture neuritogenesis supporting a need for Smn function during the earliest stages of motoneuron development. We also used the conditional collection to inquire when SMN is needed in development to fully rescue survival. RESULTS Generation of mutants To analyze the role of SMN in motoneuron development, we generated a genetic model that Rabbit Polyclonal to SLC9A3R2 depleted SMN from the earliest stages of development. Zygotic mutants have Smn protein present during the first 6 days post fertilization (dpf) due to maternal deposition of RNA into the yolk (5). Motoneurons are given birth to around 10 h post fertilization (hpf) (20), lengthen their axons out of the spinal cord beginning at 16C17 hpf (21,22) and develop dendrites starting 2 dpf. Therefore, to analyze motoneuron development under conditions of low SMN, we generated mutants lacking both maternal.