Best Treatment For Headaches And Migraines
Common triggers of tension headaches include:
The exact cause of cluster headaches is unknown and there don’t seem to be specific triggers. Triggers often start migraines and tension headaches, but not cluster headaches. Cluster headaches often occur at the same time each day. One headache will last anywhere between 15 minutes to 3 hours. You can have one or many headaches in a single day.
The name suits because they occur in clusters. At least one daily headache occurs for several weeks or months in a row. Usually, these headache groupings last 6 to 12 weeks.
Symptoms of cluster headaches can include:
Other characteristics of cluster headaches:
Other risk factors that can’t be changed include:
You are at higher risk for migraines if your family has a history of migraines, if you have a sleep disorder, or if you have a mood disorder, such as bipolar disorder or depression.
Women are three times more likely to develop migraines than men.
Hormones involved in menstruation, pregnancy, and menopause all come into play. Hormones in contraceptives and hormone replacement therapies can also be triggers.
Women often get migraines just before or during menstruation. These episodes usually subside during pregnancy and after menopause begins.
Sometimes a headache is a sign of a serious medical problem.If you experience a sudden intense headache different from any you’ve experienced before, or have accompanying fever, vomiting, confusion, weakness, stiff neck, seizures, or other symptoms, seek out immediate medical care.
The migraine episode
Phase One — The Prodrome Phase (Preheadache)
The prodrome phase has nothing to do with headache pain or auras.
In the past, you may not have even associated these symptoms with your headache. It occurs immediately preceding or days before the headache phase.
Symptoms of the prodrome phase can include:
– Mood swings
– Food cravings
– Unexplained yawning
– Unusual sensitivity to light, sound, or smell
– A stiff neck
– Difficulty focusing
– Frequent need to urinate
Symptoms of the prodrome phase vary from individual to individual. Some patients find relaxation therapy or meditation to be helpful.
Phase Two — The Aura Phase
An aura is a sensory disturbance. Auras occur before or during the headache phase.
But these sensory disturbances only occur in one-third of migraine episodes. Some people never experience auras at all. Auras can be quite unusual and unnerving. They affect vision, touch, or speech.
One of the most vivid visual disturbances is when zig-zag lines suddenly appear in your vision. It’s harmless but can be very frightening.
Auras can affect both eyes, but not always. Other visual disturbances include:
– Blurred vision
– Flashing lights
– Blind spots that expand over time
Some people feel numbness or tingling in the arms during the aura phase. Disturbing motor auras can impair your ability to speak or even think clearly. You can experience slurred or jumbled speech and cognitive confusion.