Composition on the text of Prishvin
The famous Russian writer MM Prishvin in his text puts the philosophical problem of the influence of nature on man. He asks himself: is nature capable of making a person happier and healing it?
The problem touched by the author is extremely relevant, because in our technocratic times it is very important that people do not lose touch with nature, they do not cease to feel part of nature. Feeling this connection, a person can not commit evil, murder or treachery. Feeling this connection, a person seeks to do good and strengthen what is called life in any of its manifestations.
The author tells us a story about an injured boy who is about to die. His last wish was to see a stream. The narrator fulfills the request of the dying man: he carries the stream to the shore. Nature not only makes the boy happy, but also gives him the strength to struggle for life. “The wounded listened, closing his eyes, his lips, bloodless and dry, moving convulsively, expressing a strong
The position of the author is very clear. Prishvin is a singer of nature. He drew from this source and believed that nature is able to help and even save. Prishvin brings the reader to the idea that the beauty of nature is able to heal, give strength, strengthen, push to something important. Doctors save the life of a dying person “was helped by the beauty of the stream and the resolute and excited words of the narrator that” the blue dragonfly is flying over the creek. “
I fully share the author’s point of view and also believe that nature can please a person and give him strength. The validity of this idea is confirmed by a number of examples from life and literature.
In O. Henry’s story “The Last Leaf,” the main character, Johnsy, falls ill with pneumonia. She lies in bed and counts how many leaves are left on the old ivy. Johnsie is sure that when the last leaf falls, she will die. But the leaf keeps
In Kuprin’s story “Sack the Sack,” the main characters admire the beauty of nature: a wonderful rainbow, strawberries, abundantly spread out across the clearing, bright colors, fluffy clouds. Kuprin calls to learn to see the beauty of nature, says that this makes a person happy, give him the opportunity to rise above the ordinary.
Nature is an integral part of our life. The human soul blossoms in communion with nature – animals, flowers, trees, therefore, by communicating with nature, a person becomes spiritually richer. Heals only the native land and its maternal breathing – from childhood to pain the sweet smells of native forests and fields.