lorence Luchs had lost hope. She had resigned herself to the idea that she was going to die of esophageal cancer. That's when her daughter, Sheila Ann Kogan, read about a completely new technique that was showing promise in treating cancers such as Mrs. Luchs'. It is called photodynamic therapy (PDT), a
revolutionary treatment that uses a light-sensitive drug to selectively destroy cancer cells. Mrs. Luchs was one of the first patients to undergo the therapy at
Frank Gress, MD, Chief of Endoscopy, (L) and his associate, Mo Barawi, MD, Attending Gastroenterologist, (R) display the photodynamic laser used to activate photosensitive medication which targets and destroys certain cancer cells.
The key to PDT is the medication, which in addition to being photosensitive, tends to concentrate in malignant tissue. Laser light at a prescribed wavelength
activates the drug, causing it to disrupt and ultimately kill cancer cells.
Photodynamic therapy begins with the infusion of the medication, porfimer
sodium, which is absorbed throughout the body. The medication remains in malignant cells for longer than it does in normal cells. Two days after the infusion, physicians endoscopically pass a laser light source
into the esophagus to activate the drug as
it lingers in the tumor cells.
"Surgery is still the treatment of choice for most tumors," said Frank Gress, MD, Chief of Endoscopy at Winthrop. "However, for patients who are not candidates for
surgery, early research indicates that PDT
is at least as effective as radiation and chemotherapy for treating large tumors."
PDT is being used against cancers of the gastrointestinal tract, lungs, skin, head and neck. The technique also shows great promise in treating Barrett's esophagus, a pre-cancerous condition caused by chronic gastroesophageal reflux disease, or GERD. Barrett's esophagus affects between eight and 20 percent of all patients who are
evaluated for symptoms of GERD. Currently surgery is the preferred treatment for advanced Barrett's esophagus and
"The main side effect of PDT is
photosensitivity," explained Dr. Gress. "The medication concentrates in tumor cells, but smaller amounts also accumulate in the
skin. Patients therefore must observe light
precautions following treatment."
Just two weeks after undergoing PDT, Mrs. Luchs' condition had improved. Dr. Gress reported that her esophageal tumors had shrunk. More importantly, her quality of life improved. "She is able to eat and drink normally and has gained weight," said Sheila Kogan. "She looks and feels better."
For additional information on PDT at Winthrop, call Dr. Gress at (516) 663-8977.