End of life care is essential for dying with dignity
Just as there is a beginning to everything, there also is an end. Life is no exception.
In fact, the dying process begins at birth. It is inevitable that as people age, they approach the end of their lives.
Most people have a definite fear of dying. This is a normal defense mechanism. No one wants to die before their time. Everyone does everything in their power to live as long as the good Lord allows.
There will come a time when end of life care will be mandatory for all. This care is the responsibility of the dying person and his or her family physician.
It is in the preamble of physicians to care for dying patients in a manner that is inseparable from the physician's ability to improve a patient's life. One of a physician's most important missions is to allow terminally ill patients to die with as much dignity, comfort and control as possible.
There comes a time when all of modern medicine's abilities to prolong life have ceased to be effective for an individual. This time is usually evident to those involved.
In particular, the patient knows they are not going to get better; the family knows that the patient is not going to get better, and physician knows this as well.
When this time comes, it is good for everyone involved to talk about the end of the patient's life. It is important, even prior to the actual occurrence, for everyone to make provisions as to what they would like done or not done in their last days.
People need to specifically say, if the time comes that their heart or breathing should stop, if they want extraordinary means to keep their heart and breathing maintained. These decisions have to be made long before a person is unable to make an informed, knowledgeable decision. The same holds true for food and water.
Patients need to state whether they want artificial or forced feeding and fluids. These things should be talked over with all the family members, the physician and even the family attorney.
Most people have a fear of the process of dying. No one wants to die in pain. No one wants to die without their significant other being available. No one wants to lose control of their bodily functions, activities of daily living or their mental prowess.
It is importance for everyone to know that pain can be and will be controlled. Medical science today has many procedures and medications that will control pain. It is important to know that most symptoms can be controlled. This means that if a patient is suffering from shortness of breath, nausea, vomiting, sleeplessness, cough, diarrhea, constipation, anxiety and depression, these conditions can be treated and controlled.
There are organizations at the disposal of the physician that can keep patients in any environment they wish. This means that if a person wants to stay home and die at home, that option is available to them. One of the main organizations that has proved itself over the many years is Hospice.
Hospice is a vibrant group of dedicated professionals who are indispensable in Winter Haven and Polk County for the care of a dying patient. They provide for all of the patient's physical, emotional and, sometimes, spiritual needs.
Just as all of life has a beginning, all of life will end. It is a fact that life will end for everyone. However, there are many in the medical profession and ancillary people who can, and will, help at this stage of life.
Dr. Gordon J. Rafool is a specialist in family practice and geriatrics at Gessler Clinic in Winter Haven.