The client wanted to investigate the opportunities of building the ecosystem of data collecting, primary processing, transmission, storage, and post-processing via Long Range technology at the maximum possible distances.
The client used a traditional network system powered by the battery, which distributes data through the LTE network. Each transmission was costly and the batteries had gone fast.
Long Range (LoRa) devices provide the opportunity to solve problems with connection to the premises and devices. The technology could extend to the periphery of municipal and industrial operations, supply chain, agricultural fields, and even to your home and yard. LoRa-based solutions offer the ability to connect these devices and distribute access where a range of legacy systems is lacking. Typically, these are devices that run on batteries that are connected to the Internet and go far beyond outdated connection technologies without installing additional repeaters or mesh points. Thanks to the low-power wireless qualities of LoRa Technology allows the use of low-cost sensors to transmit data from the object to the cloud, where they can be analyzed to improve performance.
Obtained benefits after installation of LoRa technology:
The sensors used: air humidity, temperature and lighting sensors, CO2 sensors, GPS, motion sensors, air, and soil pollution sensors.
We used a data-transmitter unit or ‘sensors package’ (DTU or SP), which is a separate device with a self-contained power battery supply charged by the built-in solar panel. Individual sensors (or stand-alone sensors) can also be remote and connected to the DTU (SP) via the IP68 connector.
DTU (SP) is connected to a base station (BS) via the communication channel, which is organized using LoRa technology. The base station has access to the Internet.
The BS exercises general control over the DTU (SP). After receiving the information, it displays a confirmation of data acknowledgment and, if necessary, issues new settings to the DTU (SP) for the collection of information. In the settings, could be such parameters as turning on / off a separate sensor, averaging measurements, the transmission interval of information.
The BS sends the received information to the server. The user communicates with the server via the HTTPS protocol. A user with administrator rights has the ability to change the settings of both the BS and individual DTUs (SPs).