Research Shows Chess Makes Kids Smart!
Chess research shows adding chess to your child’s life is a wise and smart move! Chess can do great things for kids! This collection of studies and papers show the ways chess makes a difference in your student’s life.
Research studies show chess improves academic skills and exercises intelligence! It’s your move!
The Benefits of Chess in Education by Patrick S. McDonald presents the best review and summary of research on the benefits of chess for students available today.
After making the decision to include chess in your child’s life, you will want the best scholastic chess workbooks available for K-12 students. Our workbooks are the best-selling scholastic chess workbooks in the world! 166,685 in print now! Thank you!
Why? Simply, the best!
The workbooks are reasonably priced, and Volume Discounts are available and automatically applied at checkout, so consider ordering as a group!
Chess Rules For Students is a workbook for students learning the game of chess and for beginning students returning to the game. No previous knowledge of chess is necessary. Parents unfamiliar with chess will find this booklet a valuable guide to their child’s new interest.
A student-friendly Answer Key makes self-correction fun!
Checkmate! Ideas For Students is a workbook for beginning and intermediate students. Checkmate! covers the tactics used in checkmate attacks with clear explanations, diagrams and arrows to pinpoint the key features.
Unlike many other basic checkmate books, Checkmate! categorizes the checkmates by the tactics used to force the checkmate–like Pins, Sacrifices, Removing the Guard, Attraction, Clearance and Attacking Flight Squares–rather than only the checkmate pattern itself.
The worksheets and Answer Key are clear and simple for the student to use, and easy for the parent, teacher and coach to correct! Fun!
Chess Tactics For Students is a workbook containing 434 carefully selected problems in worksheet format. Chess Tactics has been extensively field tested with elementary, middle-school, and high-school students over a four-year period.
This book is ideal for independent seat work as well as for homework and classroom instruction.
The worksheet format and Answer Key enable self-correction with minimal dependence or direct help from a chess teacher, coach, or parent.