Three Sisters Planting Method
Like people, plants are greatly influenced by each other, and these influences can be both good and bad. The Three Sisters planting method is a type of companion planting in which plants give each other something beneficial when they’re grown together. Although the Three Sisters method may include a variety of plants, it originated with corn, beans and squash.
About the Three Sisters
The Three Sisters planting method originated with the Iroquois people. Corn, beans and squash provided the main food supply of the Iroquois, and the Three Sisters planting method was based on the hill planting method used for cucurbit crops. Iroquois women began with corn, planting the kernels in a hole, and as the seedlings began growing, they’d mound the soil around them, creating a hill about 1 foot high and 2 feet wide. These hills were arranged in rows that were spaced about 1 foot apart. A few weeks after planting the corn, they planted beans in the same hills, and between the hill rows, they planted a low-growing crop such as squash.
Beans, corn and squash work well together because they all thrive in full sun and prefer average moisture. Corn seeds should be sown in pairs and placed into the soil 1 inch deep and spaced about 18 inches apart. Once the seeds germinate, keep only the stronger of the two seedlings and mound the soil around the base of the seedling. Beans are planted about 1 inch deep once the soil has warmed to between 60 and 85 degrees Fahrenheit. Plant your beans at the base of the corn seedlings so that the tendrils can climb up the stalks. Squash must be planted between the rows of beans and corn in mounds or small hills that are typically 3 feet high and 3 feet wide. Plant four to five seeds per hill and cover with a thin layer of soil. Once the seeds germinate, remove all but the three strongest seedlings.
Planting beans, corn and squash together is beneficial for all of these crops. Corn requires a lot of nitrogen for optimum growth, and the beans provide this nitrogen to the soil. In return, the cornstalks provide a pole for the beans to climb. The leaves of the squash plant provide shade for the soil, which preserves moisture and inhibits the growth of weeds. In order for it to work, it is vital that the corn sprouts before the beans.
Beans and squash are not the only companions you can plant when using the Three Sisters method. Many cucurbits, including melons and cucumbers, provide the same benefits as squash, and they also require full sun and moderate water. Peas may replace beans, and these can be planted earlier, as long as the soil has warmed to at least 45 degrees Fahrenheit. Once peas have germinated, they should be thinned so that there is about 1 inch between each plant.
Renee Miller began writing professionally in 2008, contributing to websites and the "Community Press" newspaper. She is co-founder of On Fiction Writing, a website for writers. Miller holds a diploma in social services from Clarke College in Belleville, Ontario.