3 Surprising Health Benefits of CoffeePosted by Sidi Ba on
Coffee is part of the everyday routine of a lot of people. We often hear about the negative effects that coffee can have but what about the positive ones? In this short article we'll be going over a few health benefits of coffee, in order to illustrate the positive aspects of coffee, as well as to show why we decided to make Coffee and Dark chocolate our monthly flavour for the month of November.
1. Coffee may improve heart healthA few studies have shown that coffee may improve heart health and specifically blood pressure. One study in 2018 showed that drinking three to five cups a day may reduce the risk of heart disease by 15% (3).
2. Prevention against diseases
Several studies have shown that there may be a link between coffee and the prevention of many diseases :
- A few studies have shown that people who consume coffee regularly have a reduced chance to develop Parkinson’s disease. (3)
- Several studies have demonstrated a link between coffee and the reduction of risk to develop type-2 diabetes. This link also remains true even if the coffee is caffeinated or not. (5)
- Coffee can even have an impact on depression. Some studies have shown that the risk of depression was higher in individuals that did not drink coffee compared to those who did. (4)
3. Can reduce the risk of several types of cancer
Several findings show that regular consumption of coffee may lead to preventing several types of cancers, notably prostate and liver cancer. (4)
It is important to note that coffee does contain caffeine which can be detrimental if it is consumed too often. Caffeine is a stimulant, and is present in many drinks that affect energy levels.
A regular cup of coffee usually contains about 95 milligrams of caffeine while a decaffeinated coffee has about 4 milligrams of caffeine. How many milligrams should you take per day? Well, the answer seems to vary based on the health of the individual, but on average, most healthy adults should not consume more than 400 milligrams of caffeine, which is roughly 4 cups of coffee per day(1).
Caffeine can cause dependence and a person can have some serious withdrawal symptoms if they stop drinking caffeinated substances for a few days, which is why it’s important to limit our dependence on caffeine. Just because you can drink 4 cups a day, doesn’t mean you should! Especially late at night, since caffeine can disturb sleep. Make sure to responsibly moderate your caffeine intake, just like you do with every other substance or food.