Fluorescence is a property that is said to improve the color of diamonds. However, that is not the case. While you’re unlikely to detect a difference, diamond fluorescence might actually make the diamond look worse in most lighting situations. Diamonds can sometimes sparkle or luminesce when exposed to UV light due to minute impurities. Around 35 percent of colorless diamonds have UV fluorescence, which can be very subtle or quite intense.
Gemologists created a lighting standard for color grading of diamonds without a UV element after learning about how UV affects diamonds. The standard, however, shifted in 2008. Diamond hues are now assessed with a UV component using a daylight-equivalent light bulb. This signifies that the color grade includes the fluorescence effect.
Effects Of Fluorescence On Color Grade
Diamonds could have a color two grades superior to their hue under non-UV lighting when they have a very intense blue fluorescence. Strong blue fluorescence differs by only one grade, while medium fluorescence differs by half a grade. The impacts of weak fluorescence are insignificant. In the end, these minor color grade variations are unlikely to be seen.
Fluorescent Diamond Cloudiness
Cloudiness is another disadvantage of very luminous diamonds. Though this effect isn’t present in all fluorescent diamonds, it’s important to examine the stone closely before purchasing. Cloudy or milky effects are more common in diamonds with high fluorescence, but they can also appear in diamonds with moderate fluorescence. However, slightly fluorescing diamonds are extremely hard to locate.
All Diamond Fluorescence Are Blue In Color
Despite the fact that blue is the most prevalent diamond fluorescence color, some diamonds emit in a different color. The second most prevalent color is yellow, which has the opposite effect on color grading as a blue diamond. As a result, a diamond with significant yellow fluorescence may be given a color grade lower than it would be in a UV-free environment. Green, magenta and red are more uncommon fluorescence colors. A diamond may appear darker if it has a lot of fluorescence in these colors.
Purchasing Fluorescent Diamonds Online
When shopping online, look for a trusted seller with high-quality, up-close photographs. Before selecting a fluorescent diamond for a diamond ring, inspect it for hue and cloudiness. Diamond fluorescence is also present in lab-grown diamonds. Therefore, you can get a fluorescent diamond that is not costly as natural diamonds. You need to make sure that you are buying fluorescent diamonds from a reputable jewelry brand.