Does your back often hurt after a day working in the office? No matter how ergonomic office chairs at work are, the problem might lie elsewhere. The key to avoiding back pain is to practice proper sitting posture.
The average American adults sit more now than at any other time in history. The American Heart Association says the number of sedentary jobs today increased by 83% since 1950. This development isn’t good for our health, especially our spines.
Keep reading for our guide on how to sit properly. Stick around till the end for some extra tips for keeping a good posture.
1. What Is Good Posture?
One of the first things we learn about in school or at home is good posture. As children, it’s easy to exercise good sitting posture. It’s also easy to lose it as we grow older and work desk jobs.
Let’s take a reminiscent look at the proper sitting posture. The right posture puts the key parts of your body in correct alignment. It also means that the right amount of muscle tension supports these key parts.
These key parts include your spine, neck, and arms. Your joints, muscles, and ligaments are also in check with good posture. In actuality, a majority of your upper body gets various benefits from good posture.
2. Benefits of Practicing Good Posture
What benefits does sitting properly offer us? If you’re sitting in the right position, you get a big improvement in your spine health. You also reduce the strain on your body when you exercise and move.
Having proper posture also allows you to maintain balance when you’re moving and exercising. You reduce the wear and tear on your joints, ligaments, and muscles as well. Also, you reduce the risk of muscle strain and overuse when you sit properly.
Do you want to avoid or reduce back pain? Does your wrist often hurt when you’ve been in front of the computer for a while? Practice proper posture and you can avoid these problems.
You can also avoid a ton of other diseases linked to too much sitting. These diseases and conditions include obesity, diabetes, heart disease, and even a shorter lifespan. In some cases, it’s even possible to counteract these effects only by sitting properly.
3. What Is the Proper Sitting Posture?
Let’s discuss what the best sitting posture is when you’re working with a computer.
First, check the level of your eyes and that of your computer screen. You should keep the top of your screen level with your eyes. Keep the computer screen at a full arm’s length from you.
An improper sitting posture can affect not only your back but also other parts of your body. When you’re sitting, keep your shoulders relaxed and low, not lifted or hunched up. Check also if your lower arms are parallel to the floor and resting on a support.
Your elbows must be at a 90-degree angle. If they aren’t, you likely have your lower arms bent up high. Adjust your desk or your chair so you can place your hands in the right position.
Note how far you have to reach to access your keyboard and mouse. Must you bend to reach for them? The right distance is where you can control them with your arms bent at the elbow.
Your spine as a natural curve at its lower part. Your chair should support this curve while keeping clear of your upper back. To practice correct posture, it’s also vital to keep your upper back straight.
The back of your chair should be right by your hips. This will help keep you from slouching. Don’t try to lean on one side either.
Check that your thighs are parallel to the ground. If you’re short, invest in a footrest to help your feet rest at the right height. Speaking of feet, keep them flat on the floor.
4. How Do I Practice Good Sitting Posture at Work?
Now, companies take measures to get ergonomic equipment for their employees. Invest in massage chairs for the office. You can always find massage chairs for sale online that can fit your office needs.
During your shift, do you spend over an hour on the phone? If you’re often manning the telephone at work, get a headset. This will reduce the time you spend with your head bent and your shoulder raised.
Do your wrists and arms hurt when you’re using the keyboard and mouse? Try using different keyboard and mouse types. Some keyboards in the market have built-in spaces to help support your wrist.
If your desk is too wide, work in a smaller space. Keep your mouse and keyboard closer so you won’t have to keep reaching for them. If your desk is too small, focus on keeping your computer screen at least a full arm away from your eyes.
Take 30-second breaks every 30 minutes to stand and stretch your sedentary body. If you can’t afford it, get a standing desk. Every 30-45 minutes, alternate between standing and sitting.
5. Tips to Improve Your Sitting Posture
$60 billion goes into resolving lower back pain. Even when you’re working at home, make sure you still practice the correct sitting posture. When you’re relaxing at home, go ahead and relax but make sure you do so in the correct posture.
It’s easy to remember to sit properly. However, it’s difficult to practice good posture. If you want to gain this tiny change in lifestyle, try getting a sedentary alert.
Change your lifestyle by becoming more active. Exercise for 30 minutes at least three times a week. The best activities are a mix of stretching, aerobic, and strengthening exercises.
It’s Never Too Late to Practice Good Posture
Your health is an important and often overlooked investment in life. In this era, people tend to get distracted more by material and financial wealth. However, once you’ve gotten too much damage from bad posture, no financial wealth can undo it.
Practice the proper sitting posture by following our guide here. We hope you found this piece of content informative and if you want to see more guides on health and other topics, continue reading our other articles today!.