Black history month may be over, but a poster prominently displayed in a McDonald's near my neighborhood tells us we should be observing it every day of the year.
One way of doing so might be to recall that blacks used to make up most of the workers at the fast-food palace. Today, most are Hispanic immigrants.
Nevertheless, there are other ways of observing black history, and one may be arriving at your children's school as soon as next year.
With help from the taxpayers by way of the National Endowment for the Humanities, some 24 "scholars" have concocted a curriculum for American schools that will focus on what is now called in some quarters the "Black Holocaust" and, according to a Cybercast News Service report last month, "on issues like slavery reparations that are typically not addressed by kids' textbooks." The program "may be incorporated into the curriculum of public schools across the nation as early as September 2003."
Of course, there are several good reasons why most textbooks don't deal with "issues like slavery reparations." Among them are
But for some, who think racial propaganda is just the ticket for public school curricula, reparations, white guilt and the supposed "genocide" of blacks by whites are just what most children, black and white, need to have their brains washed in.
The designers of the curriculum are two black teachers from Milwaukee, Dennis Smith and Yolanda Farmer, and their project, as CNS reports, relies "on federal grant money from the National Endowment for the Humanities (NEH) to support their educational efforts."
Ostensibly, the curriculum is supposed to teach black kids all about their roots in Africa, including from which tribe they are descended. Mr. Smith has already figured out his own "roots" and learned that they go "back to a 'great empire' in Africa that existed more than 400 years ago."
One rather suspects that Mr. Smith will soon discover that his ancestors were the emperors of the "great empire," but in any case, the "roots" stuff is largely a cover for another, hidden agenda.
"Smith said there is a greater lesson for kids, both black and white, in performing such genealogical research," and that purpose is as follows, as Mr. Smith explains it:
"Civilization itself started in Africa and it worked its way to this part of the world, but most African-Americans as well as white Americans don't know that. No matter how much we try to disprove that reality, it always comes back to the fact that civilization did start in Africa and then spread out throughout the rest of the planet."
Mr. Smith acknowledges that "his curriculum would rely on African-American historical resources and artifacts provided by the Black Holocaust Museum in Milwaukee."
The Black Holocaust Museum, he explains,
"is our history, just like slavery is our history, just like hip-hop, just like the Temptations or Elvis Presley. All of that is part of African-American history. African kids have to know and take ownership of that history, as well as white American kids must know African-American history."
The Black Holocaust Museum itself, according to its own website,
"was founded to educate the general public of the injustices suffered by people of African Heritage in America, and to provide visitors with an opportunity to rethink their assumptions about race and racism."
What Mr. Smith wants to teach, of course, is nothing more than racial brainwashing, complete with bad grammar and intended to drill into the noggins of innocent white children how their own ancestors were genocidal killers, how and why they should spend their lives wallowing in guilt about it, and how and why blacks—the heirs of "great empires" no one else has ever heard of—should reclaim their imperial heritage by manipulating the government, the schools and anyone foolish enough to let them get away with it.
Mr. Smith also appears eager to swipe a bit from white history. Pathetically, Elvis Presley seems to be about the best he can think of to steal.
Courses like the one that Mr. Smith and his colleagues have come up with are hardly new. But now, with the help of the federal government through the NEH and probably the Education Department, they can reasonably expect to impose their phony history and racial power trip throughout the nation's school system.
It ought to tell us something that hardly anyone seems to have known about this gigantic anti-white binge and even fewer—in the Republican House, the Republican Senate or the Republican White House—seem to have raised any objection to it.
COPYRIGHT CREATORS SYNDICATE, INC.
[Sam Francis [email him] is a nationally syndicated columnist. A selection of his columns, America Extinguished: Mass Immigration And The Disintegration Of American Culture, is now available from Americans For Immigration Control.]