President, Emancipator, Corporate Pitchman
Learn about the life and legacy of Abraham Lincoln, and his contributions to the American identity.
Abraham Lincoln is regarded as one of the greatest leaders in American history, and a permanent part of the American spirit. As the mythology around him has grown, his image and life have been appropriated across a broad cultural spectrum. This exhibit not only tells his story, but dives into his impact on the US government as well as corporate America.
Gallery Surface Area
2,000 to 5,000 sq. ft.
One-way, inbound; paid by host venue
All include English text and voiceover. Multi-language functionality is available upon request. Text can be converted by host venue.
Step inside the exhibit
Explore the 20 multisensory tactile prints and large-format photographs included in the exhibit.
The iconic 'Statue of Abraham Lincoln', seated at the famous Lincoln Memorial Center In Washington, DC, USA. (Photo by: Universal Images Group via Getty Images).
"Washington, DC" travel poster depicting light streaming over the Lincoln Memorial's Abraham Lincoln statue, illustrated by Joseph Binder for United Air Lines, 1955. (Photo by Potter and Potter Auctions/Gado/Getty Images).
A glamorous portrait of President Abraham Lincoln graces trade cards from Between the Acts cigarette manufacturer, which hired Heppenheimer and Maurer Lithographers to create a series of cards featuring United States presidents, New York, 1890. (Photo by Transcendental Graphics, Getty Images).
Poster for 'Young Mr. Lincoln', left: Henry Fonda (as Abraham Lincoln) on midget window card, 1939. (Photo by LMPC via Getty Images).
Release photo of a 1966 Lincoln Continental Four-Door Sedan.
US postage stamp bearing the image of American President Abraham Lincoln (1809 - 1865) and was first issued November 19, 1954. (Photo by Blank Archives/Getty Images).
Side view of bronze life mask and hands of Abraham Lincoln. This bronze grouping was made from original plaster molds taken of Lincoln's face and hands by the Chicago sculptor Leonard Wells Volk (1828-1895) in 1860. In 1886, Volk's friend, sculptor Augustus Saint-Gaudens, initiated a fund-raising campaign to purchase the casts for the National Museum (later known as the Smithsonian Institution). Plaster copies sold for fifty dollars, while bronze copies cost eighty-five dollars. (Photo by Chicago History Museum/Getty Images).
WWI homefront poster promoting participation in the purchase of war bonds, using an Abraham Lincoln quote stating "That government of the people, by the people, for the people, shall not perish from the earth." (Photo by David Pollack/Corbis via Getty Images).
Abraham Lincoln Engraving, 'Ticket to World's Columbian Exposition', Chicago, Illinois, 1893. (Photo by: Universal History Archive/Universal Images Group via Getty Images).
'Medal Depicting Lincoln', 1865/94. Artist Unknown. (Photo by Heritage Art/Heritage Images via Getty Images).
What is a "tactile image"?
A tactile image harnesses the senses of touch, sound, and smell to help the blind and visually impaired community experience visual knowledge in a meaningful way.
Having worked extensively with the blind community, our patented technology allows the visually impaired to create accurate mental pictures of visual imagery without the need for a sighted companion.
We provide all our exhibit hosts with dynamic and interactive catalogs to help tell the story of our exhibits.
Click through to the rich audio components that help the visually impaired create accurate mental pictures for themselves.
Tet and the Battle of Hue, Newseum 2018
Learn how our traveling exhibition on the Battle of Hue changed the way the blind and visually impaired community could experience art.
This exhibition would not have been possible without the help of Getty Images.
Interested in President, Emancipator, Corporate Pitchman?
Book this traveling exhibition for your institution today.