Lecture like Aristotle – this is how you leave a lasting impression!
Although techniques used long before our time may seem outdated at first glance, there is much that philosophers like Aristotle have taught that can still help us today.
This includes, for example, that Aristotle taught that a memorable speech rests on three pillars. In this post, we’ll explain what these are and how you can build your speech based on these pillars.
The 3 pillars – this is what they are
Aristoteles called these 3 pillars the basis of effective communication. And even though that was 2,300 years ago, this advice is still as relevant today as it was back then.
The first pillar is based on on “Ethos”. This point stands for the fact that as a speaker it is essential to establish credibility. For example, storytelling can be very helpful to build a connection with your audience from the beginning.
For more tips, on how to use storytelling in your presentations, have a look at our blog article on “storytelling”.
The second pillar for a memorable speech is called “Logos”. As the term suggests, this pillar is about relying on facts and logic. If you provide your audience with true facts and figures that make sense, it will be easier for you to gain the trust of your audience.
For more tips, on how to gain your audience’s trust, read our blog article on “Testimonials”.
The third and last pillar according to Aristotle, is called “Pathos”. This is all about appealing to the emotions of your audience. If the audience is emotionally involved in the topic, it is often easier for them to listen attentively, and your message will remain in the minds of your audience much longer.
Extra-tip: How to make your presentation more memorable
To make your presentation even more memorable, you can go one step further than the method already taught by Aristotle. Use a professional design for your slides to visualize your content.
This could be images, charts, icons, or videos. These make your presentation look livelier and appeal to your target group on an emotional and rational level at the same time.
Are you looking for professionally designed PowerPoint templates to support your presentation? Feel free to have a look around our store! Look for example at these slides:
Conclusion: Present like Aristotle!
Feel free to try basing your next presentation on Aristotle’s three pillars. Your audience will thank you and you will leave a lasting impression!
Do you have any questions regarding this topic or about PowerPoint in general? Do not hesitate to contact us at [email protected]. We will be happy to help you!
More articles, that you could be interested in:
- Use testimonials in presentations for more credibility!
- Storytelling in presentations – connect emotionally with your audience!
- Interactive presentations – 7 Tips to help you shape them to meet your goals!
- Images in PowerPoint – here’s 2 ideas how to skillfully include them!