Klooga labour camp was part of the Vaivara concentration camp network. The camp was established in September 1943 near Klooga borough. It was one of the largest of the Vaivara camps and operated the longest, from September 1943 to 19 September 1944. The area had been turned into a military zone already during the previous Soviet occupation (1940–1941). Now, the German military company Todt operated here. Before the arrival of the Jewish detainees, Soviet POW and convicts along with civilian workers worked on the construction of the camp.
Klooga did not have any links to the Eastern Estonian shale oil industry, unlike most of the other camps. Klooga’s prisoners were first and foremost used in the timber and concrete industry that was important for the war economy.
The number of prisoners in Klooga stayed around 1800–2100. Approximately 3000 Jews (more women than men) might have passed through the camp. Unlike other Vaivara camps, Klooga prisoners lived in stone buildings that had functioning plumbing and running water. Inmates that had medical training worked in the prison hospital located in the camp territory. The prisoners were mainly employed in timber and concrete industries, which were important for the war economy. The camp was liquidated on 19 September 1944, and consequently a mass murder of Jews that had not been evacuated took place. The number of those executed is estimated at 1800–2000. According to a post-war Soviet investigative committee, 108 Jews survived the mass murder.
More information about Klooga can be found HERE
JÄGALA CAMP AND KALEVI-LIIVA EXECUTION SITE
In August 1942, the German Security Police and SD established a camp for Jews at the former Estonian military summer camp in Jägala, Harju County, approximately 25 kilometres east from Tallinn. The direct management of the camp was under the purview of Estonian officials of the German Security Police. Estonians had also been hired as guards. Jägala camp was established as a temporary camp, as it was not meant for long-term accommodation of prisoners or for putting the detainees to work.
More information about Kalevi-Liiva can be found HERE
Will be added in the future