Vietnam has gradually improved from being an impoverished nation experiencing starvation in 1945 to becoming the leading exporter of Vietnam white rice. Nowadays Vietnam white rice is exported to many countries such as China, the Philippines, the USA, and Africa.
An overview of Vietnam white rice
Since ancient times, rice has been cultivated in Vietnam. It is one of the top five nations in the world for rice production. Most rice exported from Vietnam is white rice.
What is Vietnam white rice?
Vietnam white rice is milled rice that has been stripped of its husk, bran, and germ. This affects the flavor, taste, texture, smell, and looks of the rice, preventing spoiling, increasing storage life, and leading to being simpler to digest. The rice is polished after milling (hulling), resulting in a bright, shiny, and white grain.
Both the milling and polishing operations deplete nutrients. Due to thiamine insufficiency, an unbalanced diet based on unenriched white rice exposes many people to the neurological disorder beriberi (vitamin B1). White rice is frequently supplemented with some of the nutrients lost during processing. Therefore, sometimes Vietnam white rice is enriched with B1, B3, and iron. Rice’s nutritional makeup varies slightly based on variety, soil conditions, environmental circumstances, and fertilizer type, like with all-natural foods.
Vietnam white rice is a significant food source as well as a strategic export product for Vietnam. Vietnam produces approximately 40-46 million tons of white rice per year on average; in addition to local consumption, the export volume of Vietnam white rice is approximately 25-28 million tons per year. The Mekong River Delta – the primary rice bowl – accounts for more than half of overall output and more than 90% of total rice exports. White rice exports are critical to Vietnam’s socio-economic development. The rice sector has made significant progress and achieved numerous accomplishments in recent years. Vietnam’s white rice exports account for around 12-15% of global rice exports on an annual basis. Vietnam white rice is available in more than 150 nations and territories. The main export market is Asia, the US, the EU, Africa, and South Korea.
Different types of Vietnam white rice
Many varieties of Vietnam white rice are available from Vietnamese exporters, which satisfy the demands of consumers’ preferences in terms of price and quality.
Vietnam white rice is classified into three types based on its length: long-grain rice, medium-grain rice, and short-grain rice.
Long grain rice has a length of more than 6mm on average. Long grain rice is narrow and long, with a length that is four to five times that of its width. Long grain Vietnam white rice is one of the most widely consumed grains in the world; other varieties include Jasmine rice, ST25 rice, Nang Hoa rice, and others.
- Jasmine rice
Jasmine rice is a well-known type of Vietnam white rice for its high quality and distinct flavor after cooking. It is a daily product that everyone requires approximately 2-3 times every day.
Long grain jasmine rice is not as sticky as short-grain rice, but its flavor remains the same. The hue is always vibrant and appealing. Jasmine rice has been mostly exported to Iraq, the Philippines, and the EU at a price of 660 USD/MT.
Contact us: +84855555243 to get the latest price of Jasmine rice.
People in some nations use Jasmine Vietnam white rice to cook traditional foods that require the scent of rice and consume it virtually every day, therefore it is far more suitable than others.
- ST25 rice
ST25 is a rice variety in the ST rice series. ST is an abbreviation for “Soc Trang,” the birthplace of this rice in the Mekong Delta. Because of the extensive irrigation infrastructure, pleasant weather, and skilled farmers, these places are ideal for cultivating ST25 rice.
ST 25 is the pride of Vietnam white rice because this type of Vietnam white rice is the most delicious rice in the world. With the distinction of being the world’s most delectable rice, ST25 Vietnam white rice is not only famous among Vietnamese, but it is also becoming a favorite delicacy among many rice consumers worldwide. The US and China are the two largest export markets for ST25 5% broken rice.
- Nang Hoa rice
Nang Hoa Rice is created from Nang Hoa 9 rice varieties that are drought, salinity, and alum resistant. The growth period of this Vietnam white rice lasts between 95 and 100 days. Summer-autumn and winter-spring are the two seasons in which Nang Hoa rice is commonly cultivated.
Nang Hoa fragrant rice is a premium variety of long grain rice. Rice grains are slightly bigger and longer, with a mild and light aroma. Nang Hoa Vietnam white rice has 1.5 times the iron, calcium, and protein content of ordinary rice.
This type of Vietnam white rice has characteristics like it is sweet, soft, and lump-free, when cold, and it does not stiffen or become difficult to chew. Africa, China and other Asian countries all imported rice. Furthermore, Nang Hoa Vietnam white rice meets import requirements for demanding markets such as the United States and Europe.
- IR 504
Since 1992, IR 504 rice has been widely planted in the Mekong Delta. The short growth time of IR 504 increases productivity while decreasing cost. Furthermore, due to its versatility, IR 504 is a Vietnam white rice variety that is ideal for a wide range of farming circumstances.
The grain in IR504 is big and milky white. It is appropriate for those who prefer dry rice. This type of Vietnam white rice has a dry and spongy texture but a sweet flavor due to the high Amylose concentration; thus, it is best used to manufacture rice flour, which is a vital ingredient in noodle or snack products.
At this time, IR504 is exported at 450 USD/MT FOB to many countries in Africa and Asia.
Contact us: +84855555243 to get the latest price of IR 504 rice.
Medium-grain Vietnam white rice is shorter and bigger than long-grain rice. When this type of Vietnam white rice is cooked, this rice yields soft, and somewhat chewy that adhere together. Ham Chau rice is the most common medium-grain Vietnam white rice.
- Ham Chau rice
The grain of short-term, 90-day-growing Ham Chau medium rice is rounded and silver-bellied.
After cooking, porous rice will bloom significantly, making it ideal for processing fried rice at well-known restaurants. Additionally, Ham Chau rice is appropriate for households that enjoy eating a lot of inflated, spongy rice. This type of Vietnam white rice is also used to make casters, pancakes, and noodle factories.
Short-grain Vietnam white rice is so named because it is only slightly longer than it is wide. This squat, plump rice cooks soft and tender, although it is prone to sticking and clumping. Japonica is the most prevalent short-grain Vietnam white rice. Short-grain rice is commonly used in sushi, molded salads, and pudding.
- Japonica rice
Since 2016, Japonica Vietnam white rice has been grown in Vietnam. Because of the extensive irrigation infrastructure, suitable weather, and skilled farmers, the main growing region of Japonica is in the Cuu Long River Delta.
The characteristics of Japonica Vietnam white rice are round, smooth, pearly white, and have a delicate, soft scent. The rice grain keeps its innate ductility when cooked on white and sticky rice, which is easy to consume even after chilling. As a result, Japonica is the primary food in Japanese meals.
Japonica rice has stronger adhesion than other forms of rice due to its higher amylopectin concentration. Flux, Lipid, Protein, sugar, vitamins, and minerals are the main ingredients of this type of Vietnam white rice.
K-Agriculture supplies high-quality Japonica rice are exported to China, Korea and other Asian countries at a price of 640-660 USD/MT. Contact us: +84855555243 to get the latest price of Japonica rice.
Vietnam white rice versus the world
Vietnam is one of the top rice exporting countries in the world. Even with the expansion of COVID-19, Vietnam white rice exports in 2020 reached 6.2 million tons, valued at US$3.1 billion. Despite that the amount of rice exported declined by around 3.2 percent in comparison to 2019 because of national food security, the value of exported rice climbed by 10.7 percent.
In recent years, Vietnam white rice market share in the global market has been relatively consistent at 12-15 percent in terms of value. Export volume relative to the rest of the globe ranked third in the world in terms of rice export volume from 2015 to 2019.
The years 2015, 2017, and 2018 demonstrate Thailand’s strong position in the global rice export industry, with a market share that is double that of Vietnam. However, the market share gap between Vietnam and Thailand is closing.
Why should you buy Vietnam white rice?
There are 3 key reasons that make Vietnam white rice a worthy purchase.
Vietnam white rice has top quality and flavor
Vietnam white rice has a particular flavor and fragrance that draws customers in. The high quality of Vietnamese white rice is well known around the world. In 2019, Vietnamese ST25 rice won the most delicious type of rice, beating Thai and Cambodian rice, at The Rice Trader’s World’s Best Rice event in Manila, Philippines.
Furthermore, with a long history of farming white rice, Vietnam has an advantage over other countries in the cultivating and processing stages, resulting in a superior overall quality of Vietnam white rice.
Vietnam white rice has large and stable output
According to the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development, Vietnam white rice output in 2021 will exceed 43.86 million tons, an increase of 1.1 million tons over the previous year.
Despite a 39,700 ha drop in cultivated area, yield climbed by about 1.9 quintals/ha compared to 2020 to completely meet domestic consumption, processing, and export demand.
Vietnam white rice production maintains the trend of adopting high-quality rice types at a rate of more than 77 percent to boost the value of the “Vietnamese rice grain brand.”
Vietnam white rice has governmental support
In Vietnam, rice has long been a strategic crop for national food security. For decades, the government has actively supported increases in Vietnam white rice productivity, first for the domestic market, then for export markets.
Since 2008, the government has issued a wide range of policies to support agricultural production, including Vietnam white rice production via measures that include: paying inputs cost for farmers in case of disasters and diseases and supporting the development of high-yield rice varieties.
Therefore, above are the reasons why Vietnam white rice is preferred by many rice importers all over the world.
The price of Vietnam white rice
There are several factors that affect the price of Vietnam white rice such as type of rice, broken rate, color, import quantity, etc. To be more specific, ST rice and long grain Jasmine rice are much higher. By contrast, IR 504 and OM 5451 have an affordable prices.
The chart above shows the price ranges for different types of Vietnam white rice from K-Agriculture, the best white rice supplier in Vietnam.
The price of Vietnam white rice not only depends on rice varieties but also on the proportion of broken rice. Rice that has been broken into pieces in the field, during drying, during shipping, or during milling is known as broken rice. The broken grains are separated from the entire grains and sorted according to size using mechanical separators. The frequent proportion of broken rice in Vietnam white rice is 5%, 15%, 20% and 100%. 5% broken rice is significantly more expensive than 100% broken rice.
Another element that importers should consider is the moisture of Vietnam white rice.
Vietnam white rice: How to import white rice from Vietnam?
This section will give you a step-by-step guide to importing Vietnam white rice.
Step 1: Know Vietnam white rice
Do you know anything about Vietnam white rice you’re importing? The first step in importing food is to deeply understand the various types of Vietnam white rice.
For each market, different types of Vietnam white rice will be imported. You can choose appropriate types of Vietnam white rice based on the priority in your nation.
- If you want to import inexpensive rice, you should get IR 504 or OM 5451.
- If you want to import high-quality rice for a high-demand market, you should get ST25 rice and Jasmine rice.
Step 2: Know the import requirements of your country for Vietnam white rice
As an importer to import Vietnam white rice, you should consider the following import requirements of your country.
- White rice requirements
Your imported Vietnam white rice must be produced, processed, stored, and labeled in sanitary circumstances. Depending on your country, imported rice will be subject to different laws.
- Import duty
Import tariffs will differ based on the commodity. When you import various varieties of Vietnam white rice and sell them in your nation, you must analyze the import tax levied on these products in order to compute the exact cost and estimate your earnings.
The following HS codes for rice goods can help you find the import tax:
To find the import tax, look for these HS codes in the Import-Export tariff table of your countries.
- Documents requirements
When importing different types of Vietnam white rice, you must be aware of and prepare the necessary documents. Documents relating to the quality of the goods, payment terms, or transportation may be included.
Some common documentation required for the importation of Vietnam white rice: Certificate of Origin, Phytosanitary Certificate, Fumigation Certificate… However, it may differ based on the needs of each country.
Step 3: Find reliable Vietnam white rice suppliers
Finding a trustworthy Vietnam white rice supplier is challenging. Below are some ways to find your appropriate rice suppliers to import Vietnam white rice.
- Use Google: websites such as go4WorldBusiness, World’s Top Exports, or the Government Office can provide you with a list of potential white rice suppliers.
- Linkedin: Some groups such as Rice Millers & Traders, IMPORTER & EXPORTER RICE, Rice Import & Export, etc have rice suppliers who have the capacity to supply Vietnam white rice.
- Facebook: Some groups namely Rice Traders, RICE-IMPORT-EXPORT, WORLD RICE, GRAIN EXPORTERS & IMPORTERS have rice suppliers who are potential to import Vietnam white rice
- Trade fair: Meeting providers of different types of Vietnam white rice at agricultural trade exhibitions is a typical tactic for your firm. The Paris International Agricultural Show, AgriTech Expo Zambia, and other popular agriculture expos are examples.
Step 4: Enter the contract with Vietnam white rice exporters
The exporter and importer have to discuss all terms of the contract. Some important points that should be carefully considered are Quantity, Delivery, Payment, Documents, and Arbitration.
The most common mode of transportation for Vietnam white rice is sea transport thanks to its reasonable freight cost and high capacity. Terms of trade in sea transport used by the importers and Vietnam white rice exporters are usually FOB and CIF. “FOB [name of originating port]” in international ocean shipping refers to the seller (consignor) being in charge of the expense of the products’ transit to the port of shipment as well as their loading. The cost of maritime freight, insurance, loading, and transportation from the port of loading to the port of discharge is covered by the buyer (consignee). When Vietnam white rice is loaded at the port of loading, the seller transfers the risk to the buyer. CIF, or Cost, Insurance, Freight, designates a contract wherein the seller is obligated to pay for shipping to the port of origin, principal carrier, and minimal insurance.
Regarding Payment terms, Vietnam white rice exporters usually prefer L/C payment method. A letter of credit, often known as a “credit letter,” is a bank guarantee that a buyer will pay a seller on time and in full. The bank will be compelled to pay the entire or remaining sum of the transaction if the buyer is unable to make a payment on it. Vietnam white rice exporters often require the importers to open L/C through the top bank and the advising bank is also the top bank in Vietnam. The top 10 commercial banks in Vietnam are: Vietcombank, Techcombank, VietinBank, ACB, Military Bank, VPBank, BIDV, TPBank, VIB, and AgriBank.
Step 5: Trace the shipment and receive Vietnam white rice
The exporter will oversee and track the entire shipping process in order to keep importers informed throughout the process of importing goods by sea. An Arrival Notice will be sent to you by the shipping company or forwarder at least one day before the ship’s arrival date.
Following that, you will receive delivery orders (D/O) for the Vietnam white rice shipment. The transporter or forwarder issues a D/O to importers so that they can obtain the products. D/O will reveal who is keeping and who will receive Vietnam white rice.
Step 6: Do customs clearance of imported Vietnam white rice
Every good imported into your country must be inspected, appraised, assessed, and evaluated at customs. This allows customs officials to assess the appropriate customs duty and check the product to avoid illegal imports. It is notable that each country will ask for specific documents for customs clearance. You should use the internet search engine to learn about the customs clearance process in your country and how to prepare the relevant documentation related to importing Vietnam white rice. This is a challenging process. If you are unable to do it on your own, you might seek the assistance of a forward agent or a broker.
Top 5 Vietnam white rice suppliers
Here are the top 5 biggest rice wholesalers in Vietnam.
Sunrise Ins Group is a prominent producer and exporter of high-quality agricultural products from Vietnam and around the world, mainly Vietnam white rice.
After many years of experience, the organization has constantly reinforced its market position and consumer trust. The company’s products are currently shipped to various nations and territories thanks to the country’s extensive distribution network.
K-Agriculture is one of the best agricultural factories. They supply well-known Vietnam white rice varieties such as Japonica, IR 504, OM5451, DT 8, ST24, and ST25, as well as Jasmine rice. They have provided wholesale rice to over 100 nations. K-Agriculture, which receives funding from the Vietnamese Ministry of Industry and Trade, has been a constant source of Vietnam white rice varieties. K-Agriculture had exported rice to many countries like Canada, Ghana, Belarus, etc.
If you want to import white rice from Vietnam, feel free to contact us via:
VILACONIC GROUP is a rice and coffee specialist, with Vietnam white rice being their core product.
Their humble beginnings may be traced back to a farmer who set up a small Vietnam white rice mill in the fertile fields of the Mekong Delta Region. Over the last two decades, VILACONIC has evolved into an international group with local and global renown.
Song Hau Food
In its 22-year history, Song Hau Food Company has accomplished a great lot, including membership in the Vietnam Food Association.
In Vietnam, Song Hau rice mills have an annual capacity of 200,000 to 250,000 tons for exporting Vietnam white rice to foreign markets.
Phat Tai Co., Ltd
Phat Tai was formed and developed over the years with efforts to establish Vietnam’s strong agricultural products such as rice, Vietnam white rice (IR504, OM5451), fragrant rice (jasmine rice, DT8 rice, KDM rice, OM4900 rice), and glutinous rice… in order to promote domestic consumption and export to any country around the world.
Phat Tai Co., Ltd. has been recognized as a strong export brand name with approximately 80 countries as marketplaces. Aside from accomplishments in import-export activity, its domestic trade sector has been rapidly expanding.
If you are interested in importing Vietnam white rice, please fill out the form below to get more information.