Can Babies Get Too Much Vitamin D?
Vitamin D is critical for healthy development of infants. According to the Food and Drug Administration, the vitamin aids with absorption of calcium and is essential for strong bone growth and the prevention of rickets. Yet for all the positive benefits of vitamin D, medical experts warn that it is possible for infants to receive too much of a good thing.
In 2008, following the publication of a study indicating that only about one-quarter of all infants were meeting the recommendation of 400 international units per day of vitamin D, the American Academy of Pediatrics strongly encouraged parents of breast-fed infants or those who were consuming less than 1 liter of formula per day to give their babies an oral vitamin D supplement. Vitamin D supplements for infants most often come in liquid form, with doses administered through a dropper. However, experts caution that this delivery method could potentially cause an overdose, leading vitamin D toxicity.
According to the Mayo Clinic, though the body is capable of limiting the amount of vitamin D absorbed through exposure to the sun, liquid vitamin supplements can bypass this natural defense. In 2010, the FDA issued a warning about vitamin D toxicity risk among infants, cautioning that some supplements come with droppers capable of holding more than the 1 milliliter recommended for daily doses. Though most often treatable, MedLine Plus identifies constipation, muscle weakness and vomiting as symptoms of vitamin D toxicity. In more severe cases, it can cause damage to the bones and kidneys.
Incidents of vitamin D toxicity are rare. An exact level of toxicity has not been established, but most cases involve ingestion of more than 40,000 IU per day. This means that the correct-sized dropper containing a 1-milliliter dose would have to be administered more than 100 times to reach toxic levels. Vitamin D toxicity is more likely to occur through a prescription rather than an over-the-counter liquid vitamin supplement.
Always talk to your pediatrician or health care professional before giving your child any supplements. If vitamin D supplementation is recommended, to be certain that your baby receives no more than 400 IU per day, the Food and Drug Administration stresses the importance of using only the dropper that comes with the supplement rather than substituting droppers from other products. Regularly check that the units of measurement on the dropper are clearly marked and easy to understand. Additionally, storing the vitamin D supplement in its original packaging can be helpful to ensure that you and other caregivers have access to proper dosing instructions.
Lauretta Claussen has been writing professionally since 1999. Specializing in health and fitness topics, her work has been published by a variety of print and online media outlets. She earned her journalism degree from Lewis University in 2001.