The basic principle underlying the recommendation to consume fewer carbohydrates is the concern that carbohydrates causes weight increase. This is not entirely true in fact this might be the opposite. The best way to lose weight and maintaining it, is the combination of a diet high in fruits and vegetables, whole cereals, legumes and low fat dairy products with daily use.
Exceptionally low carb diets are unlikely to adequately support your daily nutritional needs. Most low carb diets are almost always Low in fiber, void of some or all of the most essential nutrients your body need to function optimally, such as those found in fruits and vegetables.
Low Carb Diets Robs Your Body Of Essential Vitamins & Minerals
A specific area of concern is the prevalence of High saturated fats and very little carbohydrates because they are low in the essential B vitamins, vitamins A, E, minerals and iron. Therefore missing important Antioxidants and phytochemicals.
The types of foods consumed when on a low carb diet are usually inclusive of salami, chicken, bacon, beef, fish, eggs and little to no vegetables, as well as lots of saturated fats including but not limited to canola and corn oils, butter and mayonnaise.
In the short term, low carb diets may induce weight loss because they restrict energy. When this happens the body starts to use stores of glucose and glycogen (from the liver and muscles) to replace the carbohydrates it is absent from diet. Consequently the weight would not be from loss of fatty tissue, but water since this is part of the glycogen release process.
What Happens When Carbohydrate Stores are Depleted
When carbohydrate stores are depleted, the body looks for other sources of energy such as fat. This process produces ketones which can cause acidosis (When the body is burning) too much fat, this can be very dangerous since the blood ph would be disturbed which can be fatal if not caught in time.
The long-term effect of a diet very low in carbohydrates and high in saturated fat is still unclear and should be considered inadequate to say the least. Your goal therefore should be to lose weight in a manner that is safe, only then would weight loss be beneficial. Attempting to do otherwise will be exchanging one set of health problems for another.
Antioxidants and Fiber are Missing In A Low Carb Diet
Antioxidants and fiber are found in good carbs, the absence of good carbs means there is little or no antioxidants or fiber, thereby increasing person’s risk to be susceptible to constipation and eventually developing bowel or colon cancers.
A recent survey has demonstrated that weight loss on a low carb diet was not dissimilar to a low-fat diet the end results appear to be the same in both cases, high cholesterol, belly fat and all weight related health problems. Diets that are high in protein, little or no carbohydrates and unsaturated fats are causative factors in a number of obesity related ailments, such as heart disease, type 2 diabetes and even some cancers. The emphasis should therefore be on eating a balanced diet inclusive of your RDA of carbohydrates.
I hope this article will give you a brief idea about the hidden dangers of low carb diet to our health and body. Thanks for reading. Don’t forget to share it with your friends and followers.
Leave a Reply