A new study at Auburn University’s College of Veterinary Medicine is examining the viability of an unusual way to fight cancer — with a drug derived from cobra venom.
The Auburn University Research Initiative in Cancer (AURIC) is currently studying the ability of MMX, a drug composed from proteins of detoxified cobra venom, to shrink melanoma tumors in dogs. AURIC Director Dr. Bruce Smith says the hope is that the treatment can one day be effective in treating cancer in humans as well.
Since its formation in 2012, Smith has served as head of AURIC, which provides a “unified structure” for the university’s cancer research, according to its website. That includes several research grant programs for graduate students and faculty members to develop research projects at various stages, with the goal of eventually getting those studies funded by sources outside of Auburn, such as the National Institutes of Health.
The Food and Drug Administration is funding AURIC’s study of MMX, which is a collaboration with Nuovo Biologics, a Florida-based research company that has already done much of the preliminary development and testing of the drug over the past decade. “The goal of this study is to generate preliminary data for licensing it as a drug,” Smith says. “We think there’s a good chance it will work.”
When MMX has been used by veterinarians outside of a structured research setting, the results have been largely successful in shrinking tumors in dogs. And despite the drug’s venomous source, Smith says it has proven to be remarkably safe — a contrast to treatment like chemotherapy, which can have aggressive adverse side effects on patients.
“In fact, it’s been given in huge doses to a variety of animals, and nobody has ever been able to see any toxicity,” Smith says. “We think about cancer drugs, and we’re usually focused on a dose that just barely won’t kill [the patient]… And yet, MMX appears to be extremely safe. The safety margin is huge.”
Pet owners whose dogs have melanoma — a disease which typically appears inside the lip of canines — are encouraged to ask their veterinarian for a referral to the oncology service at Auburn’s Wilford and Kate Bailey Small Animal Teaching Hospital. Because the trial is funded, Smith says, enrollment and treatment is free — it just requires five weekly visits to Auburn. The trial also pays for the removal of the tumor at the end of those five weeks, “if there is any left,” Smith says.
If the trial is successful, he adds, it wouldn’t be difficult to translate the treatment to human patients. “One of the things that we focus on at AURIC, actually, is the concept of ‘one health,’” he says. “So rather than thinking about human health [versus] animal health… we tend to think much more in terms of how [they] are very similar. Melanoma’s a great example. These tumors have the same causes, the same mechanisms, and very often the same outcomes. So if we have those similar biologies, the drug should work very similarly [in both humans and dogs].”
To find out more about AURIC and its research, visit: vetmed.auburn.edu/auric