College, and really life in general, is a balancing act. At times, it can be challenging to manage your time properly. Here are a few tips on balancing school with life.
Identify time wasters
There are only so many hours in a day, and we often see our time wasted by scrolling through the endless abyss that is social media. While it is essential to take breaks, you should try your best to avoid engaging in activities that will waste your time, especially when working on a deadline or when you have set aside a specific time frame specifically for school work.
Make a to-do list
Before getting to work, you must first know what you are working on. Making a to-do list is an easy way to keep track of all your tasks. After completing your tasks in one place, you can begin to reorganize, completing work with earlier deadlines first and working your way down the list.
Get a planner
Your planner is a one-stop shop for your life. From your doctor’s appointment to your club meeting, purchasing a planner will allow you to have all your events in one place and will keep you from over-extending yourself. By actively using a planner, you are better at managing your time and keeping school from overwhelming your life.
Establish a routine
Humans thrive off consistency and success. By establishing a routine that you stick to, you are more likely to get all of your work done, allowing room for fun in your life. Everyone works differently, so curating the perfect routine for you is essential for success.
Do not double-book yourself
Double-booking yourself is a really easy way to get overwhelmed by your life. You are only one person, and you cannot be in two places at the same time. If you have a lab at 8:30 p.m. every Wednesday, do not plan to get dinner with your friends at 8:30 p.m. on Wednesday.
Sleep and personal hygiene are necessary parts of existing. Do not sacrifice your mental or physical health for the sake of school. You come first, and it’s essential to prioritize your health.
You are not a machine. It is so important to give your mind and body time to rest and recuperate. After spending twelve hours writing a paper, you are allowed to sit around and do nothing. Research has found that by giving your mind time to rest, you better your chances of success, boost your confidence and improve your overall mood. There is only so much information you can take in, and it is essential to take a minute for yourself.