Soledad Unified School District
Weekly Newsletter - MARCH 6, 2020
Every Student...Every Day!
CORONA VIRUS INFORMATION FROM THE MONTEREY COUNTY HEALTH DEPARTMENT DATED MARCH 3, 2020
Monterey County is Preparing for Impacts of COVID-19 (Novel Coronavirus)
Cold and Flu season is upon us. The California Department of Public Health reports that influenza (flu) activity levels have increased over the past several weeks. As a reminder, please do not send your child to school if they are feeling sick. Keeping your sick child home will be a great benefit for the health and wellness of our students and staff. The flu is a contagious respiratory illness caused by influenza viruses. It can cause mild to severe illness. Some people, such as older people, young children, and people with certain health conditions, are at high risk of serious flu complications. Symptoms of influenza can vary, but generally include a high fever, headache, chills, body aches, sore throat, and cough.
The 2019-20 flu season has been complicated by recent reports of a novel coronavirus. Coronaviruses are a large family of viruses. Common symptoms in an infected person include a fever, cough, and shortness of breath or difficulty breathing. Although there have been reported cases of novel coronavirus globally, to date, there have been no reported coronavirus cases in Monterey County. A confirmed case was announced on Friday, January 31, in Santa Clara County. Since then, an additional case was confirmed in Santa Clara County and two cases were confirmed in San Benito County.
According to the Center for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), the best way to prevent influenza is as follows:
Tips to Prevent The Flu
● Get vaccinated every year
● Avoid close contact with sick people
● Frequent handwashing with soap
● Stay at home if you are experiencing flu-like symptoms
● Avoid touching your eyes, nose, and mouth
● Individuals with chronic health issues and/or individuals experiencing severe symptoms should be evaluated by a medical professional.
The Soledad Unified School District will continue to monitor the situation and obtain updates from the California Department of Public Health and local health officials about the diagnosis and management of cases of novel coronavirus, as applicable. People who have traveled to Wuhan, China since Dec. 1, 2019, could have been exposed to the virus. Seek medical care if you traveled to Wuhan and develop a fever and/or respiratory symptoms within 14 days of your return.
If you have questions about these topics, please contact Dave Autore, District Nurse at firstname.lastname@example.org. We thank you for your cooperation and support.
The Month of March kicked off with Dr. Seuss Day at Soledad USD!
District Administrators and Staff join in the celebrations at the Elementary Schools
Mr. Bangs, Roxanna Argueta, and Mr. Vanoli at Jack Franscioni ES
Dr. Guss reading to Frank Ledesma Students
Mr. Vanoli reading to students at Jack Franscioni ES
Mr. Vanoli reading to Ms. Celia Quezada's 1st graders at Rose Ferrero!
Check out more stories and pictures by going to the Schools' Bulletins.
South County Strings Music Program
LAST OPPORTUNITY TO SAVE ON WRIST BANDS FOR THE SEF CARNIVAL! YOU MAY PURCHASE THEM AT THE DISTRICT OFFICE OR ONLINE FOR SAVINGS!
The Soledad Education Foundations receives a higher percentage of all the wrist bands sales. Wrist bands are $23 for a one-day of unlimited rides at the Carnival! If purchased at the Carnival, they'll be $28 each.
Below is the link to the webpage for our online ticket sales. The link is live, and you can purchase tickets now or click on the QR code to access the site.
If you have any questions, please call Maria Torres at the District Office at 678-0668 or email@example.com or Irma FIrme at 678-2909 or firstname.lastname@example.org