Virtual Reality Pod
A Virtual Reality Experience
What is virtual reality?
Virtual reality (VR) means experiencing things through our computers that don’t really exist. We create a believable, interactive 3D computer-created world that you can explore so you feel you really are there, both mentally and physically.
Putting it another way, virtual reality is essentially:
1.Believable: Extremely! You really feel like you’re in your virtual world (on Mars in the Ocean, or wherever) and to keep believing that, or the illusion of virtual reality will disappear.
2.Experiential: As you look around, the VR world needs to move with you. You will watch a 3D movie complete with sounds and be transported up to the Moon or down to the seabed.
3.Computer-generated: Why is that important? Because only powerful machines, with realistic 3D computer graphics, are fast enough to make believable, interactive, alternative worlds that change in real-time as we move around them.
4. Explorable: A VR world needs to be big and detailed enough for you to explore. However realistic a painting is, it shows only one scene, from one perspective. A book can describe a vast and complex “virtual world,” but you can only really explore it in a linear way, exactly as the author describes it.
5.Immersive: To be both believable, VR needs to engage your mind with 3D video and sounds. VR is quite different. It makes you think you are actually living inside a completely believable virtual world (one in which, to use the technical jargon, you are partly or fully immersed). It is two-way interactive: as you respond to what you see, what you see responds to you: if you turn your head around, what you see and hear in VR changes to match your new perspective.
You have heard of Virtual Reality entertainment for rent and are curious what it is all about? Party Pals Virtual Reality rentals is here to make it happen! Virtual Reality (VR) is about transporting you to places that you might otherwise never get to experience! VR may look like a relatively simple device but it’s actually a pretty amazing piece of kit packing a wealth of cutting-edge tech. The hugely exciting virtual reality for rent system includes a whole bunch of amazing hardware designed to create a sense of complete immersion into your three-dimensional world complete with sound. VR radically redefines digital entertainment. Discover a universe of possibilities and explore the world like never before. The Experience of Virtual Reality takes you to faraway lands, puts you in the center of the performance and brings you face to face with unbelievable environments and places.
Experiences included but not limited to;
The Blu Whale and Sunken Ship Dive – Encounter the largest species on earth a whale. Ever wonder what it is like to scuba dive a ship wreck? A deeply immersive VR experience featuring an incredible close encounter with an 80 foot whale, is already recognized as one the most iconic VR experiences to date (a Sundance Film Festival 2016 selection). This incredible VR experience that allows audiences to explore the wonder and majesty of the ocean through different habitats.
The Blu Undersea Encounter – A totally subversive Exploration of a most beautiful and colorful coral Reef and witness the magnificence of an undersea migration of sea creatures on the edge of the virtual coral reef. Finally, Venture into the deepest dark region of the ocean to discover the iridescent abyss.
An experience that allows one to see what it is like to see what the famous diver explorer Jacques Cousteau may have saw.
History of Flight “ Stand in the Middle of an Airport Runway and Experience a journey through the history of aviation” a brief history of flight gives you excellent 360 degree VR experience of an airshow one could never see in real life. Witness the Wright Flyer™s first leap, dodge bullets from a WWI fighter, get buzzed by the leading-edge F22 Raptor fighter jet, and be nearly engulfed by the world™s largest plane.
Showdown Cinematic VR Experience “ VR experience takes you through a cinematic, bullet-time inspired action scene. The all around and overhead experience takes you through a slow motion, higher than average amount of things coming towards you as guns are blazing in the scenario. Ammo and debris slices through the environment just missing you and may find yourself ducking the debris! Watch a fiery car barrel past overhead, and face off with a colossal mech enemy in the end.
Introduction to Virtual Reality “ Discover a universe of possibilities and explore the world like never before. The new Introduction to Virtual Reality takes you to faraway lands, puts you in the center of a Cirque du Soleil performance and brings you face to face with a giant from a bygone era.
Seal Team Delivery Vehicle “ The SEAL Delivery Vehicle or (SDV) is a manned submersible and a type of Swimmer Delivery Vehicle or diver propulsion vehicle used to deliver United States Navy SEALs and their equipment for special operations missions . SDVs carry a pilot, co-pilot, and combat swimmer team and their equipment to and from maritime mission objectives on land or at sea. Our SEAL delivery vehicle VR 360 degree experience takes you right inside a delivery vehicle underwater in a 360 vr experience taking cargo from a to z. A short experience in which you hop into the cockpit of a Undersea SEAL Delivery Vehicle (SDV). It™s designed as something of a training experience that has been released for all to see.
We also offer custom branding on our Virtual Reality systems for rent. Our VR rental is the finest system available anywhere, complete with player pod and a 60 monitor for the spectators waiting to play to see the Virtual World you are in. The futuristic aluminum pod design assure a safe virtual reality rental environment.