The aim of this lesson is to introduce you to IELTS general training reading true false not given questions.
This lesson will also be useful if you are taking academic reading as you still have true false not given questions - the readings are just more academic in nature.
In this type of question, you are given a short reading text followed by a set of statements.
You have to read each statement, then by comparing those statements to what has been written in the text, you must decide if the statement is:
Always read the statements very carefully then compare them with what is in the text. There may only be slight differences between the text and the statement.
Think about meaning. If you just look at the words, many may match, but this does not automatically mean it is true. You must understand what is being said.
Be aware of paraphrasing. Some or all of the words in the text will not be the same as in the statement - they will be paraphrased. For example:
Candidates often have the most difficulty distinguishing between false and not given statements.
Remember that for something to be false, the information in the text specifically contradicts what is in the statement.
If it is not given, there will likely be information in the text related to the statement, but not enough for you to know if it is true or false.
Take a look at the text then try to answer the questions. An example has been done for you.
After you have answered, click on show/hide to see the answers.
Arriving At Sydney Airport
Just follow these simple steps for a trouble-free arrival.
Follow the ARRIVALS sign if you are ending your journey in Sydney or transferring to an Australian domestic flight.
This will take you to the Immigration Hall where you must present your passport and any necessary visa/health documentation.
Proceed downstairs to claim your baggage from the carousel indicating your flight number. Free trolleys are available for your bags.
To clear customs take the Red Channel if you have goods to declare or the Green Channel if you have no goods to declare.
You will then be in the Arrivals Hall. From here you can obtain transport into central Sydney, and transfer to Australian domestic flights.
If you want to visit Sydney you should follow the ARRIVALS sign.
"Follow the ARRIVALS sign if you are ending your journey in Sydney or transferring to an Australian domestic flight".
You are not told anything about what to do for international flights so this will be 'not given'.
"Proceed downstairs to claim your baggage from the carousel indicating your flight number".
It says baggage must be collected "from the carousel indicating your flight number". This contradicts what is in the statement: "any carousel", so it is 'false'.
"To clear customs take the Red Channel if you have goods to declare or the Green Channel if you have no goods to declare".
This piece of text matches what is being said in the statement so it is 'true' - that there is a choice of two customs channels, and which one you choose will depend on whether you are declaring goods or not.
"You will then be in the Arrivals Hall. From here you can obtain transport into central Sydney, and transfer to Australian domestic flights".
You are told there is transport to central Sydney, but there is nothing to say there are differing options. You can probably assume there will be, but if it does not say then it has to be 'not given'.
IELTS general training reading true false not given questions
in a full test
"I think these eBooks are FANTASTIC!!! I know that's not academic language, but it's the truth!"
Linda, from Italy, Scored Band 7.5
New! CommentsAny questions or comments about this page or about IELTS?
Post your comment here.