Karunapara, Karuṇāpara, Karuna-para: 6 definitions
Karunapara means something in Hinduism, Sanskrit, Buddhism, Pali. If you want to know the exact meaning, history, etymology or English translation of this term then check out the descriptions on this page. Add your comment or reference to a book if you want to contribute to this summary article.
Languages of India and abroad
Karuṇāpara (करुणापर).—a. very kind. काकुत्स्थं करुणामयं गुणनिधिं विप्रप्रियं धार्मिकम् (kākutsthaṃ karuṇāmayaṃ guṇanidhiṃ viprapriyaṃ dhārmikam) Mahānār.
Karuṇāpara is a Sanskrit compound consisting of the terms karuṇā and para (पर). See also (synonyms): karuṇāmaya.Source: Cologne Digital Sanskrit Dictionaries: Shabda-Sagara Sanskrit-English Dictionary
(-raḥ-rā-raṃ) Compassionate, tender. E. karuṇā, para excellent.Source: Cologne Digital Sanskrit Dictionaries: Monier-Williams Sanskrit-English Dictionary
Karuṇāpara (करुणापर):—[=karuṇā-para] [from karuṇa] mfn. compassionate, tender, [cf. Lexicographers, esp. such as amarasiṃha, halāyudha, hemacandra, etc.]Source: Cologne Digital Sanskrit Dictionaries: Yates Sanskrit-English Dictionary
Karuṇāpara (करुणापर):—[karuṇā+para] (raḥ-rā-raṃ) a. Compassionate.
[Sanskrit to German]
Sanskrit, also spelled संस्कृतम् (saṃskṛtam), is an ancient language of India commonly seen as the grandmother of the Indo-European language family (even English!). Closely allied with Prakrit and Pali, Sanskrit is more exhaustive in both grammar and terms and has the most extensive collection of literature in the world, greatly surpassing its sister-languages Greek and Latin.
Karuṇāpara refers to: one who is highest in compassion, compassionate Sdhp. 112, 345;
Note: karuṇāpara is a Pali compound consisting of the words karuṇā and para.
Pali is the language of the Tipiṭaka, which is the sacred canon of Theravāda Buddhism and contains much of the Buddha’s speech. Closeley related to Sanskrit, both languages are used interchangeably between religions.
See also (Relevant definitions)
Partial matches: Para, Karuna.
Full-text: Karunamaya, Karuna.
No search results for Karunapara, Karuṇāpara, Karuna-para, Karuṇā-para; (plurals include: Karunaparas, Karuṇāparas, paras) in any book or story.