We are currently verifying that this resource no longer uses Adobe Flash and will update the review shortly.
Canva Infographic Maker - Canva.com
Grades5 to 12
2 Favorites 0 Comments
Create and design stunning infographics with Canva's drag and drop infographic creator tool. Choose from several design layouts to begin - upload images from your computer or your Facebook...more
Here is the direct link to share this resource review. Feel free to copy and paste this URL into an email or place it on your web page or blog so others can read this TeachersFirst review:
Create and design stunning infographics with Canva's drag and drop infographic creator tool. Choose from several design layouts to begin - upload images from your computer or your Facebook account. Next, change your background, add text, and personalize as desired. When complete, choose from links to publish, download your creation as an image or PDF file, or copy the link to share via URL. This tool works well for collaboration projects, too. Share the URL with others and choose the "can edit" option to allow others to make changes. Midway down the page, you will find step-by-step tips for creating and designing infographics. There is an iPad app (free) available for this tool. Note: you must register (with email and password) before you can access this site.
tag(s): data (136), infographics (52), posters (45)
In the ClassroomExperiment with Canva on a projector or interactive whiteboard (let the students do it!) using different design "themes." Make changes without having to configure the whole Infographic. After creating Infographics as a class, review the other types to show basic design principles. Students can create Infographics of a classroom topic, relationships and definitions of major terms, lab information, and more. Find data and information that connects your content to the outside world, such as the statistics and causes for endangered species. Consider assigning the creation of an Infographic as an assignment to understand any curriculum content and connect it with the real world. For example, show the many ways to use electricity or the impact of slavery on an economy. Have students explain an experiment and report the results with graphical information to provide meaning. Learn about food groups (now displayed as myplate) by dissecting a food diary or a typical school lunch meeting daily requirements (and other nutrition topics).
If you use literature circles in your classroom, making an Infographic about a novel the group read would be a great conclusion for the lit circle project, and it might entice others in the class to read the novel. Post the infographics on your web page for all your students and their parents to enjoy.
To challenge your gifted students, have them research and create infographics depicting the tough issues or "flipsides" related to your curriculum topic. Some suggestions: Major court cases and issues involving freedom of speech (during your Constitution unit), risks and benefits of nuclear power (in a physics class), or how an author's experience influences what he/she writes. Extend student learning by asking them to create a webpage using Webnode, reviewed here, that includes their infographic. Be sure to point out that many of the same tips shared for creating infographics applies to web page construction.
You must be registered and logged in to add items to your favorites.
Use the form at the top of the page to log in, or click here to join TeachersFirst (it's free!).
Add your comments below (available only to members) | Become a Member
Close comment form