What is the source of wisdom?
Job 28:12-28 NKJV “But where can wisdom be found? And where is the place of understanding? (13) Man does not know its value, Nor is it found in the land of the living. (14) The deep says, ‘It is not in me’; And the sea says, ‘It is not with me.’ (15) It cannot be purchased for gold, Nor can silver be weighed for its price. (16) It cannot be valued in the gold of Ophir, In precious onyx or sapphire. (17) Neither gold nor crystal can equal it, Nor can it be exchanged for jewelry of fine gold. (18) No mention shall be made of coral or quartz, For the price of wisdom is above rubies. (19) The topaz of Ethiopia cannot equal it, Nor can it be valued in pure gold. (20) “From where then does wisdom come? And where is the place of understanding? (21) It is hidden from the eyes of all living, And concealed from the birds of the air. (22) Destruction and Death say, ‘We have heard a report about it with our ears.’ (23) God understands its way, And He knows its place. (24) For He looks to the ends of the earth, And sees under the whole heavens, (25) To establish a weight for the wind, And apportion the waters by measure. (26) When He made a law for the rain, And a path for the thunderbolt, (27) Then He saw wisdom and declared it; He prepared it, indeed, He searched it out. (28) And to man He said, ‘Behold, the fear of the Lord, that is wisdom, And to depart from evil is understanding.’ “
- God is the source of all wisdom.
Proverbs 1:2-7 NKJV To know wisdom and instruction, To perceive the words of understanding, (3) To receive the instruction of wisdom, Justice, judgment, and equity; (4) To give prudence to the simple, To the young man knowledge and discretion– (5) A wise man will hear and increase learning, And a man of understanding will attain wise counsel, (6) To understand a proverb and an enigma, The words of the wise and their riddles. (7) The fear of the LORD is the beginning of knowledge, But fools despise wisdom and instruction.
- The reverence of God is the beginning of Wisdom.
John 1:1-3 NKJV In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God. (2) He was in the beginning with God. (3) All things were made through Him, and without Him nothing was made that was made.
Wisdom comes from reverencing God’s Word.
- Knowledge is taking in the Word of God.
- Wisdom is the correct application of knowledge from God’s Word.
Proverbs 1:1 NKJV The proverbs of Solomon the son of David, king of Israel:
- A Proverb is a two line poem.
Hebrew: Mashal (maw-shawl) properly a pithy maxim, usually of a metaphorical nature; hence a simile (as an adage, poem, discourse), a rule or a standard.
A stick that we use to stabilize a plant – something that does not change that will cause the plant to grow in the direction that we want it to.
Culture today says to just turn your kids loose and they will figure out the standards to live by. That is not true.
Proverbs 22:15 NKJV Foolishness is bound up in the heart of a child; The rod of correction will drive it far from him.
The Book of Proverbs are not just Proverbs recorded by Solomon. Two other Kings are mentioned in the book. Some believe these other Kings also sat at the feet of David and learned wisdom.
Proverbs 30:1 NKJV The words of Agur the son of Jakeh, his utterance. This man declared to Ithiel–to Ithiel and Ucal:
Proverbs 31:1 NKJV The words of King Lemuel, the utterance which his mother taught him:
- Solomon was the wisest King that lived other than Jesus.
- Wisdom of Egypt:
1 Kings 4:30 NKJV (30) Thus Solomon’s wisdom excelled the wisdom of all the men of the East and all the wisdom of Egypt.
- Wisdom of Babylon (Iraq):
Isaiah 47:10 NKJV “For you have trusted in your wickedness; You have said, ‘No one sees me’; Your wisdom and your knowledge have warped you; And you have said in your heart, ‘I am, and there is no one else besides me.’
- Wisdom of Edom (Jordan):
Jeremiah 49:7 NIV Concerning Edom: This is what the LORD Almighty says: “Is there no longer wisdom in Teman? Has counsel perished from the prudent? Has their wisdom decayed?
1 Kings 4:29-34 NKJV And God gave Solomon wisdom and exceedingly great understanding, and largeness of heart like the sand on the seashore. (30) Thus Solomon’s wisdom excelled the wisdom of all the men of the East and all the wisdom of Egypt. (31) For he was wiser than all men–than Ethan the Ezrahite, and Heman, Chalcol, and Darda, the sons of Mahol; and his fame was in all the surrounding nations. (32) He spoke three thousand proverbs, and his songs were one thousand and five. (33) Also he spoke of trees, from the cedar tree of Lebanon even to the hyssop that springs out of the wall; he spoke also of animals, of birds, of creeping things, and of fish. (34) And men of all nations, from all the kings of the earth who had heard of his wisdom, came to hear the wisdom of Solomon.
Matthew 12:42 NKJV The queen of the South will rise up in the judgment with this generation and condemn it, for she came from the ends of the earth to hear the wisdom of Solomon; and indeed a greater than Solomon is here.
1 Corinthians 1:30 NKJV (30) But of Him you are in Christ Jesus, who became for us wisdom from God–and righteousness and sanctification and redemption–
- How did Solomon get wisdom?
2 Chronicles 1:6-10 NKJV (6) And Solomon went up there to the bronze altar before the LORD, which was at the tabernacle of meeting, and offered a thousand burnt offerings on it. (7) On that night God appeared to Solomon, and said to him, “Ask! What shall I give you?” (8) And Solomon said to God: “You have shown great mercy to David my father, and have made me king in his place. (9) Now, O LORD God, let Your promise to David my father be established, for You have made me king over a people like the dust of the earth in multitude. (10) Now give me wisdom and knowledge, that I may go out and come in before this people; for who can judge this great people of Yours?”
James 1:5-6 NKJV If any of you lacks wisdom, let him ask of God, who gives to all liberally and without reproach, and it will be given to him. (6) But let him ask in faith, with no doubting, for he who doubts is like a wave of the sea driven and tossed by the wind.
- Wisdom comes when we ask God for it.
Wisdom is not just some deep mysterious thing that is only applicable to these spiritual things but is available to us for every area of our lives.
Job 28:28 NKJV (28) And to man He said, ‘Behold, the fear of the Lord, that is wisdom, And to depart from evil is understanding.’ “
The potential for wisdom of God begins to enter into your life the moment that you make Jesus the Lord of your life and you are Born Again.
2 Chronicles 1:11 NKJV Then God said to Solomon: “Because this was in your heart, and you have not asked riches or wealth or honor or the life of your enemies, nor have you asked long life–but have asked wisdom and knowledge for yourself, that you may judge My people over whom I have made you king–
Proverbs 3:13-18 NKJV Happy is the man who finds wisdom, And the man who gains understanding; (14) For her proceeds are better than the profits of silver, And her gain than fine gold. (15) She is more precious than rubies, And all the things you may desire cannot compare with her. (16) Length of days is in her right hand, In her left hand riches and honor. (17) Her ways are ways of pleasantness, And all her paths are peace. (18) She is a tree of life to those who take hold of her, And happy are all who retain her.
In Proverbs 3:15 wisdom becomes the metaphor of a beautiful virtuous woman. Wisdom of man is likened to a harlot.
We gain wisdom by asking God for it and it comes by His Word. We hold on to wisdom by meditating in the Word of God.
Psalms 1:1-3 NKJV Blessed is the man Who walks not in the counsel of the ungodly, Nor stands in the path of sinners, Nor sits in the seat of the scornful; (2) But his delight is in the law of the LORD, And in His law he meditates day and night. (3) He shall be like a tree Planted by the rivers of water, That brings forth its fruit in its season, Whose leaf also shall not wither; And whatever he does shall prosper.
Joshua 1:7-8 NKJV Only be strong and very courageous, that you may observe to do according to all the law which Moses My servant commanded you; do not turn from it to the right hand or to the left, that you may prosper wherever you go. (8) This Book of the Law shall not depart from your mouth, but you shall meditate in it day and night, that you may observe to do according to all that is written in it. For then you will make your way prosperous, and then you will have good success.
Don’t turn to the right hand (long-life) or to the left hand (riches and honor)
3 John 1:2 NKJV Beloved, I pray that you may prosper in all things and be in health, just as your soul prospers.
There is no limit to the prosperity of your soul.
Proverbs 1:1-2 NKJV The proverbs of Solomon the son of David, king of Israel: (2) To know wisdom and instruction, To perceive the words of understanding,
Hebrew: chokmâh (khok-maw’) wisdom (in a good sense): – skillful, wisdom, wisely, wit. Literally means to pound it in!
How did you learn the multiplication tables? You pounded it in to your thinking and consciousness.