Do you want to pursue a degree in Naturopathic Medicine? Naturopathic medicine is a distinct healthcare profession that mixes natural healing with science and evidence-based practices. You might be wondering if a degree in naturopathic medicine has a good ROI. Today, we’ll look at whether or not there is a demand for naturopathic doctors.
What is a naturopathic medicine doctor?
Naturopathic Doctors (NDs) are professionally trained as primary care physicians who can diagnose, treat and prevent illnesses. NDs earn a naturopathic medicine degree from an accredited university. They are trained in the latest solutions and focus on the least invasive and least toxic therapies to cure underlying causes of illness and to support the body’s natural healing processes. These doctors address chronic health issues like diabetes, asthma and heart disease using modern medical science and natural therapies. These treatments include nutritional counselling, botanical medicine, homeopathy, and minor surgery.
Is there a demand for naturopathic doctors?
According to the Bureau of Labor Statistics, the naturopathic health field continues to add new jobs and its growth rate is expected to steadily rise at 10% per year. Naturopathic medicine is now rated as having an “excellent” career outlook. Health careers websites report that those who are in this career field will make a prosperous living into the foreseeable future. Plus, naturopathic medicine continues to gain acceptance and recognition in North America. This trend is in line with the fact that a growing number of Americans are beginning to take their health choices more seriously.
More patients across North America are demanding to have a choice in how their healthcare needs are handled, and many are looking for providers who offer preventative strategies, provide natural medicine and are evidence-based in their approach. These are all foundational aspects of naturopathic medical practice.
What is the ROI with getting a naturopathic medicine degree?
There are many ways that getting a degree in naturopathic medicine will be a great return on investment.
Flexibility in job options and work environment
Getting an education in naturopathic medicine can provide you with the foundation for many rewarding career choices. Naturopathic doctors who currently practice in the U.S. are able to work in a variety of professional settings that include private practices, multidisciplinary clinics, hospitals, pharmacies, community health centers, insurance companies, supplement companies, laboratories and other organizations in the healthcare industry.
Once you graduate from an accredited institution, and pass the national board exam, you can begin practicing immediately. Many naturopathic physicians focus on general medicine, but others can decide to have a more specialized practice. These individuals might focus on specific illnesses like heart disease or autoimmunity, or they can choose to focus on certain patient populations like women’s health or pediatrics.
Naturopathic doctors can also choose to go into the academic field and pursue a position on the faculty at educational institutions like universities or community colleges. Plus, these individuals can also choose to focus on research, which helps to progress the field of naturopathic medicine even further. There are also those who choose to focus on the management side of healthcare, non-profit leadership or corporate/public health.
Great job growth and career outlook
As we briefly mentioned above, there is a growing demand for naturopathic medicine and practitioners across North America each year. More and more people are starting to realize the value of naturopathic medicine. Career prospects for naturopathic doctors continue to grow each day as more and more people look for treatments which will supplement or replace conventional medicine. This increasing interest in wellness practice and therapies, a growing desire for healthful aging techniques and a renewed focus on prevention and self-care are all positive factors for ND careers.
According to the National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health, almost 4 in 10 Americans use some form of complementary and alternative medicine treatment. Hospitals and other healthcare institutions have responded to this consumer demand by continuing to incorporate natural treatments in their services.
Not many people realize this, but many naturopathic doctors can be found working with medical doctors at health facilities. Naturopathic medicine is projected to grow rapidly and it has been labelled as a “Bright Outlook Occupation” by O*Net.
Job satisfaction from helping and treating patients using natural approaches
Naturopathic physicians are able to positively impact patients’ health using natural, non-invasive and less toxic therapies. This is especially important in a growing opioid epidemic. NDs are at the forefront of medicine helping to fulfill the need for natural healthcare options in the healthcare system today.
NDs typically take their time to learn a patient’s entire medical history, and do not diagnose a condition based only on a patient’s current symptoms. They work to address the underlying causes of the illness and to support the body’s own natural ability to ward off disease. This means that they generally spend more time with their patients. This increased time limit allows for added satisfaction among patients and physicians.
If anything mentioned in this article appeals to you and your future plans, then pursuing a degree in naturopathic medicine and becoming a naturopathic doctor could be the right path for you.
Kristy Ngai is a content writer for BreezeMaxWeb that helps businesses showcase their brand through enticing copy. When she’s not working, you can find her playing net in a local beer league or biking around the city.