People with restless legs syndrome (RLS) experience an uncomfortable feeling in the legs, coupled with a strong compulsion to move the limbs so as to alleviate the symptoms. The feeling may be described as "creeping," "crawling," or "aching" and happens most often at night, during periods of rest or inactivity. So people with RLS have trouble falling asleep. They may also wake up frequently at night because of periodic limb movements, a condition that occurs frequently among people with RLS.
Periodic limb movement disorder is characterized by repeated body movements. Unlike RLS, which occurs when a person is resting or trying to fall asleep, the movements of period limb movement disorder occur during sleep, and the person may be unaware of them. These movements may occur in the toes, feet, ankles, and/or legs.
According to some estimates, as much as 15 percent of the population has RLS. Most have symptoms that are mild and can be managed with self-care and better sleep habits. For more severe cases, medications may help.
This section contains more information on:
Restless legs syndrome is a neurological disorder, thought to be related to the activity of dopamine, a chemical that carries messages in the central nervous system. RLS can also be caused by other conditions, such as peripheral neuropathy or diabetes. Iron deficiency can cause RLS or make it worse.
About half of patients with restless legs syndrome have relatives with the condition. Although symptoms can start at any age, older people may be more likely to have severe symptoms. RLS is more common during pregnancy. It may also appear in people who have another medical problem, such as anemia or kidney problems.
Last reviewed on 10/05/2006
U.S. News's featured content providers were not involved in the selection of advertisers appearing on this website, and the placement of such advertisement in no way implies that these content providers endorse the products and services advertised. Disclaimer and a note about your health.