It can be a result of all sorts of day-to-day events or issues that you are faced with - anything from problems or arguments with good friends, financial worries, having too many things to do or feeling under pressure to perform well at work.
In your mind, stress may cause you to feel worried, anxious or irritable as well as leading to mental health problems which can get in the way of everyday life. It is also linked to insomnia which can become a vicious cycle as one will affect the other and vice versa – if you don’t sleep well, you may feel stressed and if you’re stressed, you may struggle to sleep properly.
Apart from how it affects people’s minds, did you know that stress can also affect your body?
Stress can cause headaches, muscle pain and dizziness. The stomach and digestive system are also highly affected by stress levels.
So how does all this stress lead to heartburn and indigestion?
Well, the relationship between stress and digestive problems is not an obvious one but stress can sometimes contribute to symptoms of indigestion. Having pressure on your stomach can also be a trigger for heartburn so with one of the symptoms of stress being muscle tension, there may a link.
If stomach acid is able to rise up into your oesophagus, you may start to feel the pain of heartburn in your chest area. Apart from this, stress can also affect the digestive system.
If you are suffering from heartburn or indigestion, Gaviscon Double Action can help you in the short term. For more long term solutions, learning how to manage and reduce your level of stress will not only help you feel happier and in a better mood, but it could also improve your health!
Sleeping well when you are stressed can be very important, the only problem is that being stressed can make it hard to sleep. Make it as easy for yourself as possible by creating a comfortable environment to sleep in. Be sure that the room is dark and warm and give yourself enough time to get a good night’s sleep in.
As well as being good for your health and wellbeing, physical activity has been proven to have a whole host of other benefits and one of them is reducing the risk of stress. Exercise also helps to boost endorphin levels (which are our feel-good hormones) and also gives us a sense of achievement. Find something that you enjoy doing, whether it’s running outside, swimming or yoga.
Eating well is a great defence against stress as it is much easier to handle when you are healthy.
During times of stress, we usually turn to comfort foods but it is important to nourish your body with the nutrients that it needs. Avoid high fat, sugary foods and instead eat fruit, vegetables and carbohydrate-rich dishes such as a baked sweet potato.
Talk to someone
Dealing with stress on your own can be hard work and talking to someone you trust can make a huge difference in how you are feeling, whether that be a good friend or a GP. Talking treatments such as cognitive behavioural therapy (or CBT) can also help you understand your thought patterns, recognise your trigger points and identify positive actions you can take.
Try these small lifestyle changes to help reduce your stress levels and you should soon, hopefully, start to see the effects.
All information is not meant to diagnose or prescribe. Gaviscon Double Action for heartburn and indigestion. Always read the label. Suitable from 12 years old. If symptoms are severe or prolonged you should consult a doctor or pharmacist.
Article published 1 January 2021