ALL ABOUT DOGS and CATS Resource Center for Canine & Feline Lovers
Pet Behavior Articles - Canine Behavior
Several canine behavior experts believe yawning plays a similar role in canine social
behavior. Recently I saw dogs playing at a local dog park use yawning behavior to slow
down a really rough play session. Several large dogs were running around the dog park,
with a few small terriers in pursuit. When the terriers caught up with the big dogs, they
began nipping at legs, jumping at faces, and otherwise showing some really rough play. In
the middle of the rough play, two of the larger dogs sat down, scratched, and yawned.
After these two dogs yawned, a third and fourth yawned, and the activity level of the play
slowed significantly. A potential dog fight was averted -- all because a few of the dogs
scratched and yawned!
Recently I was teaching Riker, my four-year-old Australian Shepherd, a new scenting
exercise in which he had to find a scented article hid among other articles with different
scents. (This is similar to the AKC scent discrimination exercise in Utility-level obedience.) I
thought the training was progressing well, but then I noticed Riker was yawning at me. He
would make eye contact, hold it for a second, look away and then yawn. He was trying to
tell me to ease up a bit. We did something else (a few easy retrieves) so I could stop his
training session with praise for him, and then took a break from our training for a few
minutes. I let him run, relieve himself, I rubbed his tummy, and then we went back to
training. With that break, he was back on course and our training session ended well.
Although some experts have suggested that dog owners can use yawning to change their
dog's behavior (for example, to calm a tense situation), I have not seen that to be very
effective. For a human yawn to change canine behavior would require the dog to be willing
to accept that kind of guidance -- and if the dog were willing -- other training tools or
techniques would work just as well.
However, knowing that your dog may yawn to calm you or to relieve stress you may be
putting on the dog (especially in training situations) can be very useful. Just recognize that
a yawn may signal more than sleepiness!
Article by Liz Palika , writer for The Dog Daily
Yawning Doesn't Always Mean Your Dog Is Tired
By Liz Palika
Yawning is something many animals do, from lizards and
snakes to almost all of the primates, including people. Often
yawning signifies sleepiness or boredom, but many experts
believe yawning is also a social behavior. Psychologist Robert
Provine of the University of Maryland in Baltimore County
notes that human yawning is not just a gaping mouth but a
gaping mouth combined with a stretched jaw, a tilted head
and squinting eyes. And a true yawn can be contagious; one
person yawns and those watching all soon begin to yawn.
Provine suggests this contagious yawning could be a
subconscious behavior that ties people together -- a signal of