2-2. Implication of Samjae &
what is Samjae? To talk of them along the commonest way others say, Trio of
Sky, Earth and Man is called Samjae. And what is Kang-Yu? Duo of hardness and
softness is called Kang-Yu.
However, this intepretation is nothing but an analogical explanation of these
concepts, so it can be a mere beginning of its explanation yet can be neither
its essence nor its whole. Particularly, although the concept of Kang-Yu has
been used often in most cases by many martial artists, it couldn't be something
more than a rhetorical analogy, failing to be taught effectively and clearly,
since it was not sophisticated enoght yet. Concerned with Samjae, it is difficult
to find even some discussion about it. Therefore, we need to settle and systemize
the concepts of Samjae and Kang-Yu more academically to get clearly understanding
The Samjae as TAEKWONDO was defined in a clear way as I formalized the ways
of Sky, Earth, and Man from the point of technical view in Philosophical
Principles of TAEKWONDO: the way of Sky was "everything
of yourself should be kept on its own place, i.e. its most proper position in
continuous change"(Ch.6); the way of Earth was you should "have
your opponent opposed to the world harmonizing yourself in it"(Ch.11);
the way of Man was "you should
always keep yourself as what you are", so you should "return
immediately to a settled pose which is the core of each motion of yours"(Ch.12),
to say in different way, you should pursue continuously what you intend to do.
On the other hand, Kang-Yu as TAEKWONDO, which was suggested comprehensively
though vaguely in PPT, will be defined here in clear and distinct way and it
is two principles of techniques: Kang-gi (technique of Kang) is "to concentrate
your power and movement on your opponent's weakest part"; Yu-gi (technique
of Yu) is "to follow his motion and intention".
These definitions of Samjae and Kang-Yu are sure to be full of implications.
For they enable us to get agreement of techniques and conceptual system, over
mere rhetorical analogy. Up to present, however, we don't have enough amount
of academical materials that support discussions of the concepts of Samjae
and Kang-Yu though they are important ones of oriental philosophy. Accordingly,
we need some academical discussion about them to establish philosophical and
logical foundation for these conceptsbefore we begin talking about Taekwondo
and its philosophy.