Spirulina, chlorella, Afa from Klamath lake, 3 powerful gifts from nature
Dernière mise à jour : 12 janv.
Microorganisms are a source of life, in the earth, in our body, as in the sea. They also populate our oceans, color our marshes and our rivers.
In recent years, we have often spoken of some of them, which have become harmful, but above all linked to our own excessive practices and pollution.
However, phytoplankton and microalgae are among the first living substances to appear on our planet more than 3 billion years ago. Some estimate their number at 200,000 different species: a huge potential source of food and health for us, because some have exceptional nutritional and therapeutic properties and are now being studied by numerous research centres.
Numerous studies show that some of them are a concentrate of beneficial power, antioxidants, antitumor, antiallergic, antiinflammatory, detoxifying, protective against heavy metals, stimulating the immune system, stem cells, antibodies, blood platelets and finally oxygenation of the body and organs by their natural action on EPO.
They limit platelet aggregation and regulate cholesterol.
They are also very rich in nutrients, proteins, vitamins or omega 3 fatty acids, good for the skin and purifying. Spirulina is a microscopic cyanobacterium (0.1mm), known for millennia in the lakes of certain tropical regions in India, Africa, Mexico, China, Ecuador, Tibet, the Andes. Rich in protein (50 to 70%, 5 times more than wheat), in iron, in chlorophyll pigments (promotes the production of red blood cells and purifies the blood), in amino acids, it also contains 30 times more beta-carotene than carrots . Cortes reported in his memoirs, how the Aztecs collected a kind of green mud from the surface of the lake around Tenochtitlan, which they then dried in the sun to consume in the form of cakes. Similar practice among the Kanembous in northeastern Chad, which was only rediscovered by Belgian biologists in the 1960s.
In France, Ifremer has proven its effects on bad cholesterol, antitumours and on the side effects of cancer treatments. Chlorella biomass also contains about 60% protein. Spirulina or chlorella have antiviral, antitumor, antioxidant, anti-inflammatory, antiallergic, antidiabetic and antibacterial properties. As for AFA KLAMATH, another cyanobacterium, it would be, according to the naturopath Dr. Jean Pierre Willem, the richest food on the planet; filling all the deficiencies and excellent depolluting of the organism. Better than spirulina or chlorella: 115 micronutrients (amino acids, nucleoproteins, peptides, beta-carotene, chlorophyll, polysaccharides, vitamins A, B, C, F, J, K, mineral salts, trace elements). Just over a century after the death of Antoine Béchamp, humans are finally re-understanding their potential primary role in human and ecosystem health. One should wonder why this was not the case earlier, because Chlorella was discovered in 1890 and its benefits were already experienced during the First World War. As for spirulina, many peoples have known it for centuries. It is now hoped that AFA Klamath can soon be grown on a larger scale.
Bacteria, microalgae, phytoplankton use and transform the energy of sunlight and carbon dioxide to grow and multiply. They produce energy, organic matter and oxygen through photosynthesis. Like plants but with a productivity about 10 times higher than terrestrial plants per m2 of cultivation on the ground (Ifremer study). Since Neolithic times, humans had noticed their nutritional value and consumed these substances. Like certain ancestral traditions in Africa, around Lake Chad for example, or among the Amerindian peoples of Mexico or the Incas have shown us. Today researchers are interested in the therapeutic virtues of some of their molecules or pigments such as phycocyanin, a photosynthetic pigment (from phyco algae and cyan / blue-green kyanos), derived from spirulina (15% of its weight) and of AFA, responsible for this amazing blue color and powerful antioxidant, stimulating the immune system and stem cells, antioxidant according to several thousand published scientific studies. In France, Ifremer has proven its antitumor effects, on bad cholesterol or the side effects of cancer treatments.
Several studies have proven that phycocyanin is a better solar spectrum receptor than chlorophyll.
It detoxifies, strengthens natural immunity, stem cells, supports autophagy and apoptosis, protects the kidneys and the body against heavy metals. It is not recommended to take it pure, extracted from spirulina or afa klamath, but natural, contained in its carrier plants, to prevent the molecules from being degraded during extraction or digestion.
Chlorella is a kind of unicellular green freshwater microalgae, powerfully detoxifying and antioxidant due to its concentration of vitamins A, C, E, chlorophyll (four times more than organic spirulina) and contains 18 different amino acids and many mineral salts and trace elements: iron, sulphur, calcium, zinc, potassium, magnesium, manganese… Just like spirulina, it also contains polyunsaturated fatty acids, including omega 3, beneficial among other things, for cardiovascular disorders. It was discovered by a biologist in 1890 and quickly renowned for its nutritional qualities during the First World War. Surprisingly, it has been somewhat forgotten in the West until recent years, but it is widely consumed in Japan as a dietary supplement. Chlorella cures, often combined with spirulina, or other plants such as sea buckthorn berries and camu camu, are known to strengthen the immune system, reduce the level of toxins, waste products and free radicals accumulated in the body. of patients, act on arterial hypertension, cholesterol levels and fibromyalgia disorders (Study: Nutritional supplementation with Chlorella pyrenoidosa for patients with fibromyalgia syndrome: a pilot study. Merchant, R. E., Carmack, C. A., and Wise, C. M. Phytother .Res.2000…).
Studies also seem to prove that chlorella and spirulina would be effective in blocking the proliferation of cancer cells. Algae tend to absorb substances present in their direct environment. Choose algae from natural sites, far from any form of pollution. Like spirulina, chlorella grows in many regions around the world, in lakes and streams. Chlorella is a freshwater algae that can be consumed in powder or tablets, just like spirulina. When it comes to dosages, there is no official dosage. On the other hand, manufacturers often indicate that you should not consume more than five grams of chlorella per day. In addition, like spirulina, chlorella is taken in regular cures. It is advisable to start a cure with small daily doses, and to increase these over the weeks. Spirulina and chlorella One is a cyanobacterium and the other is a freshwater algae. These two foods are world famous for their respective composition. Often confused or compared, they are also very often associated. And for good reason, the effects of these foods complement and multiply when consumed together. Spirulina is generally associated with chlorella to detoxify the body, but also to fight against anemia. Indeed, these two foods are very rich in iron. We can also highlight the effectiveness of spirulina and chlorella in oxygenating the body. As well as to avoid deficiencies in case of malnutrition.
Another wild algae emerges among all plants: Aphanizomenon. It contains all the nutrients that are essential for life and can fill the deficiencies that most humans suffer from. The list of problems it can fix is endless. The freshwater algae Aphanizomenon Flos-Aquae (AFA) grows in an exceptional biotope in Klamath Lake, near Mount Shasta, Oregon, USA. A 250km2 lake, which was a sacred place for the Amerindians, with a natural phenomenon of eutrophication which was reinforced after the drainage of the surrounding swamps. Today hyper-eutrophic, it presents these cyanobacteria almost unique in the world with an extreme density, up to 30,000 filaments per ml at the end of summer. The nutrients contained in considerable quantities at the bottom of this lake come from a volcanic eruption. Far from any industrial pollution, at an altitude of 1300 m, Klamath Lake, whose surface is covered with blue-green algae, meets all the conditions for photosynthesis. As one of the oldest organisms on Earth, blue algae have the property of photosynthesis like all plants. They are in fact the organisms with the highest concentration of chlorophyll pigments. Chlorophyll captures photons from solar radiation in the leaf system. It uses this energy to split the water molecule inherent in the life and development of the plant, into hydrogen and oxygen. Oxygen is rejected for the most part (regeneration of the ambient air), or used in other metabolic reactions, while the hydrogen combines with the carbon dioxide absorbed by the plant (purification of the ambient air) to form various sugars. From these sugars, the cellular metabolism develops, through various oxidation-reduction processes, complex molecular structures that vary according to the genetic characteristics specific to the plant species. In addition, the cell membrane of Aphanizomenon is composed of a substance almost identical to glycogen which makes it 95% assimilable, unlike Chlorella whose cell membrane is composed of cellulose which makes it difficult to assimilate. Considering the multitude of nutrients present, many disorders can be patched. Polyunsaturated fatty acids allow the fluidity and permeability of membranes, and intercellular exchanges. Furthermore, the presence of antioxidants neutralize the deleterious effects of free electrons that attack cell membranes. The presence of most of the nutrients essential to life helps restore and balance all metabolisms. AFA acts as a metabolic bio-regulator, restores physical and mental energy, stops brain aging and depression through the presence of phenylethylamine (PEA). PEA is a natural amphetamine capable of modulating attention, mood, anxiety, it is a neuro-modulator, useful in particular for Parkinson's and Alzheimer's patients who have poor metabolism of neurotransmitters. The release of stem cells from the bone marrow and the migration of these tissue repair stem cells is the natural mechanism that the human body has developed over thousands of years to heal and regenerate itself. The mythical Fountain of Youth may have been discovered. The AFA study led us to the discovery of a fabulous natural phenomenon: the use of stem cells for healing, regeneration and repair.
The immune system as a whole is very complex. It is made up of numerous organs and tissues (bone marrow, spleen, lymph nodes, thymus, etc.) which produce different types of cells endowed with specific immune functions as well as chemical molecules that modulate these different immune functions. One of these cell types is called natural killer cells or NK lymphocytes. They are a subset of T lymphocytes. They are also called cytotoxic T lymphocytes, which means “toxic to other cells”. One of their main functions within the body is to seek out and kill cancerous or virus-infected cells. Some components of the seaweed have immunostimulating potential. The outermost layer of AFA cells contains heteropolysaccharide substances that activate the white lineage (leukocytes, macrophages) responsible for natural defences. AFA has the unique property of stimulating the migration of monocytes and B and T lymphocytes, the killer cells of the immune system programmed to detect and destroy degenerated cells and virus-infected cells within the tissues of the body. organization. Thanks to its phycocyanin content, this algae prevents the oxidation of DNA. AFA stimulates the mobilization and migration of immune system cells, stimulates macrophage activity, prevents inflammation and pain by inhibiting cyclo-oxygenase (COX-2) activity, stimulates brain function and improves the body's own regenerative mechanism, is an exceptional source of omega-3 fatty acids. All our organisms are polluted by food which contains pesticides, chemical fertilizers, insecticides, xenobiotics, by heavy metals (dental alloys) and by electromagnetic radiation.
In addition, the soils increasingly contaminated by chemical and demineralized fertilizers produce polluted fruits and vegetables, whose nutritional value is collapsing. Heavy metals are deposited in the tissues, poisoning them, slowing down and disrupting their functions, especially in the liver and kidneys. AFA demonstrates a binding capacity for these substances and their elimination from the body. AFA protects the body against various toxic substances. The action of this algae results from the combination of its macromolecules, mainly polysaccharides and pigments, with contaminants. The high content of chlorophyll and superoxide dismutase potentiate the antioxidant effect. Restore mental balance
AFA contains most of the proper nutrients to fuel and restore the nervous system and brain. These are the minerals, the vitamins in particular the B group, the amino acids precursors of the neurotransmitters. They act in an effective and precise way when their proportion corresponds to the needs of our organism. Among the amino acids stands out the phenylethylamine (PEA) produced by the brain, known for its mood-enhancing abilities. It is also a powerful antidepressant agent. This neuromodulator is synthesized from two other amino acids, phenylalanine and tyrosine. It can be said that an impressive list of nervous disorders will benefit from all of these nutritional ingredients: depression, attention deficit, hyperactivity in children, behavioral and mood disorders, nervous fatigue, burn out (nervous exhaustion) memory problems, the sequelae of head trauma. Considering the unprecedented action of this tiny algae which ensures the fluidity of cell membranes, fights against free radicals, protects against all forms of pollution, fights inflammation, stimulates cell regeneration, reduces the effects of stress, we will not be not surprised to see sometimes exceptional results in fibromyalgia, multiple sclerosis, Charcot's disease and neurodegenerative diseases against which official medicine has no answer: Alzheimer's, Parkinson's, spinal muscular atrophy, macular degeneration of the retina, etc. . The Depression
A decrease in cerebral concentrations of endogenous PEA may therefore play a major role in the etiology of certain forms of depression. In fact, one treatment's antidepressant drug has been observed to work by increasing the level of PEA in the brain. A study shows that when taken orally (10 mg/d) PEA is effective in reducing symptoms of depression in 60 percent of patients tested. The daily consumption of one gram per day of AFA extract could constitute an effective therapeutic approach in the treatment of depression or other psycho-affective disorders.
Anti-inflammatory properties of phycocyanin This seaweed contains phycocyanin, the blue AFA pigment that has been shown to inhibit the development of the enzyme cyclo-oxygenase (COX-2), which is responsible for causing pain and fatigue in the body. inflammation, by blocking anti-inflammatory neurotransmitters. Phycocyanin is also a powerful natural antioxidant and immunostimulant. It is able to stimulate the production of stem cells within the bone marrow and therefore the synthesis of red and white blood cells and platelets. It is a dietary supplement of choice during convalescence. Autoimmune diseases People suffering from autoimmune diseases or those affecting the immune system (lupus, CFS, Hashimoto's thyroiditis, rheumatoid arthritis, multiple sclerosis) have been able to find in the blue-green algae AFA a precious life aid. In France, it is estimated that 5 million patients have an autoimmune disease spread over 50 diseases.
anti cancer NK cells are able to recognize cancer cells or those that have been infected with a virus. The strategy of these NK lymphocytes is radical: they directly approach cancerous or vitro-infected cells and release powerful free radicals in their immediate environment. These free radicals create a hole in the cell, which dies. The dead cell is then phagocytosed ("eaten") by another type of immune cell, macrophages, the body's garbage collectors. To leave the blood stream, reach target tissues and recognize abnormal cells, NK lymphocytes have so-called "adhesion" molecules that allow them to pass from blood to tissues through the wall of capillaries, as well as molecules on the surface. (receptors) that help them detect infected cells. Ingesting Aphanizomenon flos-aquae triggers the migration of 40% of NK cells circulating in the blood to the tissues where their main function is immune surveillance and elimination of cancer cells and other viruses. Further research may show that ingesting small amounts of AFA daily may help prevent cancer and viral infections.
Antioxidant action As an antioxidant, AFA may also impact immune status Human bodies on the one hand produce free radicals and on the other hand are exposed to environmental producers of free radicals. Damage (oxidative stress) caused by free radicals includes cellular mutations, contributing to almost all disease processes and damaging immune function. Free radicals destroy cytokines which are important communication pathways for the immune system. Damaged immune cells and the destruction of their communication pathways make the body more prone to disease. Glutathione, our main and most powerful antioxidant, protects us against oxidative stress and sequesters free radicals that can damage cellular DNA and RNA. AFA protects against oxidative damage and delays the depletion of intracellular glutathione, thereby protecting and supporting cells and immune system function.
Restores all metabolisms AFA is effective in many dysfunctions, sometimes in an unexpected way! To which compound can these changes be attributed? It is difficult to highlight such a molecule. It is these numerous substances, of high vibratory quality which interfere at the level of all the organs, glands and tissues. However, certain nutrients can be individualized to explain the improvement of particular terrains. To curb inflammation, in addition to Omega 3, we can highlight phycocyanin, the blue pigment specific to this type of algae. Phycocyanin has the effect of inhibiting cyclooxygenase 2 (Cox-2), an enzyme strongly involved in the inflammatory process. It also neutralizes the activity of lipoxygenase by blocking the formation of two important inflammatory compounds, leukotriene B4 (LTB4), involved in the genesis of asthma, and prostaglandin E2 (PGE2). AFA also has the property of stimulating certain essential glands: the liver, the adrenals, the pancreas thanks to stem cells and other micro-nutrients.
Type 1 and 2 diabetes are markedly improved. In addition to its role in glycemic control, the pancreas contributes to the digestion of proteins. This is how, in several types of allergies, imperfectly degraded protein molecules enter the blood through a porous and permeable intestinal wall that destabilizes the immune system. The adrenal glands are the most stressed endocrine glands during the stresses of modern life: nutritional stresses (deficiencies and intoxications), emotional, physical and environmental stresses. They are the keystone of the immune system, they manage the metabolism of sugars, fatty acids and proteins and ensure the acid-base balance. Upsetting this balance can lead to the proliferation of germs and viruses. How to put such a nutrient forward to explain this long list of surprising effects which for some border on miracles? One thing is certain: it is a food very rich in substances that act as catalysts in all the activities of the human body.
In summary Aphanizomenon has positive effects on: Gastrointestinal problems, colitis, gastritis, bloating, heartburn, parasitosis. Cardiovascular problems, hypercholesterolemia, hypertension, hypotension, arteritis, infarction. Rheumatism, fibromyalgia, arthritis, cramps, torticollis, lumbago. Depression, tinnitus, head trauma, attention deficit, hyperactive children, memory impairment, chronic fatigue, autism, epilepsy, spasmophilia, anorexia, bulimia, panic attack, phobias. Diabetes, hypoglycemia, gout. Skin problems, allergies, impetigo, mycosis, cellulitis, eczema, adiposity, cysts, psoriasis, shingles, vitiligo, urticaria, herpes. Colds, flu, coronavirus, hepatitis, viral infections. Gynecological problems: menopause, fibroids, endometriosis, dysmenorrhea, polycystic ovaries. Heavy metal poisoning, electromagnetic pollution. Alzheimer's, Parkinson's, multiple sclerosis. Endocrine dysfunctions (thyroid, pancreas, obesity). The ENT crossroads: retinal macular degeneration, cataracts, glaucoma, tinnitus, Ménière. Aging, cellular degeneration, myasthenia. Cancer, AIDS, recovery of the body and acceleration of healing in the event of drug treatment (triple therapy, chemotherapy, antibiotic therapy, anxiolytics). The long covid, Lyme disease (borreliosis), sarcoidosis. Lung problems: pulmonary emphysema, bronchitis, sleep apnea, bronchial dilation, COPD.
Thanks to Doctor Jean Pierre Willem for his information about AFALG, from his blog:
association-biologique-internationale.com which is "a gold mine". Written in french only though. thanksyou for your attention
#nutrition #health #naturalhealth #prevention #research #medicine #integrativemedicine #africa #usa #biology #nature #naturopathy #pharmacopeia #bacteria #detox #wellness #regeneration #food #superfood #selfcare #foryou #fyp #healing #eatright #naturelover