Feeling angry when something goes wrong is a normal part of the human experience. Anger can be a healthy response that helps us get motivated to take corrective action and make changes to our lives, or in situations that need to be fixed. However, for some people, expressing anger in a healthy and helpful way does not come easy. When this is the case, anger management classes can help.
Anger is a basic human emotion. Basic human emotions are an evolutionary trait that help humans adapt and survive. Anger is associated with the “fight, flight or freeze” response of the sympathetic nervous system, which is the response that comes before the urge to fight arrives. Fight does not mean fist fighting, but it does point to an extreme release of energy, emotions, and stress hormones. For our primitive ancestors, this response helped them hunt or protect themselves from predators.
For modern humans, anger — and its associated stress on the nervous system — no longer has any evolutionary benefits. In fact, anger can be incredibly harmful for our health and well-being. Short-term memory, judgment, brain neurons and the immune system are negatively affected through prolonged release of these stress hormones which accompany severe anger.
The ability to manage anger is a learned behavior. ARM Dallas provides caring and qualified Anger Management Professionals to guide through the exploration and source of your anger difficulties. If what you have read so far is something you are experiencing in combination with substance abuse, contact us. We are here to provide treatment for the various aspects of substance abuse, mental illness and emotions which are out of control.
Anger is a by-product of certain mental health disorders. Anxiety, PTSD, and Bipolar Disorder, among others, note anger traits as symptoms. Additionally, withdrawing from drugs or alcohol can cause emotional and angry outbursts and is generally a sign that someone is struggling with addiction and needs help.
Depending on the level of anger experienced and frequency, anger can contribute to problems with relationships, occupation and mental health. However, recognizing when anger is contributing to problems in your life, relationships, or taking a toll on your overall well-being is an important first step in getting treatment.
While there are many mental health disorders that mark anger as a symptom, there are several that are anger-based, such as:
Intermittent Explosive Disorder (IED) is an impulse control disorder.
Symptoms involving anger with IED include:
Oppositional Defiant Disorder includes disruptive behaviors and a pattern of losing one’s temper, lashing out impulsively, becoming resentful and arguing. Combined with difficult symptoms of this disorder, anger only exacerbates the demanding situations the extreme behaviors produce.
Symptoms involving anger with ODD include:
Conduct Disorder includes a combination of disruptive behaviors based on violating norms, rules and the rights of others.
Symptoms involving anger and CD include:
Borderline Personality Disorder symptoms include impulsivity, instability and angry outbursts. People affected with this disorder fear abandonment and crave reassurance and validation of their feelings and emotions.
Symptoms involving anger in BPD include:
Anger Management Counseling leads the patient into understanding their own personal anger and why it exists. Learning healthy ways to manage anger, teaching self-help techniques to thwart out-of-control outbursts, and pinpointing sources of anger takes time. Managing anger is not an overnight process. Learning healthy coping skills takes time and effort, but it is possible.
Things from everyday stressors to major life challenges can trigger anger symptoms. Setting goals and then practicing step-by-step techniques are management skills that can help individuals struggling with anger issues utilize newly learned skills, instead of falling back on dangerous old behaviors.
If you are already struggling with controlling your anger and have developed negative coping mechanisms, you need to consider anger management counseling.
Those experiencing extreme anger may attempt self-help techniques before reaching out for help with anger management counseling. If anger is combined with substance abuse or mental illness, anger management may be too complicated to resolve using self-help techniques alone. This is why it is important to get an evaluation from a mental health professional to resolving anger issues — especially in conjunction with mental health or substance use disorders.
Whether you need long-term help or short-term guidance, holistic techniques are always good to learn. They can be incorporated into the treatment plan to help alleviate anxiety and incorporate a sense of self and hope in the beginning stages of treatment.
Support groups for those with anger management problems are another tool to be approached in your treatment. Taking advantage of every resource available encourages self-awareness and hopefulness for a healthy future.
The ability to manage anger is a learned behavior. ARM Dallas provides caring and qualified Anger Management Professionals to guide you through the exploration and source of your anger difficulties and give you the tools to learn to manage your anger in helpful and healthy ways. .
Our staff of medical and mental health professionals offer caring and individual treatment plans for those experiencing anger, substance abuse and mental illness. For more information about our treatment options, call us at 214-943-5010 or contact us today.
The first step is always the hardest, but most rewarding. ARM Dallas is here when you’re ready to make a change.
ARM Dallas is devoted to healing those struggling with addiction, mental health disorders, and dual diagnosis through faith-based treatment and unwavering support.
©2021 Copyright ARM Dallas All Rights Reserved