ESTONIAN RESIDENTS’ AWARENESS OF USING DOMESTIC DRINKING WATER FILTRATION SYSTEMS
Aim: The aim of the research is to describe and explain the usage the awareness of domestic drinking water filtration systems in Estonia.
Methods: The sample consisted of volunteer adult Estonian residents who undertook an anonymous electronic questionnaire in the connect.ee environment. The questionnaire was distributed in social media. Data collection was carried out from 12.09.2020 to 31.10.2020.
Results: Among 140 respondents, 76 % were female. 76% of the respondents used the tap water, 14% private well water and 10% private drilled well water. 35% of respondents used domestic drinking water filtration systems, of which 8% used systems that were attached to the faucet, 83% used systems that were integrated to the piping, and 4 respondents used filtrating pitchers. 63% of respondents found the water to be purer after filtration. The main reasons for using the filtration systems were to improve the aesthetic appearance of the water (29%) and to remove excess iron (21%). Maintenance of filter systems is very important for 42% of respondents, and important for 54% of respondents. 23% of respondents do not clean the filters at all, 20% of the respondents, who do clean the filtration systems regularly, are carrying this out once in few months. 31% of respondents used clean water for rinsing the filtration system. 50% of respondents claimed that water filtration systems can affect health and 51% of those respondents, found that the impact on health is positive. However, 23% thought that the impact on health could be negative if the filters are not maintained correctly (19%), or if the filter systems are too efficient and can remove necessary minerals from the water (6%).
Conclusion(s): Domestic drinking water filtration systems are mainly used to improve the appearance and organoleptic properties of water. Most of the respondents use the integrated filtration systems. Most of the respondents find it important to clean the systems and the most used method for cleaning is rinsing with clean water. About a fifth of the respondents clean the filters once in few months. Half of the respondents who see that domestic water filtrations systems can affect health claim that the impact is positive.
Presenter e-mail: email@example.com