Article 83 Election of the President
(1) The president is elected in joint session of parliament.
(2) Three delegates from every region, elected by the regional councils in a way guaranteeing minority representation, participate in the election. The Aosta Valley is represented by one delegate.
(3) Presidential elections, conducted by secret ballot, require a two-thirds majority of the assembly. After the third ballot a majority of the members is sufficient.
Article 84 Eligibility, Incompatibility, Allowance
(1) Any citizen over fifty years enjoying civil and political rights is eligible for president.
(2) The presidency is incompatible with any other office.
(3) Remunerations and endowments of the president are defined by law.
Article 85 Presidential Term
(1) The presidential term is seven years.
(2) For the election of a new president, the speaker of the house of representatives summons parliament in joint session with regional delegates thirty days before the end of term.
(3) If the parliament is dissolved within three months of end of term, the new chambers elect the president within fifteen days of their first meeting. Meanwhile, the former president continues to be in power.
Article 86 Substitute of the President
(1) If the president is unable to perform his duties, they are carried out by the speaker of the senate.
(2) In the case of permanent inability, death, or resignation of the president, the speaker of the house of representatives calls presidential elections within fifteen days unless more time is needed because the chambers are dissolved or their term is expiring within three months.
Article 87 Presidential Duties
(1) The president is head of state and represents the unity of the nation.
(2) The president may send messages to parliament.
(3) He calls parliamentary elections and sets the date of their first meeting.
(4) He authorizes the government's legislative initiatives.
(5) He promulgates laws and issues decrees with the force of law as well as government regulations.
(6) He call a referendum when provided for by the constitution.
(7) He appoints state officials as provided by the laws.
(8) He accredits and receives diplomatic representatives, ratifies international treaties once they are authorized by parliament, provided parliamentary approval is necessary.
(9) He is the commander of the armed forces and chairman of the supreme defense council constituted by law; he declares war according to the decision of the parliament.
(10) He chairs the superior council of the judiciary.
(11) He has the power to grant pardons and commute punishments.
(12) He confers the honors of the republic.
Article 88 Dissolution of the Chambers
(1) The president may dissolve one or both chambers after having consulted their speakers.
(2) He may not exercise this power during the last six months of his term, provided this period does not coincide partly or entirely with the last six months of the term of chambers.
Article 89 Countersignature
(1) Acts of the president are void unless countersigned by the ministers who are responsible for and submitting it.
(2) Acts with the force of law and other acts as defined by law also need to be countersigned by the prime minister.
Article 90 Presidential Indemnity
(1) The president may not be held responsible for exercising his duties, except for high treason and attempts to overthrow the constitution.
(2) In these cases, he must be impeached by parliament in joint session by a majority of its members.
Article 91 Oath of Loyalty
The president, prior to taking office, has to swear before parliament in joint session an oath of allegiance to the republic and the constitution.