Poorer people of all ages are less likely than wealthier ones to follow recommended strategies for weight loss, finds a recent study in the American Journal of Preventive Medicine.
“We found that compared to persons of higher household incomes, both youths and adults of lower household incomes were less likely to use strategies that are consistent with U.S. Department of Health and Human Services recommendations,” which include reducing fats and sweets and increasing exercise, said lead author Lisa Kakinami, Ph.D., a postdoctoral fellow at McGill University.
In addition, she said, they found that youths from low income homes were more likely than their wealthier peers to use strategies that are inconsistent with the recommendations, including purging, fasting and skipping meals.
The researchers utilized data collected by the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) between 1999 and 2008 on participants age 16 or older, and between 2005 and 2010, on those 8 to 15 years old. The sample comprised 6,035 adults and 3,250 youths from four income categories (under $ 20,000; $ 20,000 to $ 44,999; $ 45,000 to $ 74,999; and at or above $ 75,000).
Compared to the wealthiest adults, the poorest ones, with incomes below $ 20,000, were 50 percent less likely to exercise when dieting, 42 percent less likely to drink a lot of water, and 25 percent less likely to reduce intake of fats and sweets. Youths in the two lowest income levels were about 2.5 times more likely than the most affluent youth to use multiple weight-loss strategies that are against public health recommendations.
Lack of funds may limit some options for lower-income dieters, wrote the authors; for instance, fees at weight loss groups may be prohibitive. However, poorer peoples’ lower use of other recommended strategies, such as drinking lots of water, can’t be explained by finances. The authors postulated that the numerous stresses of poverty may account for added barriers for lower income people trying to lose weight.
Scott Kahan, M.D., MPH, director of the National Center for Weight and Wellness in Washington D.C., commented that this the first study he’s seen to “explicitly assess the link between poverty and actual weight loss behaviors.” “The new data suggest that the poorest among us, who are already disproportionately hurt by overweight and obesity, may also be wasting money on unproven and perhaps dangerous weight loss products,” he said.
The above story is based on materials provided by Health Behavior News Service. The original article was written by Milly Dawson. Note: Materials may be edited for content and length.
Original story here.
Fitness News — Sciencedaily
— Courtesy “Science News Daily” (ScienceNewsDaily.com) <p>
Chronic stress can wreak havoc on your body and increase your risk for disease. Dietician Samantha Heller explains how exercise can help you handle anxiety.
Video Rating: 0 / 5
You Can Help Your Child Get More Exercise By Following These 5 Tips
Does your child get enough exercise? You can get your children more active with these 5 fun parenting tips.
Better Health in Four Steps
In just four steps, you can improve your health for the better and this article will show you how. The steps below are bite-sized nuggets of health information you can actually use to live a healthy life. Here we go… Nutritional supplements are the first step As far as I’m concerned, they are very important […]
Top 4 Nutrition Predictions in the New Year
Several food and nutrition trends were in the spotlight this year, including the continued rise of plant-based diets, non-dairy ice creams and superfoods that are blasts from the past — legumes, apples and cabbage. It can be easy to experience nutrition whiplash in the New Year, but don’t be a victim. Get a jump-start on […]
5 Ways to Feel Good While Getting Fit
Setting intentions is a powerful thing. Then when you have that shiny new gym membership in hand, you feel like nothing stands between you and your goals to get in shape once and for all. Trouble is, lack of motivation, unpreparedness and busy schedules have a way of interfering with our plans. If you find […]