For years there has been much controversy over a possible link between children’s vaccines and autism. The debate was further publicized by actress Jenny McCarthy when she claimed that the Measles, Mumps and Rubella (MMR) vaccine caused her son’s autism.
What Health Experts Say
The U.S. Center for Disease Control (CDC), World Health Organization and other well-known medical organizations say that studies have shown no link between vaccines and autism. When many parents were questioning a preservative in vaccines called thimerosal the preservative was taken out of most children’s vaccines. The change in vaccines didn’t seem to impact rate of autism diagnoses, showing no link between the two. Many vaccines have been studied and so far none prove that vaccinations cause autism.
My Personal Opinion
My son, Quay has autism and I knew from the moment he was born that he was different. He showed signs from a very young age – so young that doctors told me that they couldn’t give him a diagnosis of autism until he was a little older. In my case, vaccinations don’t seem at all related to my son’s autism, but I can only speak for my family.
The Public Debate
Jenny McCarthy has been very active against vaccines and she’s also claimed that she has cured her child’s autism through a special diet and many different types of therapies. Some of the therapies she used on her son, Evan have been deemed “risky” by health professionals. While some parents believe Jenny’s claims about autism, the medical community shows no proof in her claims. Some have even claimed that her son could have been misdiagnosed and may have Landau-Kleffner Syndrome. Although her son’s story sounds like one of success, most autistic children have not seen the same results.
Should I Vaccinate My Child?
This is a question that parents are asking a lot. Although this is a question best answered by your child’s doctor, current studies show there is no link between vaccines and autism. There can be significant risks if your child is not vaccinated. Many children who are not vaccinated later develop illnesses that could have been prevented. Parents should do a lot of research and understand the risks that come with vaccinations as well as without them before making a decision for their child.
Parents who are looking for a cause of autism or a treatment should do plenty of research from many reputable sources. As more research and studies are done, we may find more answers to our questions about autism, but for now we don’t have much definitive information. Stay up to date on current research and always weigh the risks when making decisions on your child’s health.
Please feel free to share this blog with your friends and family members, and if you’d like more information about autism, please join our newsletter.