Elimination Diet Plans: What They Are, Types and Benefits
Taking a walk on the wild side of nutrition, elimination diet plans are an alternative to traditional eating plans that focus on experimenting with eliminating certain foods from what you eat, instead of adding or subtracting amounts or working to balance out carbs, proteins and fats. Let’s take a look at what they are, the types and the benefits you can get from them.
The elimination diet is a short-term eating plan that involves cutting out certain foods in order to help you identify the cause of physical symptoms to which you are reacting. It is believed that some reactions to foods may be delayed, so eliminating certain foods can help you identify the cause of such reactions.
An Elimination Diet works by removing all known allergens or food sensitivities from the diet for a period of time and then reintroducing foods one at a time. By going through this process, you’ll be able to narrow down what foods may be causing your reactions.
Types with Solutions
1. The Elimination and Reintroduction Diet – This type of diet eliminates foods thought to cause reactions for about two to three weeks and then reintroduces them one at a time. This is done to more accurately assess reactions to certain foods.
2. The Rotation Diet – This type of diet calls for avoiding certain food groups for four or more days before reintroducing them. By following a rotation diet plan, you’re able to avoid over-exposure to foods that trigger sensitivities.
3. The Specific Carbohydrate Diet (SCD) – The SCD is a strict diet that eliminates all grains, sugars and starchy vegetables. It focuses on allowing only certain types of carbohydrates and unprocessed foods.
4. The Fructose Malabsorption Diet – With this diet, high fructose fruits and foods are eliminated with the purpose of reducing symptoms of irritable bowel syndrome such as gas and bloating.
5. The Gluten Free Diet – A gluten-free diet eliminates gluten from the diet in order to reduce symptoms of Celiac disease, a digestive disorder caused by an autoimmune reaction to gluten.
• Better digestion of food
• Reduced allergy and other sensitivities
• Improved energy levels
• Better concentration
• Increased nutrient absorption
• Weight loss
• Reduced inflammation
Elimination diets are a great way to assess food sensitivities and overall create a healthier eating lifestyle. By cutting out certain foods for a period of time and then reintroducing them, you’ll be able to determine what’s causing certain reactions and, in the end, positively impact your physical health.
Q1. Is an elimination diet right for me?
A1. An elimination diet may be right for you if you have symptoms that respond to changes in your diet. It’s important to work with a health care provider when considering an elimination diet.
Q2. How long should someone follow an elimination diet?
A2. An elimination diet should be followed for a short period of two to six weeks.
Q3. How long does it take to see results on an elimination diet?
A3. Results from an elimination diet may take several weeks to show. The time it takes for results to show depends upon the type of diet being followed.
Q4. Is it safe to follow an elimination diet?
A4. Generally speaking, an elimination diet is safe when followed for a few weeks. However, it’s important to discuss any potential risks with a health care provider before starting.
Q5. What are the benefits of following an elimination diet?
A5. Following an elimination diet plan can improve digestion, reduce allergies, improve energy levels, better concentration, increased nutrient absorption, weight loss, and reduced inflammation.