At Commonwealth, we imagine the histories, tales, and voices of Black People ought to be honored and uplifted throughout Black Historical past Month—and daily. Pandemic or no pandemic, there are nonetheless loads of methods for us to rejoice and study. Our employees has gathered quite a lot of sources, together with music, books, movies, and conversations, that will help you rejoice our nation’s wealthy cultural heritage and perceive our shared historical past.
Keep in mind: Educating ourselves within the title of humanity and justice for all isn’t meant to be restricted to 1 month. Neither is it a prescribed record of actions or to-dos; reasonably, we hope these sources spark your curiosity and assist us all—domestically and globally—develop into extra aware
Choosing literature by Black writers is particularly essential throughout Black Historical past Month. By celebrating and supporting Black authors and publishers, we are able to allow extra genuine storytelling that displays Black experiences, identities, and voices. Listed below are a couple of you’ll be able to take a look at:
The 1619 Undertaking: A New Origin Story. This guide by Nikole Hanna-Jones weaves collectively 18 essays that discover the legacy of slavery in present-day America with 36 poems and works of fiction that illuminate key moments of oppression, battle, and resistance.
The Deeper the Roots: A Memoir of Hope and Dwelling. In his guide, Michael Tubbs shares what it was like rising up Black and broke in Stockton, California. He talks about being raised by his household of sturdy ladies, the life-altering encounters he had with Oprah Winfrey and Barack Obama, and the challenges of being a pacesetter within the twenty first century.
So You Need to Discuss About Race. Ijeoma Oluo gives a dialogue of the racial panorama in America, addressing the problems that divide us and bridging the hole between individuals of shade and white People fighting race complexities.
Talking of Race: Why Everyone Must Discuss About Racism―and The best way to Do It. A PBS host, award-winning journalist, and self-described “light-skinned Black Jew,” Celeste Headlee has been pressured to discuss race since childhood. In her guide, she teaches us learn how to have productive conversations about race and gives insights, recommendation, and assist.
From podcasts to playlists and politicians to performers, we’ve compiled a variety of content material to tune in to for Black Historical past Month. So, as you grind via the center of winter, hearken to our suggestions to be impressed, enlightened, and moved.
1619 Undertaking. Nikole Hannah-Jones says the contributions of Black individuals are typically ignored of the American story. Her mission is to reframe U.S. historical past via the lens of slavery.
The Life and Losses of Politian Michael Tubbs. Former Mayor of Stockton, California, from 2017 to 2021, Michael Tubbs tells listeners why “While you’re championing points that go towards 400 years of historical past, you may lose generally.”
How higher to honor the contributions and achievements of Black People than by studying extra about their tales? We share this record of talks and movies to shine a light-weight on new voices and historic trailblazers.
23 Nice TED Talks to Have fun Black Historical past Month: A roundup of insightful talks that provide recent, considerate views on Black id. Most are 20 minutes or much less. View the record.
Hidden Figures: Set in Nineteen Sixties Virginia, this inspiring film relies on the true tales of three pioneering African American ladies who have been NASA mathematicians. Their calculations helped America obtain a few of its best accomplishments in house. Watch the trailer.
Selma: This 2014 historic drama starring Cuba Gooding Jr. recounts the story of Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. and John Lewis main the march from Selma to Montgomery to safe equal voting rights. Watch the trailer.
The Autobiography of Miss Jane Pittman: This 1974 tv film starring Cicely Tyson
depicts the lifetime of a 110-year-old Black lady (sure, 110!). She was a former slave who lived via the Civil Warfare and the Civil Rights Motion. Watch the trailer.
With dwelling places of work in Waltham, Massachusetts, and San Diego, California, we wish to
make you conscious of a number of Black-owned companies in our communities. From eating places
to bookstores, we hope you’ll think about visiting and supporting these
Visiting a museum or library is a vibrant technique to immerse your self within the richness of different cultures, take within the tales of the previous, and depart along with your eyes opened a bit wider to the world. These occasions are filled with challenges, however exploring a digital assortment is straightforward. Plus, you get to set the hours—and snacks are inspired. In honor of Black Historical past Month, listed below are a couple of digital visits to think about:
Native to our dwelling places of work, Boston has the Museum of African American Historical past, and there’s the San Diego African American Museum of Fantastic Arts. The Museum of African American
Historical past is internet hosting a couple of on-line occasions celebrating Black Historical past Month which might be value trying out. When the time is correct—and the doorways are open—maybe an in-person go to is in retailer.
Make a Lasting Impression
As dad and mom know, younger minds might be impressionable. Story time is the right alternative to show kids about Black trailblazers and pioneers in our historical past. This roundup of 24 books to learn to your kids in honor of Black Historical past Month makes it straightforward to get
began.Even if you happen to don’t have little ones to learn to, take a spin via the record. Scrolling via the quilt artwork and fascinating summaries is sort of pretty much as good as looking an precise bookstore or library. Nearly.
Inform Us About Your Celebration
Whether or not you’re seeking to educate your self about Black tradition in America otherwise you need to be part of the dialog, we hope these sources assist encourage motion, connection, and consciousness. If you happen to learn any of those books, watch any of those movies, or go to any of those Black-owned companies, cease by our Fb web page to inform us all about it.
Third-party hyperlinks are offered to you as a courtesy. We make no illustration as to the completeness or accuracy of data offered at these web sites.
Editor’s be aware: This put up was initially revealed in February 2021, however we’ve up to date it to deliver you extra related and well timed data.