It’s not easy being a parent in a climate crisis
24 Mar 2023
Helen's Drought Story
22 Mar 2023
The Australian curriculum must be protected from fossil fuel lobby groups seeking to rewrite facts in our children’s education, says Australian Parents for Climate Action (AP4CA).
A review of the national curriculum is currently open for public consultation and has received a submission from Australia’s chief fossil fuels lobby group, the Minerals Council of Australia (MCA).
AP4CA, which represents over 14,000 parents and carers, welcomes revisions proposed by The Australian Curriculum, Assessment and Reporting Authority (ACARA) to the National School Curriculum’s existing sustainability cross-curriculum priority, which highlight the impact of human behavior on climate change and the potential for human innovation to ensure a safe climate for future generations.
Nic Seton, Sydney-based parent and CEO of Australian Parents for Climate Action, said: “We are deeply disturbed by news that mining companies are seeking to derail ACARA’s review by lobbying for a science curriculum that glorifies fossil fuels — a heavily subsidised industry that is entirely incompatible with a safe climate future.
“Our national curriculum must serve the interests of the next generation, not fossil fuel mining companies. Teaching children to glorify fossil fuels is akin to telling them that the world is flat: it is dangerous and it is embarrassing.
“The draft curriculum goes some way towards educating and empowering students and their families to take positive climate action. There is scope to better articulate the implementation of this cross-curriculum priority.”
Siobhan O’Leary, mother of two also from Sydney, said: “As parents, it is crucial for our schools to lead in educating and preparing students to adapt and survive in a changing climate, which will be the defining issue for generations.
“The fossil fuel industry has historically contributed to Australia’s prosperity yet as the International Energy Agency and other academic and industry bodies have concluded we can have no new fossil fuels if we are to keep global warming to the Paris target of 1.5°C.
“The rightful place for lessons on fossil fuels is in history class. Our children need STEM skills for the clean energy jobs of the future; to survive and thrive in the rapidly decarbonising global economy.”
AP4CA is the nation’s leading organisation to engage, organise and empower parents and carers to advocate for a safe climate for our children’s future. To find out more visit ap4ca.org
For media enquiries phone Emma Hannigan on 0404 999 564
Australian Parents for Climate Action meet and work on the lands of Aboriginal & Torres Strait Islander people and respect that sovereignty of those lands was never ceded. We pay respect to Elders, past and present and emerging, and acknowledge the pivotal role that Aboriginal & Torres Strait Islander people continue to play within the Australian community.