Search Results for "H"
One born in lawful matrimony, who succeeds by descent, and
blood, to lands, tenements or hereditaments, being an estate of
inheritance. It is an established... more
One who has an indefeasible right to the inheritance,
provided he outlive the ancestor. 2 Bl. Com. 208.
A term used in the civil law. Beneficiary heirs are
those who have accepted the succession under the benefit of an inventory
regularly made. Civ. Code... more
A collateral heir is one who is not of the
of the deceased, but comes from a collateral line; as, a brother, sister,
an uncle... more
civil law. A conventional heir is one who takes a
succession by virtue of a contract; for example, a marriage contract, which
entitles the heir to the... more
Forced heirs are those who cannot be disinherited. This
term is used among the civilians. Vide Forced heirs
Heir at common in the English law. The heir at
is he who, after his father or ancestors death has a right to, and... more
In Louisiana, irregular heirs are those who are
testamentary nor legal, and who have been established by law to take the
succession. See Civ. Code of... more
HEIR AT LAW
r legitime. There are three classes
of legal heirs, to wit; the children and other lawful descendants; the
fathers and mothers and other lawful ascendants; and the... more
estates. This word seems to be compounded of heir and loom,
that is, a frame, viz. to weave in. Some derive the word loom from the
A presumptive heir is one who, in the present
circumstances, would be entitled to the inheritance, but whose rights may
be defeated by the contingency of... more
civil law. A testamentary heir is one who is
constituted heir by testament executed in the form prescribed by law. He is
so called to distinguish him... more
A term used in the civil law, adopted by the Civil
Code of Louisiana. Unconditional heirs are those who inherit without any
reservation, or without making... more
A female heir to a person having an estate of
there is more than one, they are called co-heiresses, or co-heirs.
Eng. law. The name of the kingdom or government established by
the Saxons, on their establishment in Britain so called because it was
composed of seven kingdoms,... more
civil and canon law. The art or office of a herald. It is the
art, practice, or science of recording genealogies, and blazoning arms or
ensigns armorial.... more
English Law, A species of easement, which consists in the
to feed ones cattle on another mans ground.
estates. Anything capable of being inherited, be it
corporeal or incorporeal, real, personal, or mixed and including not only
lands and everything thereon, but also heir looms,... more
That which is inherited.
Eng. law. The adoption of any erroneous religious tenet, not
warranted by the established church.
2. This is punished by the deprivation... more
Popular Forms: Accounting, Affidavits, Assignments, Attorney Forms & Guides, Bankruptcy, Bill of Sale, Business, Canadian Forms, Collections, Confidentiality, Contracts, Copyright, Corporations, Credit, Declarations, Deeds, Divorce, Employment, Entertainment Law, Family Law, Government, Health Care, Homestead, Indemnity Agreements, Intellectual Property, Internet, Landlord & Tenant, Leases & Rentals, Letters, Limited Liability Co., Living Trusts, Name Change, Non-Compete, Non-Disclosure, Notices, Parental Permissions, Partnership, Power of Attorney, Promissory Notes, Real Estate, Receipts, Releases, Sale of Goods, Spanish Forms, Technology, Trusts, UCC Forms, Wills, more...