How to Control Garden Pests with Home Remedies
It can be exceedingly frustrating to find insects eating leaves and harming your garden plants. While some garden insects are helpful – like ladybugs that eat aphids and bees and other pollinators – others can do significant damage. Fortunately, home gardeners can call upon natural remedies for garden pests and home remedies to keep bugs off plants.
Garden Insects and Natural Insecticides
It is important to distinguish between insects that benefit your garden and those that may harm it. Pollinators, like bees, butterflies and moths, are clearly beneficial to gardens because pollination allows for fruit production in food-bearing plants and promotes seed production. As Piedmont Master Gardeners describes, in addition to pollinators, there are other beneficial insects. Predatory insects, like praying mantises, spiders, ladybugs and wasps, eat or otherwise kill other insects that may be causing problems in your garden – such as aphids, cabbage loopers, tomato hornworms and more.
When it comes to keeping harmful bugs off your plants, opt for home remedies and natural insecticides. Chemical pesticides can be harmful to humans and animals, as well as insects, and you won’t want to use them on plants you plan to consume. Moreover, chemical insecticides can hurt beneficial insects as well as as harmful ones, negatively impacting the ecosystem in your garden and in your region. Always opt for natural remedies for garden pests first!
Preventative Measures and General Remedies
First, consider preventative home remedies to keep bugs off plants. The Old Farmer’s Almanac highlights several ways to reduce the number of harmful insects in your garden before they become an issue. Strong, healthy plants are less vulnerable to insects, so be sure to meet your plants’ growth requirements and give them fertilizer and water as needed. Companion planting can also offer significant benefits. For example, dill (Anethum graveolens, hardy in U.S. Department of Agriculture plant hardiness zones 2 through 9) naturally attracts beneficial insects including predatory insects, which can help keep the population of harmful insects in your garden at a minimum.
You can usually prepare natural remedies for garden pests with things you already have in your home. Dilute 1 tablespoon of pure, mild dish soap or castile soap in 1 quart of water in an empty spray bottle to create an all-purpose spray for insect control. You can also create a spray to smother insects by mixing 1 cup of vegetable oil with 1 tablespoon of mild liquid soap, and then adding 2 to 8 teaspoons of this mixture to 1 quart of water. Add pureed garlic or hot pepper (in either chopped or dried powder form) to water, along with mild soap and/or oil, to create a homemade bug spray for plants.
Targeted Solutions and Indoor Plants
For a targeted approach to specific pests, choose a natural insecticide for home use that is specifically suited to control the pest you want to address. According to Family Handyman, sand, wood ashes or diatomaceous earth (naturally occurring soft rock) sprinkled around the stems of plants can help deter slugs. Address whiteflies by coating plants with a combination of lemon-scented dish soap and water (1 tablespoon of soap per 1 gallon of water). Spraying plants with a natural insecticide that includes oil can be a good solution for aphids.
You can also use natural insecticide for indoor plants. The Clemson Cooperative Extension emphasizes first preventing insect issues with proper plant care and handpicking early insect infestations. To address an infestation on houseplants, use rubbing alcohol and a cotton swab to wipe insects off of leaves. Non-chemical insecticidal soaps will also work for houseplants as well as garden plants.
If you are making a spray with oil, garlic, chile powder etc., look for spray bottles with larger tubes and nozzles so they won't get blocked by the solids in the solution.
Things You Will Need
Pure, mild dish soap or castile soap
Hot peppers or dried chile powder
Non-chemical insecticidal soap
- Always test home remedies on a small area of a plant a day or two before you use it extensively to make sure it will not cause any damage.
- Plant marigolds anywhere you suspect soil nematode infestation. Marigolds do not repel the pests, so they will not prevent infection of other plants in the area. Rather they serve as traps and lure soil nematodes to their own roots, killing those that attack it. Nematodes enter marigold root systems, where they remain trapped in an environment that prevents them from completing their life cycles and reproducing until they die.
- Occasionally doing nothing at all about minor garden insect problems simply winds up serving dinner to local beneficial predators, which works out well for all parties except the pest species.
- Home remedies don’t discriminate -- they are as deadly to beneficial insects as they are to pests. Avoid exposing bees, spiders, ladybugs and ants to homemade pesticides products.
- Make only as much home remedy pest control material as needed for a single application. Use it right away and discard any unused portions.
- Do not apply soap solutions to plants with hairy leaves. The tiny hairs hang onto soap and cause tissues to burn. Other plants that are sensitive to soap sprays include portulaca, sweet pea, plum, hawthorn, cherry and some tomatoes.
Elizabeth Perry is a writer and editor. She graduated with honors from Vassar College in 2013, earning her BA in English and specializing in literature and literary theory. She is a lover of sustainable agriculture and self-reliance, and has experience gardening and farming, including on a flower farm. She has contributed creative writing, arts journalism, and literary criticism to a variety of publications, both in print and online.