Wearing sunscreen is not only done when you’re at the beach or during summer time. Before social media happened, little was known about the importance of sunscreen. But since many brands and even online influencers or vloggers tackle the importance of including sunscreen in your daytime skincare routine, it has then continued to shed light on many people, especially to women who want to stick to a good skincare routine.
In this article, we will be breaking down the reasons why you should wear sunscreen everyday. So without further ado, let’s begin!
1. Helps Avoid Skin Discoloration
Skin discoloration can be characterized by dark or light markings on the skin. This is also considered as one of the most common skin damage caused by the sun. Too much exposure to the sun can cause hyperpigmentation — which is a result of the uneven production of melanin in the skin.
Melanin is a pigment that provides color to our skin, hair, and eyes. The more melanin you have on your skin, the darker it will be, while the lesser melanin you have, the lighter your skin will be. So when there is an uneven production of melanin, it leads to the discoloration of the skin, with some areas being darker or lighter than others. However, it can be avoided by applying sunscreen on your skin at occurring intervals throughout the day to keep the patches or spots from showing. For best results, make sure to apply sunscreen 30 minutes before you go out so that it can be absorbed by the skin and won’t easily wash off when you sweat.
2. Prevents Skin Cancer
According to the American Cancer Society, most skin cancers are caused by exposure to UV rays in sunlight. It can also come from exposure to some man-made sources of UV rays such as tanning beds. Obviously, sunscreen is not the cure to skin cancer, but it does help prevent the risk of developing skin cancer. See to it that you never forget to apply sunscreen, especially when you’re out in the sun between 10 A.M. to 4 P.M., as this is where almost half of the UV radiation is received and the sun’s rays are the strongest.
3. Reduces Tendencies of Inflammation
Skipping your sunscreen is one of the skin care mistakes you need to stop doing. And if you’re the type to get lazy in applying sunscreen, you may want to rethink your skin care decisions. One of the reasons why it’s advisable to include sunscreen in your daily skin care routine is because it not only protects your skin from getting burned and developing hyperpigmentation, but it also helps in reducing the tendencies of inflammation from the harmful rays of the sun. Wearing sunscreen everyday can prevent wrinkles and fine lines from developing on your face, and it can enhance the texture and skin tone as well.
4. Prevents Sunburn
Sunburns happen when you spend too much time out in the sun without wearing any sunscreen. You can also get it from tanning beds and booths. Keep in mind that the longer you are exposed to direct sunlight without any sunscreen protection, the more adverse the effects will be. If you’ve had a sunburn before, you will know that it’s painful, so it’s best to wear sunscreen to prevent any severe conditions.
5. Avoids Sun Poisoning
Sun poisoning is more severe compared to sunburn. Some of its symptoms include severe rash, blistering or peeling skin, dizziness, dehydration, lightheadedness, and shortness of breath. Take note as well that the range of symptoms of sun poisoning vary depending on the severity. To avoid sun poisoning, make sure to wear a sunscreen that contains at least SPF 30 or higher, has UVA and UVB protection, and is water resistant.
6. Reduces Any Signs of Aging
Photoaging is described as the premature aging of the skin which is a result of frequent exposure to ultraviolet radiation from the sun and even from artificial UV sources. Too much exposure to the sun without any protection can hasten the onset of fine lines and wrinkles on the skin, so it’s important to wear sunscreen on a daily basis to avoid damaging the skin cells.
7. You Have a Wide Variety of Sunscreen Options
There’s no reason not to wear sunscreen anymore since there’s already a wide variety of sunscreen options that you can choose from, with each one having a broad spectrum of protection. Sunscreens today also come in different textures such as water-based, gel, and cream to suit every skin type.
It’s easy to forget or miss out on wearing your sunscreen, but making it a habit of not wearing any sunscreen protection can do more damage to your skin than you think it can. No matter how much you think it’s not important or it will not do much for your skin, think again. It’s always better to prevent further skin damage when you still can, rather than face severe skin conditions in the long run.
We hope that reading this article has helped explain the reasons why wearing sunscreen everyday is a must.
If you are looking for Skincare Products in the Philippines, visit our page, we have a variety of items for you to browse! Like our Facebook page for updates!