The A1c test is different from a regular blood sugar test because it measures the amount of sugar bound to a protein in your red blood cells called hemoglobin. Taking this test once a month will show you how well your diabetes has been managed on average over the past few months.
One should aim for an A1c of less than 7% as a general rule. How much less depends on what you do to bring about that decrease. Taking measures to bring your A1c down to a normal range reduces your danger of developing nerve damage, eye problems, and heart disease.
The optimal A1c range will be communicated by your doctor. So, how do you get there? In addition to any medication your doctor may prescribe, consider the following strategies.
Replace your outdated cookware immediately. If you don’t have one already, a kitchen scale and a set of measuring cups are essential. You can use these as a guide for determining appropriate meal sizes. Consuming more calories than your body uses up will lead to an increase in blood sugar levels. It is possible to lower your A1c by restricting your calorie intake.
If you’re just starting out, it’s a good idea to measure your food to get a sense of what appropriate serving sizes are. It’s a good thing we have a scale and measuring cups for that. Seeing the size of a single serving, especially of starchy foods like cereal, rice, and pasta, may come as a shock at first. But this should keep you from gorging yourself unintentionally.
Reduce your carb intake. Carbohydrates do have a greater effect on blood sugar than other nutrients. Overconsumption of starchy carbohydrates has been linked to an increase in A1c levels. However, keep in mind that not all carbohydrates are bad. You should prioritize those that are high in fiber and nutrients over those that are primarily carbohydrate sources.
You should make some adjustments to your serving. Vegetables low in starch, such as carrots, greens, zucchini, or tomatoes, should make up about half of your plate, according to nutrition experts. You should fill a quarter of your plate with whole grains like brown rice or quinoa, and the other half with a lean protein like chicken or tofu.