A refrigerator or freezer should be thoroughly dry and stored with its door slightly ajar. Some items can be stored inside large appliances. Cartons can be stacked on top of stoves, refrigerators and freezers. Make sure that stove and cooking equipment are cleaned before they are stored.
Bicycles and Other Metal Items:
To retard dust, wipe all metal surfaces with a rag containing a few drops of machine oil.
Books and Documents:
Pack books flat to protect their spines. do not place boxes directly on the floor. Use pallets or skids to prevent moisture. Use packing to fill out empty pockets in the cartons. Do not pack fragile items in the same carton with books. Do not overload.
Bedding, Clothing, Curtains, Drapes, and Linen:
Clothing, curtains and drapes should be stored on hangers or carefully folded and stored in dresser drawers or cedar chests along with bedding and linen. Food crumbs or stains should be removed before storage. Avoid storing anything that will attract rodents.
Dishes and Glassware:
Place a layer of packing inside both the bottom and top of cartons containing glassware. Label all cartons containing glass. All glass items should be individually wrapped. Nest cups and bowls and stand plates, saucers and platters on edge. Wrapped glasses should be placed toward the top of the carton padding above them. Fill all pockets with newspaper. Do not place heavy items atop boxes containing glassware.
Place a pallet, cardboard mat or plastic sheet on the floor and stand sofas and mattresses on end. Place sofa cover over sofa and wrap mattress in a mattress bag. Disassemble beds and tables and wrap table legs in paper. If a table will not disassemble, place padding on the floor and place the table on its top with the legs pointing up. Use dresser tops for stacking cartons and dresser drawers for linens or small, delicate items. Keep upholstery off the floor. Most lightweight chairs should be stacked "seat to seat" or placed upside down on tables which cannot be disassembled. Place a light dust cover over your furniture, books and documents.
Save the original cartons with contained delicate ornaments and pad the ornaments with packing paper or newsprint. Wrap strings of lights around a piece of cardboard before placing in a carton lined with packing paper.
Wrap large lamp bases in padding. Wrap smaller lamps and place them in cartons. Pack delicate lamp shades separately. Do not use newsprint to wrap lamp shades or any other goods which may be damaged by ink stains. Do not store heavy items atop cartons containing lamps or lamp shades.
Mirrors, Windows and Screens:
The items should be stored on edge, not flat.
Records and Phonographs:
Records should be stored on edge to prevent warping. When moving a record player, the tone arm and turntable should be secured to prevent bounding.
Metal tools should be cleaned and wiped with a rag containing a few drops of machine oil to retard rust. Long-handled tools such as rakes, shovels and hoes should be clean, lightly oiled and tied in bundles.
Additional Tips and Information can be found HERE