Getting enough vitamin D can be tricky. People with excess body weight, darker skin tones, and people who spend too much time indoors are all more likely to have lower levels of vitamin D. In addition to helping your body absorb calcium, optimal levels of vitamin D may help prevent depression and plays an important role in proper immune system function.So how do you know if you’re not getting enough? We put together the following list of six signs that may indicate you need more vitamin D.
Did you know that muscle weakness could be a sign of a vitamin D deficiency? A study published in the //www.bmj.com/content/330/7490/524">British Medical Journal states that, “Poor muscle strength and weakness may be associated with vitamin D deficiency, which is common among elderly people because the capacity of the skin to synthesise the provitamin calcidiol (25-hydroxycholecalciferol) decreases with age.” What that means is that our skin becomes less efficient at turning sunlight into vitamin D.
Lack of Sleep
Did you know that vitamin D may be important for maintaining a healthy sleeping routine? //www.journalsleep.org/ViewAbstract.aspx?pid=29865">A recent study by the National Sleep Council found that low levels of vitamin D may influence the quality and quantity of your sleep.
A 2012 study found that women with a higher level of vitamin D were less likely to gain as much weight as women with low levels of vitamin D.
Prone to Colds & Flu
A 2010 study on schoolchildren, suggests that during the winter, vitamin D supplementation “may reduce the incidence of influenza.”
Research by the University of Sheffield suggests that insufficient vitamin D levels may increase the severity of IBS symptoms in some people.
A 2014 study found that low vitamin D was common among patients suffering from fatigue. Researchers stated that when the vitamin D levels in these patients was normalized, they showed significant improvement in “the severity of their fatigue symptoms.”If you feel like you’re experiencing any of the symptoms above, our primary recommendation is to always check with your physician. At the same time, there are ways to make sure you’re getting enough vitamin D. Check out these posts for more information about maintaining proper vitamin D levels and more: