“Design and technology is an inspiring, rigorous and practical subject. Using creativity and imagination, pupils design and make products that solve real and relevant problems within a variety of contexts, considering their own and others’ needs, wants and values. They acquire a broad range of subject knowledge and draw on disciplines such as mathematics, science, engineering, computing and art. Pupils learn how to take risks, becoming resourceful, innovative, enterprising and capable citizens. Through the evaluation of past and present design and technology, they develop a critical understanding of its impact on daily life and the wider world. High-quality design and technology education makes an essential contribution to the creativity, culture, wealth and well-being of the nation.”National Curriculum
The DT curriculum at Corpus Christi is designed to meet the broader aims of the National Curriculum whilst drawing in links to other subjects such as Science, Mathematics and Religious Education. It is our belief that the curriculum for DT at KS3 should be progressive through each year of study in the 30 teaching hours allocated to each pupil. As a result of this, pupils will be able to progressively build knowledge and understanding of key concepts and themes throughout the key stage; focusing on the social, moral and environmental impact of Design and Technology as well as building designing and making skills through practical work.
Pupils will become proficient not only in technical and practical expertise needed to perform everyday tasks confidently, but also in the making and evaluating elements of the iterative design process. Additionally, pupils will learn about the properties of a range of materials and their environmental impact and build technical skill throughout a range of practical projects. Across the key stage pupils will carry out 15 hours of practical work, developing skills working with natural and man-made wood, plastics, electronics, CAD and metal casting.
At the centre of this is the ability of pupils to understand and communicate the wider effects of design and technology on the environment and improve the pupils’ sense of stewardship of the planet we have been given by God. Pupils will gain an understanding of the wider impact of the materials they work with each year on the environment.
Teaching staff will be required to constantly develop their individual subject knowledge and implement new and emerging technologies into the schemes of work (which are to be continually developed and refined) In the limited time available for teaching staff key concepts are to be delivered with clarity and focus and linked throughout the key stage in order to be retained in pupil’s long-term memory.
The curriculum also enables pupils to make informed decisions about a wide range of further learning opportunities and career pathways within the subject.
The national curriculum for design and technology aims to ensure that all pupils:
Through a variety of creative and practical activities, pupils should be taught the knowledge, understanding and skills needed to engage in an iterative process of designing and making. They should work in a range of domestic and local contexts [for example, the home, health, leisure and culture], and industrial contexts for example, engineering, manufacturing, construction, food, energy, agriculture (including horticulture) and fashion]. Topics and themes are focused and whilst supports the syllabus rather than a route through to the GCSE specification. These have been broken down into the following assessment objectives.
Core principles: – Recall, select and communicate knowledge and understanding in design and technology including its wider effects.
Designing and Making principles: – Apply knowledge, understanding and skills in a variety of contexts and in designing and making products.
Specialist Technical principles:- Analyse and evaluate products, including their design and production in greater depth taught through one material category or system.
When designing and making, pupils should be taught to:
Assessment will be continuous and largely formative through the use of regular recall and pupil explanation. In addition to this, understanding will be communicated and assessed through written work. In Key Stage 4 pupils will complete formative assessments at the end of each unit to check their knowledge and understanding. Summative assessment will take place at intervals appropriate to the school reporting cycle.
In design technology, we believe that all pupils should be equipped with and supported in developing a high level of reading and literacy capability. There are clear expectations for how subject knowledge and understanding will be demonstrated through oracy and literacy. This will ensure that pupils show a deep understanding of the topics taught across both key stages. Age appropriate subject knowledge vocabulary will be taught to pupils. This will be modelled by teachers and explained to pupils to continually reinforce the expected standard.
Reading strategies are implemented in the design technology department and are informed by the demands of the scheme of work, pupils’ reading ages, and the key principles of the Corpus Christi approach to ensure pupils are supported in developing their reading, literacy, and oracy across the curriculum.
Colleagues should take time to model effective reading by, for example, reading a passage aloud prior to the class reading. Additionally, colleagues must be aware of when difficult vocabulary needs to be pre-taught and this should be highlighted within the scheme. The way in which subject specific vocabulary is taught will be differentiated to suit the ability of all pupils.
The aim of the design technology curriculum is to be accessible to all pupils. Pupils of all abilities should be able to participate and enjoy the subject and it is our responsibility to ensure that this happens. The scheme of work sets out the overall curriculum but will contain suggestions as to where this may need to be adapted for pupils with SEND. Teaching should meet the specific needs set out in the individual pupil passport and appropriate differentiation and scaffolding should be provided to meet individual or whole group needs.
Unit 1 Introduction to graphic design
Pupils will develop an understanding of the components of graphic design. They will do this by working with physical and/or digital materials and techniques.
Pupils must know about and demonstrate the use of:
Pupils must evaluate:
Unit 2 Graphic design practice
Pupils must demonstrate use of:
Pupils must evaluate:
Unit 3 Responding to a graphic design brief
The learner must know how to:
The pupil must evaluate:
Unit 4 Graphic design portfolio
Pupils must know about:
Pupils must demonstrate:
Pupils must evaluate:
For further information regarding the Design and Technology curriculum please contact:
Mr Holden, email: email@example.com or telephone school reception: (01772) 716912.