United States History II
US History II isn’t just for history majors! It’s often required regardless of major at most colleges and universities, and that means it’s usually offered as a survey course to hundreds of students at the same time. Skip the lecture hall and take it on your own, online, and enjoy live, one-on-one help when you need it with StraighterLine.
US History II picks up after the Civil War, in a period known as Reconstruction, and covers every significant theme in American society up to and including the post-9/11 era. You’ll evaluate the successes and failures of various Reconstruction plans and identify the factors that led to the rise of Populism, American expansionist policy, and the development of the Progressive movement. Investigate the causes of US involvement in “The War to End All Wars.” Analyze the social and economic developments of the period between World War I and the Great Depression. Study the factors that led to World War II and the Cold War, and the major economic, social, and diplomatic developments of the Eisenhower, Kennedy, and Johnson administrations. Separate the facts from the fiction about the Civil Rights movement of the 1950s and 1960s, U.S. involvement in Vietnam and the impact of the war on American society. Finally, you’ll assess the major domestic and international developments of the Nixon, Ford, Carter, Reagan, and first Bush administrations, along with major domestic and international developments since 1990.
Online United States History II is transferable for 3-credits and comes with:
Choose your online United States History II course options below:
Do you prefer self-paced courses, or do you want to study as part of a small group (cohort) of students? Maybe even a professor-led course? Choosing the right course takes more than just knowing how it works. Which courses are our best values? Most popular? Highest rated by students like you?
Click on the courses below to find out more about your online course options, or to enroll right now.