Did you notice that most superheroes got their powers after they were bitten by an animal? The most popular of them has to be Spiderman and I am sure that everyone knows his origin story. What’s interesting is that even though superheroes are just fictional characters, in real life there actually exist animals who have skills that are basically superpowers.
Today we’re going to take a look at some of nature’s most amazing animals and how their special skills put them in a special category of animals that have superpowers. Get ready to be amazed because some of these following animals possess abilities such as magnetic teeth, super speed and even eternal life!
Turritopsis Dohrnii Jellyfish
Even though this might be hard to wrap your mind around, this special jellyfish is actually able to live forever!
Chitons are mollusks that have a special ability which allows them to make teeth out of magnetite.Mantis Shrimp
Humans have three color-receptive cones in their eyes while this special shrimp has sixteen! This means that the mantis shrimp is able to see a dozen colors more than us.
There are many amazing species of falcons but what sets this one apart is the fact that Peregrine Falcons can fly at super speeds of around 240 miles per hour.
Geckos might look like cute little animals but they are some of the world’s best climbers. Geckos are able to climb about everything they want because they have over 14,000 tiny hairs in every square milometer of their foot pads and they increase grip resistance.
Hairy Frogs are basically the Wolverine of the animal kingdom. These awesome frogs possess the power to break their own bones and use them as claws.
The mimic octopus is similar to a shapeshifter since it’s able to change its colors and appearance in order to scare predators away!
Alpine Ibex Goats
These goats are so good at climbing that sometimes it seems like they are defying gravity.
Sea cucumbers are capable of basically liquefying their bodies in order to fit through small gaps.
Obviously, you can tell that elephants are strong, but did you know they can lift up to 300 kilograms only with their trunks?
The Lyrebird’s vocal cords are very developed and it gives it the ability to recreate any sound from its environment such as a chainsaw or photo camera shutter for example.
The reason why the Platypus is included in our list is that it has a sixth sense which gives it incredible awareness. What I mean by this is that the Platypus will be able to tell where you are at all times even though it cannot see or smell you.
This cute little fish is actually a predator that’s able to turn invisible by changing the color of its skin.
The reason why the Salamander is considered to have superpowers is because it is able to regrow its limbs.
Even though Dung Beetles are really small, they are actually quite strong! They are so strong that they’re able to pull over 1000 times their body weight.
There’s no doubt in my mind that the Chameleon is a true master of camouflage.
Hummingbirds are so fast that they do everything at super speed! In fact, a hummingbird’s heart goes up to 1,260 beats per minute.
As its name implies, the Archer Fish is a sharpshooter! This fish is known for using its lower jaw to spit a jet of water at bugs.
The Anglerfish is a deep-sea predator that lures its prey with a special light.
Their size and strength might be amazing but what really makes whales incredible is their musical skill. Whales are able to “sing” complex songs that can be heard by other whales even though they might be at a thousand miles distance.
Honey Badgers are so brave that they need to be classified as super animals. There’s nothing that scares these little animals, not even lions or cobras. They fight on a daily basis and there’s even a video of a Honey Badger taking on six lions at the same time!
Even though no one likes fleas, it’s hard to deny how awesome it is that they are able to jump 200 times their body length in one single jump.
Swifts are amazing birds that have endless stamina. Scientists are saying that these birds are able to fly for 200 days without stopping once.
As you can probably tell by their name, these eels are able to create and control electricity by only using their bodies!
Don’t be fooled by this bug’s small size because it is quite incredible. It is able to blast sound at 99.2 decibels which is the same volume as an orchestra.