Taiba Willanene Water Project – Senegal
Taiba Willanene, Kaffrine, Senegal
Taiba Willanene is a small rural village that is located 5 km south of the national highway in the region of Kaffrine. There are 10 Wolof compounds and 7 Pular compounds in the village, and the estimated population is 300 people. The majority of community members are peanut farmers.
In May, 2013, a water tower located 1 km away replaced two wells and became a reliable source of potable water in Taiba Willanene. The village members wish to start dry-season gardening, but there is no access to a reliable water source.
This project is to provide a water source for the establishment of a community vegetable and fruit tree nursery in order to increase access to, and diversify, legumes in the area.
The nursery will be established in a well-protected cement enclosure that is owned by the community, centrally located, and currently vacant. Piping will be run from the water source to the garden and a spigot installed.
Water Charity funds for will be used to buy 60 meters of piping, a valve, water meter and other necessary parts for the water spigot. Funds will also be used to pay for transport of materials and digging and other installation costs, including hiring a plumber to assemble the piping and water spigot.
The community has formed the Taiba Willanene Community Vegetable and Tree Nursery, and has organized meetings to plan the project. Members have agreed to contribute 1/3 of total project costs that are not associated with the installation of the water spigot. Community contribution funds will be used to make repairs to the iron gate so that it is functional, and to the attached storage shed that will be used as a local seed bank.
Community members have divided the 360 square meters into 25 separate garden plots that will be owned and maintained by each household. Water will be bought by the pan and paid for individually or by the household. Community members will use and share pails and available watering cans to water their garden plots.
The Peace Corps volunteer will work with community members to provide training in on-site composting, growing and caring for vegetable and tree nurseries, and proper seed storage.
300 community members in 17 households will benefit from what is grown, consumed, and sold out of the garden.
Peace Corps Volunteer Directing Project
This is an important project that will benefit the entire community through improved nutrition, enhanced food security, and potential for economic benefit.
Dollar Amount of Project
Donations Collected to Date
Dollar Amount Needed
$0 – This project has been fully funded through the generosity of Elizabeth Szabo, of Pembroke, VA, USA.
Any contributions in excess of the Dollar Amount of Project will be allocated to other projects directed by this PCV and/or projects of other PCVs in this country.
This project has been finished. To read about the conclusion of the project, CLICK HERE.