What Happens If South Vietnam Wins The War In The Civil War
The defeat of Japan in the second world war made the remaining Japanese troops disarmed by the allies as the winners of the second world war. The presence of Japanese troops in Vietnam was no exception. Through France, England and China. The remnants of Japan's glory in Vietnam were lost.
China is moving towards the north of Vietnam. Meanwhile, Britain and France moved south in pursuit of the remaining Japanese troops in the country.
After the three countries succeeded in disarming the Japanese army in Vietnam. There were disagreements between the three countries regarding the future of Vietnam itself. China, which supported the Viet Minh revolutionary movement, wanted an independent state of Vietnam. Meanwhile, Britain and France wanted to return Vietnam to French rule.
The dispute that initially occurred at the negotiating table between China, France and Britain. Instead, it dragged the great battle that took place in Vietnam. Ho Chi Minh who was the leader of the Viet Minh army tried to expel the British and French from their country.
After a great battle between the Viet Minh revolutionary forces assisted by China against the French and British troops. Finally on May 7, 1954, the Viet Minh managed to conquer the forts of Dien Bien Phu and Eleine. This success at the same time made the British and French troops have to admit defeat to the Viet Minh.
Although the French and British troops were defeated by the Viet Minh troops. However, fierce battles still occur between the two camps.
And to resolve conflicts that continue to occur. An agreement called the Geneva agreement was made to resolve the conflict. The contents of the agreement is to divide the territory of Vietnam into two regions. South Vietnam became the possession of the Bao Dai empire and became the state of South Vietnam. Meanwhile, northern Vietnam belonged to the Viet Minh revolutionaries and became the state of North Vietnam.
Even though it was already divided into two sovereign states. The conflict in Vietnam is not over. This conflict actually put Vietnam in a state of civil war.
The momentum of the Vietnam war was used by America and the Soviet Union, which at that time were still at odds in spreading their influence. This war also became an ideological war between America and the Soviet Union in sticking their ideology in Vietnam.
Great battles between North Vietnam, supported by the Soviet Union and China, against South Vietnam, supported by America. In the end, North Vietnam won. With the last battle that took place on April 18, 1975 in Saigon which is the capital of South Vietnam. The battle that was won by North Vietnam finally made North Vietnam fully control the territory of Vietnam. So the symbols of North Vietnam dominate Vietnam today.
Indeed, in that battle, North Vietnam won. But what happened to South Vietnam who got victory in Vietnam. Approximately the following things happened, based on my personal view.
1. VIETNAM WILL NOT BE A COMMUNIST COUNTRY
It is certain that South Vietnam won in the Vietnamese civil war. The country would not be the Communist state it is today. Most likely, Vietnam will become a liberal country with the influence of Liberalism from the United States.
2. THE CAPITAL OF VIETNAM IS POSSIBLY IN SAIGON, NOT HANOI
From the start, Saigon has been the capital of South Vietnam. If the South Vietnamese troops managed to defeat the Viet Chong troops at that time. The capital of Vietnam will be the city of Saigon, not Hanoi, which has been the capital of North Vietnam from the start.
3. HO CHI MINH SYMBOLS WILL BE REMOVED
During the fight against France and England, Ho Chi Minh was a person who played a major role for North Vietnam. He and the Viet Minh revolutionary forces managed to defeat the French and the British. Then Ho Chi Minh also became a vital figure in the Vietnam civil war. So it is not wrong if Ho Chi Minh's services are so remembered by the Vietnamese people. Many monuments were built in Vietnam to commemorate the services of Ho Chi Minh. One of them is to present the name of the city of Ho Chi Minh City. If South Vietnam were victorious in the civil war, the city's name would likely be wiped out.
4. VIETNAM FOREIGN POLICY POLICY
So far, Vietnam is known as a communist country that is close to other communist countries such as China and the Soviet Union. But if it was South Vietnam who won the battle, most likely that would change. Where Vietnam will be friendly with western countries.