In the rich world, a revolution is taking place in cancer detection and treatment, especially among eight types of cancer. About half of cancer diagnoses are now survivable.
Mutations in our approximately 20,000 genes can accumulate over time, but if they occur in a few dozen genes that control cell growth or the suppression of growth, cancers can occur. Many mutations result from poor diet, lack of exercise, smoking, and alcohol, but many are random and accumulate with age.
We have cellular mechanisms to repair many mutations, but about one out of a thousand may escape repair and with rapid cell growth, the mutations in cancerous cells accumulate more rapidly as well. Just as bacteria become resistant to antibiotics, rapidly mutating cancers become resistant to many traditional chemotherapeutic agents.
Our cells present specific proteins on their surfaces that help our immune system identify them as normal. Cancers may present abnormal bits that act as “antigens” that elicit an immune response from a group of our blood proteins called antibodies.
These antibodies are now being used for a variety of cancer treatments. Some cancer cells actually put antigens on their surfaces to tell the immune system to disregard them. These antigens can now be blocked with targeted antibodies called “check-point” inhibitors that take the brakes off the immune system allowing often widely disseminated cancers to be relentlessly sought out and destroyed. This treatment is what has allowed former President Jimmy Carter to become cancer free after being diagnosed with stage-four melanoma.
Some antibodies can be coupled with radioactive chemicals or other toxic agents that can attach to specific cancer cells. Some drugs can block the chemicals needed to generate the new blood vessels that cancer cells need to grow. Some can block specific DNA repair mechanisms that the cancer cells depend on to stay alive.
With increasing sensitivity and specificity these cancer antigens can be detected with “liquid biopsies” from body fluids or even breath tests that act as “signatures” for specific cancers, helping to direct treatment with increasing precision. Based on these early cancer antigen profiles, vaccines to specific cancer antigens may even be available to prime the immune system to fight the cancer wherever it exists and eliminate it from the body.
Small-scale organs or “organoids” are now being created in the laboratory for cultivating cancer cells in an environment similar to the body. This is leading to advanced analyses that will translate into more refined and effective treatments.
As remarkable as much of this is, it is often looked at by drug manufacturers as the perfect profit storm. Rich, older Americans who are politically active may be desperate for treatments that are priced based on what manufacturers think they can get. A $100 billion-a-year market is anticipated.
As a society, we are already facing tough decisions about how we will spend our health care dollars, the largest portion of which are already misappropriated.
If more and younger people have access to affordable health care, it will prevent more sepsis from untreated early infections. It will prevent more heart attacks, strokes, and renal failure from undiagnosed and untreated diabetes and hypertension, now the leading cause of death in the world.
Every other rich nation has decided that the answer to this question is that universal coverage should be the first priority.
As Americans, maybe it is time we had this discussion.
William Culbert is a physician who lives in Oak Ridge. He has a practice in Clinton.