A wide range of liquid products can be transported and stored in totes, also known as intermediate bulk containers (IBCs). Different industries, such as chemical, pharmaceutical, food and beverage, and agriculture, use these plastic containers in assorted sizes, ranging from 250 to 330 gallons.
When the totes are discarded after use, they pose a significant environmental challenge, meaning finding a solution to this problem is imperative to the health of our environment. As an effective way to reduce the environmental impact of totes, many industries are now embracing tote reuse programs, which is helping to lead to a more sustainable approach.
In today’s article, we are going to feature a few ways that a reusable tote program is helping to protect the environment and lower the overall carbon footprint and waste accumulated due to IBCs and/or totes.
Instead of disposing of used totes, companies can clean and refurbish them for continued use, helping to minimize waste drastically. By partaking in this initiative, there is also a significant reduction in the amount of plastic waste that ends up in landfills, oceans, and other natural habitats, ultimately saving the environment from excess pollution.
An enormous amount of energy is required to produce new totes from virgin materials, so by re-using totes, companies reduce the need to manufacture new ones, thus conserving energy. This, in turn, reduces greenhouse gas emissions that contribute to climate change.
Reducing Transportation Emissions
It consumes a great deal of energy and produces greenhouse gases when totes are transported between production facilities and warehouses. The use of reused totes reduces the need for new totes to be transported, thus reducing transportation emissions. As a result, the environmental impact of tote shipping is reduced.
Increasing A Company’s Social Responsibility
In today’s business environment, corporate social responsibility (CSR) is increasingly important. A tote reuse program can help companies demonstrate their environmental stewardship and commitment to sustainability. This is because in order to enhance their reputation among stakeholders, companies can reduce waste, conserve energy, and promote sustainability.
Totes re-use programs can save significant amounts of money and be environmentally friendly. The cost of refurbishing and reusing totes is often lower than manufacturing new ones, reducing production costs. So, essentially, companies can save on transportation costs by reusing totes instead of purchasing new ones and transporting them to their facilities.
The Enerco Way
The use of re-used totes reduces waste, conserves energy and natural resources, and improves air quality. As an added benefit, these programs can help companies improve their CSR profile and save significant amounts of money. In order to promote environmental sustainability and reduce their environmental impact, industries that use totes should consider re-using their containers.
At Enerco Services, we offer tote re-use programs that provide environmentally friendly solutions for industries that use totes. Our program includes tote refurbishment, cleaning, and delivery services, enabling companies to reduce their environmental impact while saving on costs.
Are you interested in learning more? Contact us today to learn more about our tote re-use programs and how we can help your business become more sustainable.