It's Red Ribbon Week
This year Red Ribbon Week will be celebrated October 23-31st. Red Ribbon Week is the oldest and largest and most visible drug prevention campaign in the country. Red Ribbon Week not only teaches lessons in the classroom but also provides useful information to be used at home and in the community setting. The anti-drug campaign is a tradition dating back to 1988. Red Ribbons are used as a symbol of intolerance towards the use of drugs. School systems throughout the country will participate. Students will partake in activities designed to teach them how to say “no” to drugs. Students are learning what to say and how to say it, when being approached by someone offering drugs or other harmful substances.
Studies have shown that students that are subjected to five or more years of RRW, reveal that repeating the anti-drug message is having a positive impact. Among the first things that students do to kick off the week, is take the Pledge to be Drug-Free. Students will also be encouraged to talk to their parents and friends about Red Ribbon Week and what being drug free means to them. The activities will continue throughout the week, encouraging the same say “no” to drugs message.
Experts say it is imperative that parents don’t let this week pass by without encouraging their children to talk about staying drug free. Parents should initiate conversations with their children about making positive choices and also the consequences of making bad choices. Parents should also support the activities going on in school because by showing interest in Red Ribbon Week, parents show students how important it is to remember this message. Parents should also ask their children what they are hearing from their peers about various substances. Most importantly, parents should clear up any misconceptions students may have heard for their peers about drugs, alcohol and tobacco. Children of parents who talk to their teens regularly about drugs are 42% less likely to use drugs than those who don’t, yet only a quarter of teens report having these conversations. Talk to your children, it is the best prevention.
Wear your Red Ribbons proud Beaufort, wear a red shirt or hang a banner.
As a community let’s keep our kids off of drugs. When your children come home wearing their Red Ribbons, ask them about the ribbon and what it means, this is your chance to initiate conversation on an already open door.