Not being able to talk with her about what was happening made me feel very lonely.
If you are looking after someone who is ill, these caregiver modules are for you. Whether you are a first-time caregiver, have been caregiving for a while already, or if you have done this before, you will find helpful information contained in these modules. Whether you are looking after someone who has just come home from hospital, who is living with a chronic condition, who has a life-limiting illness, or who would like to remain at home for as long as they can.
These modules are dedicated to all unpaid family and friend caregivers. Your tireless efforts are the glue that holds our healthcare system together.
Module 1: Diagnosis and reactions
When a diagnosis is first received, you are likely to experience all kinds of thoughts and feelings. Explore some of these emotions and family member reactions in detail, and discover some ideas that can help.
Module 2: Communications and conversations
Good communication is always important, but it is especially essential in caregiving situations.
Discover some suggestions and strategies to help you get through some of the more difficult conversations you will have with the person who is ill including future goals of care, assigning a substitute decision-maker, and estate planning. Learn basic tips for talking to children, friends, and colleagues, along with strategies to optimize your time when talking to healthcare professionals.
Module 3: Preparing for caregiving at home
This module will provide you with information to help you understand what is involved in providing care in the home and ensure that both you and the person you are caring for are comfortable. It will also help you determine if you can take on this role.
Module 4: Looking after you: Lessons from the airline industry
Many caregivers do not realize that in order to take care of someone else, they first need to take care of themselves. Discover some factors to consider in looking after your own health and needs while caring for someone else, and find some helpful suggestions and tools.
Module 5: About medications
Giving medication to the person who is ill can be a major part of caregiving. Learn about some of the different forms and roles of medication; tips to keep them organized; and safety procedures for storing, disposing, and administering medications.
Module 6: Hands-on care
A big part of your at-home care will involve keeping the person who is ill as comfortable as possible including some personal hygiene tasks, meal preparation, and mobility assistance. This module will explore some safe strategies and techniques to help keep you and the person who is ill safe and comfortable while you are caregiving.
Module 7: Recognizing symptoms to assess comfort and care
This module will provide an overview of some of the different common symptoms and give you ideas and suggestions about what to look for, information on what the healthcare team may do to help, and suggestions for how you may be able to help.
Module 8: When death is near
With life-limiting illness, it is difficult, even for healthcare professionals, to predict when death will occur, and often caregivers and families do not know what to expect as death nears.
This module will explore some practical considerations for a home death, ways to prepare yourself and children as death is approaching, and other things to consider when you are at the bedside.
Module 9: After death has occurred
The death of a family member is probably one of the most difficult experiences you will go through, and you may also find yourself with many pressing demands and details to sort out. Having a basic idea of what happens right after a person dies can help ease some of the stress.