Primarily through self-study and computer based training, students will develop essential skills in software for word processing, presentations, and spreadsheets. The bulk of the course will be devoted to preparing students to be able to leverage current, emerging, and future technologies. Topics include the application of computers to major career disciplines, the internet, Web 2.0, the impact of computers on society, and emerging and disruptive technologies.
The course explores how computers represent different types of data; numeric, text, image, and audio. Students learn about the difference between analog and digital signals, finite precision, Boolean logic and simplification of digital circuits using Boolean algebra. In addition, they learn how computers perform arithmetic using adders, and how bit storage is implemented using latches and flip-flops. At a higher level, students also learn how computer components interact to achieve computing; memory hierarchy, chipset and system clock, bus system architecture, storage device organization, and motherboard/CPU.
(Also GIS 105) In this course we study the American political and economic systems; we explore their interdependence and investigate the nature of their integration. Since the United States Constitution is the single common unifying legal force of the American Society, we study the structure of the Constitution first. Then, we focus on the commercial and economic provisions of the Constitution. Next, we investigate the relationship between economics and politics and finally we discuss the social philosophies of the main political groups that compete for political power in America today.
This course helps individuals understand personal financial planning. Specifically, the content of this course is geared to teach students how to prepare personal budgets and how to evaluate insurance requirements. The fundamentals of investment decisions will also be covered. Any student who has taken or is taking BUS 312 cannot take BUS 107 for credit.
Students will develop the essential spreadsheet skills to solve business problems. Students will learn
how to create and format a workbook and work with formulas, functions, charts, and graphics.
Students will also learn to use PivotTables and PivotCharts, advanced formulas and functions, how
to manage multiple worksheets, and other advanced techniques. Students cannot receive credit for both CMP 100 and CMP 108.
This course provides an introduction to features and functions of networking components. It provides the knowledge and skills needed to configure and troubleshoot basic networking hardware, protocol, and services. Laboratory work is integrated within the class.
This course provides an overview of the various forms of cyber crime and the methods, thought process and tools used by criminals. Criminology theories such as conflict, control and strain will also be discussed. The impact of cyber crime and public policy implications will also be explored.
This is an essential course for Business and Accounting majors and utilizes mathematical operations to solve practical business problems. The topics include whole numbers, fractions, decimals, solving equations, percentages with applications, simple interest, compound interest, persent value, annuities and sinking funds, sales, excise and property taxes, business statistics and reading and analyzing financial statements. The primary objective of this class is to ensure that business majors have the essential math skills to be successful in the Business and Accounting majors. This compliments the college core math classes. The math core is conceptual whereas this new class is totally focused on applications to business and word problems. 1 c.u.
An introduction to the problem solving process, numerical methods, algorithms and algorithm design . Basic principles of software engineering, program design, coding, debugging, and documentation are introduced . Structured and object-oriented programming is taught using the Java platform.
This class will discuss contemporary visualizations and critique their effectiveness in conveying information. Students will learn techniques for visualizing multivariate, temporal, text-based, geospatial, hierarchical, and network-based data. Students will learn how to acquire, parse, and analyze datasets and the process of encoding data visualizations to achieve aesthetically pleasing, effective communication.
Introduction to the world of a manager, the knowledge needed, the process of managing, the actual practice of managing, and the adjustments to change that are important in the modern world.
Basic accounting concepts, fundamentals of accounting procedures, development of accounting principles and practices, and the determination,valuation, and presentation of accounting information. Emphasis on accounting theory and its relationship to the preparation of financial accounting statements. Use of a computerized practice set will be required.
To continue the study of basic accounting concepts, fundamentals of accounting procedures, development of accounting principles and practices, and the determination, valuation, and presentation of accounting information. Emphasis on the use of accounting information as it pertains to management.
This course is based on Cisco Networking Academy CCNA curriculum. This is the second of two courses to prepare students for the CCENT/ICDN1 certification test. The course introduces students to basic switching and routing concepts, configurations and troubleshooting. Topics include VLANs, InterVLAN routing, static and dynamic routing protocols RIP2 and OSPF. Students will also be introduced to firewalls, DHCP and NAT.
Microeconomics focuses on the decision making of individual consumers, producers, and owners of resources; demand and supply analysis with some applications; market failures; output production and costs; the operation of a price-directed economy; and distribution theory - the pricing of the factors of production.
Introduces students to the basic operation and management of a Microsoft NOS (Network Operating System) LAN. Students will be able to install a server, and a workstation software in a LAN environment. Troubleshooting and network security will be emphasized. Topics will also include policy loan controllers, performance monitoring, and troubleshooting techniques. Students will be able to configure NOS features and utilities for upgrades and interoperability with other NOSs and clients.
This course will provide instruction on developing, deploying and maintaining applications for mobile devices that use the Android and IOS platforms. Students will develop applications that function solely on the device and applications that integrate with Web Services.
The determinants of national income, output, employment, and price level; introduction to money and banking and to monetary and fiscal policy; introduction to public finance and international trade; review of supply and demand analysis with some applications.
This course provides students with the knowledge and skills to secure and safeguard applications and services from the threat and vulnerabilities of unauthorized acess. The course covers the majority of the Security+ certification. Topics discussed include authentication methodologies, forms of cyber-attacks, virtual private networks, firewalls, cryptography, web security, and physical security.
This course is an introductory statistics course applying a hands-on approach to business problems using Microsoft Excel. Topics include the organization and presentation of data, measures of central tendency and dispersion, basic concepts of probability theory, sampling theory, statistical estimation, hypothesis testing, and regression analysis.
Introduces students to Wireless Networks configurations, maintenance, and troubleshooting with strong emphasis on design, security vulnerabilities and management. Students gain insight on emerging Wireless LAN protocols, Media Access standards and Radio Frequency fundamentals. Configuration and troubleshooting of Access Points and hosts to a wired network will be emphasized in a lab-environment.
A continuation of CMP 126. Continued development of design, coding, debugging, and documentation. Topics covered include Servlet, Java Server Pages, Web Application, polymorphism, overloading along with the most common aspects of Java.
Emphasis is placed on the importance of efficient data structures and algorithms in design and implementation. The classic data structures include arrays, strings, list, linked lists, stacks, queues, trees, and graphs and iterative and recursive programming techniques. Algorithms include sorting and searching with emphasis on complexity and efficiency.
An introduction to web design concepts and technology, this course covers the fundamentals of the Internet, browsers, web servers, and web programming languages. Students will gain extensive practical experience using HTML and CSS.
Introduction to the field of supply chain management, physical distribution, production and inventory control, purchasing, transportation, warehousing and materials handling, order processing, communications, and problems and issues related to the field.