Being in the information technology or IT industry means that you and your company rely heavily on servers for all types of computing. You are likely using servers that are beyond capacity. In such situations, a server can overheat and cause serious damage!
Let’s understand few best practices used in the industry to prevent the server from overheating:
Ensure Ventilation in the Server Room
Servers generate an enormous amount of heat. To counteract this, they should be kept in areas with adequate ventilation and cooling. If the room where the server is kept is not well ventilated, the server will heat up even faster and there is a risk of melting. This results in the server being completely irreparably damaged. Hence, it is necessary to maintain ventilation in the server room.
Keeping the Server Room Temperature Low
As in the previous point, a good cooling system is also required to prevent heat from damaging the server. IT server maintenance largely relies on proper temperature conditions in the room. Coolers, fans, and the necessary air conditioning must be introduced into the room. If the server starts to warm up, it can cool down quickly if a proper cooling system is installed in the server room.
Separate Quarters for Server Equipment
If the servers are not indoors, some people may not be able to withstand the cold environment and low temperatures required to keep the server cool. It is therefore always an advantage to have all IT hardware equipment in separate rooms. A special cooling system such as cooling shelves can be added and the temperature adjusted accordingly.
Regular Server Maintenance is a Must
It can happen that the server is not subjected to additional load, but it heats up quickly. This can happen due to outdated hardware. Servers must be checked routinely and hardware needs to be replaced if necessary. Not only server will be protected from damage, but you can also take advantage of new hardware versions or server spares.
Servers are an essential part of any business because of the critical resources they contain. Damage to the server due to heating problems can result in the loss of such resources and hinder the work of an organization. Therefore, you should always keep your servers in a suitable environment and have easy access to them. Server support services & server maintenance should always be in place to counter times when the server gets damaged.