Do you have trouble remembering important events and dates? Having a busy lifestyle can cause you to forget about important schedules and tasks but there are ways you can improve your long-term memory.
Sometimes, it can be difficult to look after one’s well-being when you’re stressed about work or the family. But taking care of your body can improve brain function in the long run, helps promote a good night’s sleep, and has the potential to prevent neurodegenerative dysfunction such as Alzheimer’s disease and Parkinson’s disease.
So, if you’re serious about taking care of yourself and want to know how to increase memory and reduce the risk of cognitive impairment, read on. We will give you some tips and tricks that may improve your cognitive skills.
Tips to Improve Memory
-Omega 3 Supplements
Oil is extracted from fish such as sardines, anchovies, and salmon and placed into capsules for human consumption. The oil contains fatty acids such as eicosapentaenoic (EPA) and docosahexaenoic (DHA), which are known for their heart & skin benefits.
These essential fatty acids in fish oil may play a vital role in improving one’s memory as well as helping with mild memory loss, mental decline, and depression. EPA and DHA are both powerful anti-inflammatory components & can improve one’s brain function through all stages of life.
EPA and DHA are abundant in cell membranes, which aid in the health & functionality of brain cells. This, in turn, will help improve your memory. Adults that show a lower percentage of DHA tend to show signs of increased brain aging.
Increasing your omega-3 intake can potentially help dispel brain fog, reduce short-term memory loss, and help the overall health of your brain. You can buy omega-3 capsules at any pharmacy but make sure they’re from a well-known brand as cheap generic versions can cause health problems as well.
-Sugar Can Cause Brain Decline
Eating too much sugar can actually increase cognitive decline and affect your working memory. Studies show that artificial sugar reduces brain volume in areas responsible for short-term memory. Eating too much candy or drinking a soda can interfere with the way insulin regulates how cells store and use sugar.
The regulation of how these cells are stored by insulin is responsible for processing thought and emotions. Therefore, sugar is not only bad for your body by causing obesity and diabetes, but it’s also responsible for poor brain function.
To get your daily intake of sugar you should eat food rich in natural fructose such as pears, apples, mangos, cherries, strawberries, blueberries, oranges, peaches, and grapes.
-Get the Correct Amount of Sleep
Not getting enough sleep can increase brain fog and make you lethargic. Sleep plays a vital role in memory consolidation. We’ve written before about the important role sleep plays on our brain function.
During sleep, important brain waves are formed that are responsible for storing memory. Brain waves transfer these memories from the hippocampus (center of emotion and memory) to the prefrontal cortex (planning and personality development) where long-term memories are stored.
Poor sleep causes these memories to become stuck in the hippocampus, which results in an increased forgetfulness of names, dates, important tasks, and responsibilities.
It’s important to get a sufficient amount of sleep each night to avoid the deterioration of your brain in the long run. If you have trouble sleeping at night you can try prescribed medication from your practitioner or you can take part in a meditation program.
-Take Up Meditation
Meditation is known to improve one’s mood and memory, as it helps you become more mindful. Practicing any form of meditation can help you relax and improve your overall rational thinking. It keeps you positive and calms you down in stressful situations.
Some people prefer to take natural action instead of taking medication to improve their memory and meditation is one of those natural practices. Meditation is known to increase the blood flow to the brain that creates stronger blood vessels in the cerebral cortex which expands your memory.
Taking part in meditation also improves one’s concentration making it easy for you to work on difficult tasks and increases your problem-solving skills.
-Video Games and Brain Function
One would think that playing games all day may actually slow your brain down. In fact, educational games can actually improve your motor skills and spatial awareness.
Researchers have carried out a study that shows video gaming could be a therapeutic way to treat psychiatric patients or patients that have neurodegenerative diseases such as Alzheimer’s. Specific parts of the brain can be trained by using video games.
Video games are fun and easy ways to relax but they can also help you concentrate. They aid you in becoming more aware which could actually increase gray matter in the brain.
-Don’t Drink Too Much Alcohol
Any bad chemical you put into your body can have major negative effects on your overall health. High consumption of alcohol can actually create brain deficits. Binge drinking can also damage the hippocampus (part of the brain for short-term memory).
While drinking in moderation doesn’t have major long-term negative effects, binge drinking can increase the risk of blood clots on the brain, which is the major cause of strokes and other brain function decline.
Drinking a lot of alcohol in one sitting can also dehydrate your body and while it’s not enough to cause immediate issues, over time, dehydration can cause the brain to age prematurely. You will be more susceptible to Alzheimer’s disease and dementia in time and be more at risk of other brain dysfunctions.
There are many other ways you can improve your memory and cognitive function, such as exercise, reducing stress, and mindfulness meditation, but it all starts with what you put into your body. As they say “you are what you eat.” Therefore, incorporate protein, essential fatty acids, vitamins, and minerals into your diet daily to improve your body & brain function.
Take part in exercises such as running, dancing, swimming, or any type of physical activity at least twice a week. This can also improve the function of your brain and it will help you sleep better at night.
Look after your body by taking the necessary steps to improve your memory. Ultimately, when you’re older, you may well experience fewer medical problems. Taking care of your mind and body today may decrease the chances of dementia in the future.