As time marches onward, the need for maintaining an environmentally friendly household becomes ever more apparent. Each day brings us new awareness for just how essential it is to do our part to minimize energy usage. Reducing energy use also helps reduce your power bill – so taking these steps will not only help the environment, but also help reduce your power consumption in the long run!
Improved Home Insulation
Maintaining a comfortable environment in your home means making sure the air you want stays inside and the rest stays outside. Seal off any leaks or cracks that would allow hot air in during the summers or warm air out during the winters. This reduces the workload on your air conditioning systems as they do not have to attempt to cool air seeping in from the outside as well as the air already circulating within your home.
The reduced energy demands from improved insulation will reduce your carbon footprint AND help keep those energy costs down.
You do not have to keep your home completely cooled when you are not home. Allowing the temperature to rise a bit when nobody is home helps reduce workload on air conditioning systems. Use of smart thermostats makes it easier as they can be programmed to automatically cool the home just before you return. This allows for the best balance of energy saving and comfort.
If you do not have a smart thermostat and can’t afford one, making a habit of setting it manually before you leave and as you get home will produce similar results. Just do not make the mistake of turning the temperature down to minimum or up to maximum. Only set it to the temperature you need to remain comfortable. Ideally you shouldn’t leave too much difference between the inside and the outside temperatures.
Maintaining Your Air Conditioner
Keeping your AC well maintained is essential for ensuring that your energy costs and carbon footprint remain low. Air conditioning companies like Adams AC are vital for helping you keep your system working at peak capacity. By investing in keeping your air conditioner well maintained and up to date, you will save more than what you spend on maintenance. This is especially true if you do not slack off and make sure to keep filters properly cleaned.
A poorly maintained air conditioner has to work harder to keep a home cooled, this means more energy burned, which means more carbon released.
This is a simple trick you’ve been taught since you were a child. When you leave a room, turn out the lights. Only use the lights when they are needed and make a habit of switching them off whenever you walk out of a room. Not only will this habit save you money and energy, it can also make it easier to tell if somebody is in a room or not if everybody is doing it in the household.