Table of Contents
- 1 When you involve human participants in any scientific research What obligations do you have?
- 2 How do you ensure the protection of the participants of research?
- 3 What kinds of rights should be considered when using humans in research?
- 4 In what way is the IRB involved in using participants in a research study?
- 5 When did the NIH start protecting human subjects?
- 6 How to select participants in my research study?
When you involve human participants in any scientific research What obligations do you have?
Three basic principles, among those generally accepted in our cultural tradition, are particularly relevant to the ethics of research involving human participants: the principles of respect of persons, beneficence and justice.
How do you ensure the protection of the participants of research?
Breach of confidentiality is a potential risk of participating in research. To protect participants’ confidentiality, you should encrypt computer-based files, store documents (i.e., signed consent forms) in a locked file cabinet and remove personal identifiers from study documents as soon as possible.
When should informed consent be obtained?
Informed consent should be obtained after the participant has been presented with pertinent information, has had adequate time to review the consent document and have all questions answered. Consent should also be obtained prior to any study specific procedures.
What is the best way to maintain confidentiality in a research study?
Researchers employ a number of methods to keep their subjects’ identity confidential. Foremost, they keep their records secure through the use of password protected files, encryption when sending information over the internet, and even old-fashioned locked doors and drawers.
What kinds of rights should be considered when using humans in research?
The most salient ethical values implicated by the use of human participants in research are beneficence (doing good), non‐maleficence (preventing or mitigating harm), fidelity and trust within the fiduciary investigator/participant relationship, personal dignity, and autonomy pertaining to both informed, voluntary.
In what way is the IRB involved in using participants in a research study?
In sum, IRB members, IRB administrators, and investigators each play a role in protecting research participants within an institutional framework that removes impediments to quality research while ensuring compliance with applicable regulations.
What is protection from harm in research?
Protection of Participants Researchers must ensure that those taking part in research will not be caused distress. They must be protected from physical and mental harm. This means you must not embarrass, frighten, offend or harm participants.
When do you need to consider human subjects in research?
Investigators must assess whether the risks are reasonable in relationship to the benefits to the individual subjects and the knowledge to be gained. It is not enough that a proposed line of work is found to be justifiable; it is also necessary to consider whether alternative methods would be preferable.
When did the NIH start protecting human subjects?
As a part of NIH’s commitment to the protection of human subjects and its response to Federal mandates for increased emphasis on protection for human subjects in research, the NIH Office of Extramural Research released a policy on Required Education in the Protection of Human Research Participants in June 2000.
How to select participants in my research study?
Convenience sampling: the participants are consecutively selected in order of apperance according to their convenient accessibility (also known as consecutive sampling). The sampling process comes to an end when the total amount of participants (sample saturation) and/or the time limit (time saturation) are reached.
Who is responsible for human subject protection in research?
Human subject protections are a shared responsibility of principal investigators, other personnel involved in studies with human subjects, and the Institutional Review Board (IRB).