India is home to a wide exhibit of ecozones including deserts, mountains, tropical and mild woodlands, streams, fields, and, surprisingly, an island archipelago. Ongoing many years have seen the number of inhabitants in India develop gigantically, which has represented a huge danger to India's natural life. Because of this issue, as well as the ramifications of unlawful hunting and poaching, the arrangement of biosphere reserves and national parks was thought about. There are presently 87 National Parks, 13 Biosphere reserves, and wildlife sanctuaries throughout the country. Creatures like the Asian Elephant, the Bengal Tiger, the Asiatic Lion, the Leopard, and the Indian Rhinoceros are vital to Indian culture and are related to divinities. The prominence of such creatures helps in preservation endeavours and they are progressively significant for wildlife and ecotourism. Thus, numerous wildlife sanctuaries and biosphere reserves are committed to protecting these creatures. Project Tiger was laid out in India to "keep a noticeable tiger populace in their local climate". Project Tiger attempts to increase the tiger population and had set up 39 wildlife sanctuaries around the nation.
This undertaking is viewed by a lot of people to be one of the best protection endeavours in present-day history. Project Elephant is a less popular, yet similarly significant preservation project. Its point is to safeguard elephants, their territories, and migration paths to guarantee the survival of elephants in India. Kaziranga National Park was created in the Golaghat and Nagaon areas in the territory of Assam quite a long time back. It has been recorded as one of India's UNESCO World Heritage Sites as it is home to the Great One-horned Rhinoceros populace. It is likewise a significant bird haven and tiger hold and has a huge reproducing populace of elephants and wild water bison. The seventeen Biospheres in India safeguard not just the normal fauna of the country, they additionally safeguard the wonderful flora, a considerable lot of which are just tracked down in India. The lotus is the national blossom of India, while orchid and marigold plants are copious. Many blossoms are utilized for restorative purposes while bougainvillea, roses, and jasmine are well known just in light of their phenomenal excellence. Many trees found in India hold exceptional social and religious importance and many trees are safeguarded as living, normal landmarks.
The official tree of India is the Banyan, while trees like the Indian rosewood, the Ashwagandha, and the Brahmi are predominantly grown. India is buckling down towards safeguarding its natural resources and supporting its native societies. The travel industry in India likewise upholds and supports neighborhood economies that are reliant upon this income, by involving nearby produce and setting out financial open doors for local networks. There are limitations on the number of individuals allowed to enter the core area of woods so as not to aggravate the existing pattern of nature and its wildlife. There is likewise pressure on resorts to practice reusing, utilizing solar power, and water reuse. Holiday camps, eco-retreats in wildernesses, tree houses in lodgings, and houseboats taken care of by neighbourhood individuals are a portion of the eco-travel industry's well-disposed choices in different locations, offering both extravagance and reasonable convenience.
Q1. What is the importance of wildlife’s existence in India?
Wildlife contains all living organic entities (plants, creatures, microorganisms) in their regular natural surroundings which are neither developed nor trained nor subdued. Be that as it may, in its strictest sense, it incorporates crude warm-blooded creatures, reptiles, birds and fishes, and so on. Certain significance of wildlife in India are:
Environmental Balance: Wildlife keeps up with the equilibrium of nature through-
Regulation of populace of various species.
Food chains or sections of food and energy through a series of populaces involving producers, consumers, and miniature life forms.
Natural cycles or dissemination of inorganic supplements among biotic and abiotic conditions.
Q2. What is natural wildlife India?
wildlife in India consists of a variety of plants (flora) and animals (fauna) the
only country in the world that has both lions and tigers in India.
Some species of deer: Indian Bison, Nilgai,
Vulnerable: Nilgiri Langur, Barasingha, etc
Desert Fox, the Himalayan Brown Bear, etc
Endangered: Black Buck, Crocodile, Indian
Endemic Species: Andaman Wild Pig, Mithun in
Arunachal Pradesh, etc
has a variety of animal species and living things (about 7.6% of mammals, 14.7%
of amphibians, 6% of birds, 6.2% of reptiles, and 6.0% of flowering plant
species), because of its different and favorable geographical factors.
Q3. How can we protect the wildlife
of national parks, wildlife reserves, sanctuaries, zoological gardens, etc. to
serve as protected areas. To rehabilitate some threatened species of animals as
well as plants in some protected habitats of its erstwhile distribution. Take
up a captive breeding program for species whose survival in wild is severely
threatened. Need to educate people to achieve their participation, through the
Celebration of wild life week, setting up nature clubs, publication of wildlife
books and journals, etc.
State laws: Forest and wildlife are on a
concurrent list in the constitution by the 42nd Amendment in 1976.
Wildlife protection Act, 1972: for providing legal protection
to wildlife and endangered species.
Q4. Is there plenty of wildlife in
has both lions and tigers in its forests. Some species of deer such as Indian
Bison, Nilgai, Chausingha, and Gazel are found in India. The only living
population of the Asiatic Lions, Gir is in the Forest of Gujarat.
number of wildlife sanctuaries in India is 89000 and there are almost 1361
species of bird in preservation. The elephants are seen in the forests of
Kerala, Assam, Karnataka, West Bengal, and Assam. Camels and Wild Asses are
found in the Thar Desert and Rann of Kutch. India is home to about 7.6% of
mammals, 14.7% of amphibians, 6% of birds, 6.2% of reptiles, and 6.0% of
flowering plant species.
Q5. How many natures are there in
assortment of Indian natural treasures for nature lovers
Natural Arch, Tirumala hills: A
Marble Rocks, Jabalpur
Balancing Rock, Mahabalipuram
Amarnath Cave, Jammu &
Kashmir: The Iced Lingam
Belum Caves, Andhra Pradesh:
Longest Caves in Indian Subcontinent
Loktak Floating Lake, Manipur:
Only Floating Lake in the World
Manikaran Natural Springs: Hot
Water Bath in River Beas
Majuli Island, Assam: The
Living Root Twin Bridges,
Meghalaya: The One-Odd Tree Wonder
Dudhsagar Falls, Goa: Rush of
Valley Of Flowers, Uttarakhand
Great Rann of Kutch, Gujarat
Reverse Waterfall, Lonavala:
Waterfall That Flows Up
Hogenakkal, Tamil Nadu: Niagara
Falls of India
Krishna’s Butter Ball,
Mahabalipuram: A Rare Phenomenon
Q6. Which animal is found only in
Sangai Deer: It is mainly found in the
southern part of Loktak Lake in the Keibul Lamjao National Park, Manipur.
Nilgiri Tahr: that can be found only in India
in the Western Ghats, Tamil Nadu.
Lion-Tailed Macaque: The Lion Tailed Macaque is found
in the Western Ghats in Southern India, and around the world.
Kashmir Stag: The Kashmir stag is a subspecies
of Central Asian Red Deer unique to India. Once found all over the Kashmir
Nilgiri Blue Robin: The Nilgiri Blue Robin or
Nilgiri Shortwing is a passerine bird, mainly found in the Shola forests of
Email a Friend