Educational Resource has Powerful Impact
A recent survey of Teaching Tolerance subscribers shows the magazine is having a powerful impact in the nation's schools.
Teaching Tolerance magazine, one of the Center's most popular educational resources, is having a powerful impact in the nation's schools according to the results of a recent survey.
The survey, completed in October, shows that 75% of subscribers to the twice-yearly magazine used at least one activity from the Fall 2004 issue in their classrooms, and a third used more than one.
"Teachers clearly desire information on conflict resolution and social ostracism in their schools," said tolerance programs director Jennifer Holladay. "These are exactly the kinds of issues Teaching Tolerance addresses."
More than 600,000 educators across the country receive Teaching Tolerance twice a year. The magazine, distributed free of charge by the Center, provides anti-bias strategies for K-12 teachers to help them promote respect and understanding among students.
Although the Center has long received positive feedback on the magazine, the survey attempted to pinpoint how Teaching Tolerance is perceived and used by the experts, teachers.
"This survey represents the Center's deep commitment to ensuring that the resources we provide to the nation's teachers meet their needs and further anti-bias student education," said Holladay.
Of the more than 1,600 educators who responded to the survey, 99% said they would recommend Teaching Tolerance to other educators, and another 99 percent gave an above-average rating to the magazine.
"When 99% of your readers rate your magazine as excellent or good," Holladay said, "you can feel pretty confident that the Center's resources are being put to good use."
The October survey focused on the Fall 2004 issue of Teaching Tolerance, a "best of" issue featuring articles from previous issues and new strategies to combat bias in the classroom. The magazine's most popular stories from that issue included an article on Mix It Up at Lunch Day, one on the discrimination faced by overweight children and a third on sexual harassment in schools.
Other popular articles from the Fall issue included an interview with Columbine High School principal Frank DeAngelis on dealing with tragedy and an essay by a young student with Down Syndrome.