If you were to walk around CIS on any given day, you would find a multitude of learning activities occurring. For example, when I walked around the upper elementary the other day, I saw one of our G2 classes in a circle time animatedly discussing something with their teacher and the other one working on individual reading and writing tasks with the teacher assisting small groups and individuals. The G3 students were on the class Chromebook sets with earphones working on a listening task, while the G4 students were in groups – some were making stools in our Makerspace area. The G5 class was participating in a discussion and some direct instruction on a task or event. It was so refreshing to see such a range of group and individualized instruction occurring, with ALL students actively engaged in their respective activities. I did not see a single student off-task (although I am sure there are times when they are as they are still young and learning after all!).
I wanted to share our Core Beliefs with you (listed below), as these are what fundamentally drive how we do things at CIS. The above-mentioned learning is not occurring by accident! Our teachers spend many hours planning for it. I would like to thank them for their efforts, and look forward to seeing the impact it has on our students learning over the year in both ES and MHS.
CIS Core Beliefs
1. Learning is a joyful, creative, and open-ended exploration.
2. Each child’s curiosity needs to be identified and nurtured (morally, socially, physically, and academically) to reach her/his potential.
3. Collaboration, communication, and contribution are essential for learning.
4. As world citizens, we have respect for self and others, and value diversity in all forms.
5. Learning includes contributing to the world through service learning and sustainable environmental stewardship.
6. As an IB World School, the Learner Profile Attributes and Approaches to Learning are embedded in all that we think, say, and do.
Have you seen evidence of these Core Beliefs in school? Parents – have you seen it in your child’s work, words and/or behavior? Students – have you see it in the types of learning you participate in? If you do not, I challenge you to ask the relevant person how your learning relates back to these core beliefs. Let me know if you are not satisfied – we are always looking for new ways to improve on how we do things!
Have a restful weekend,
Dr Gwyn Underwood
by Glenn Davies, Elementary Principal/PYP Coordinator
The big news over the past week has been the artificial grass which has been laid on the lower elementary playground over the past weekend. This was a joint project between the PTA and the school and was made possible largely due to the 2018 Christmas Bazaar organized and run by the PTA. In addition to the grass, several tricycles are also on their way, one of which has already arrived.
Goal Setting Conferences
This coming Wednesday, September 18th, KG to G5 classes will hold their Goal Setting Conferences. Grades 3 to 5 conferences will begin at 12 noon, and KG to G2 conferences will begin at 12:30pm. On Thursday 12th September, you were sent an email inviting you to sign-up for a Goal Setting Conference. Please do review the information in this email carefully.
Friday Parent Drop-in
Today (Friday) grades 2 to 5 held their first formal Friday parent drop-in time between 7:30 am and 8:00 am. Such active involvement from our parent community contributes significantly to the strong learning environment CIS is able to create. We encourage all parents to make the most of the parent drop-in opportunities in order to understand more about your children’s learning journey here at CIS.
Dates for your Calendar
September 18th – Goal Setting Conferences
September 27th – Half day of school (House Activities Day)
Day C wheels days – September 19th, September 25th, October 2nd, and October 15th
NEW ZEALAND Education Fair
September 17 •Tuesday – 9:15 – 10:00am (Canteen Annex)
Open to all parents and Grade 10, 11 and 12 Students
- The University of Auckland
- University of Canterbury
- Massey University
- Manukau Institute of Technology
- Southern Institute of Technology
- Toi Ohomai Institute of Technology
- Weltec and Whitireia Institute of Technology
- UC International College
- UP Education
- Study Group