IELTS Essay Topics with sample answer.
IELTS Essay Sample 1120 - Very few school children learn about the value of money
- Last Updated: Monday, 26 July 2021 12:06
- Written by IELTS Mentor
- Hits: 27737
IELTS Writing Task 2/ IELTS Essay:
You should spend about 40 minutes on this task.
Write about the following topic:
Very few school children learn about the value of money and how to look after it, yet this is a critical life skill that should be taught as a part of the school curriculum.
Do you agree or disagree?
Give reasons for your answer and include any relevant examples from your own knowledge or experience.
You should write at least 250 words.
Sample Answer 1: (Agreement)
Schools usually deal with different academic subjects while overlook teaching money management skills. This is why many students, who do well in school, struggle while taking care of their finances in real life. Academic studies and financial intelligence cannot be seen as inherent contradictions but as two mutually independent competencies. So, I believe that the value of money and money management should be taught in schools.
The author of the book “Rich Dad Poor Dad” terms Financial Independence as you being able to make your money work for you and not the other way around. Students who get to learn about how to spend, invest and save money rarely find themselves in financial predicaments despite what their salaries bring in. Such skills are often inculcated through family and teachers. And students, who lack these skills, usually find themselves with insufficient funds no matter how much their jobs pay them. They never learn to develop their assets. It renders them dependents on their jobs for life as it is their only source of income. The earnings are mostly spent on their liabilities leaving them with paltry savings.
If money management is taught as a part of the school curriculum, all the students will get a chance to learn such skills. They will grow up to have more knowledge of money and finance. Consecutively, they will have a better perspective while making financial decisions. This will lead to a more stable, enriched and self-reliant society. Lessons learned in schools last for a long and that is why teaching money management to students is so vital.
To conclude, earning money may not be the goal in life but it is the money that provides us with our basic needs and a sense of security. Learning the skills to value and handle money is a crucial part of life. Thus, I believe that lessons for financial management should be made a part of the school curriculum so that more and more students can have a financially stable future.
[Written by - Gunjan Mahindre]
Sample Answer 2: (Disagreement)
Money management skill is undoubtedly important, but if it should be a part of the academic curriculum is debatable. Many schools are already overwhelmed with the subjects they teach, and adding personal financial affairs to the syllabus would make things worse. Moreover, this is a skill that teachers cannot instil in a person through lectures and exams. This is why I believe that parents should take this responsibility.
To commence with, no matter how many chapters someone reads or how many exams he or she takes on the value of money in life, until this person earns, saves and invests money, it is impossible to learn the practical aspect of personal finances for him or her. Teachers are not in a position to decide whether a student should work besides study, and manage his or her finance. Parents, on the other hand, are ideal to monitor and supervise this aspect. They can teach their children the value of money and put them in situations when they need to take responsibility.
Moreover, learning to manage someone's finance is a different type of skill that class lectures cannot teach. Finally, a teacher does not know every aspect of a student's family and their financial condition. This is why the same lecture is not suitable for all students when it comes to making financial decisions. Opposed to that, parents are in a far better position to let their children learn this essential life skill.
To conclude, money management is a practical aspect of life and theoretical classes conducted by school teachers are ineffective to develop this great skill. Parents, on the contrary, should take command of this aspect and prepare their children to value money and handle personal finance efficiently.