Low Coolant Level The coolant (usually a mixture of water and antifreeze) in your engine doesn't just work to keep the engine from overheating: It's also the source of heat supporting the heating system. If there isn't enough coolant in your system, the heater core will blow cold air into your car.When the engine heats, coolant transfers to the heater core, helping it warm the interior. However, coolant that's polluted with contaminants and rust particles inhibits the core from pushing warm air into the car, and it'll send out cold air.
Why is my car heater blowing cold air?
Yes, it is one of the most essential car heating system components which plays a crucial role in keeping your car hot. Contaminated coolant and low coolant levels in the vehicle are also among the most common reasons why your car heater blowing cold air and not getting hot enough.
Why does my car overheat so fast?
Reason #1: Not Enough Coolant. Your car uses coolant – usually made up of 50% antifreeze and 50% water – to cool your engine down, especially during the hot months of summer. During the winter when you crank up your heat, the coolant is brought over from the engine to the heater core that then blows warm air into your car.
Why does my car feel cool when I crank it up?
During the winter when you crank up your heat, the coolant is brought over from the engine to the heater core that then blows warm air into your car. It can feel cool for the first few minutes because the engine has to warm up in order for the coolant to heat up and provide heat to your interior.
Why is my car heater not working?
All you get is cold air blowing through your vents so you jump out of your car to get warm somewhere else, leaving it running. Or you can grab your portable heater if you get desperate. You may wonder why the car heater is not working – here are 7 possible explanations: 1. Your car is more than likely low on coolant
Below you will find two interesting articles on a similar topic 👇Does Honeywell thermostat have a reset button?
Should I Turn my Furnace Fan off when it’s Cold?