Click Banner Below for USpostcards.com
Our Web Sites use different shopping carts and have to be ordered separately
Identifying the Age of Postcards
Used with permission from J.L.Mashburn (Colonial House)
The dating of the postcard for years or eras of issue can be accurately determined if
the card is studied for identity points. Research has already been done by earlier
historians and guidelines have been put into place.
There were seven eras for the postcard industry and each one has distinguishing points
to help establish its respective identity. The following helps determine the era of the
card in question.
PIONEER ERA (1893-1898)
The Pioneer Era began when picture postcards were placed on sale by vendors and
exhibitors at the Colombian Exposition in Chicago, May 1893. These were very popular and
proved to be a great success. The profitable and lasting future of the postcard was
greatly enhanced. The cards from this era are relatively scarce. They can be identified by
combinations of the following:
- All have undivided backs.
- None show the "Authorized by Act of Congress" byline.
- Postal cards will have the Grant or Jefferson head stamp.
- Most, but not all, will be multiple view cards.
- The word "Souvenir of…" or "greetings from…" appear on
- Postage rate, if listed, is usually 2 cents.
- The most common titles will be "Souvenir Card" or "Mail Card."
- Appeared mostly in the big eastern cities.
PRIVATE MAILING CARD ERA (1898-1901)
On May 19, 1898, the government gave private printers permission to print and sell
postcards. These cards were all issued with the inscription "Private Mailing
Card," and today they are referred to as PMC's. It is easy to identify these because
of the inscription. It may be noted that many of the early Pioneer views were reprints as
Private Mailing Cards.
UNDIVIDED BACK ERA (1901-1907)
On December 24, 1901, permission was given for use of the wording "Post Card"
to be imprinted on the backs of privately printed cards. All cards during this era had
undivided backs of privately printed cards. All cards during this era had undivided backs
and only the address was to appear on the back. The message, therefore, had to be written
on the front (picture side) of the card. For this reason, there is writing on the face of
many cards; this is becoming more acceptable on cards of this era.
DIVIDED BACK ERA (1907-1915)
This era came into being on March 1, 1907. The divided back made it possible for both
the address and the message to be on the back of the card. This prevented the face of the
card from being written on and proved to be a great boon for collectors. Normally the view
colors or images filled the entire card with no white border.
WHITE BORDER ERA (1915-1930)
The White Border Era brought an end to the postcard craze era. The golden age ended as
imports from Germany ceased and publishers in the U.S. began printing postcards to try to
fill the void. The cards were very poor quality and many were reprints of earlier Divided
Back Era cards. These are easily distinguished by the white border around the pictured
LINEN ERA (1930-1945)
Improvements in America printing technology brought improved card quality. Publishers
began using a linen-like paper containing a high rag content but used very cheap inks in
most instances. Until recently, collectors considered these cards very cheap. Now they are
very popular with collectors of roadside America, Blacks, Comics, and Advertising. Views
are also becoming more popular as collectors realize that this era too is a part of out
history, and these cards help to illustrate the changes in the geographic structure of
PHOTOCHROME ERA (1939 to present day)
"Modern Chromes," as the postcard fraternity now calls them, were first
introduced in 1939. Publishers, such as Mike Roberts, Dexter Press, Curt Teich, and
Plastichrome, began producing cards that had very beautiful chrome colors and were very
appealing to collectors. The growth of this group has been spectacular in recent years, so
much so that there are now many postcard dealers who specialize only in chromes.
REAL PHOTO POSTCARDS (1900 to present day)
Real Photo postcards were in use as early as 1900. It is sometimes very hard to date a
card unless it has been postally used or dated by the photographer. The stamp box will
usually show the process by which it was printed---AZO, EKC, KODAK, VELOX, and KRUXO are
some of the principal ones. Careful study of photo cards is essential to make sure they
have not been reproduced.
Click here for:
Oldpostcards.com - Homepage
(page opens in new window)
Click the images to display a larger view and more detailed info about the card