A pure white Ragdoll cat is a dream come true for most cat lovers who like to have this breed in all its glory. Here are some amazing facts about this cat.
Ragdolls are a breed of cat that originated in England. They were developed by crossing domestic cats with jungle cats. These hybrids were then brought back to England and they were eventually accepted by the Cat Fanciers’ Association (CFA) in the year 1989. The name ragdoll comes from the fact that these cats are born with a white coat, which makes them look like a fluffy dolls. The cat’s body is shaped like a ragdoll. It has soft fur, short legs, and a long tail.
What Makes A Pure White Ragdoll Cat?
The white color of the cat comes from an autosomal dominant gene. When the parents are both carriers of this gene, their kittens will be pure white. If one of the parents is a carrier for this gene but does not have it, then the kittens will be all black or all white. This gene is not found in any other breeds of cats. The color of the cat also comes from an autosomal recessive gene.
It can also be found in a few other breeds of cats, but it is not as common. In this case, when both parents are carriers for this gene, the kittens will be a mixture of the two colors. The parents of these cats are usually called ‘carrier’ and they are carriers for both genes. Carrier cats are not affected by either of these diseases.
Genetics: This is the only cat breed where a person can get a white kitten by just breeding two pure white parents. This is why the pure white Ragdoll is a very popular cat breed. Pure white Ragdolls are very rare. There are only four to five thousand pure white Ragdoll cats in the world today. They are all descended from the original pure white cat that was born in the UK.
Learn more about: What Colors Do Ragdoll Cats Come In?
How Do I Know If My Cat Is A Carrier?
You can find out if your cat is a carrier of the white gene by doing a DNA test. A carrier cat will be able to produce pure white kittens. If your cat has white fur, you should consider doing a DNA test on him.
Cats are carriers because of their large litter sizes and long breeding cycles. The first cat born in a litter will always have white fur. If a black cat is bred to a white cat, then the first born kitten will be white. The white gene is dominant, so if both parents are carriers, their offspring will be carriers as well.
Interesting Facts About A Pure White Ragdoll Cat
A beautiful, friendly, and affectionate Ragdoll kitten. A rare and beautiful white color, with a lot of personalities. The Ragdoll is one of the most popular cat breeds in the world and has been around for quite a while. They are very friendly, gentle, curious, playful, and independent.
Pure white Ragdoll cat is rare to find across the world. It is also known as a “white kitten” or a “white baby” and has a very high chance of being born with the genetic disease, which is called blue eye. The most common color of eyes in a Ragdoll is yellow. Blue eyes are a recessive gene and can be passed down from parent to their offspring. The chances of a white cat having blue eyes are much higher than the chances of a pure white human being having brown eyes.
The eyes of Ragdolls are almost always blue. This is because blue is the dominant eye color. The chances of a Ragdoll having blue eyes are around 95%. However, Ragdolls with blue eyes have a very high chance of having albinism. Albinism is a condition where the skin, hair, and eyes are completely white. A Ragdoll with albinism is also known as a “Snowflake”. It has been observed that the first thing a Ragdoll cat will do when they are born is to open its eyes. This shows that the baby is aware of its surroundings. Ragdolls are very friendly cats and have affectionate personalities. They are gentle and soft-spoken. They can be trained to be good pets for people who can handle them.
Read more about: Is My Cat A Ragdoll Mix Or A Pure Breed?
The pure white ragdoll cat is a breed that most people love to have. Commonly referred to as a snow-white cat it is all white like snow and just adorable.
It is very similar to the Persian and Abyssinian but has more of a longhair appearance. They are considered to be miniature longhairs. The average size is usually around 7-9 inches tall and weighs around 2 pounds. There are a variety of colors and markings and they come in both shorthairs and longhairs.
This article provides basic information about the pure white ragdoll that you need to know about this breed.
Frequently Asked Questions
Can Ragdolls be pure white?
No. Ragdolls are a mix of colours. The colour of your ragdoll is determined by the genes you have and the environment that you were raised in. The pure white ragdolls are very rare to find.
Are Ragdolls born white?
Some ragdolls are born pure white depending on the genes their parents carry However, most Ragdolls are not born white, they are born with some grey or brown hairs. These hairs will fade as the dog gets older. Some people believe that the hair will never fade but this is not true.
What is the most common Ragdoll color?
The most common Ragdoll colour is cream/white, followed closely by grey. Some also have blue eyes.
Are white Ragdoll cats deaf?
No, white Ragdolls are not deaf. They do have very small hearing loss, however, they are not born deaf. If a cat was born deaf it would be very difficult to train. Most Ragdolls live for 10-14 years.