Neurofeedback is a type of therapy whereby the brain is trained and reprogrammed to self regulate, having positive impact on behaviour and socialisation.
It’s a concept Stuart Black from BrainTrain UK has taken to the next level. BrainTrain, who have been running clinics in the London and Heartfordshire area for just under a year, offer neurotherapy without a referral from a GP, paediatrician or health professional.
Brain waves are analysed by connecting electrodes to the scalp, and deciphering when the brain is processing information. The website states:
Sophisticated computer technology assesses these raw brainwaves and that data is used to provide direct feedback to the brain on how well it is functioning, using video software. Patients can choose to ‘play’ these video games with the brain, or watch documentaries or music videos. For younger clients a cuddly bear that vibrates can be used to give extra sensory feedback.
Stuart, who spent four years as director of the Cromwell Hospital in London had always been interested in self development and well being technology.
He told Autism Daily Newscast:
“I’d been reading the work of Dr James Hart and I’d been talking to a good friend of mine who is a Professir of Neuroscience at a Canadian University hospital who offer neurotherapy as an alternative therapy for children with ADHD and autism, but also for enhancing athletes for peaking their performance.
“It came from the concept of Operant conditioning, so giving rewards, we provide visual or audio stimulus when the brain is working well.”
Neurotherapy has predominantly been used for children and adults with attention deficit syndrome, but neurotherapy with children and young adults with autism have proved successful at the London based clinics. Stuart said:
“The results with autism are mostly encouraging. The autistic spectrum is difficult for parents because there’s a lot of different therapies and medication being offered for different diagnoses on the spectrum.”
BrainTrain UK run clinics in Egham, Surrey; Battersey, Clapham Junction, Hertfordshire and Harley Street. For more information contact email@example.com
More on Brain Train UK will appear in this April’s Autistic Spectrum Digest which is available on Itunes and Android. Download your copy now!