Nowadays, bike sharing has become one of the most prominent ways of transportation in most urban areas. Starting from the mid-2000s, the usage of a bike sharing program began to spread worldwide, and people started to use it as an alternative to car driving because it has numerous benefits. In this article, we’ll look at some of the essential benefits of electric bike sharing that are the reason for the industry’s success and make people’s life more efficient.
Nowadays, the world has become extremely fast-paced, and finding ways to help us save some time is something we all strive for. With a fast electric bike, you can go from one destination to another without having to spend much time looking for a place to park or being stuck in traffic. According to the Washington Post, Americans spend nearly an hour of their day in traffic, which they could use for other more productive activities. With an e bike, people will avoid getting stuck in a traffic jam, saving a lot of time and energy.
Safety and Security
Besides the fact the bike sharing system helps reduce the amount of traffic and, therefore, the likelihood of car accidents, it is also one of the safest transportation methods. According to Vox.com, so far in the United States, no one has died from a bike sharing program. Primarily for safety reasons, there are federal regulations that prevent electric bikes from going over a certain speed limit (20 mph for most bikes). An electric bike has sturdy and wide tires, which usually prevent the rider from falling on a rough and bumpy road. Additionally, e-bikes are specifically designed to stand out; painted in bright colors, they’re easy to spot, which reduces the likelihood of a collision.
Driving a car requires sitting the whole time, which can cause health concerns. This can be easily avoided if you choose bike sharing services as an alternative to car transportation.
Riding a bike is an excellent form of exercise, especially for people with busy schedules that don’t have time to go to the gym. With the use of the best e bike, you can kill two birds with one stone by incorporating cardio goals into your daily commute.
Additionally, riding an e-bike is a great way to reduce stress and anxiety. It positively impacts heart health and improves blood flow, coordination, and metabolism.
With the best electric bike, you can avoid a lot of expenses, as they’re much cheaper than private transport; you pay for them based on the distance you need to go. In the bike sharing industry, the distance doesn’t matter, but the amount of time you spend riding matters, which makes a striking difference when it comes to money.
Since electric vehicles don’t use fuels like diesel and gasoline, they don’t produce harmful exhaust fumes. You can reduce your overall carbon footprint and greenhouse gas emissions by using a bike sharing program. Besides, they are being charged with electricity and solar energy, making them completely eco-friendly and sustainable.
Moreover, we’ve already established that using e-bikes helps to reduce traffic jams, which are one of the major contributors to air pollution.
Nowadays, due to the development of the bike sharing market, you can create your own micro-mobility enterprises utilizing e-scooters and bikes. This is possible to achieve with ANIV, a customizable micro-mobility sharing platform.
Team up with ANIV to help us transform the bike and scooter sharing industry. Bicycles, electric bicycles, scooters, and smart lockers are among the equipment that ANIV offers for your company from top global brands.
Using ANIV, you can manage your fleet with AI data-driven software and generate extra income by utilizing the platform’s various capabilities. Within its scooter and bike sharing app, ANIV offers a wide variety of customizable features that will provide all the necessary tools for your company.