Elevator | Lift Bank Layouts
Elevators, or lifts, should be specified and arranged around a series of design factors that include: occupancy type, speed and quantity of traffic, total vertical distance to be traveled, and the desired time and speed of travel. When deciding on an appropriate layout and location for your elevator banks, it is advised to locate lifts near the building’s primary entrance in relation to the main path of circulation, and to also remain easily accessed by every floor. Groups of elevators, or banks, are typically controlled by a single call button and operating system, but individual elevators may be designed to operate independently of the group in special circumstances.
When specifying an elevator system, consult the lift manufacturer for detailed recommendations for sizes, controls, layouts, and installation requirements. Likewise, consult appropriate building codes for structural and mechanical requirements for the elevator shafts, fire separations, ventilation, and soundproofing.
On top of functionality, the important factors to consider when planning an elevator layout include: safety, quality, aesthetics, capacity (especially during peak times), and the environment of building type for which the elevator is to be installed.
A common residential elevator is usually 3’ wide by 4’ deep ( .91 x 1.22 m). In compliance with ADA standards, the depth should have a minimum of 51 inches (1.30 m), width of 68 inches (1.73 m), and door width of 36 inches (.91 m). The common elevator for office buildings are 6’ wide by 5’ deep (1.83 x 1.53 m). The doors of the elevator are typically 4’ wide (1.22 m).
The ultimate location of elevators is dependent on the building type. In many cases, the elevators are positioned near stairwells and in the center of buildings to create a core service or circulation area. In public or commercial buildings, the elevators are located in the lobbies next to stairways. The position of this form of vertical transportation should take into consideration its accessibility and distance to be traveled by occupants.