Endodontic therapy in dental setup should be simple, predictable and of course the most wanted by patients that's painless and time saving. In recent dental advances RCT is the preferred management modality, for root canal infections.RCT for molars are more challenging and demanding, due to the multicanal system. Since we donot want you to loose your permanent molars which is a threat to occlusal bite.Single sitting RCT is the choice now a days
Why single sitting?
Persons with busy working hours feel this ideal.
To reduce multiple visits to dentist
Due to new recent advances with availability of latest equipment and materials,its in demand.
Need For Root Canal Treatment
Removal of bacterial infection from tooth
Removal of pain
Prevention of further spread of infection throughout tooth to periapical tissue and surrounding bone
Prevent further damage of tooth by infection.
Procedure for Endodontic Treatment
1. First Evaluation and endodontic tooth preparation
a small x-ray of the tooth is taken to check the tooth shape and root canals infection site
local anthesia is administered at the infected site
a canal is made in tooth to allow for removal of the damaged pulp
2. Clean root canal and pulp chamber
root canal may be cleaned once or several times to ensure infection is cleared
in some cases, medications may be placed to prevent infection by removing germs from the teeth
3. Root Filling
after root canal is check and cleared, the root canal is filled
the tooth tends to be brittle after root canal treatment.To bring back the teeth to normal form and function,the tooth is protected with the help of crowns that helps teeth to provide extra strength and protection.
With the help of endodontic treatment we target to create an absolutely infection free root canal system,which allows for healing of the periradicular tissues as well as the teeth is saved from being sacrificed. A successful procedure is one which has removed bacteria in the tooth and completely filled the canals. In single sitting RCT we, modern technological machines and units such as the Endomate unit and Root Apex locator are utilized to provide better prognosis and increase the long term success rate. This new system,which makes endodontics easy,and painless for patients.
Implants in todays dental trend advancements are titanium posts,which are tooth root substitute.These tiny posts areinserted into the jawbone where teeth are missing.They act as metal anchors are surgically placed into the jaw bones. The bone bonds with the titanium, creating a strong foundation for artificial teeth. Small posts are then attached to the implant, which protrude through the gums. These posts provide stable anchors for artificial replacement teeth.
The Surgical Procedure
Todays implant system is very easy procedure which includes two surgical procedure, First, implants are placed within your jawbone. For the first three to six months following surgery, the implants are beneath the surface of the gums,which helps in making a bond with the surrounding jawbone. During this time patient is given to wear temporary dentures and advised soft diet. After the implant to has formed a bond with the jawbone, the second visit the implants are uncovered and small posts are attached to which the artificial teeth are anchored.These posts protrude through the gums. When the artificial teeth are placed these posts will not be seen. The entire procedure usually takes six to eight months. Advances in dental implant technology have made it possible in select cases, to extract teeth, and place implants with crowns at one visit. This process, called "immediate loading" greatly simplifies the surgical process.
Who actually performs the implant placement?
Implants are a team effort between implantologist ,prosthodontist.,restorative dentist.
Why dental implants?
Implants are now for improved life style,quality of life. When you lose single teeth or multiple teeth you may not express but you have never become fully accustomed to losing such a vital part of yourself.Dental implants today is the new path way renewed self-confidence and peace of mind.Even older people want to maintain a good quality of life,and with dentures they don't get that satisfaction of there own teeth.For them its one morechance to restore your smile ,as your ability to eat and speak properly.Implants are definitely best solution for toothless jaw.
Are you a candidate for implants?
If you are considering implants, your mouth must be examined thoroughly and your medical and dental history reviewed.
What type of anesthesia is used?
The majority of dental implants and bone grafting can be performed in the office under local anesthesia, with or without intravenous sedation.
Care For Implants
Once the implants are in place,regular dental check ups are advised.Routine dental visits and proper tooth brushing,flossing,rinsing mouth helps in maintainence of implants.
What are porcelain veneers?
Porcelain veneers, are wafer-thin shells of porcelain that are bonded onto the front side of teeth so to create a cosmetic improvement for a tooth.These veneers are the latest advancement in dentistry which uses minimal tooth preparation giving your teeth a very natural looking smile.They are now a days widely used along with ceramic crowns for smile correction. Advantages of porcelain veneers
Create a very life-like tooth appearance.
Since porcelain veneers having the glass-like in the advantage is that they are translucent. When a porcelain veneer is bonded onto a tooth's surface it will closely mimic the light handling characteristics of dental enamel"One property of tooth enamel is that it's translucent. The translucency effect of a tooth's enamel, is an important aspect of what give teeth their characteristic lustrous appearance. . This translucency effect of the porcelain veneers creates a lustrous appearance for the tooth that very closely resembles the appearance of enamel.
Porcelain veneers resist staining.
As a group, cosmetic dental bonding materials have the shortcoming of being susceptible to staining and discoloring.. Since porcelain is a ceramic, and therefore glass-like, a veneer's porcelain surface will be extremely stain resistant. Indications for veneers
Porcelain veneers can be used to repair minor tooth imperfections and defects Porcelain veneers can be used to cover over and conceal fillings that have become stained or discolored Porcelain veneers can be used to make color changes for teeth that have permanent stains In some cases porcelain veneers can be used as an alternative to orthodontic treatment What steps does a dentist take when they make a porcelain veneer for a tooth?
1. .Before this preparation is started according to the need the area is anaesthetized. Usually the avery minimal of tooth preparation is done .5 to.7millimeters
2. The dentisrt takes impression to create dental molds of your tooth using impression putty.Shade selection is done to match your current tooth shade. This impression is sent to laboratory who will in turn make your porcelain veneer.
3.In second visit . First the porcelain veneer will be cleaned and prepared for the cementation process. Your tooth will also be cleaned, and the veneers are bonded to the tooth surface and polishing is done.
We in T32 Dental spa offer you two different tooth whitening treatments which we can adapt to suit your lifestyle and budget. Our 'at-home' tooth whitening treatment will give you whiter teeth in only two weeks and can be implemented entirely at your convenience. Alternatively, you can opt for Zoom Advanced Power the Wow! Factor professional tooth whitening system. Zoom Advanced Power is a scientifically advanced procedure that is carried out in less than one hour at our tooth whitening clinic.It is the brightest and most powerful chair side whitening. It is safe, effective and fast, making it the ideal tooth whitening procedure for busy individuals and for anyone looking for immediate results. With the new Zoom advanced system, patients experience up to 67% less sensitivity . And it is also 50% whitens up to B1 shade or better in just 45 mins The procedure is simple and take only one-hour. After doing the supragingival scaling and polishing, whitening gel containing hydrogen peroxide is placed over your teeth. The ZOOM advanced power lamp is used to act on your teeth to activate and break down the hydrogen peroxide. As the hydrogen peroxide breaks down, it allows oxygen to enter your teeth and bleach the dentin and enamel.This helps your teeth to have an instant bright teeth in just 45 minutes.Ceramic crowns and bridges
Crowns and bridges are techniques involving cutting down the tooth or teeth to be restored and covering them entirely with caps.It is basically refers to restoration of natural teeth that have been damaged decayed or lost.Crowns are made to restore individual tooth where as bridges are used to replace one or more missing teeth.Indications for crown or bridges
There are large fillings in tooth and covers most of the surfaces of teeth making the strength weaker.
Discolouration or compromised esthetics.
Lot of damage caused to the teeth due to decay.
Fractured tooth which cannot be restored with filling.
After root canal treatment teeth becomes brittle,to support the teeth crowns are given.
Gives you back your smile
Helps you properly chew and speak
Maintains the shape of your face
Distributes the forces in your bite properly by replacing missing teeth
Prevents remaining teeth from drifting out of position
Helps preserve the natural function and position of the teeth
Restores and maintains natural bite
1. Porcelain fused to metal dental bridges
2. All porcelain dental bridges
3. All metal dental bridges (Gold)
The all porcelain dental bridges and porcelain fused to metal (PFM) dental bridges are tooth colored bridges. Some porcelain crowns have metal inside which gives strength and support to the porcelain. PFM dental bridges are usually used to restore back teeth where the forces of chewing and grinding are strongest. Porcelain is usually always used for the front teeth but may be used for the back teeth..With recent newadvances there are porcelain that with stands stress more well and can be used in posterior teeth.
The Empress crown more like a glass. can be very beautiful. For appearance's sake, we prefer the Empress*
The Procera crown - Procera is a milled ceramic on the inside with a more traditional porcelain baked onto the outside. The advantage of Procera is its exceptional strength. An advantage of Procera is that it doesn't have to be bonded to the tooth but can be cemented with ordinary crown and bridge cement, a technique familiar to all dentists.
Zirconia crowns look beautiful and very natural. Zirconia is an extra tough ceramic material, and it can be made extra thin. They have no metal in them, and can be made translucent or opaque, depending on the demands of the situation
Today we are no more worried to get our teeth filled,as various tooth coloured fillings are present in recent times,which matches our tooth shade as well as helps us to smile confidently.Normally we use composite which is plastic resin which creates a strong bond with the dentin& enamel. The other important quality is the colour.These resins comes in variety of shades so it matches your particular tooth structure.These tooth coloured fillings are bonded to the tooth by procedure called Dental bonding in which a tooth-colored resin material is applied and hardened with a special light, which ultimately "bonds" the material to the tooth to restore or improve person's smile.Why Tooth coloured fillings
Repairs decayed teeth
Repairs small chipped or cracked teeth
Improves the appearance of discolored teeth
Closes minor gaps and spaces between teeth
Changes the color and shape of teeth
Corrects mild crooked teeth to a certain degree
A cosmetic alternative to amalgam fillings
Protects a portion of the tooth's root that has been exposed when gums recede
Steps dentist performs
1. Dentist may anastetize the tooth depending on the amount of tooth preparation.
2. Entire tooth surface is cleansed and isolated with cotton rolls to ensure a tooth surface which is plaque free. And debri free.
3. The dentist selects shade using shade guide which mimics your current tooth shade.
4. Tooth shaping is done according to damage caused.
5. The tooth enamel is treated with acidic conditioner which is called etching done at microscopic level to create enamel roughning, for perfect bonding.
6. Then etch tooth surface is treated with bonding agent a liquid that is able to seep in the microscopic roughness.
7. Once the initial bond with tooth established composite is added to the tooth surface layer wise to create chemical bond