Mice in Pennsylvania are a common pest. As the weather gets colder, mice and other common Pennsylvania rodents try to make their way into our homes in search of food, water, and shelter from the elements. While this may not seem like a big deal, mice in your home can be a big problem. They can spread a variety of diseases, cause asthma attacks and allergic reactions, and even chew through pipes and wires leading to floods and fires. Professional pest control in Pennsylvania can help keep your home protected from mice and other common area pests. Call BHB Pest Elimination and let us help you!
How Mice Find Their Way Into My Home?
Mice are an incredibly resourceful pest. If they need food, water, or shelter there is little that will stop them in their search. One of the most common ways mice get into homes is through cracks or holes in walls, floors, or foundations. They can also sneak in through gaps in windows or roofs, through sewer lines, and through pipes and other utilities that aren’t properly sealed.
It can be hard to find the holes that mice crawl through because they are so small. Mice have adapted to be able to squeeze through holes no larger than a dime and no wider than the width of a pencil. This means they can be incredibly difficult to keep out of your home without professional help.
What Do Mice Eat?
Mice are omnivorous. This means that they will eat just about anything that will provide them with nutrients. While they prefer to eat foods that are high in carbohydrates, they are not picky. Here are some of the foods that mice will eat inside your home:
Mice will eat cheese, but it is a myth that it is their favorite food.
They will also feed on outdoor vegetation. This means that if you have mice in your home, your garden is also likely in danger. They will destroy home gardens and crops to find their next meal.
How To Get Rid Of Mice In Pennsylvania
As a homeowner in Pennsylvania, the best thing you can do to get rid of mice is to keep them out of your home in the first place. Here are a few mouse prevention tips to keep mice away:
- Seal cracks and crevices around your home
- Make sure gutters are working properly and water is running away from your home
- Keep firewood at least 20 feet from your home
- Use door sweeps on exterior doors
- Store food in airtight containers
These tips will help you keep mice out of your home and away from your family and friends.
If you are already dealing with a mouse infestation in your Pennsylvania home, don’t waste your time with DIY options. Most of the options available to you are at best band-aids for the problem. They may trap a few mice, but they don’t get to the heart of the problem. For that, you need professional help.
Professional House Mouse Control Made Easy
The best way to keep mice out of your home is with professional mouse control from the trained specialists at BHB Pest Elimination. We will work quickly to eliminate any active infestations in your home. After that, we can provide sanitation services to clean up after these filthy pests, and exclusion services to make sure that your home remains mouse free. Contact us today for a free inspection and let us get started with a home pest control plan to keep you, your family, and your property protected from mice and other pests.