Mareshah and Adullam
Micah 1:15 KJV
Yet will I bring an heir unto thee,
O inhabitant of Mareshah:
he shall come unto Adullam
the glory of Israel
People in Mareshah, I (God) will bring an army against you, to fight your town. And it will win. And Israel’s leaders will need to hide at Adullam. The verses 10 to 15 may tell how Assyria attacked Judah in 701 BC
Yet will I bring an heir unto thee
As you art now occupied by possessors who expelled the former inhabitants, so will I bring “yet” again the new possessor, namely, the Assyrian foe.
Other heirs will supplant us in every inheritance but that of heaven.
Inhabitant of Mareshah
Micah now prophesies against his own city: and because it signified a heritage, he says that God would send an heir to possess it.
It was one of the cities in the lowlands of Judah
Adullam the glory of Israel
This is how they thought themselves, because of the strength of their cities.
Adullam means “justice of the people”. It is a town of the Canaanites allotted to Judah and lying in the lowlands, and the site of the cave where David hid.
- Adullam was one of the royal cities of the Canaanites, now Aid–el–ma (Joshua 12:15; 15:35).
- It stood on the old Roman road in the valley of Elah (q.v.), which was the scene of David’s memorable victory over Goliath (1 Samuel 17:2), and not far from Gath.
- It was one of the towns which Rehoboam fortified against Egypt (2 Chronicles 11:7).
- It was called “the glory of Israel” (Micah 1:15) as it was superior in situation. When it, and the neighboring cities fell, Israel’s glory was gone.
The Cave of Adullam has been discovered about 2 miles south of the scene of David’s triumph, and about 13 miles west from Bethlehem. At this place is a hill some 500 feet high pierced with numerous caverns, in one of which David gathered together “every one that was in distress, and every one that was in debt, and every one that was discontented” 1 Samuel 22:2
Some of these caverns are large enough to hold 200 or 300 men.
× 0 ×