California leads the nation in reducing greenhouse gas emissions and is currently working to ensure that 33 percent of the state’s electricity is generated from renewable resources. The California Energy Commission’s Public Interest Energy Research (PIER) is the state’s premier energy research, development and demonstration program, advancing science and technology in the fields of energy efficiency, renewable energy, advanced electricity technologies, energy-related environmental protection, transmission and distribution, and transportation technologies.1
PIER has invested more than $600 million over the last decade to bring to market energy technologies that provide environmental and economic benefits to California’s ratepayers. This is accomplished by enlisting businesses, utilities, energy companies, public advocacy groups, and world-class scientists at California’s universities and national laboratories.1
PIER’s State Partnership for Energy Efficient Demonstrations (SPEED) program in particular aims to demonstrate and apply new lighting and HVAC technologies throughout a wide range of California venues and campus settings. These demonstration projects highlight technologies developed through a unique collaborative process that leverages public research and development funds to help manufacturers bring innovative, energy-efficient products into the commercial marketplace.2
In partnership with PIER’s SPEED program, the California Lighting Technology Center (CLTC) at the University of California in Davis has completed numerous lighting pilot projects that demonstrate how combining energy-efficient lighting technologies with smart sensor controls can reduce energy, save money, and improve safety. Recently, 100w bi-level induction shoe box fixtures from U.S. manufacturer EverLast® Lighting were installed in the California Department of Public Health parking lot in Richmond. When the lot is vacant, adaptive occupancy sensors dim the fixtures to 40 percent power, and when motion is detected the fixtures power back up to 100 percent.
Energy-efficient EverLast® induction shoe box parking lot fixtures with integrated controls that dim to low light levels during unoccupied periods were also installed at UC Davis’s School of Veterinary Medicine. This demonstration is part of a campus-wide commitment to reduce electricity use by 60 percent by the end of 2015.
EverLast® bi-level induction shoe box fixtures, California Department of Public Health
(Photo Credit: CLTC)
EverLast® bi-level induction shoe box fixtures, UC Davis School of Veterinary Medicine
(Photo Credit: CLTC)
EverLast® Lighting is a subsidiary of Full Spectrum Solutions, Inc. and has quickly grown into the leading manufacturer of energy efficient lighting solutions for roadway, parking structure, facility and area lighting applications. For additional product information, visit www.everlastlight.com, call 888-383-7578, or email firstname.lastname@example.org. For press inquiries, contact Kyle Leighton at email@example.com.
PIER’s SPEED program is managed by the California Institute for Energy and Environment (CIEE), which is a branch of the University of California Energy Institute at UC Berkeley. CLTC is subcontracted by CIEE to develop and implement lighting technology demonstrations. For more information about other PIER demonstrations, visit www.pierpartnershipdemonstrations.com.