What is chlamydia?
Chlamydia is a sexually transmitted infection (STI) caused by the bacteria Chlamydia trachomatis. It can infect both men and women and can cause serious health problems if not treated. In women, it can cause pelvic inflammatory disease (PID), which can lead to infertility. In men, chlamydia can cause urethritis, which may lead to gonorrhea and other complications. Symptoms of chlamydia vary depending on the person infected, but may include a discharge from the penis or vagina, pain during intercourse, and fever. If you think you may have chlamydia, get tested right away!
Symptoms of Chlamydia
Common symptoms of chlamydia can include pain during urination, fatigue, urge to urinate, bleeding while urinating, itching, sore throat, redness in the eye. Chlamydia can be cured with antibiotics, but it’s important to get tested and treated as soon as possible to avoid any long-term health problems.
Symptoms in Men
Burning sensation while urinating, pain in the urethra, penile discharge, swelling and pain in the testicles.
Symptoms in Women
Burning sensation while urinating, vaginal discharge, pain in the increased vaginal bleeding, abdominal pain and pain during sex.
Chlamydia STD by Sex/ Gender
The rate of reported chlamydia cases among females was two times higher the rate among males.
By Age Group
Most of the cases are seen in people under the age group of 15 – 24.
Chlamydia is easily preventable with the use of condoms and can be cured with antibiotics if caught early. It is important for sexually active individuals to get tested for chlamydia on a regular basis.
The following infographic walks you through chlamydia statistics and symptoms of chlamydia in men and women.
STDs are becoming very common in the US and around the world. One of the most commonly reported STDs in the US is Chlamydia. It is important to have safe sex if you are an avid player in bed. Chlamydia generally does not show any symptoms in its early stages, thus it is the prime reason for the widespread of Chlamydia, especially among the youth.