As you all know by now, fertile cervical mucus is necessary to nourish and help the sperm to swim and survive to reach the egg in order to get pregnant.
You should know that hostile cervical mucus hinders and even damages and kills sperm making conceiving much harder.
Your body should produce fertile cervical mucus a few days before and during ovulation. Fertile quality mucus is thinner in consistency and watery, and the most fertile looks like egg whites called egg white cervical mucus (EWCM is the usual abbreviation on ovulation charts) and is usually clear or cloudy appearance. See here for more details on what to look for.
Fertile cervical mucus becomes less acidic more alkaline as ovulation gets closer which promotes the best environment for sperm to survive.
You should be checking your mucus daily to know when you are getting fertile cervical mucus. When you detect it then you know you are about to ovulate. See here for when and how often to check your mucus. You should begin to have baby making sex about every 36 hours (or approximately every 24 to 48 hours). See here for the best getting pregnant positions.
Hostile cervical mucus is what you should have at times other than at ovulation. Hostile mucus is dry, crumbly or thicker lotion-like consistency and usually yellowish or milky white.
Hostile cervical mucus is more acidic and caustic to sperm as sperm need an alkaline environment to survive.
If you notice while checking your mucus that you don’t have a lot of EWCM during the time you should be ovulating, then your ovulation mucus may be too hostile for sperm to make it to the fallopian tubes to fertilize the egg (ovum). Which means that your mucus is too acidic for sperm to survive. See here for how to check your cervical mucus.
Our bodies, including our cervical mucus, can become too acidic when we do not eat a proper diet. (Such as eating foods with preservatives and pesticides.) See more about fertility diets here.
Cervical Mucus: What to look for | Cervical Mucus: When to check | Cervical Mucus: How to check | Cervical Mucus Changes at Conception and Ovulation | Fertility Herbs | Vitex Agnus Castus | Evening primrose oil | Basal Body Temperature (BBT) | Luteal Phase Defect | Menstrual Cycle Length | Ovulation Bleeding | Ovulation Pain | Ovulation Predictor Kit | Cervical Position | When Does Ovulation Occur? |
The Fertility Realm › Signs of Ovulation › Fertile vs Hostile Cervical Mucus
The Fertility Realm › Cervical Mucus › Fertile vs Hostile Cervical Mucus
Website design by LW
Have your say about what you just read! Leave me a comment in the box below.