Click on each to discover the gallantry & meritorious awards appended to the Riflemen of the London Irish.
Distinguished Service Order (DSO)
The Distinguished Service Order (DSO) is a military decoration of the United Kingdom, and formerly of other parts of the Commonwealth of Nations, awarded for meritorious or distinguished service by officers of the armed forces during wartime, typically in actual combat.
Military Cross (MC)
The Military Cross (MC) is the third-level military decoration awarded to officers and (since 1993) other ranks of the British Armed Forces, and used to be awarded to officers of other Commonwealth countries.
The MC is granted in recognition of “an act or acts of exemplary gallantry during active operations against the enemy on land to all members, of any rank in Our Armed Forces”. In 1979, the Queen approved a proposal that a number of awards, including the Military Cross, could be awarded posthumously.
George Medal (GM)
The George Medal (GM), instituted on 24 September 1940 by King George VI, is a decoration of the United Kingdom and Commonwealth, awarded for gallantry “not in the face of the enemy” where the services were not so outstanding as to merit the George Cross.
Military Medal (MM)
The Military Medal (MM) was a military decoration awarded to personnel of the British Army and other services, and formerly also to personnel of other Commonwealth countries, below commissioned rank, for bravery in battle on land.
Distinguished Conduct Medal (DCM)
The Distinguished Conduct Medal, post-nominal letters DCM, was established in 1854 by Queen Victoria as a decoration for gallantry in the field by other ranks of the British Army. It is the oldest British award for gallantry and was a second level military decoration, until it was discontinued in 1993. The medal was also awarded to non-commissioned military personnel of other Commonwealth Dominions and Colonies.
Volunteer & Territorial Decorations (VD,TD)
The Efficiency Decoration, post-nominal letters TD for recipients serving in the Territorial Army of the United Kingdom or ED for those serving in the Auxiliary Military Forces, was instituted in 1930 for award to part-time officers after twenty years of service as an efficient and thoroughly capable officer. The decoration superseded the Volunteer Officers’ Decoration, the Colonial Auxiliary Forces Officers’ Decoration and the Territorial Decoration.