Class 5 EVS Blow Hot, Blow Cold Revision Notes and Worksheets PDF for Quick Preparation and Revision
Chapter 15 of Class 5 EVS- Blow Hot, Blow Cold is about how a woodcutter used his breath to cool as well as warm things on different occasions for different purposes. It also explains why he breathed into the fireplace. Students will learn how the same action has different outcomes at different times, in this chapter. The same breath was used to warm one’s hands and to cool down hot food. To understand the context, read the Blow Hot, Blow Cold summary in the revision notes.
The simpler explanation given in Class 5 EVS Blow Hot, Blow Cold revision notes will help you to understand all the important things in the chapter Blow Hot,Blow Cold. You will get a clear idea of how the woodcutter used his breath to achieve certain effects.
Class 5 EVS Revision Notes - Chapter-wise List
The class 5 EVS notes will help students prepare better for their examinations. They are prepared by experts and are in accordance with the latest CBSE syllabus and guidelines.
Download PDF of Blow Hot Blow Cold Class 5 Notes CBSE EVS Chapter 15 [Free PDF Download]
FAQs on Blow Hot Blow Cold Class 5 Notes CBSE EVS Chapter 15 [Free PDF Download]
1. Why was the woodcutter blowing on his hands?
The woodcutter blew on his hands because his hands were frozen cold due to the weather. He blew on his hands to make them ready for cutting wood.
2. Why was the man confused by seeing the woodcutter using his breath?
The woodcutter used his breath to cool down his food, warm his hands and make the chulha catch fire quickly. He was unable to figure out the reasons and was confused.
3. What is a chulha?
A chulha is a furnace prepared to cook food. The woodcutter used stones to make it.
4. What is the significance of the title ‘Blow Hot, Blow Cold’?
The title ‘Blow Hot, Blow Cold’ refers both to the main storyline and the environmental information that this lesson is providing. The woodcutter’s story revolves around his actions related to breaths and the certain outcomes of those actions. The title here connotes the meaning behind those actions as blowing air hot and cold can produce variety or results such as lighting fire, cooling down potatoes, etc.
5. Who wrote Blow Hot, Blow Cold Class 5?
Blow Hot, Blow Cold is the chapter 15 of Class 5 EVS written by Dr. Zakin Hussain. The objective of this story is to provide environmental knowledge of the water cycle, along with the scientific reasons behind the daily activities of a person.