Instill Confidence and Success in Young Athletes
We’re certain that, as a parents, you want to help your child develop confidence and discipline in sports and life. And as a sports parent, you’d love for your children to reach their potential in sports. But encouraging your child to strive for greatness without pressuring them can be a challenge.
It’s no secret that sports success is linked closely to an athlete’s mental toughness. If your young athletes struggle to perform well in competition, are frustrated with their performance, talk about quitting or display low confidence levels, mental game training can help. Both you and your young athlete can learn how to build mental toughness and improve performance with sports psychology coaching for kids.
“Ashley wanted me to let you know that she placed very well at her competition this past weekend, thanks to you! She won the short, won the long, and had her personal best. She now looks at her competitions like ice shows and has fun. It is really nice to see her thoroughly enjoying the skate. She is very focused and very confident. We definitely attribute this to you.”*
~Brenda Glassco, Skating Parent
How Young Athletes Benefit from Mental Coaching
To become mentally tough, young athletes need to learn how to:
- Build confidence that transfers easily from practice to competition.
- Define and manage the high expectations and beliefs that lead to frustration and discouragement
- Supercharge focus and confidence before competition
- Let go and quickly move on from mistakes, losses, and setbacks
- Manage distractions and negative self-talk to perform with laser-like focus.
“I want to thank you for the great work you are doing with Ty. He seems to be soaring with confidence right now. We are flying out to see him pitch next weekend. He threw well Friday night and is drawing a lot of interest from several Division 1 schools.”*
~Randy Sullivan, Baseball Parent
What Parents Learn from Working with a Mental Game Coach
To be an effective and influential sports parent, you’ll learn to:
- Assess what you might be doing or saying to hurt your athlete’s confidence
- Say and do the right thing to your athletes to boost their confidence before and after competition.
- Help your athletes thrive in sports with 4 key questions you should always ask after games.
- Encourage your athlete to play their best without pressuring them
- Understand what is holding your athlete back from a relaxed and focused performance in competition.
- Apply mental toughness skills to boost performance, make lasting changes, and help your child succeed in both sports and in life.
“Michelle had the best weekend of soccer she has ever played. She was relaxed, did not get frustrated with herself or teammates, and never once ‘shut down.’ Numerous parents noticed a difference in her composure and attitude. Thanks again for EVERYTHING… Michelle is in a very good place right now!”*
~Diana, Michelle’s Mother
One-on-one sports psychology coaching is the fastest and most effective method to improve your athletes’ mental game, boost their performance, and make lasting changes. And as a bonus, parents learn what to say to help young athletes feel confident and thrive in sports. Please call us at 888-742-7225 with your questions.
Peak Performance Sports offers expert mental performance coaching with our trained mental coaches. Please preview our certified mental performance coaches and visit their bio page for more details…
Please share this introduction to mental coaching video with your young athletes:
Certified Mental Game Coaching Professionals
Patrick Cohn, Ph.D., Mental Coach to Professional Athletes
He is the owner and founder of Peak Performance Sports. He received a Master degree in sports psychology from California State University Fullerton with Dr. Ken Ravizza and a Ph.D. from The University of Virginia with Dr. Bob Rotella specializing in Sports Psychology.
He’s worked with athletes and teams for over 30 years including the Miami Dolphins, NASCAR winners, NHL, and NFL Players, National Motocross Champions, as well as PGA Tour professional golfers. Dr. Cohn also mentors coaches, therapists, life coaches, and mental coaches in the field of mental performance coaching via his Sports Psychology Certification Program.
Today, Dr. Cohn specializes in working with professional athletes in all sports, motorsports athletes, golfers, and day traders.
Jaclyn Ellis, M.S., MGCP, Mental Coach to Collegiate and High School Athletes
Jaclyn is a mental performance coach for Peak Performance Sports. She earned a Master’s degree from Illinois State University. She competed in soccer, volleyball, and tennis and was a competitive youth head soccer coach in Bloomington, IL.
She is a certified Mental Game Coaching Professional (MGCP) with Peak Performance Sports, LLC. And she’s completing the requirements to be a Certified Mental Performance Consultant (CMPC) through AASP.
Coach Jaclyn specializes in mental performance coaching with High School and College level athletes in all sports including soccer, basketball, baseball, softball, volleyball, golf, hockey, lacrosse, gymnastics, cheer, dance, cross country, wrestling, football, and American Ninja Warrior athletes.
Georgia Miller, M.E., MGCP, Mental Coach to Collegiate, High School and Junior Athletes
Georgia is a mental performance coach for Peak Performance Sports. She is a certified Mental Game Coaching Professional (MGCP) and is working towards becoming a Certified Mental Performance Coach (CMPC) with AASP.
After playing collegiate volleyball, she earned a master’s degree in Athletic Counseling from Springfield College. Georgia has delivered mental coaching for various teams at the high school and junior level.
She does mental performance coaching for athletes in all sports including golf, baseball, gymnastics, basketball, softball, field hockey, wrestling, ice hockey, motocross, musicians, dance, and football. She specializes in working with young athletes, high school athletes, and sports parents in all sports to help athletes perform better and cope with pressure.
Contact Us Today
Please contact us today to learn how mental coaching works and to request pricing on all one-on-one mental performance programs. Complete the web form below to contact us via email, or call us toll-free.
Please provide your name, email, sport and role below:
Or Call us today at 888-742-7225 | Read Success Stories From Athletes