I'm sorry to hear about your father's passing, but it's wonderful you want to do something special with his ashes. Here are 6 ideas:

1. Scattering: Scattering ashes is a very popular way to commemorate your loved one. If he had a favorite place or somewhere the two of you enjoyed spending time together, you could scatter them there. It may bring you comfort to know he is somewhere he loved dearly. Of course, you should always check the regulations and rules concerning the disposal of human remains in your chosen location before you go ahead with this decision.
2. Jewelry: Many people opt to wear jewelry containing the ashes of their loved ones to feel close to them, such as rings or necklaces. There are many options to choose from to suit your style and taste. You can buy a pendant necklace with a hollowed-out center and funnel a small pinch of his ashes inside, or you can have a piece custom-made to incorporate the ashes right into the metal. Some companies even make it possible to convert ashes into a man-made diamond, which you can then have placed in any setting you prefer. To add a personal touch, you can get the jewelry piece engraved, perhaps with your loved one's name or a sentimental saying.
3. Trees: For lovers of nature, this is a wonderful way to use their ashes. The remains are planted in a biodegradable urn along with soil and a sapling which are then planted in the ground. Over time, the tree absorbs nutrients from the ashes as it grows, which means the ashes will forever become a part of the tree.
4. Fireworks: For someone outgoing with a bright and bubbly personality, fireworks would make the perfect send-off. Some companies make fireworks that incorporate ashes so you can have an unforgettable and beautiful fireworks display to remember your loved one with.
5. Ashes tattoo: For fans of body art, this is a unique and permanent way to commemorate a loved one. For this process, some of the ashes would be mixed with tattoo ink and used to complete the tattoo as normal. The design of the tattoo is up to you, but some wonderful commemorative tattoo ideas include a portrait of your loved one, lyrics to their favorite song, a beloved phrase or saying of theirs, or their name. It is worth noting that this isn't a standard request and not all tattoo artists would be willing to perform such a task. You should take your time to research artists who have significant experience with this style of tattoo.
6. Vinyl: If your loved one was a huge music fan, this is the ultimate way to commemorate them. The ashes of your loved one can be pressed into a vinyl record with the audio of your choice. It will look and play just like a standard record. You can use their favorite song or even a recording of their voice if you have one.
