Here you'll find articles and resources for STEM+Arts education, also known as STEAM. Topics include science, technology, engineering, math and arts education and range from research reports to feature articles to profiles of makerspaces to news about new STEAM and STEAM initiatives in schools.
The county is familiar with competitive robotics. One of its high schools teams was ranked as the fourth best in the world, based on its performance during the 2019 FIRST Robotics World Championship in Detroit.
Students today need to understand not only how to code online, but also how computer science and coding connect to the tangible objects in the world around them.
The Alaska School Activities Association added esports as an activity to its high school roster of sports. The inaugural playing season, which began running in September, will last until next week. Playoffs will take place in January.
A Czech company with a 3D printer has launched an "academy" to provide educators with free 3D lessons that can be integrated into their classes. Y Soft Corp., which produces the BE3D EDEE 3D printer for schools, offers a set of printing lesson plans through BE3D Academy.
"Heart transplant surgeon." "Computer scientist." "Data science business owner." Those are three of the current entries in a competition that will award 15 separate $2,000 grants to help young women pursue their dreams in technology.
Michigan's Cranbrook Institute of Science is using a grant for producing a STEM program in state schools that includes real-world application and "resource efficiency." The donation came from the FCA Foundation, the charitable division of Fiat Chrysler Automobiles. The Foundation gave out $1.65 million in grants to numerous Detroit-area educational programs.
Amazon is teaming up with Georgia Tech for a new competition to teach students how to remix music using code through its Amazon Future Engineer program.
Rural school districts in Missouri are adding esports clubs. West County R-IV School District has acquired 14 "high-end computers" through a grant, which will be situated in the high school's industrial technology computer lab and used for student competitions.
A company that produces chips for hardware used in blockchain and artificial intelligence applications has launched a mining farm in Texas and committed to teaching blockchain to local students.
The elementary school math program’s latest offering will allow teachers to keep track of student progress on game-based learning modules.
With the sudden increase of the virtual campus, the number of vulnerable endpoints has expanded exponentially. This new normal calls for security resilience--the ability to protect the integrity of every aspect of the system and withstand unpredictable threats or changes, and then emerge stronger. Districts must embrace multi-layered endpoint security solutions and the latest technologies, such as unified platforms and extended detection and response (XDR) capabilities, in order to protect their networks.