Quince is a hardy vine that is easy to grow in most gardens. A healthy tree will reward you with a bountiful harvest every year. Quince isn’t hard to grow, even in drought prone areas. Annual Fruit Yield: A bushel of quince fruits per bush. Quince blooms on and off all year.
Quince is a perennial vine that prefers full sunlight but does well in low moisture conditions. If planting in full sun, make sure to mulch around your garden to help conserve moisture. Cut off the main stem of the plant is going to be young, or let it grow more than one year. When planting, dig a hole twice the root width and depth of the shrub.
The Quince Plant likes well-drained soil. It prefers fertile, slightly acidic soil. To prepare your soil, add one tablespoon of lime per 5-inch pot and mix in well. Be careful when digging the hole, because Quince roots are very stubborn. If the planting starts out too deep, the roots may well go into the holes.
Keep the Quince Plant healthy by feeding it once a month with a commercial compost containing well-mixed commercial fertilizer. Don’t add too much fertilizer, because it can burn the leaves of the plant. The roots will also need to be regularly plucked to keep them healthy. If you’re concerned about weeds, lightly spray the area with a non-selective weed killer every three months. You’ll probably need to use this herbicide more frequently in the succeeding years, so consider introducing it sooner rather than later.
The most important thing to remember for healthy plant growth is to make sure that your Quince Plant gets plenty of sunlight and has well-drained soil. Sunlight, combined with soil drainage, is the best combination for a healthy garden. Do not over-water your Quince Plant, as it will become constantly soggy. This could rot its roots and even kill it.
As mentioned earlier, you should test soil drainage regularly. If your Quince Plant is not getting enough water, or if it seems to have trouble draining, it could be due to poor planting position or poor soil drainage. Check the underside of your plants using a dry trowel to determine whether the soil is deeply packed with soil. If so, you should probably dig some additional holes and repot your plant. If it’s okay without digging, then you’re on your way to having a healthy and beautiful garden.