Research shows that the earlier students with a disability get employment training, the better their chances are for steady work and independence after high school.
In Tennessee and across the country, Pre-Employment Transition Services (Pre-ETS) are available to any students ages 14-22 with a disability. These services make sure students get job skills training and/or internships at an early age.
Pre-ETS is supported by the Workforce Innovation and Opportunity Act (WIOA) that was signed into law July 22, 2014. The program works to make sure students receive training and develop skills to reach their education, career and life goals.
A student with a disability can be a student in a traditional education setting, a student being homeschooled, or a student in a non-traditional secondary education setting.
In addition, students who are pursuing education after high school can receive Pre-Employment Transition Services. However, tuition is not included as a Pre-Employment Transition Service.
Services for a Successful Transition
The state of Tennessee works with several partners across the state to provide five services that help students make a successful transition to job opportunities:
1. Job Exploration. Explore the world of work and career choices.
2. Work-Based Learning. Get paid or non-paid work experiences that may be in school and/or after school.
3. Workplace Readiness. Prepare the student for the workplace.
4. Self-Advocacy. Help the student learn more about themselves and the disability. Also help the student learn how to interact with the world.
5. Post-Secondary Counseling and Enrollment Assistance. Explore options for students seeking careers that require education after high school.
Learn More About Pre-ETS
Here are some more key points about Pre-Employment Transition Services for students and their parents or caregivers:
- The student isn’t required to have a current Individualized Education Plan (IEP) or 504 plan to receive Pre-Employment Transition Services.
- There is no cost for these services to the students or their family.
- Most services are provided by local organizations that hold agreements with the Tennessee Department of Human Services.
- Participating in Pre-ETS doesn’t qualify an individual for Vocational Rehabilitationservices. If your child is nearing the end of their high school career, you are encouraged to contact your local Vocational Rehabilitation Counselor. The counselor can determine if the student is eligible and what services may be available to help them pursue a job.
- A student may receive any one or combination of Pre-Employment Transition Services set up for their education needs and the goal of finding work.
Learn about the Community Targeted Transitional Support Services Program, which serves adults with certain mental disorders who also meet the most recent federal poverty guidelines.
A TennCare program called Employment and Community First CHOICES helps people with an intellectual or developmental disability achieve their own goals for employment and independent living.