Category Archive: Kivalina
During a reward lunch in the classroom, students watched Pink Panther and a child got kidnapped by the rouse of an ice cream truck. She's snatched up into the ice cream truck by a butterfly net after she received her treat.
Student: "At least she got to keep the ice cream."
While grabbing a treat for recycling after school:
Student: "I forgot to tell you a secret."
Me: *whispers* "what is it?"
Student: "We got a new little dog."
Me: "Oh, wow! What kind?"
Student: "A boy. My mom doesn't like the girl ones because they always make babies...[pause]...and they get their period."
As the school year comes to a close, so does my time in Kivalina. Yesterday was the one […]
Word of the Week
what: /wut/ pronoun. 1. The “nerd word”, commonly given to an unsuspecting victim…or the all-powerful Queen of the Nerds (me).
Example: “Ms. Duchene! Ms. Duchene!” —- “What?” —– “You’ve got the nerd word!” —- “As Queen of the Nerds, I thank you.”
Side note: At one point, I was fighting for the title as Queen of the Nerds to which students were trying to make someone the Empress, but thankfully that was short lived. At another point, students were telling each other that they couldn’t give away the “nerd word” as I was the reigning queen. It was a strong trend at the beginning of the school year that has fizzled and made a comeback multiple times.
While working on fractions in math class.
Student A: They're gonna be you in the future.
Phrase of the Week
I never: /I nĕv•ər/ exclamation. 1. An exclamation meaning “I didn’t do it!”, “I’m not guilty!”, “It wasn’t me!” or “It isn’t my fault!”
Example: “Who left their pencil on the back table?” … “I never!”
Side note: There are two very common circumstances when this would occur. First, no student is even remotely going to get in trouble and a simple question is asked. Second, someone is highly likely to have made a poor decision and everyone (including the person who made said decision) wants to claim innocence.
When people ask me about my Arctic Alaskan adventure, this is probably what they’ll hope I say life is like…plus polar bears.
On the first of February, we started a stretch of winter storm after winter storm, blizzard after blizzard. […]
While drinking out of a school issued water bottle that they aren't allowed to take home:
Student A: *serious and curious* "Do you know how to wash dishes?"
Me: *cautious* "Yes...why?"
Student A: "Could you take my water bottle home and wash it?" *sly smile*(My inner thoughts - adiiiiiiii...but also yes...I've been meaning to for a while now.)
Word of the Week
aza: /ah•zah/ exclamation. 1. one word expression that can be used in disbelief, exaggeration, or to express “wow”
Example: “Cheetahs can run up to 75mph.” … “AZA!”
Side note: Similar to adii, I have no idea how it is spelt, but it is likewise two distinct syllables with emphasis on the second syllable.
All about my new hobby this school year: quilting.