We’re dedicating the month of November to educating people about how to maintain healthy, bright skin because November is National Healthy Skin Month. We will go over some fundamental skin basics this week.
Your skin starts to feel the drying affects of the cold, dry winter air as the Christmas season draws near. This is a perfect opportunity to consider your skin’s health and how you can preserve and protect it. As a result, the American Academy of Dermatology (AAD) has declared November to be National Healthy Skin Month. During this time, everyone is urged to learn about the functions of the skin and how to keep it functioning and looking its best. The objective is to increase awareness of the need of maintaining healthy, moisturised skin all year round, not only during the winter.
Board-certified dermatologist Christian Millett of Tyson’s Corner, Virginia’s Forefront Dermatology says that learning about your skin is crucial for a variety of reasons. Skin changes might be a symptom that anything is wrong with your general health. Many illnesses, including an allergic response, an infection, or an autoimmune disease, can cause itching or a rash. A mole that has changed or developed a new growth may be a form of skin cancer. Paying close attention to your skin might reveal crucial hints about the overall health and fitness of your body.
These are only a handful of the numerous interesting and enlightening facts about your skin. In addition to spreading awareness about common skin issues including eczema, psoriasis, acne, and skin cancer, National Healthy Skin Month is an excellent opportunity to learn about healthy skin.
Establishing a connection with one of our experts is a crucial step you should take to maintain the health of your skin, particularly if you experience an itchy, painful, or bothersome skin disease. Schedule a consultation with our experts if you or a family member have a skin issue or would want to make an appointment.
2 Harley Street,
W1G 9PA, UK
78 London Hill Road,