Interpersonal relation is a relation or bond that exists between two parties. This can be classified as a bound that is very strong. This relationship may occur as a result of social commitment, love, solidarity or even work commitment. It can vary from various aspects of relationship in the family, workplace, places of worship and clubs. This relationship tends to interdependency to each other. Those in these relations tend to have various influences towards each other. This branch has various sub-branches attached to it. These sub-branches include sociology, anthropology, social work and psychology. The skills attached to interpersonal are very important and vital towards development of a relationship (Schutz, 1966).
Get a price quote
Communication is an aspect that is very relevant to interpersonal relationship. This makes it possible for people to exchange vital information necessary for interactions. If this communication lacks, then it implies that the whole process of relationship is deemed useless. This enhances that success is achieved in life and in all activities, which take place. The communication that takes place between these people means that there is a pattern that is formed. The skills of communication are eminent to ensure that this process is helpful to those who interact. The moods that we pose and the concern that we have become a leading aspect that helps to identify when people have bad day or when one is facing rough times or even good news that we may perceive.
The relevant skills necessary for interpersonal relationship are very important. These skills help determine success that the work or each individual will achieve. These skills help in making people enjoy their workplace or even their families better. These skills are very relevant when the work or family may be going through hard time that may require intervention. The feedback that we get from other people tends to help us save and improve interpersonal skills. Interpersonal relationship is very relevant in workplaces as it ensures that it boosts the morale of all employees. This may not lead to productivity, but can make the employees work in the best way possible to ensure success is achieved. Happiness is an aspect that is associated with strong interpersonal relationship.
Struggling with your essay?
Ask professionals to help you?
Interpersonal relationship is deemed very dynamic. This is because they must have a beginning and an ending. They grow progressively as the people involved get to know each other. There are various theories that are involved with this relationship. This means that some processes are followed when a relationship is starting. These steps include acquaintance, build-up, continuation, deterioration, and termination. This may lead to a close relationship between friends of their friends. This relationship is referred to as transitivity. Some of the theories that support formation of relationship include attachment theory. This theory states that a relationship is formed based on an attachment that occurs between two people. The other theory is the system theory. This theory states that the interconnections that exist between different people and cycles are what lead to relationships (Mann et al., 1967).
Theory of confirming is another one, which is used to explain about formation of a relationship. This theory states that many people form relationships when they feel that they have insecurities happening in their lives. This makes them want to see the feelings of others and tend to compare them with those of others. This, as explained, happens in three forms, including recognition, endorsement, and acknowledgement. The other theory that explains formation of interpersonal relationship is social exchange. This theory states such aspects as money and love among others. This theory states that people in this relationship tend to maintain it if it has good rewards and minimal costs. Several steps are essential in the development of a relationship. These steps include relax, listen, act carefully, respond well and acknowledge (Heider, 1958).
Many literature reviews have come to explain about interpersonal relationship. Some of these reviews state that people’s interests can only be known if they are let out to the people. This implies that those who are in a work setting needs to have strong relationship. This is stated that better relationship in work places enables all employees to share communication in the best way possible. This means that employees are able to make the work place the most enjoyable place. This makes them have a relationship that steers success. In his review, Stoetzer (2010) stated that interpersonal relationship had an effect towards those in a work set up in various ways. Stoetzer explains that if there is any workload, this may affect the employees. He also explains that if they are well established they can lead to better coordination between them (Stoetzer, 2010).
New to BestWritingHelp?
Get your 15% OFF the first order! Code firstorder
The emergence of new technology is also stated to exert an influence on interpersonal relationship. This implies that some forms of communications using technology can lead to some intimate relations formed between employees. This is stated as the use of messages is an aspect that is commonly used by many people. This may have a considerate impact on interpersonal relationship between two people. The use of this method is known to have great effects on this relationship. The study conducted shows that many tend to have a better relationship at work. This shows that technology is a factor that enhances the relationship. This explained that improvement of relations in work is greatly increasing due to technology. Any information is exchanged regardless of the location of those employees (Gackenbach, 1998).
The reviews have also stated that those who are constant users of this technology are at a liability of facing great danger. These reviews explain that the employees who regularly use this method of communication risk losing their interaction with people. This is explained that they become very fearful and are not able to keep up with face-to-face interactions. This aspect is very essential for any employee. If this aspect is affected, then it may affect the way the employee relates to others physically. These reviews also explain that the use of technology also has an adverse effect towards employee relationship. The use of technology like the internet has made it possible for people to look for answers in it. This makes employees drift from each other, as they cannot contact with each other and get the necessary answers. This has great effect on how these employees will relate. This will lead to loss of unity and participation of employees (DeVito, 2011).
Interpersonal relationship is an aspect that is very common and s very valuable to each individual. This implies that better relationships are needed to enhance that success is achieved. Good interpersonal relationships are needed for better coexistence. Communication is an aspect that is very relevant in interpersonal relationship. This makes it possible for people to exchange vital information necessary for interactions. If this communication lacks, then it implies that the whole process of relationship is deemed useless. This enhances that success is achieved in life and in all activities, which take place. The communication that takes place between these people means that there is a pattern that is formed. The skills of communication are eminent to ensure that this process is helpful to those who interact. The moods that we pose and concern that we have become a leading aspect that helps to identify when people have bad day or when one is facing rough times or even good news that we may perceive. Interpersonal skills should be upheld in every situation to ensure that people live with peace and unity to enhance that we achieve success.