INTERNATIONAL DAY FOR THE ELIMINATION OF RACIAL DISCRIMINATION. 21 MARCH.
Picture: During the World Economic Forum held in Davos from 21- 24 January this year, young Climate change activists were invited.
The American Press Agency ASSOCIATED PRESS was one of the accredited to cover the event. They took this picture, but for the public distribution and publication with other media, they chose to crop out the African activist...just so. After the critics under which they came as a result of their shameful editorial choice, they issued an apology, arguing that it was due to the building behind the Ugandan activist...the building looked bad in the picture...had that building been behind Greta Thunberg...Hard to believe...
Associated Press is (was) a respected media organisation who should not allow, permit, condone, associate with racism...the media is supposed to be the fourth estate.
Author: the Editor of AMAM
The International Day for the Elimination of Racial Discrimination
It is observed annually on the day the police in Sharpeville, South Africa, opened fire and killed 69 people at a peaceful demonstration against apartheid "pass laws" in 1960.
In 1979, the General Assembly adopted a programme of activities to be undertaken during the second half of the Decade for Action to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination. On that occasion, the General Assembly decided that a week of solidarity with the peoples struggling against racism and racial discrimination, beginning on 21 March, would be organized annually in all States.
Since then, the apartheid system in South Africa has been dismantled. Racist laws and practices have been abolished in many countries, and we have built an international framework for fighting racism, guided by the International Convention on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination. The Convention is now nearing universal ratification, yet still, in all regions, too many individuals, communities and societies suffer from the injustice and stigma that racism brings.
Read more of the UN website.