Spreadsheet vs Workbook
Summary: Difference Between Spreadsheet and Workbook is that Spreadsheet software allows users to organize data in rows and columns and perform calculations on the data. Most spreadsheet software has basic features to help users create, edit, and format worksheets. While Workbook is consider as whole file that can contain bundle of worksheets in it.
Spreadsheet software allows users to organize data in rows and columns and perform calculations on the data. These rows and columns collectively are called a worksheet. Most spreadsheet software has basic features to help users create, edit, and format worksheets. The following sections describe the features of most spreadsheet programs.
A spreadsheet file is similar to a notebook that can contain more than 1,000 related individual worksheets. Data is organized vertically in columns and horizontally in rows on each worksheet. Each worksheet usually can have more than 16,000 columns and 1 million rows. One or more letters identify each column, and a number identifies each row. Only a small fraction of these columns and rows are visible on the screen at one time. Scrolling through the worksheet displays different parts of it on the screen.
A cell is the intersection of a column and row. The spreadsheet software identifies cells by the column and row in which they are located. Cells may contain three types of data: labels, values, and formulas. The text, or label, entered in a cell identifies the worksheet data and helps organize the worksheet. Using descriptive labels, such as Gross Margin and Total Expenses, helps make a worksheet more meaningful.
Workbook is consider as whole file that can contain bundle of worksheets in it. You can sort related information in a single workbook that containing different worksheets. Every worksheet having different data in it but these worksheets collectively saved as workbook. To create a workbook you can simply open a blank workbook by clicking the File Tab. And then new, so there will be a new workbook for you where you can store different information’s in different worksheets.
Difference Between Database and Spreadsheet Software
Difference Between Spreadsheet and Worksheet
Difference Between Spreadsheet and Database
Difference Between Software and Hardware
Difference Between Educational Software and Entertainment Software
Leave a Comment
You must be logged in to post a comment.