The high incidence of colorectal cancer in recent years has been a serious threat to human health. As a multiple digestive tract cancer, colorectal cancer is closely related to people’s eating habits.
Developing good eating habits plays a significant role in preventing and treating colorectal cancer. A balanced diet is important to avoid nutrient deficiency in a fast-paced modern society. Here are some dietary guidelines for colorectal cancer patients.
Stay away from processed meat
Consumption of processed meat and red meat is a convincing cause of colorectal cancer and researchers found that people who intake processed meat frequently are much more likely to develop colorectal cancer. Some processed meat like cold cuts, bacon, sausage and hot dogs contain high levels of nitrates and sodium, which are carcinogenic.
Look for calcium and vitamin D
The calcium and vitamin D are of great value to our health and can help decrease the risk of getting colorectal cancer. The recommended intake for men is about 1800 mg daily and about 1500 mg for women. Besides, adults are recommended to consume 200 IU (5 μg) of vitamin D daily. Good sources of calcium include: dairy products like milk, cheese and yogurt, fish like salmon and sardines, and dark-green leafy vegetables such as kale, mustard, and collard greens. Sources of vitamin D include salmon, sardines, milk, egg yolks, and chicken livers.
Limit fat and sugar
Scientists found that obesity is linked to the risk of colorectal cancer and it increases the risk of colorectal cancer by 19%. It is high time that people who suffer from being overweight threw away desserts and sugary drinks in hand. Moreover, people should limit the consumption of processed meat containing saturated fat.
Love fiber-rich food
A study found that intakes of more than 20 g/day of fiber are associated with a 25% reduction of colorectal cancer risk. Fiber-rich food can stimulate bowel movements to clear away carcinogens and toxic substances. Whole grains, vegetables and fruits are the best sources of fiber. Some top fiber-rich food includes avocados, Asian pears, berries, coconut, figs, peas, okra, acorn squash, turnips, black beans, pick beans and nuts.
Developing a plant-based diet is important in preventing colorectal cancer. Adults are advised to consume enough vegetables and fruits high in various vitamins and fiber and avoid high-fat food.