ON THE FRONT LINES Freedom Rider Hank Thomas took courageous stand in 1961
One day in 1961, Hank Thomas had a horrific choice to make.
He was a civil rights soldier on a bus stranded on the outskirts of Anniston, Ala., that had just been firebombed. If the African-American teenager stayed in the disabled Greyhound bus he would burn to death or die of smoke inhalation. If he managed to get out despite men surrounding the bus pushing against the closed doors, the spindly 19-year-old was likely to be beaten to death by the raging mob.
With his lungs filling with sooty black smoke, Thomas escaped after state troopers ordered to the scene by then U.S. Attorney General Robert Kennedy showed up.
That’s one of Thomas’ stories likely to come up May 30 when he delivers the keynote speech at the local NAACP’s 42nd Annual Freedom Fund and Awards Banquet.
With Thomas that night at the Hilton Daytona Beach Oceanfront Resort will be Janie Forsyth-McKinney, who back in 1961 was a 12-year-old not thinking about her white skin as she ran one bucket of water after another to the bus set ablaze in front of her home.
Forsyth-McKinney’s act of humanity got her family run out of town, but it also became a symbol of colorblind heroism in the middle of the turbulent South.
The 73-year-old Thomas and Forsyth-McKinney will take the banquet crowd back to the 1960s after a 7 p.m. dinner and awards ceremony. This year’s NAACP event will focus on the 50th anniversary of the 1965 Voting Rights Act, and Daytona Beach residents who helped change the city since then will be honored.
“Without those fundamental rights to vote everything else is pretty much lost,” said Cynthia Slater, president of the local NAACP branch.
In a phone interview last week from his Atlanta home, Thomas said he started fighting for equality when he was growing up in St. Augustine. He remembers testing the 1950s mores of segregated drinking fountains when he was 12.
As a black person, he also wasn’t allowed to check out books in a St. Augustine library, but he still went there. He brought his own books and sat where he was sure to be seen.
“Being a rebel almost came naturally to me,” Thomas said. “I knew segregation was wrong so I always pushed the limits. ... If I lived in Alabama or Mississippi I probably would have been killed.”
After high school, Thomas moved to Washington, D.C., to attend Howard University. In 1960, he became a founding member of the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee, a student arm of the civil rights movement.
The next year he became one of the 13 original members of the Freedom Riders, a bi-racial group that rode buses in the South to try to force compliance with U.S. Supreme Court decisions in 1946 and 1960 which ruled that segregated public buses were unconstitutional.
With no inkling of the horror ahead of him, on May 4, 1961, Thomas climbed onto a bus in Washington, D.C., that was scheduled to arrive in New Orleans two weeks later. In Alabama things took a nightmarish turn.
“As that bus was burning and we were trying to get off, Ku Klux Klansmen were holding the door and I heard them saying, ‘Burn them alive,’” Thomas said.
When Thomas finally managed to get off the bus, he was walloped with a large stick and knocked unconscious. When he came to he was about to be attacked again, so he took a life-threatening chance and used a state trooper as a human shield, grabbing the officer from behind.
The officer pulled out his gun, but only fired into the air and told the attackers, “You’ve had your fun,” and ordered them to back off.
The hellish experience didn’t break Thomas’ resolve, and he traveled with the Freedom Riders until they ended their protests in November 1961. He was arrested 22 times and accumulated more terrifying encounters, including getting “the hell beat out of” him in a Mississippi jail for refusing to call police and guards “sir.”
After serving in Vietnam and getting out of the Army in 1966, Thomas settled in Atlanta. He became a successful businessman, owning and operating two Fairfield Inns by Marriott, Dairy Queens, coin laundromats and nine McDonald’s restaurants — including one in Atlanta that he maintains wouldn’t let him work at the counter because of his skin color.
While Thomas built a good life for himself, he never forgets what he went through in the 1960s — and what others went through. He went to Selma, Ala., a few weeks ago for the 50th anniversary of the voting rights march there that turned bloody, and he visited the grave of a 26-year-old black Vietnam vet. The man survived the war but was shot by a state trooper after he returned home and protested his inability to vote, Thomas said.
“I placed a wreath there and I saw six or seven bullet holes in his tombstone,” Thomas said. “It was the only time at Selma the emotions overcame me.”
It’s the kind of thing he wants his teenage grandchildren to learn about, and he sometimes takes them on car trips through the South so they can see the places in his stories.
“I am very, very proud of the small part I had to play in changing the culture of this country,” he said.
He hopes racial equality continues to improve in his grandkids’ lives.
“I hope we can find a way to live together in peace,” Thomas said. “I’m an eternal optimist.”
WHAT: Event raises money for the local NAACP and honors those who’ve made positive changes in the community. WHEN: 7 p.m. May 30 WHERE: Hilton Daytona Beach Oceanfront Resort, 100 N. Atlantic Ave. TICKETS: $75 each MORE INFORMATION: Call (386) 255-3736