In this article, we shall be sharing some of the uses and importance of reflective wears for workers on-site. Reflective clothing, also known as high-visibility or hi-vis workwear, has become an important piece of Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) for workers.
It’s a kind of wear won by site workers that has highly reflective property or a colour that is easily discernible from any background.
WHO ARE TO WEAR REFLECTIVE WEARS
The answers simply is any worker who works in the following places
- Working around road construction (or construction where you’re exposed to traffic)
- Employment by railways or utilities
- Law enforcement
- Emergency response
- Working as part of an airport ground crew
IMPORTANCE OF REFLECTIVE CLOTHING
The purpose of reflective clothing, also known as high-visibility warning clothing, is to signal the presence of the user in places and situations which may cause potential threats to their health and safety Such signalling must be effective at any time of day and night, when it is dark — in the light of vehicle lamps, headlamps as well as street lighting, e.g. on municipal roads.
USES OF REFLECTIVE COTHING
Reflective clothing is commonly used by construction workers and those performing maintenance works on motorways and roads or tracks e.g. railway tracks, airports, docks and wharfs. It should also be used wherever there is risk that a worker may collide with or be hit by moving machines or objects.
These types of risks occur in industrial facilities and also in various kinds of transport. The risk of collision also applies to workers employed as drivers. Drivers are particularly at risk of being hit by passing vehicles in the case of a breakdown, when they need to repair the vehicle on the road.
Similar risks occur also during the loading and unloading of vehicles. Clothing with reflective elements is also used by chemical and medical rescue teams and fire brigades.
NOTE; that in all situations of risk when reflective clothing is used, it does not guarantee complete safety, but it optimizes appropriate visibility and will significantly reduce the risk of an accident.
Reflective clothing should also be used in non-professional situations, in particular on the roads. This applies mainly to pedestrians and cyclists also while walking and cycling to work. When moving along streets with no lighting or insufficiently lit streets, and/or absence of separate walkways, pedestrians who are often poorly visible are at a risk of being hit by cars.