Sleep apnea is no laughing matter. If you are struggling with this sleep disorder, you could find yourself battling with snoring or other problems due to an obstructed airway to the point that it is truly robbing you of a good night’s sleep. In the worst cases, sleep apnea could cause a person to briefly stop breathing hundreds of times during the night. If left untreated, you could be in for serious health problems down the line.
The health risks of sleep apnea and snoring
One of the main indicators of sleep apnea is snoring, a problem that is thought to be a nuisance by many. However, it is a sign of an obstructed airway, whether it is due to an obstruction in the nasal passages or the mouth. When the airway is obstructed, you actually stop breathing. Your body fights to breathe again, jerking you awake. You never settle into a sound, sleeping pattern.
Fatigue, confusion, and depression are common side effects of sleep apnea. In addition, as your body is deprived of oxygen, it places a strain on your heart. You could be a higher risk for high blood pressure, strokes, and heart attacks.
Dental treatments could help with sleep apnea
There’s a chance that your sleep apnea could be due to a problem with your teeth. Often, it’s an issue with the bite that causes the obstructed airway. If this is the case, your dentist can help to diagnose the reason for your bad bite, or malocclusion and help you find a sleep apnea treatment. If you’ve been dreading the thought of being hooked up to a CPAP device, your dentist could have good news for you.
Sleep apnea treatment could be simple
Once diagnosed, your sleep apnea could be resolved with something as simple as a mouth guard that is worn at night. Orthodontic correction or other dental treatments can help correct your bite to clear your airway as well. The best way to find out if dental treatment could successfully treat your sleep apnea is to make an appointment.
Set up a consultation and allow your dentist to give you a thorough evaluation. It is possible to find treatment so that you can breathe easy at night again and get the rest that your body needs. Let your Milwaukee dentist help.