[ kuh-nek-tiv ]
/ kəˈnɛk tɪv /
Save This Word!
serving or tending to connect: connective remarks between chapters.
CAN YOU ANSWER THESE COMMON GRAMMAR DEBATES?
There are grammar debates that never die; and the ones highlighted in the questions in this quiz are sure to rile everyone up once again. Do you know how to answer the questions that cause some of the greatest grammar debates?
Question 1 of 7
Which sentence is correct?
OTHER WORDS FROM connective
con·nec·tive·ly, adverbcon·nec·tiv·i·ty [kon-ek-tiv-i-tee], /ˌkɒn ɛkˈtɪv ɪ ti/, nounnon·con·nec·tive, adjective, nounnon·con·nec·tive·ly, adverb
non·con·nec·tiv·i·ty, nounpre·con·nec·tive, adjectivequa·si-con·nec·tive, adjectivequa·si-con·nec·tive·ly, adverb
Dictionary.com Unabridged Based on the Random House Unabridged Dictionary, © Random House, Inc. 2023
How to use connective in a sentence
The third method of securing coherence in a sentence is by the use of connectives.
The use of connectives has been discussed when treating of emphasis secured by subdual of unimportant details.
The organs of locomotion: muscles and their attachments and connectives; namely, tendons, ligaments, and bones.A Civic Biology|George William Hunter
In these combinations, the vowels e and o are sometimes used as connectives.
Closely associated with the optic was the small oculomotor, and near the connectives the small second antennal.
British Dictionary definitions for connective
/ (kəˈnɛktɪv) /
serving to connect or capable of connecting
a thing that connects
- a less common word for conjunction (def. 3)
- any word that connects phrases, clauses, or individual words
- a symbol used in a formal language in the construction of compound sentences from simpler sentences, corresponding to terms such as or, and, not, etc, in ordinary speech
botany the tissue of a stamen that connects the two lobes of the anther
anatomy a nerve-fibre bundle connecting two nerve centres
Derived forms of connectiveconnectively, adverbconnectivity (ˌkɒnɛkˈtɪvɪtɪ), noun
Collins English Dictionary - Complete & Unabridged 2012 Digital Edition © William Collins Sons & Co. Ltd. 1979, 1986 © HarperCollins Publishers 1998, 2000, 2003, 2005, 2006, 2007, 2009, 2012