Pears are pretty palatable and are sweet not only to you but to the rabbits. Their crunchy and juicy nature is what makes you want to eat them again and again. That’s why rabbits will always eat them so fast whenever you give them. And this makes you wonder whether they are safe for rabbits.
Can rabbits eat pears? Yes, rabbits can eat pears. Pears are perfectly safe for rabbits, but they should not consume much because they are too sugary. However, nutritious fruits pose severe risks to your fur babies if you don’t moderate them. Ideally, 3-4 times a week is excellent or even less the better.
As a pet owner, you must be familiar that hay is the perfect daily treat for your bunnies, but then it can also be boring, and you might consider it a fruit snack. Then what comes to your mind is, why not pears?
Let’s talk about pears now.
- What is the ideal amount of pears to be given to rabbits?
- What are the facts about pears?
- Can rabbits eat dried pears/fruits?
- Are cooked pears suitable for rabbits?
- What are the health benefits of Pears to rabbits?
- Pear Nutrition Stats
- How can you introduce pears to your rabbits?
- Frequently asked question(FAQ)
What is the ideal amount of pears to be given to rabbits?
Well, this question must have come from you after you jumped to the roof when you discovered that pears are safe for rabbits.No matter how your bunnies enjoy the pears, you should not exceed three teaspoons per 2 pounds of body weight to avoid health risks like obesity.
Fruits can be an occasional perfect treat to your bunnies but don’t just overdo it. The frequency should not be more than four times a week; if you can do less, the better.
What are the facts about pears?
1. The sugars
Pears have too much sugars. That’s why you should limit the number of pears to your bunnies. Regardless of rabbits being herbivores, their digestive system is not designed to handle fruits and vegetables so well. Too many pears will be too much sugar to your pet, causing fungi and bacteria imbalance in the caecum.
It will be sad to see your pet in problems like diarrhoea and obesity, so play safe.
2. The serving
The same way you handle your fruits before enjoying them, extend the same love to your pets. Make sure you wash the pears thoroughly with running water before you offer them to your bunnies. Because it will help eliminate any chemical remnant of the possible pesticide treatment and, if not, the pests that could be potentially risky to your fur babies.
If you are sure that they are clean, cut them into considerable sizes and offer the perfect treat to your rabbits. Let them enjoy but not more than the required amount.
3. The seeds
What about them? If you have made the mistake of feeding pears seeds to your rabbit, you better avoid it after reading this. Pears seeds contain a considerable amount of cyanide that can pose a health risk to your pets, like choking. Avoid pears seed because we are afraid you might be stricken by a rude shock of severe health hazards.
4. The pear skins and twig
Your curiosity must have taken you to this, and if not, you were almost asking. Don’t be so troubled if you have already fed your bunnies with pear skins and twigs; they are entirely safe like apples. Always make sure you wash them before the treatment.
Can rabbits eat dried pears/fruits?
Dry fruits have considerably higher amounts of sugar than fresh ones. If you want to offer your bunnies such treats, of course, they will love something a bit hard to nibble, but the amount should be far much less than that of the fresh fruits. For each portion of either hay or other fruits, use two dried resin. Otherwise, fresh fruits are the best for your bunnies.
Are cooked pears suitable for rabbits?
Cooked fruits are never a perfect choice for your fur babies, and here are the main reasons. They contain a very high amount of sugar which is toxic to rabbits, as seen earlier. Secondly, Cooking destroys fibre which is the most important to bunnies because they are hindgut fermenters.
Can rabbits eat pear leaves?
Yes, pear leaves are entirely safe for your bunnies. If you can access pear trees that have not been treated with herbicides or pesticides, a leaf or two would be a great treat to your rabbits.
What are the health benefits of Pears to rabbits?
Now that we agree that pears are safe for rabbits let’s take a journey on the health benefits.
Antioxidants and sugars like fructose and sorbitol are readily found in pears. These types of phytochemicals are essential to your pet’s cells because they get rid of radicals that may damage the cells.
Pears are rich in Vitamin C. That means when you offer this treat to your pet, you will boost its immune system alongside other benefits like fibre and potassium.
Pears contain approximately 7mg of Vitamin C, making them a rich source.
Excellent source of energy
Despite pears having a high amount of sugar, feeding your pets a considerable amount will be vital because they need that energy to push through the day. Now that you have enough information about the sorbitol and fructose in pears, you wouldn’t want to mess up the health of your lovely pet. The golden rule is to feed them in moderation.
Pear Nutrition Stats
Let’s get the real reasons why pears are neither bad for you nor your pets. According to the USDA FoodData Central database, a ripe, raw medium-sized pear has:
- 101 calories
- 1 g protein
- 0.249g of fat
- 27.1g of carbohydrate, including 5.52g of fibre and 17g of sugar.
Vitamins and minerals include.
- Vitamin K
- Vitamin C
They also have small amounts of the following:
- Vit B-6
How can you introduce pears to your rabbits?
We live in an adventurous world, and if you love it, why not your bunnies. You are free to introduce anything new to your rabbit’s diet if it is safe; that will be a healthy break from the norm. But make sure you don’t interfere with the healthy diet for your fur critters.
If it is the first time introducing the pears to the menu of your bunnies, half a teaspoon is recommended. After that, make sure you monitor closely for the next 24hours to ascertain whether there is any suspicious signs like diarrhoea, indigestion or bloating.
If nothing happens, hurray! You got it right; you can go ahead and serve a little more the next round as you move to the optimum amount.
But if you notice any signs of health problems like bloating or digestion problems, stop and eliminate the pears from the menu. Observe your bunnies for a while, but call the vet immediately if they appear very sick and stop pooping.
Frequently asked question(FAQ)
Can rabbits eat pears?
Yes, your rabbits can eat pears, and if you are not careful, they can consume even more than they deserve. The trick is, always introduce small pieces of pears to your rabbits and gradually increase them to the recommended size if they show no bad sign healthwise. Beware that pears have high amounts of sugar, so don’t give them to your rabbits frequently lest you want to compromise their health.
Note that pears and other fruits are not recommended for juvenile bunnies.
Pear leaves, skins and twigs are considered safe for rabbits but make sure they are free from harmful chemicals and pests.
Pear seeds contain cyanide that could be so harmful to your pets, so avoid them at all costs. If you accidentally offer them, don’t worry but always take care you don’t repeat the mistake.