Apollo XI Certificate
This mass-produced certificate appears to have been presented to National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) employees in appreciation for their support of the Apollo Program. The item measures 16 by 20 inches and has color illustrations, including one of the Apollo Lunar Module (LM) on the Moon with two astronauts in the …
Grumman Apollo Lunar Module Propulsion Reports and Photographs [Arons]
This collection consists of the following material documenting the work of Grumman on the Apollo Lunar Module propulsion systems: sixteen reports prepared by Raymond Arons, propulsion engineer for Grumman; two reports prepared by the Grumman Propulsion Analytic Group; one report prepared by NASA; and twenty-five photographs taken by NASA, TRW …
Soviet Space Newspapers
This collection includes 12 Russian newspaper articles from three Russian newspapers, including Pravda. These articles provide information on the Russian space flights Soyuz 11, Soyuz 9, Lunakhod 2, and on the Russian spacecraft Luna 21. Also included are two 1969 Pravda articles reporting the flight of Apollo 11. All articles are in Cyrillic.
Apollo 11 Stamp Collection [Cooke]
Hereward Lester Cooke (1916-1975), a curator at the National Gallery of Art in Washington, DC, was extremely interested in the moon landing as well as in stamp collecting. He acquired over five hundred stamps relating to the 1969 lunar landing from countries including: Afghanistan, Algeria, Belgium, Bhutan, Brazil, Burundi, Cameroon, Chad, China …
Apollo 11 Training Material
The Apollo program began as part of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) long-term plan for lunar exploration. Dr. Donald R. Maitzen worked with NASA's Flight Planning Branch as the Task Manager for On-Board Data for Apollo 11. This collection consists of material pertaining to the Apollo program inlcuding correspondence, photographs, and publications.
Apollo Stowage Lists
National Air and Space Museum (U.S.). Division of Space History
This collection consists of a complete set of printed stowage lists, including revisions lists, from the Apollo 11, 12, 14, 15, 16, and 17 missions. The collection also includes fully searchable pdf files of the lists created in 2019 by a special project initiated by the National Air and Space Museum's Department of Space History and executed by the Smithsonian's Transcription Center.
Apollo 8 and 11 Notes and Letters [Bourgin]
This collection consists a memo and correspondence relating to the Apollo 8 broadcast as well as notes relating to various astronaut post-flight tours.
Apollo 11 Launch Images [Burgess]
This collection consists of 118 digital image files created in 2009 by photographer Travis Burgess by scanning original 35 mm black and white photographic negatives which he had made in July 1969. The first series of 112 images feature Apollo 11 astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Michael Collins, and Edward E. "Buzz" Aldrin, Jr. participating in a preflight press conference on July 5, 1969, at the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) Manned Spacecraft Center, Houston, Texas. The second series consists of 6 images taken at the launch of Apollo 11 on its Saturn V rocket from Launch Pad 39A, Kennedy Space Center, Florida, on the morning of July 16, 1969.
Apollo Lunar Module (LEM, LM) Photographs [Cosentino]
This collection consists of approximately 0.36 cubic feet of material relating to the Apollo Lunar Module (LEM, LM) and other programs of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA). The majority of the collection is comprised of 8 by 10 inch photographs (both color and black and white) of interior details of various …
Apollo-Soyuz Test Project Soviet Crew Material
This collection consists of four cosmonaut trading cards, featuring individually the four Soviet members of the Apollo Soyuz Test Project: Aleksei Arkhipovich Leonov, Commander of Soyuz 19; Valeri Nikolayevich Kubasov, flight engineer for Soyuz 19; and Anatoli Vassilyevich Filipchenko and Nikolai Nikolayevich Rukavishnikov, back-up flight crew. Also included is one 11 1/2 by 8 1/2 inch …