This article is mainly focused to show that when we read some of the verses in Quran, we clearly understand that those were Muhammad’s own word, not Allah’s. The Quran makes a lot of claims about itself. It says that it is the perfect and incorruptible revelation of God to man and that it is so important that it has existed eternally on tablets in heaven.
According to the Muslims, the Quran contains the words of God. Quran is to be read as if God Himself had spoken these words stated in it. It is important to emphasize this point because if Quran is the word of God then it should not contain any errors and it should hold true for all times. However, such is not the case.
Mostly Muslims have never read the Quran with translation and understand it, a book they (nonetheless) are willing to kill and die over. Their conviction is based on what they hear from Mullahs and other Muslims, particularly as they are growing up.
For one thing, not even Muslims think that Muhammad wrote the Quran. They believe that God wrote it and then revealed it to Muhammad. A technicality you might think. But actually, they don’t even believe that Muhammad, once it had been revealed to him, wrote it down either. He spoke it, preached it, recited it (quran literally translates as ‘recitation’). And those around him, his followers, then memorized it, and some noted it down on anything to hand, like palm leaves and stones. So how did it become a book? According to Islamic tradition, not until after Muhammad had died (in AD 632), under the first caliph Abu Bakr, were these parts all gathered together and arranged into a book. The scribe Zaid was charged with the job of locating all the parts and compiling them into one volume. And around 20 years later, under the third caliph Uthman, the same scribe was charged with gathering all the variant versions that still existed, determining the correct one and burning the rest. You might think this haphazard process is not one that would have inspired confidence that the final product contained the authentic words, and only the authentic words, of Muhammad. But this is the official story, and Muslims seem happy enough with it.
The Truth about Prophet Muhammad (A Warlord )
Did the Quranic authors borrow information of science from external sources?
Under Sharia, law girls can marry at the age of 6, just like the Prophet Muhammad married Aisha.
The Expanding Universe vs Quran
The Quran makes the claim that it’s the word of God, and that it’s miraculous, and so do Muslims. Just ask any average Muslim for a proof of that, they will straight away tell you that the Quran is a linguistic miracle as it claims, that no other book is like it, that the Arabs at the time of Muhammad – who regarded language, poetry and eloquence in the highest regards, could never produce anything like it in its beauty. Yet ask the same person for a single example, and then watch them stand there with no answer, simply because they just repeat what they were told.
No miracle is needed, not to mention that the Arabic speaker can search online to find that the Quran does in fact contain grammatical and linguistic errors, which Muslim scholars tried to come up with the most bizarre excuses for as many as they could of these errors.
Muslims claim “Scientific miracles in the Quran” on you, which is basically a verse in the Quran that is given steroids and then bent in all shapes and directions to make it look as if it holds a fact that only modern science could discover. I’ll give you the simple example Read: The Expanding Universe vs Quran. Quran is full of such blunders, simple as that. It says that asteroids, planets and stars are for shooting devils that try to listen to the heavens. It says that a famous general (not named but is believed to be Alexander the Great) has found the sun to be setting in a hot muddy water spring. It says that an ant spoke and that King Solomon heard it. It says that heaven (the sky) was raised and is being held so that it won’t fall on earth.
An objective reader would almost certainly conclude that the Quran is less a product of divine origin than Muhammad’s imagination and the circumstances in which he found himself.
Here are some examples:
1: Verse 27:91 reads “For me, I have been commanded to serve the Lord of this city.” If these are the words of Allah, then it would mean that someone is ‘commanding’ him to serve another god. The verse only makes sense if Muhammad is speaking from his own perspective.
(This would also explain why “Allah” takes an oath to Allah in no fewer than seven other verses).
2: According to the sahih (authentic) hadith, Muhammad believed that the sun set each day in a spring of water. As the creator, God would know the truth. (see verse 18:86)
3: So much of the Quran is devoted to redundant claims and threats about Muhammad’s status as a prophet, yet there is not a single original moral value. Nowhere does it tell men not to rape women or refrain from sex with children. In fact, it gives men permission to rape their slaves and implies that sex with children is permissible (verse 65:4).
Wouldn’t a perfect book teach perfect morality?
4: Despite being a relatively small book, the Quran contains unnecessary repetition. Moses is mentioned 136 times. Some passages of misquoted Bible stories are nearly word-for-word identical (eg. Suras 20 & 26).
Why would God waste space saying essentially the same thing about something obscure when he could have offered clear moral principles about peace, tolerance (or a law against sex with children)?
5: The Quran confuses Mary the mother of Jesus with Mary the sister of Aaron (and Moses) in Sura 19.
Despite tortured apologetics, the simplest and most obvious explanation is that Muhammad was mistaken. This would also explain why the Quran that he narrated erroneously states that Christians worship the Virgin Mary as a god (5:75, 5:116) when they never have.
6: The Quran tells Muslim men that they may have sex with women captured as slaves. Even worse: the passage is repeated in four different places. By contrast, there is not a single verse that tells Muslims that they are to pray five times a day.
7: The Quran says that it is “clear”, but then says elsewhere (3:7) that only Allah understands the meaning of some verses (which begs the question of why they are there). It says that it explains “all things” (16:89), but then tells Muslims to follow the example of Muhammad (33:21) – without saying what that is.
In practical terms, it is impossible to understand the Quran without references to external sources such as the Hadith and Sira (usually laid out in voluminous footnotes). Yet these sources are often contradictory and almost never agreed on.
Even in the Quran, devout Muslim scholars infer dramatically different meanings from the same verses. For example, most interpretations of 38:33 say that Solomon slashed at his own horses, severing their legs and necks. However, some contemporary translators, including one of the most respected (Yusuf Ali) say that Solomon really just passed his hand over their bodies in a loving way. More alarming (and unfortunately more typical) are verses like 5:33, which mandates crucifying those who “wage war on Allah”… without really explaining what this means.
8: Unlike the Old Testament prophets, Muhammad narrated petty defenses of his claim as a prophet (and even his own sanity) that are remarkably redundant.
For example, no fewer than 8 passages (83:13, 27:68, 46:17, 16:24, 6:25, 26:137, 25:5 and 23:83) say that “Allah’s messenger” is accused of repeating “tales of the ancients,” but that anyone who doesn’t believe him will burn in Hell. Why wouldn’t Allah just say it once and then use the remaining space for something more edifying?
Isn’t this more of what one would expect from an overly-defensive poseur than from an eternal revelation of God to man?
9: The Quran says that written copies of the Bible (Torah and Gospel) existed at the time of Muhammad (29:46, 3:3, 3:78) and a great many verses “confirm” that those copies are true (even if the Jews and Christians were later accused of misinterpreting them “with their tongues”). Parts of the Quran obviously rely on the Bible for completeness and many verses insist that the Word of God cannot be changed or corrupted.
Here’s the problem: There are hundreds of New Testament manuscripts that pre-date the time of Muhammad, all discovered at different times and different places by different people. There are hundreds more of the Torah. All agree almost perfectly with the modern version of the Bible, which contradicts the Quran.
At the same time, not a single copy or fragment of either the Torah or Gospel from any era has ever been found which deviates in a way that agrees with the Quran. How is that the “true” Bible – the one that supposedly confirms the Quran – never survived in any form, while so many “corrupted” copies did?
Isn’t it more likely that Muhammad simply made it up as he went along and later accused Christians and Jews as a cover story for his own mistakes?
10: As mentioned, despite being a small book, the Quran is supposed to be the timeless, unchangeable word of God. Why would God use precious and valuable space on the personal life of one man – the same one who happens to be narrating the “revelation”?
Consider verse 33:53:
O you who believe! Enter not the Prophet’s houses, except when leave is given to you for a meal, (and then) not (so early as) to wait for its preparation. But when you are invited, enter, and when you have taken your meal, disperse, without sitting for a talk. Verily, such (behaviour) annoys the Prophet, and he is shy of (asking) you (to go), but Allah is not shy of (telling you) the truth.
That has to be immortalized on a tablet in heaven?
Substantial portions of the Quran (particularly suras 33 and 66) are equally self-serving and address the sex, money or respect from his wives to which Muhammad is entitled. Moreover, several such passages are repetitive.
Couldn’t Allah have thought of a more important message for mankind than telling us (several times over) that Muhammad may sleep with an unlimited number of women?
For too long have Muslims been cossetted from exposure to the bracing winds of historical-critical scholarship, and the result has been that Islam’s origin mythology has been able to maintain a hold over the minds of Muslims. So many of the radical groups who have waged jihad against the world in the name of their Prophet have looked to his example as a model and inspiration in their struggle. In our time, when many Muslims are already questioning Islam because of the violent and destructive fruit born of the global Islamic awakening, modern scholarship can play a part in guiding hearts towards a more peaceful path.
Thank you for reading!