A living wage is an equal voice
To the Editor:
Take a look at your bills: What do you pay for food, housing, clothing, health care, utilities and transportation? How much would it take for your family to just get by? Could you make it on $15,000 a year? $21,000? What would your family have to do without to make ends meet?
What exactly does it take to make it in America?
The working poor are not fundamentally different, nor do they practice some kind of magical math that allows them to support their families on wages that would sink your own.
This year, President Obama called for a raise in the federal minimum wage from $7.25 to $9 an hour. The controversy that followed was as predictable as it was irrelevant to those with the most at stake: the low-wage working poor.
As usual, voices of those most affected have been glaringly absent. Also missing is any discussion of the bread-and-butter question: What is it actually like to live on $7.25 or $9 an hour? Does either of these numbers constitute what working families need and deserve?
Although the terms "minimum wage" and "living wage" are sometimes used interchangeably, their meanings are quite different. A minimum wage is the lowest a business can legally pay. A living wage is what its workers need to meet their families' basic needs - to stave off the choice between a gallon of gas and a gallon of milk.
A full-time worker at the federal minimum wage makes $14,500 a year, placing him or her below the federal poverty line if that worker is supporting a family of two or more. A $9-an-hour minimum wage would push that annual income up to $21,000. But if you look at that "raise" in inflation-adjusted dollars, it leaves today's minimum-wage worker making significantly less than he did in 1968.
Low-wage workers, despite the "fuzzy math" of the minimum-wage debate, cannot spin paychecks of straw into middle-class gold. The working poor do what they must, whether that means living in substandard housing or making do with low-cost, low-nutrition food. But their bottom-line needs are no different from anyone else's.
President Obama's savviest move may have been his call for communities to act on their own, passing living-wage ordinances at local and state levels. In Washington state, for example, legislators have introduced a measure to raise the state's minimum wage from $9.32 an hour to $12 an hour by 2017.
No matter how good the product, a business is only as good as the people it employs. Don't they deserve more than minimum wage?
A recent USA Today/Pew Research Center poll found that nearly two-thirds of Republicans (64 percent) and more than nine out of 10 Democrats believe government should take action to reduce poverty.
If 25 of us wearing T-shirts stating our support for a living wage rattled the administration of a hotel, what might the 46 million people living in poverty in this country achieve working together?
Perhaps they could move the country in the direction where most Americans stand.
president and CEO
Marguerite Casey Foundation