16th April 2021
Wow! A Quick Guide to Using Interjections
Holy moly! We’ve started this post with an interjection! But what are interjections? And how do you use them in writing? We explain the basics in our guide below.
What Are Interjections?
Interjections are typically short words or phrase that express a feeling. They are usually abrupt, interrupting speech or writing as an exclamation. For instance:
Hooray! I’ve found all the lost socks!
Here, “hooray” is an interjection that expresses excitement. And while many interjections are familiar words that you might use in other contexts, others are onomatopoeic (i.e., they mimic sounds that we use to express emotions):
Ewwww, that’s disgusting.
In all cases, though, an interjection will tell us something about how the speaker or writer is feeling, whether that is excitement, disgust, or even uncertainty. The key is picking the right word or sound to express a feeling that fits the situation at hand.
Punctuation and Positioning
In writing, interjections are always set off from other text with punctuation. However, the best punctuation may depend on how you are using the interjection in question.
One option is to set an interjection apart with a comma or commas. This works at the start, at the end, or even in the middle of a sentence. For example:
Well, I’m not sure what to say.
Are you sure, hmmm, that you’re ready?
Find this useful?
Subscribe to our newsletter and get writing tips from our editors straight to your inbox.
That was unexpected, eh?
But interjections can also stand by themselves before or after a sentence. And in these cases, you can use an appropriate form of terminal punctuation instead:
Oh. It’s you again.
What? The car costs how much?
You did it! Yes!
The punctuation you use for an interjection can make a difference to the tone. For instance, using a full stop after “oh” above implies being underwhelmed. But switching this for an exclamation point would suggest surprise instead.
When to Use Interjections
Interjections are common parts of speech. Consequently, these words and phrases are most useful in writing that aims for a conversational style. This includes:
- In scripts and fictional dialogue to make speech feel more realistic.
- In marketing copy to give adverts emotive impact.
- For expressing tone when writing to people you know well, such as when emailing friends, colleagues, or family.
A few well-placed interjections can thus add a lot to some kinds of writing. However, they are also considered informal in most cases. As such, you won’t usually want to use them in formal writing, such as essays and business reports.
Expert Proofreading Services
Whatever you’re writing, it is always a good idea to have your work checked by the experts. Our proofreaders are available 24/7 to help. And if you want to try our services before you buy, our free trial offer has you covered.
3 Services for Transcribing Audio to Text
If you’ve been manually transcribing your audio files to text, it’s time to upgrade. With...
Grammar Tips: Transitive Verbs
At its most basic, a fully-functioning sentence in English will need a subject and a...
How to Write an Annual Report
Writing an annual report can be an overwhelming task to undertake. In this article, we’ll...
How To Cite Course Material in Harvard Referencing
As a student, course material can be a valuable resource when writing a paper or...
How to Write Blank Verse Poetry
Ever heard of blank verse? It’s poetry that doesn’t rhyme but follows a regular meter....
Grammar Tips: Prepositions
In the English language, prepositions can be tricky to master because they’re usually idiomatic. However,...
institutions and businesses