Worldwide, there are 55 million individuals living with dementia and it is projected that by 2050, this number will increase to 139 million. Technological devices and solutions that can benefit the dementia community also carry ethical implications such as privacy and issues of consent. AI-driven LBS solutions may exacerbate the marginalization of individuals living with dementia.
Tag: human rights
Toward a More Equal World: The Human Rights Approach to Extending the Benefits of Artificial Intelligence
By Elizabeth D. Gibbons on April 29th, 2021 in Artificial Intelligence (AI), Editorial & Opinion, Environment, Ethics, Human Impacts, Magazine Articles, Social Implications of Technology, Societal Impact
There is huge potential for artificial intelligence (AI) to bring massive benefits to under-served populations, advancing equal access to public services such as health, education, social assistance, or public transportation, AI can also drive inequality, concentrating wealth, resources, and decision-making power in the hands of a few countries, companies, or citizens. Artificial intelligence for equity (AI4Eq) calls upon academics, AI developers, civil society, and government policy-makers to work collaboratively toward a technological transformation that increases the benefits to society, reduces inequality, and aims to leave no one behind.
What if My Disability Will not be Relevant in the Future?
By Laszlo Lovaszy on June 29th, 2017 in Editorial & Opinion, Human Impacts, Magazine Articles, Societal Impact
On December 3, 2016, the world celebrated the 10th anniversary of the adoption of the United Nations Convention on the… Read More
Updating a Declaration
By John Havens on June 29th, 2017 in Editorial & Opinion, Ethics, Human Impacts, Magazine Articles
It appears that humanity’s great challenge for this century is to extend cooperative human values and institutions to autonomous technology… Read More
Personal Rights in the Age of Omnipresent Cameras
By email@example.com on June 29th, 2017 in Editorial & Opinion, Human Impacts, Magazine Articles, Privacy & Security
George Orwell once observed that “the ages in which the dominant weapon is expensive or difficult to make will tend… Read More