*NEW in 2022* Supporting All Students in New York State Career and Technical Education Programs
This guide provides a holistic overview of best practices, informed by the most current data on CTE enrollments and educational outcomes for CTE concentrators in New York State secondary schools.
The Four A's of Managing the Placement and Service of Students with Disabilities in the CTE Classroom
While many educators see CTE as a logical placement for students who are otherwise academically unsuccessful, the CTE teacher is too often unprepared for serving this population. This article discusses this issue and includes an easy, four-step model CTE teachers serving students with disabilities can use to be more effective overall.
Status of the professional preparation of teachers serving learners with disabilities in career and technical education programs
This study was designed to assess instructors’ level of training prior to entering the classroom and their comfort level in providing instruction to individuals with disabilities.
Transitioning to Life After High School - NCLD
Transition planning is critical to preparing students with disabilities for life after high school, and some states are starting early.
The Role of the Career and Technical Education (CTE) Teacher in Preparing Students with Disabilities for Transition
College Preparation for Students with Disabilities: Know Your Needs
Students with Disabilities and the Transition to Work - Routledge
This book describes how students with disabilities experience higher education and the transition to the workplace.
Forward together National Center for Learning Disabilities
Helping educators unlock the power of students who learn differently.
Obstacles and Opportunities - Creating Career and Technical Education Pathways for Students with Disabilities
In New York State, students with disabilities are among the populations most at risk of dropping out and/or not graduating from high school. While no fix can single-handedly address the disparity in graduation outcomes, high school-level CTE may help close the gap.
Transition Plans | Teach Special Education
Transition plans are a required component of Individual Education Plans (IEPs) for students who are 14 years of age and older.
Strategies for Creating Work-Based Learning Experiences in ...Schools for Secondary Students With Disabilities
Studies have found that youth with disabilities lack opportunities for work-based experiences during their secondary school careers.
Special Needs Students in Career and Technical Education: Resource
A Tennessee committee composed of state and local representatives of CTE, special education, and school counselors conducted a study related to services for special needs students in CTE. The mission was to determine and address barriers to appropriate placements of special education students in CTE programs and to write and implement suggested guidelines for school personnel. This resource can serve as a tool in the process of developing an Individual Education Plan (IEP) and in modifying competencies for special needs students.
Using Technology to Support 10 Executive Functioning Skills
This article describes how teachers can help students develop some of the most critical executive functioning skills.
Thriving in Trade School with a Disability
This article covers the benefits of vocational education, potential careers, and laws that protect both students and employees with disabilities.
Preparing Students with Disabilities for Trade School
Trade schools offer vocational programs for students with disabilities as an alternative to two- and four-year colleges.
How CTE Could Improve Graduation Rates for Students with Disabilities
Policymakers should consider CTE programs as a viable option for improving outcomes of students with disabilities because they often thrive under such programs. The blog highlights a report by the Massachusetts Department of Elementary and Secondary Education that showed students with disabilities had a 70% higher chance of graduating from CTE programs than from traditional high schools. The Huffington Post/The Blog. August 2013.
Centers, Government Offices, and Organizations
Association for Career and Technical Education (ACTE)
The Center on Technology and Disability
This website includes an extensive collection of evidence-based resources and learning opportunities related to assistive technology.
Education - Center on Disability and Development
The Career & Technical Education Special Populations Resource Center (CTSP) provides access to career and technical education (CTE) and special populations-related multimedia CTE information for parents, teachers, parents, and other education professionals throughout Texas.
National Association of State Directors of Special Education
NASDSE is a premier membership organization that supports state leaders of special education throughout the United States. Its mission is to improve individual and organizational success for state leaders of special education by providing relevant services that guide positive systemic change and results, thereby supporting students with disabilities to live, learn, work and participate in their communities.
National Center for Learning Disabilities
Through research, advocacy, and action, NCLD works to create a society in which every individual possesses the academic, social, and emotional skills needed to succeed in school, at work, and in life.
U.S. Department Of Education Office Of Special Education And Rehabilitative Services (OSERS)
OSEP is dedicated to improving results for infants, toddlers, children, and youth with disabilities ages birth through 21 by providing leadership and financial support to assist states and local districts.
Office of Special Education Programs (OSEP) / Monitoring & State Improvement Planning Division (MSIP) State Lead, IDEA Part B and Part C
View a list of IDEA Part B and Part C contacts by state.