Argumentative Essay Topics - Compelling Ideas to Get Started
18 min read
Reviewed By: Melisa C.
Oct 22, 2019
Are you about to write an argumentative essay but still confused about the topic?
Argumentative essays help students learn more about the subject matter of a particular course. This kind of writing is a genuine key to learning argumentative skills. You must pay attention to your subject while choosing a strong topic for your essay.
But what if you don’t even know what to write about?
Don’t worry! Here is a list of topics and tips to help you decide on the perfect topic for your argumentative paper.
So read on and make choosing a topic easier!
On this Page
Argumentative Essay Topics for students
Argumentative essay writing is one common academic assignment that almost every student will get to draft. In order to help the students, we have prepared a list of argumentative topic ideas. Pick a topic that works the best for you.
Argumentative Essay Topics for Middle School
What age is suitable for kids to start schooling?
Should students be allowed to evaluate their teachers?
Metal music should be banned due to its violent lyrics.
What are the pros and cons of making friends virtually?
Can we conserve energy as a society?
Does playing violent video games contribute to making a person violent in real life too?
How close is reality TV to real life?
Do girls face more societal pressure than guys?
What is the biggest challenge faced by students today?
Should there be cash rewards for getting a good score on standardized tests?
The rich should pay more taxes than the poor.
Cartoons are better than movies.
Teachers Vs. Parents: who plays a bigger role in shaping a child?
Argumentative Essay Topics for Grade 6
Here are some argumentative essay topics for 6th-grade students:
Should schools start later in the morning?
Is confining wild animals within zoos a cruel practice?
Should there be stricter laws for texting and driving?
Are social media sites like Facebook and Twitter bad for our society?
Should the voting age be lowered to allow young people a voice in democracy?
Should the school year be longer or shorter?
Is it okay for children to play violent video games?
Should cell phones be banned from schools?
Should recycling become a mandatory practice in all households?
Argumentative Essay Topics for 7th Graders
Should schools provide free meals to all students?
Are uniforms necessary for student success?
Does standardized testing accurately measure student progress?
Are after-school activities important for student development?
Is there too much emphasis on social media in education today?
Should schools place a stronger emphasis on physical education?
Are required classes in high school helpful or harmful to students?
Should all students have access to laptops and tablets in the classroom?
Is technology taking away from traditional learning methods in the classroom?
Should gym classes be mandatory for students?
Argumentative Essay Topics for Grade 8
Looking for argumentative essay topics for teenagers? Check out the ideas below:
Should the drinking age be lowered? Should the death penalty be abolished?
Is it necessary for governments to fund childcare?
Is there too much emphasis on standardized testing in schools?
Are schools doing enough to prevent bullying from happening?
Do adolescents need more sleep than adults?
Should students be allowed to have cell phones in school?
Is social media affecting the way we interact with each other?
What should be done about the student loan crisis?
Argumentative Essay Topics for High School
Is homeschooling better than the public school educational system?
Smartphones help the learning process.
Is co-education more advantageous than single-sex education?
Are GMOs safe for human consumption?
Is fast food healthy or a serious threat to physical health?
Teenagers feel more comfortable talking on social media rather than face to face.
Should it be legal to get a tattoo for kids younger than 18?
Are standardized tests beneficial for school students?
A negative high school experience you believe is important when it comes to personality.
Does the education system prepare a student for the real world?
Is there life after death?
Our society works on gender equality.
Subjects that should be removed from the high school program.
Is hate crime growing in high school?
Argumentative Essay Topics for College Students
Is the current taxation system effective or not?
Are men paid more than women in our corporate sector?
Should Shakespeare still be studied as part of the college curriculum?
Is college tuition becoming way too expensive?
Are test scores the only way to judge the competency of a student?
Getting a College degree is worth the cost.
Is the system of the electoral college still viable in the US?
Youngsters on social networks don’t realize the significance of privacy on these online sites.
Life is incomplete without faith.
Students nowadays face greater social pressures compared to the past.
Your past does not define you.
What can be done about gun control in the United States?
Is it ethical to genetically modify children to protect against diseases?
Do we need more gender diversity in STEM programs?
Argumentative Essay Topics for University Students
Should mental health services be made available for free?
Is income inequality a necessary part of capitalism?
Should the minimum wage be raised in all countries?
Does technology have a positive or negative impact on mental health?
Should universities be allowed to charge students for taking classes?
Is it necessary for governments to fund space exploration?
Should religion be taught in public schools?
What should be done about the student loan crisis?
Are animal experiments necessary for medical progress?
Should young students join a political party to enhance the democratic process?
Does free speech help promote extremism in society?
Argumentative Essay Topics for O Levels
Should the government regulate the use of social media?
Is the death penalty an effective way to prevent crime?
Are online classes replacing traditional courses in schools?
Do standardized tests accurately measure academic achievement?
Should abortion be legalized in all countries?
Do celebrity role models have a positive or negative influence on young people?
Should school uniforms be mandatory in all schools?
Should the Internet be censored by governments around the world?
Should GMO foods be allowed in supermarkets?
Does free trade help or harm developing economies?
Best Argumentative Essay Topics
Just as important as it is to create compelling content, choosing a great topic is equally important. If you want to score well in academics, you will have to impress your instructor with the best argumentative essay topics.
Below are some great topic ideas for you related to different fields. Choose the right topic for your essay and start the process.
Sports Argumentative Essay Topics
Can video gamers be counted as true athletes?
By participating in sports, can children be kept out of trouble?
Should girls be allowed to participate in the same sports as boys?
Should alternatives to steroids be legalized for professional athletes?
Do you consider cheerleading a sport?
Does your College spend a lot of money in the name of sports programs?
Student-athletes should get money for playing.
Betting on sports should be illegal.
Sports events shouldn’t broadcast alcohol and tobacco ads.
Are female athletes looked upon as sexual objects by the media?
All athletes should be tested for drugs before their performance.
Females should not be allowed to take part in extreme sports.
Impact of bodybuilding on a woman’s body in old age.
Argumentative Essay Topics Education
Parents should have an active role in their child's education.
The grading system shouldn’t exist to judge a student’s abilities.
Standardized tests should be abolished in schools.
All students must wear a uniform in high school.
Does technology benefit the educational system?
Studying in a single-sex class is better than studying in a mixed one?
All students must be made to learn a foreign language?
Programming should be made compulsory for all students.
Should students have sex education classes at school?
Should schools have the right to test students for drugs?
Girls should be equally encouraged to take part in sports in school.
The world should have a uniform language.
Hard work isn’t enough for being successful in a student’s life.
Should teachers be allowed to physically discipline their students?
How to bring change in the education system of the United States?
Social Media Argumentative Essay Topics
Are social networks an effective platform for communication?
Do people really get a job through LinkedIn?
Is Facebook legally allowed to leak the private information of its users?
Is it possible to earn a good amount of money from YouTube?
Should Facebook, WhatsApp, and Twitter be banned permanently?
Social media has successfully increased employment rates.
Celebrity endorsements are unethical.
Social media has destroyed real-life communication.
Social media has made doing business easier.
Blogging is an irrelevant profession.
How is social media depicting beauty standards?
How has social media become a major source of inferiority complex among teenagers?
Is it possible to have a life without social media at this time?
Should underaged children be allowed to own social media accounts?
Pros and cons of social media.
Argumentative Essay Topics Technology
Are cell phones harmful to the human race?
Are spy applications invading the privacy of users?
Are Millennials more dependent on computers than Baby Boomers?
Is Typescript the future of front-end development?
The impact of microwave tech on our biology.Technology has made us lazier.
Should coding be taught from middle school?
Cognitive Computers like Watson are unethical.
Should a candidate’s social media profiles be considered in the hiring process?
Children shouldn’t be given personal mobile phones.
Self-driving cars and the future of transportation.
Has technology made people less efficient?
Technological advancements in the field of psychology.
Is the future in the hands of Artificial Intelligence?
Pros and cons of depending a lot on technology.
American History Argumentative Essay Topics
What was the impact of European colonization on Native Americans?
What was the role of women in the movement toward revolution?
What were the key causes of the American Revolution?
The key issues that caused conflict between North and South and led to the civil war?
The effects of the Great Depression on the banking industry in America.
Did the Civil Rights Movement reduce or lead to racial violence?
Post World War II, how did America grow?
21st-century American foreign policy.
Is Barack Obama the first American president who made history?
Was slavery an inevitable part of the development of American society?
Should the Indian Removal Act be considered an act of genocide?
Mental Health Argumentative Essay Topics
Are antidepressants overprescribed in modern society?
Should mental health services be made free for all?
Is social media affecting mental health negatively?
Is there a stigma attached to seeking out mental health help?
What role do genetics and environment play in determining mental illness?
Can art and music therapy be effective treatments for mental illness?
How can we tackle the stigma associated with mental illness?
What can be done to reduce the prevalence of anxiety in young people?
Should there be mandatory mental health education in schools?
Social Issues Argumentative Topics
Should male workers receive paternity leave too?
Is age a major factor in relationship success or failure?
Is torture acceptable under any circumstance?
What are the primary causes of down syndrome?
What should the punishments be for failed parenting?
A candidate’s appearance shouldn’t be considered in a job hiring process.
Some common stereotypes in your society.
Cheating is increasing every day.
We are way too dependent on computers and technology.
Is boredom the cause of getting into trouble?
Beauty magazines should stop photoshopping models.
Capitalism vs. socialism. What would benefit society more?
Is the women’s rights movement justified?
The real objectives of Feminism.
Impact of homosexuality on society.
Argumentative Essay Topics Animals
Hunting for fun and sports is unethical and must get banned.
Aggressive dog breeds such as pit bulls should not be allowed as pets.
Testing beauty products on animals is justifiable.
Using monkeys for research in labs is a necessary evil.
Wearing fur and leather shouldn’t be unethical.
Is genetic modification of livestock beneficial?
Animal dissection in medical school is a good way to learn.
Owning pets reduces the risk of getting diseases. Do you agree?
Emotional support animals can truly help lonely people.
Keeping exotic animals as pets is inhumane.
Stronger laws must be enforced against animal cruelty.
Pros and cons of animal testing.
How can the emotional support of animals help in treating mental problems?
Significance of microchipping the pets.
Rights enjoyed by the ESA owners.
Argumentative Research Paper Topics
Ways to decrease childcare costs in the United States.
Are literate people better parents?
Challenges faced by female politicians.
Is rehab effective for sex offenders?
Is music a form of real art?
Spanish is a simple language to learn.
Schools should ban vending machines on-campus.
Are teachers to blame when a student performs poorly?
Are gender stereotypes encouraged by parents?
Illegal immigrants and terrorism: is it related?
Can imposing a tax on sugar help fight obesity.
Should age be a factor in relationships?
Do dreams have a symbolic meaning?
Should South and North Korea become one?
Can depression be cured using natural ways?
Unique Argumentative Essay Topics
Looking for some general argumentative essay topic ideas? Here is an ultimate list of great topics that can make your essay writing fun for you and your readers.
Controversial Argumentative Essay Topics
Should same-sex marriage be legal in all 50 states within the United States of America?
Is the feminist movement ruining the minds of young girls?
Corruption and its effects on increasing wages.
Hunting should be banned globally. Do you agree?
Which is more beneficial for society, Communism or Capitalism?
Should human cloning be allowed or not?
Abortion – A pro-life or a pro-choice?
Do anti-discrimination laws reinforce discrimination?
Should patients be entitled to request medically-assisted suicide in cases of terminal illness?
Can beauty standards be more inclusive?
Workplace dating should not be allowed, and here’s why.
Displaced immigrants and refugees should be given shelter by every country.
Is vegan or vegetarian life good for health?
Online dating has ruined the essence of old-school romance.
Chocolate can help improve our bad mood.
Is it ethical to eat meat?
Mothers make better parents naturally.
Politics can never be clean and fair.
Should the drinking age be lowered?
Easy Argumentative Essay Topics
Are girls more intelligent than boys?
Parents of middle schoolers should control their internet.
Was Johnny Depp the best choice for Burton’s Ed Wood?
Do religious movements cause the outbreak of war?
Are human beings the major source of global climate change?
Is it ethical to have kids perform chores?
Is using LEDs making a difference?
How does being a vegan help the environment?
Should teenage marriages be allowed?
Social media has brought families closer. Is there any truth to this statement?
If the House of Lords had veto power over the House of Commons, Britain would’ve been better off.
It’s okay to date multiple people at the same time.
HIV is falsely associated with homosexuals. Why?
Why are the laws neglecting tobacco and alcohol?
Most of the modern-time artists are one-hit wonders.
Fun Argumentative Essay Topics
Is panda hugging a viable career option?
Does Justin Bieber owe his success to negative PR?
Is it true that a way to a man’s heart is through his stomach?
Is the Bermuda Triangle a real thing?
Is it okay for parents to lie to their children about Santa Claus?
Did the feminist movement ever help you?
How did the feminist movement ever help you?
There is no such thing as organic food.
How to make your roommate believe that moving out is the best option.
Why should I join a different family?
Fans should not judge players after losses or failures.
Is social promotion a helpful practice?
Is racism a natural condition of human society?
Dieting must not be practiced by schoolers.
Should tattoos be perceived as a social deviation?
Is the death penalty an effective punishment for criminals?
Is it wise to replace soldiers with machines and artificial intelligence on battlefields?
Should animals be used for performing experiments?
Effects of terrorism on the foreign policy of the United States of America's cosmetic surgery worth the risks?
What is your point of view on a terminally ill person having the right to assisted suicide?
Life 100 years ago was much easier than it is today.
Is religion a factor that contributes to war?
A woman who doesn’t have enough resources to raise a child to be allowed to abort?
Physical activities are the most convenient way to relax.
The best way to enhance education is to decrease the number of classes.
Sports classes should become mandatory for everybody.
The pros and cons of using gadgets for studying purposes.
What is the most important socio-political movement of the modern era?
Argumentative Essay Topics 2023
The following are some amazing topics for argumentative essays. Have a look at them to get a better idea.
Fast food is responsible for childhood obesity in the US.
Is the United States ready for a female president?
Parents need to be very friendly with their kids.
Are smartphones harmful to our health?
Education needs to be free for all.
Is single-sex education still a good idea in 2020?
Should all people pursue a university degree worldwide?
Internet access must be unlimited and free.
Modern education has to eliminate grading systems.
Capitalism should acquire more socially significant policies.
Tourist tax is mandatory to save cultural heritage.
Kindergartens must introduce foreign language instruction.
Is hunting good for environmental well-being?
Using animals for research must be banned.
Women perform better than men in official positions and occupations.
Choosing a Good Argumentative Essay Topic
So you know the importance of choosing the right topic when writing an argumentative essay.
But what are you going to write about?
You sure don’t want to pick an argumentative essay topic that everyone else is working on. And you don’t want to research an argumentative topic where information and data are impossible to find.
You hopefully want to write on a debatable topic that will interest both you and your reader. Here are the criteria we use to choose a topic for argumentative essays:
It has to be interesting to the writer. You’ll be outlining, researching, and writing in-depth, so pick an engaging topic for your argument.
Have some information to begin with. The more familiar you are with the subject area, the easier it will be for both you and the reader.
The best argumentative essay topics are mostly controversial. If there’s no conflict and everyone agrees on everything, it won’t qualify as an argumentative essay.
An arguable thesis statement can be created according to the topic.
What Makes a Good Argumentative Essay?
A good argumentative essay is one that presents a well-reasoned and logical argument. It should be supported by facts and evidence, not just speculation or opinion. To create an effective argumentative essay, the writer must provide a strong case for their position on any given topic.
Strong Introduction and Thesis
The first element of a good argumentative essay is an interesting and clear introduction. This should introduce the topic in a way that engages readers and makes them want to learn more.
It should also provide an overview of the writer's position on the issue, as well as any evidence they will be using to support their argument.
Good Research and Evidence
Good argumentation requires good evidence. So a good argumentative essay should be backed up by research and evidence.
If a writer is making an assertion, they must provide evidence to back it up. This could include physical evidence such as statistics or quotes from experts in the field, as well as logical arguments that support their position.
The structure of an argumentative essay is also important. It should be structured in a way that makes it easy to follow and understand.
This could include using headings, subheadings, and bullet points to break up the text into more manageable pieces. In addition, it should have a clear flow of ideas, with each paragraph logically leading to the next.
Finally, a good argumentative essay should have an effective conclusion. This should provide a summary of the writer's main points and reiterate their position on the issue. The conclusion should also leave readers with something to think about, leaving them informed and with new insight.
To sum up,
After reading our list, don’t be surprised if your mind starts coming up with additional topics for an argumentative essay. We recommend that you keep a notebook or journal handy to record these topic ideas for later.
These were some of the most interesting essay topics. Did you find a topic to write on?
Now, before you overwhelm yourself by jumping straight to the writing process, we have a helpful tip for you. Go through this detailed article to learn how to craft an argumentative essay effectively.
Seeking help from professionals is nothing to be ashamed of, especially when your grades are at stake. It is quite common for some students not to have a knack for writing. Also, some might not have the time to complete assignments.
If you can relate to such students, you should consider taking help from a reliable essay writing service such as 5StarEssays.com. You can simply request ‘write my essay'. And we will have an expert essay writer to provide you with high-quality assignments regardless of type and field.
So place your order today at the most reasonable price.
Masters Essay, Literature
Jared P. is a renowned author and writing service provider with over fifteen years of experience in the publishing industry. He has a Ph.D. degree in English Literature and has spent his entire career helping students achieve their academic goals by providing expert writing assistance.