What is a Quantity Surveyor? A quantity survey is a profession in which quantity surveyors prepare estimation and costing reports and prepare budget reports for construction companies. A quantity surveyor will ensure that all structures under construction achieve the best quality within the budgeted amount which is set in the pre-construction phase and all the construction meets legal standards.
A quantity surveyor will be involved at every stage of construction. A quantity surveyor will make sure that the project is always completed within the budgeted amount. This quantity surveyor will always communicate with all teams working on that project. A quantity surveyor always collects site reports to ensure that the project is under-budgeted or that it is being executed as planned.
Roles & Responsibilities of Quantity Surveyor
Providing The Cost Estimate for Materials and Labours
A quantity surveyor makes the estimation report regarding material and labour required for the project and prepares the other extensive reports.
Examining Construction Plans
A quantity surveyor frequently examines the construction plans to evaluate various aspects of the building, such as expenses, timetables, and materials and labour required for the project. Additionally, they must make sure that the building complies with safety and health standards.
NEGOTIATING WITH CONTRACTORS
Quantity surveyors frequently draught and negotiate contracts between their clients and the building business as part of generating a budget for each project. They make a cost, labour, and material estimates and compare them to the budget that is available.
CREATING COST TRACKING DOCUMENTS
A common task for quantity surveyors is to create documents for finances, budgets, and contracts. Receipts may be used to keep track of purchases, or they may be used to keep track of recent orders to account for all consumed materials.
Quantity surveyors oversee projects to ensure they stay within the allocated spending limits. To determine their requirements, they communicate with clients and contractors. They could offer suggestions to clients, assisting them in making the most budget-friendly material selections for a project.
RESOLVING FINANCIAL DISCREPANCIES
Quantity surveyors carefully examine a company’s accounts to look for any errors that might cause financial harm. They make sure that consumers receive a fair deal that is affordable for them.
ALWAYS VISIT SITES
Quantity surveyors frequently visit building sites to make sure that work is progressing as planned and that raw supplies are accessible. They must also evaluate finished tasks and supervise payments.
EXAMINING AN EXISTING BUDGET
Quantity surveyors frequently examine an organization’s current budget to see if any adjustments would help the business financially. When it is essential and effective to do so, they may also decrease or boost financing for specific divisions of a corporation.
DETERMINING THE COMMERCIAL RISK
Quantity surveyors are in charge of determining potential commercial risks in projects by taking into account market swings in labour and cost. They may develop creative answers to issues with the aid of strong analytical abilities.
HOW TO BECOME A GOOD QUANTITY SURVEYOR
PASS HIGHER SECONDARY EDUCATION
You must first graduate from high school with a science-related major to become a quantity surveyor. You can apply for graduate programmes in quantity survey once you have a basic understanding of the necessary subject topic. Many colleges may require you to pass entrance examinations in order to get admitted.
COMPLETE YOUR BACHELOR’S DEGREE
The majority of businesses demand that potential quantity surveyors hold a bachelor’s degree in engineering, finance, management, or quantity surveying. Consider taking quantity surveying-related courses while you complete your bachelor’s degree, such as BTech (Bachelor of Technology), BArch (Bachelor of Architecture), or BPlan (Bachelor of Planning) (Bachelor of Planning). Candidates without an engineering background can also become quantity surveyors after gaining some work experience in a reputable construction business.
OBTAIN WORK EXPERIENCE
You can be eligible for quantity surveyor internships, apprenticeships, or entry-level positions once you have graduated from college.
They are the best option for anyone who wants to acquire official training while also seeing other quantity surveyors at work. Apprenticeships provide you with the knowledge and abilities required for quantity surveyors to do their jobs effectively.
Internships provide insight into the daily activities of quantity surveyors and are appropriate for anybody looking to hone their surveying abilities under general supervision. Internships are frequently short-term jobs with the potential for advancement to full-time employment after completion.
JOIN ENTRY LEVEL JOBS
For someone who prefers less supervision and more independence, entry-level positions are beneficial. Since an employer could assume you already have some familiarity with construction and surveying, entry-level employment often provides you more freedom than internships and apprenticeships.
GET CERTIFIED WITH PROFESSIONAL INSTITUTE
After completing your degree and diploma, apply to SEEVILL Quantity Survey Institute, India’s best quantity survey institute that provides civil engineers with comprehensive professional training. Join Seevill Institute’s Quantity Survey, Billing Engineering, Tendering and Contract Management, and Project Management courses to become a certified professional Quantity surveyor. The Seville quantity survey institute provides practical training to civil engineers and short-term courses to civil engineering candidates and construction professionals.
QUANTITY SURVEYOR IS A GOOD JOB OR NOT
It is a highly sought-after career with a favorable work-life balance and lucrative earning potential in quantity surveying. In this sector, there is also lots of room for growth and specialization. Beginning positions like assistant quantity surveyor, assistant cost manager, or assistant manager is a good place to start your career before moving on to the assistant vice president, assistant director, or general manager. Due to the country’s fast urbanization, the infrastructure and construction industries are experiencing a boom, and more people are anticipated to work in these fields.
WHAT IS THE SALARY OF QUANTITY SURVEYOR
Different surveyor types are frequently needed at construction sites to operate in designated estimating and costing regions. Depending on the quantity surveyor’s experience, degree, job, and region, the typical pay may change.
OPPORTUNITIES FOR QUANTITY SURVEYORS TO IMPROVE THEIR CAREER
QUANTITY SURVEYOR FOR LOSS PREVENTION
They examine building sites to evaluate various financial risk concerns for the organization. They make an effort to evaluate any potential property damage brought on by weather or other building problems. Loss control surveyors can also be those who are interested in quantity surveys because there are numerous parallels between the two positions. Both positions include assessing construction sites and the price of building supplies. Both professions also make an effort to reduce financial risks that can result in substantial financial losses.
PROFESSIONAL CONSTRUCTION MANAGER
Construction managers are experts that oversee and develop infrastructure projects for homes, businesses, and the general public. They handle all the duties of a construction crew and manage projects from start to finish. To guarantee adherence to safety rules and regulations, they oversee construction activity both on and off-site.
PROFESSIONAL PROJECT MANAGER
Project managers organize and carry out numerous initiatives for a business. They make sure that projects are completed on time and within established budgets. Both short-term initiatives, like creating content or giving a presentation, and long-term projects, like a marketing campaign, may be handled by them.
PROFESSIONAL SENIOR ESTIMATOR
Senior estimators examine designs and confer with customers to assess the risks associated with a building project. They frequently work with a group of surveyors to create cost-saving plans, such as procuring supplies in bulk and planning concurrent building projects. They assist a building business in methodically achieving its financial objectives.
After quantity survey course you will be able for estimation, cost budget and and prepare budget reports of construction companies. Land survey course give you additional quality in your career. Visit the side and see the syllabus in details