Improve the quality of life of ordinary citizens by strengthening sustainable, legitimate livelihoods.
Decades of ongoing conflict, political instability, drought and economic chaos has left Afghanistan one of the world’s poorest and unstable nations. Eighty-five percent of the population relies on agriculture and natural resource-based livelihoods, leaving them vulnerable in a precarious economy.
- Agriculture & Food: Increasing farmers' production through training, infrastructure and links to local and global markets
- Economic opportunity: Providing training and work opportunities in areas ranging from road-building to poultry farming
- Water: Supporting equal, sustainable access to water resources for farmers
- Women & Gender: Helping women learn job skills and start small businesses
All stories about Afghanistan
Afghanistan: Winter in Afghanistan brings its own challenges January 31, 2012
In freezing conditions, Afghanistan's most vulnerable are in need of water and warmth. As we help them cope with immediate needs, we're also building a stronger economy to help break the cycle of poverty.
Afghanistan: Setting a strong development agenda December 3, 2011
Ten years after the international intervention in Afghanistan began and the Taliban regime fell, world leaders are this week gathering in Germany to discuss Afghanistan's future.
Afghanistan: Helmand-born, university-bound November 10, 2011
I was at the Mercy Corps Vocational Training Centre this morning checking in with the team and catching up with some of the students and teachers.
Afghanistan: What it's like in Helmand November 9, 2011
Helmand, where I’ve worked for the last two years, is certainly a fascinating place. It is a place where you can wake to yet another suicide bombing that rattles the windows and leaves you wondering who might have been the target this time.
Afghanistan: 'All roads lead to women' May 6, 2011
This afternoon Gayle Tzemach Lemmon talked with Mercy Corps’ communications director Joy Portella and supporters from around the country and the world about the importance of investing in women -- a theme of her New York Times bestselling book, Th
Afghanistan: New book honors Afghan women entrepreneurs March 7, 2011
International Women’s Day reminds me of the many courageous women I’ve had the pleasure of meeting during my last years at Mercy Corps. In all corners of the globe, women work tirelessly — sometimes against incredible odds — to build better, more prosperous and peaceful lives for their families.
Afghanistan: When entrepreneurs need a boost December 2, 2010
Afghanistan: Searching for the next Frank Perdue November 15, 2010
Afghanistan: Better than meeting Springsteen November 11, 2010
Some people are thrilled to meet rock stars or celebrities. I, on the other hand, get really excited about meeting grape growers.
Afghanistan: Afghan farmers get noticed by NY Times October 8, 2010
I'm a big consumer of news, and sometimes I get tired of reading about the same old cadre of high-profile folks: politicians, celebrities, big business types — the "news makers." It's rare to hear about how current events impact normal people; even rarer to hear about the impoverished and voicele