C0719 COVID Safety Netting Leaflet for patients, please click below link for more information;
C0719_COVID Isolating at Home Safety Netting Leaflet Revised
Coronavirus Tier4, General Public Awareness Poster, please click below link for more information;
The NHS and Public Health England (PHE) are well prepared for outbreaks of new infectious diseases. The NHS has put in place measures to ensure the safety of all patients and NHS staff while also ensuring services are available to the public as normal.
The latest information on symptoms of Coronovirus infection and areas where recent travel may have resulted in a high risk of exposure can be found on the following link;
NHS 111 has an https://111.nhs.uk/covid-19 that can tell you if you need medical help and advise you what to do.
Use this service if:
- you think you might have coronavirus;
- in the last 14 days you’ve been to a country or area with a high risk of coronavirus;
- you’ve been in close contact with someone with coronavirus.Do not go to a GP surgery, pharmacy or hospital. Call 111 if you need to speak to someone.Like the common cold, coronavirus infection usually occurs through close contact with a person with novel coronavirus via cough and sneezes or hand contact. A person can also catch the virus by touching contaminated surfaces if they do not wash their hands. Testing of suspected coronavirus cases is carried out in line with strict guidelines. This means that suspected cases are kept in isolation, away from public areas of GP surgeries, pharmacies and hospitals and returned home also in isolation. Any equipment that come into contact with suspected cases are thoroughly cleaned as appropriate. Specific guidance has also been shared with NHS staff to help safeguard them and others. Patients can be reassured that their safety is a top priority, and are encouraged to attend all appointments as usual.Everyone is being reminded to follow Public Health England advice to.
Always carry tissues with you and use them to catch your cough or sneeze. Then bin the tissue, and wash your hands, or use a sanitiser gel.
Wash your hands often with soap and water, especially after using public transport. Use a sanitiser gel if soap and water are not available.
Avoid touching your eyes, nose and mouth with unwashed hands.
Avoid close contact with people who are unwell.
UK Government Guidence for Coronavirus (COVID-19) for Public
Find out the number of cases and risk level in the UK, what to do if you have symptoms, and what the government is doing about the virus. Please click on below link;
Coronavirus (COVID-19): UK Government Response
Please click on below link for latest information;
Some Posters for Public Informations
3.Home Isolation Advice for Suspected Patients
MEDICAL CERTIFICATE – FOR PATIENTS REQUIRING SELF-ISOLATION FOR CORONAVIRUS – COVID-19
THE CURRENT GOVERNMENT GUIDANCE FOR EMPLOYERS AND BUSINESSES ON CORONAVIRUS (COVID-19) STATES;
“By law, medical evidence is not required for the first 7 days of sickness. After 7 days, employers may use their discretion around the need for medical evidence if an employee is staying at home.
For further information, please see below links;
GUIDANCE FOR EMPLOYERS AND BUSINESSES ON CORONAVIRUS (COVID-19) – Updated 18 March 2020
GUIDANCE FOR EMPLOYEES ON CORONAVIRUS (COVID-19) – Updated 18 March 2020
COVID-19 GUIDANCE FOR PRACTICES – REQUESTS FOR MED3 ‘FIT NOTE’
Due to the current pandemic and pressure on General Practice, we are prioritising the urgent medical needs of our patients and will not be providing a medical certificate for this absence.
Get an Isolation Note for Your Employer
Use this service (link) if you have been told to stay at home because of coronavirus and you need a note for your employer
This service in only for people who;
- Have symptoms of coronavirus and have used the 111 online coronavirus service
- Have been told by a healthcare professional they have symptoms of coronavirus
- Live with someone who has symptoms of coronavirus