At its inception, Jazz was met with quite the resistance from much older audiences who didn’t understand the sound and feared it would negatively influence the younger generation. Much of this fear was founded on deeply held racist views. Jazz originated from the African American community and was inspired by the afro American
traditional folk music like the blues, and spirituals. It conveyed the very essence of what it meant to be black.
However, as is typical of music, the genre transcended its origins and spread like wildfire across the Americas. Just when it seemed like the resistance had been successful, other forms of Jazz began to material from the original genre. Leading the charge was bebop also known as hip Jazz bob and a multitude of jazz labels have sprung up since.
The History of Hip Jazz Bob.
The Bebop style of Jazz began in the 1940s and was characterized by rapid tempos and complex chord plays by expert string instrumentalists. It emerged from a need for youth to have a form of Jazz that was not as danceable as the regular upbeat swing style. They wanted to be able to create various forms that were much more mellow and more fit for easy listening.
Musical Styles and Influences of Bebob.
As bebob gradually rose to prominence, several personalities helped shape its form and define it to the world. Emerging from the swing era, it was carried by several bands, most particularly the Count Basie orchestra. This band had a profound influence on Charlie Parker, an alto saxophone player, whose musical style was heavily influenced by swing and would go on to perform and be recognized as a bebob powerhouse like many of the bebop greats of the time such as trumpeter Dizzy Gillespie, pianists bud Powell and Mary Lou Williams as well as drummers like Kenney Clarke and Art Blakey. Bebob is distinguished by its classic use of a mixture of saxophones, trumpets, pianos, double bass, and percussions.
Preserving Jazz Culture and Styles.
Because of how quickly musical styles evolve, many genres often get forgotten or intentionally phased out by mainstream music machines in favor of more current, trendy, and bankable styles. The memory of these iconic genres is often kept alive by enthusiasts and people who are nostalgic for the past. In a bid to ensure that the varying forms of Jazz that have emerged over the last century are preserved and easily accessible to whoever desires them, 1201 music, a Jazz music label was created by Achim Neumann. Its goal is to create a fine catalog of Jazz music over time that will be preserved and made available to anyone interested. The fine collection – Hip Jazz Bop album was carefully curated and features the works of Jazz greats, Howard McGhee, Jimmy Cobbs, G. Tucker, and Junior Mance all playing instruments they are famous for.
Every attempt to silence the epic rise and evolution of Jazz music has failed miserably and thankfully so. Today, the world enjoys it in all its forms. Jazz pioneers and proponents have helped solidify the existence of this exquisite musical style and have given the world a gift that will continue to give for ages to come.