Nov 08, 2016 08:54 AM EST
Higher Than Hi-Res Image Quality Is New Tech Magic In MIT: Harnessing The Power Of Laser Particles
There is an all-new technology magic discovered in Massachusetts Institute of Technology, a magic revealing possibilities of producing and even higher resolution than the average high resolution image quality. But the secret isn't magic at all- it's harnessing the power of laser particles.
With the shape of tiny chopsticks nearly the size of a fraction of the width of a human hair, laser particles appear unwarranted. These tiny and narrow "laser particles" may seem to be average-looking at first glance, but hit them with a stronger beam of "lasing threshold", then one can witness a guaranteed full-blown laser light.
And, it isn't just any light quality we are talking about, it is a maximum laser resolution emitter for image, projecting 6 times more powerful than the usual resolution. Unlike the fluorescence-based resolution stuck in microscopes, the resolution offered by the laser particles, if stimulated enough, can opt to become the clearest light for an image, MIT News reported.
In reality, the optical resolution of an average microscope is categorized in a very elementary standard, hence, the sometimes-blurry images produced. This is simply due to the lean tissue and wavelength of light due to "diffraction limit".
But what is considered a breakthrough feature of the laser particles is that they have denser tissues and can go higher in wavelengths. Theoretically, this has been ensured in the process due to the very detailed inclusion of dense tissues on each sub-wavelength, one after the other, thus increasing nanometer resolution for a few more hundreds as a result.
In the not-so-distant futures, scientists may be able to carry on biomedical experimentations with such ease, as laser particles can already be broken down into smaller sizes and attached into small-cellulites inside protein cells, observable in 10-nanometer image resolution. By then, ensuring a good view of the cells is achievable by laser lights brightening up its entire silhouette, Med Device Online reported.
For sure, that's the kind of technology our scientists are reaching out for in the future.
See Now: Facebook will use AI to detect users with suicidal thoughts and prevent suicide© 2017 University Herald, All rights reserved. Do not reproduce without permission.
Join the Conversation