Qualities of a Fireman
Firefighters not only put out fires but also respond to emergency rescue situations. Though often an adrenaline rush, firefighting is a dangerous occupation, too. They often work 24-hour shifts, and in small communities, they respond on-call in emergencies. Because of the excitement and challenges, it takes many special firefighter qualities to succeed in this emotionally intense and physically demanding occupation. The median annual pay for a fireman or firefighter was $52,500 in May 2020, according to the Bureau of Labor Statistics.
Bold and Courageous
Firefighters often risk their lives. They must use good judgment when entering structures to suppress fires and attempt rescues where fire and smoke inhalation threaten their safety and even their lives. They climb ladders and trees to make rescues. They also put themselves in danger responding to vehicle accidents and home-based accidents. They regularly expose themselves to intense heat and toxic substances and fumes. Courage not only keeps firefighters alive, but it enables them to comfort the people they work to rescue.
The physical demands of firefighting are tough, according to FireRescue1. Firefighters lift and move bulky hoses and heavy equipment. They may need to carry people from buildings and down ladders during rescues. Usually, they do all of this while wearing heavy protective gear and breathing apparatus.
In emergencies, they cannot decide to sit down and take a break. Beyond being in good physical condition, though, firefighters need an attitude of grit and toughness. This is what helps them make use of their physical abilities to push through obstacles and persevere in the midst of dire situations to save buildings and help people.
Empathetic and Compassionate
The characteristics of firefighters include empathy and compassion. The primary purpose of firefighters is to protect and serve the public. This often includes putting their lives at risk and working 24-hour shifts for modest pay.
Thus, to succeed in this line of work, firefighters must have a natural desire to help others while making personal sacrifices. A desire to help those in need is a necessary motivator, given the demands of fighting fires and helping people in emergency situations. Along with a willingness to care about the welfare of those they serve, firefighters balance compassion and humor to put themselves and other people at ease during tough times.
A firefighter personality type is team-oriented, adaptable, dependable and a hard worker reports Firehouse. Putting out a fire requires reliability and precision in the execution of each person's role. Prior to a call, fire chiefs orchestrate important strategic planning by assigning each person a role in an emergency.
Typically, upon arrival at a fire, one team positions the firetruck unwinds the hoses, begins watering the fire and ventilates the building. Another team enters the building or home and searches for anyone inside. Any missteps, delays or out-of-sequence maneuvers can waste valuable time or endanger firefighters and people inside.