Preparatory B (from 3 to 5). Lesson 27
Previous Lesson Next Lesson
To all lessons
Your FREE Demo version is here
Your full version access is here
Today I want to start my lesson with an important tip:
Always combine present, past and future times in your lessons.
The present is what you teach with your child today.
The past is a repetition of the past.
Future - look forward. Look at plays from more complex albums, try to play at least a couple of notes from them.
Today we are going to learn something new about our babies! Apparently, they are not coming to this world as white boards!
Formation of Attention from Conception up to 2 Years of Age.
I recommend to watch this video, when you will have spare time created by National Geographic channel:
Additional material: watch the National Geographic video about baby development in a womb.
A baby’s energy of attention is formed along with him from the first weeks of his existence. This energy is exclusively used to form central nervous system. After the baby is born, the energy is focused on "upgrading" existing neural connections associated with adaptation to the physical conditions of life on Earth.
We are used to thinking that a newborn “rests” while he is awake. In reality, his attention is absorbed by rather complex tasks: he works on adjusting his balancing skills developed in the womb, his sense of self in space, auditory, gustatory, tactile and other sensations to gravity, the new temperature environment, and the new space. Even the ability to laugh and cry at first presents a physical challenge for the baby's attention. First, he learns to cry or to smile and then learns to control his emotions.
Ability to think in abstract terms only starts to actively develop at the age of two, as the baby turns into a toddler.
Having learned to roll over from back to stomach and balance while sitting and standing, the toddler begins to move freely through space. The energy that used to be absorbed by the greater part of the development of motor skills in terms of gravity, is released to solve the problems of the superstructure. Now, the toddler's attention is fully ready for meaningful understanding of the world.
By 24 months, the toddler develops all the prerequisites for the development of fine motor skills.
This is why the intellectual development of toddlers should start with music lessons on keyboard instruments.
Echoic Memory and Attention of a Child
Babies begin to hear the sounds long before they are born. And once they are born, they immediately learn to reproduce them. Sometimes babies mimic intonations of adults so well that it gives us the impression that they utter the whole phrases.
Here is a small selection of babies’ videos who repeat a phrase “I love you” after adults.
Does this mean that babies actually talk? No, it doesn’t. Babies’ attention is directed towards temporary storage of unprocessed auditory information.
Comprehension is a kind of "attribution" of information received from the outside through uttering. A thought begins with uttering a word. If a phenomenon or an object does not get assigned a name and the name does not get to be uttered, the brain does not acknowledge their existence.
For example, if you want to remember a name or a word , you must repeat it .
"What is your name?" you ask a stranger.
"My name is John," you hear an answer.
“Hello, John! It's nice to meet you," you repeat his name in order to store it in your memory as an image composed of the external appearance of this particular "John," his smell, his movements, and the timbre of his voice.
The babies in the videos perceive and mimic the phrase “I love you” without understanding the meaning of each of the three uttered words. They do not even realize that they pronounce specific words. They just imitate the intonation.
Onomatopoeic attention of a student is extremely important at early stages of music education. This is how he is able to quickly learn solfeggio syllables, which serve as a bridge between his attention and musical notation as well as the piano keys.
Ask a student to repeat after you, “Do, do, sol, sol, la, la, sol.” You will see that he will do it effortlessly. Then put up the pictures of DDSSLLS letters and let your student look at them for a couple minutes. Mix up the letters and ask him to arrange them in the order they original were in without uttering the sounds of the letters.
Echoic memory will probably work faster than visual. Our attention knows that our vision can recall an image. That is why it is not worth expending energy on it. However, sounds need to be memorized as they are harder to recall. Knowing that, our attention tries to catch every single syllable.
In Hiner Method, each note is assigned a name, which is later tied to a particular location on the staves and the piano keys. Gradually working with the names of the notes as well as their corresponding sounds, the student organically develops a "perfect pitch," which in the future will help him direct attention not only to the recognition of musical sounds but also to intonations of speech in the study of foreign languages.
1. Be sure to repeat all the previous exercises
2. Triads: learning to play alternately with both hands.
Watch a video example before starting this exercise:
Fruit Lines® - keep working on the module. Use the same amount of time and stop the game by pressing F1. Write the score down.
If your child is developing faster or slower than our plans suggest, we recommend writing to us at firstname.lastname@example.org to start working with our certified specialists.
1. Keep mastering Musette with and without metronome and computer.
2. Sight-reading and sight-singing the Nursery Songs 1. "Hickory Dickory Dock": play R1 and L1
3. Repeat all other piano pieces
4. Music Sight-Reading. ТEASER the piece "Girl with Flax Hair" by Debussy.
R1, L1, P1
"Girl with Flax Hair" by Debussy
Visit our Soft Mozart forum and start your progress diary here. Use the current year section. This is the place for you to ask questions and share your experiences.
At least 2 photos and 1-2 videos of the listed activities will count towards your child's credits for the graduation DIPLOMA. Please upload the video to You Tube, copy the address from the BROWSER window and paste it into your Progress Diary. Do not forget to indicate the year and type of work in the description of your Soft Mozart Academy photo / video.
Would you like to receive lessons by email weekly? Subscribe to the e-mail lesson here:
All the lesson plans:
For 2+ students
For students from 3 to 5
For students 5+
Always check here, if we have any recital! You and your child will benefit a lot from participating in our concerts!
Your place to start your progress diary is here.