(New York, N.Y. – November 21, 2011) The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency and the U.S. Department of Energy’s National Renewable Energy Laboratory are evaluating the feasibility of developing solar power production on the Price’s Pit Landfill in Pleasantville and Egg Harbor, New Jersey.
The assessment is part of the RE-Powering America’s Land Initiative through which EPA will help revitalize abandoned sites, clean up the environment and lay the groundwork for renewable energy and job creation.
“America faces serious environmental and economic challenges caused by our over reliance on fossil fuels,” said Judith A. Enck, EPA Regional Administrator. “Part of the solution is to use previously contaminated land to generate clean energy. This strategy will revitalize communities, cut air pollution and create new jobs.”
The Price’s Pit Landfill property consists of 26 acres that had functioned as a sand and gravel excavating operation from the early 1960s until 1968. In 1969, the site became a commercial solid waste landfill and it began accepting both drummed and bulk liquid waste. Landfill operations were stopped in 1976. As part of an ongoing Superfund cleanup, EPA and DOE will assess the potential for solar power production at the site. Because the site will be level with sparse vegetation once the cap is installed, it may be a good candidate.
EPA and DOE selected 26 sites across the country where wind, solar, biomass, or geothermal energy production may be possible. EPA and DOE will determine the potential energy generating capacity of the sites, the optimal location for placement of the renewable energy technology on the sites, the return on the investment, and the economic feasibility of the renewable energy projects.
For more information about these projects of about the RE-Powering America’s Land initiative, visit:
Follow EPA Region 2 on Twitter at http://www.twitter.com/eparegion2 and visit our Facebook page, http://www.facebook.com/eparegion2/.
Source: U.S. Environmental Protection Agency · 1200 Pennsylvania Avenue NW · Washington DC 20460 · 202-564-4355 , 11-158