What is School Psychology?
School Psychology brings together training in both psychology and education. With this training school psychologists consult or collaborate with educators, parents, and other professionals to help students succeed academically, socially, behaviorally, and emotionally. School psychologists are trained to provide comprehensive academic and mental health services in a problem solving model. The NASP Model for Services by School Psychologists illustrates the scope of training/skills and functions school psychologists are prepared to provide.
To learn more about school psychology, training programs, and how school psychology works on a national level, please visit the National Association of School Psychologists website at www.nasponline.org
#1 Best Social Service Job
School Psychology ranks as #1 Best Social Service Job of 2017 by U.S. New & World Report and #47 overall in jobs.
The "Scorecard" was based on these factors:
Individuals interested in working as school psychologists should consult the National Association of School Psychologists (NASP) and respective State Department of Education websites for information about education, credentialing, and continuing education requirements for school psychologists.
The National Association of School Psychologists maintains current data on credentialing requirements in all 50 States and U.S. Territories. The Louisiana Department of Education (LDOE) website provides the most current information regarding credentialing in Louisiana.
*Credential requirements are maintained by the organizations below. For the most up-to-date information, consult their resources.
Department of Education Certification
The criteria for certification as a school psychologist in Louisiana are contained in LA Bulletin 746. Applicants must meet the criteria summarized below:
The Louisiana Department of Education issues certificates to school psychologists that demonstrate completion of a school psychology training program meeting the requirements of the current Standards for Training and Field Placement Programs in School Psychology established by the National Association of School Psychologists; or possessing evidence of current and continuous certification as a Nationally Certified School Psychologist.
There are two levels of certification. Level A - Applicants must meet requirements for the standard certificate and possess a doctoral degree (such as Ph.D., Ed. D., or Psy.D.) from a regionally accredited institution in school psychology or in psychology with a program of study emphasizing child development and knowledge and skills in education and assessment. Level B - Applicants must meet requirements for the standard certificate and possess a master's or specialist degree from a school psychology training program in a regionally accredited institution.
Entry-level school psychologists require a Provisional Certificate to work during their internship experience. The State issues a Provisional Certificate, valid for one year, and renewable once for the completion of the internship period for the standard Level A or B certificate. To obtain a Provisional Certificate, applicants must have completed academic preparation in school psychology that meets requirements of current Standards for Training and Field Placement Programs in School Psychology established by the National Association of School Psychologists, except for the internship. The internship shall be completed during the time of the provisional certificate, in accordance with internship requirements in current Standards for Training and Field Placement Programs in School Psychology established by the National Association of School Psychologists.
Individuals with valid Level A or Level B certificates, and having at least three years of supervised experience as a school psychologist, of which at least two years have been in Louisiana, may apply for a Supervisor of School Psychological Services endorsement.
School psychologists renew their certification every five years. Renewal requires:
1. at least one year of experience, or equivalent, as a school psychologist;
a. six semester hours of additional graduate credit in any of the areas specified in the Standards for Training and Field Placement Programs in School Psychology established by the National Association of School Psychologists;b. an equivalent number of Continuing Professional Development/Education Units (9.0 CEU or 90 contact hours) in a variety of activities designed to maintain and expand a school psychologist's skills, and to ensure the provision of quality services;c. a combination of graduate credit hours and Continuing Professional Development/Education Units equivalent to six semester hours (each semester hour equals 1.5 Continuing Professional Development/Education Units), for a total of 9.0 Continuing Professional Development/Education Units;d. evidence of current and continuous certification as a Nationally Certified School Psychologist since the last date of state certification or renewal.
The criteria for licensure as a school psychologist in Louisiana are governed by the Louisiana Board of Psychological Examiners.
Criteria: 1.) Possess certification as a school psychologist by the Louisiana Department of Education.
2.) Complete 1,200 hour internship in school setting under the supervision of a certified school psychologist or by a licensed psychologist in a community setting (with at least 600 of those hours completed in a school setting).
3.) Complete three years of supervised experience as a certified school psychologist within the public school system.
4.) Pass the National School Psychology Examination.
5.) Hold National Certification for School Psychologists.