|I developedThe Fashion History Pagesin 2002 ago in response to a need for reputable online information regarding the history of Western fashion. These pages were initially designed for educators and students as a place where each could come to gain broader insight into how fashion played a role in history. Over the years,The FHPageshave reached a far more diverse audience than I ever could have imagined.|
TheFHPagesunderwent a full revision in 2019 to represent a more concise overview of fashion. Each page begins with a brief discussion of major historical themes followed by descriptions of both women’s and children’s clothing. Admittedly, these pages are Euro-centric (as France and England were primarily setting the fashion trends during the 18th and 19th centuries) and are historically written from an American perspective.
The newly updatedFHPagesdraws from over 40 scholarly texts and contains a variety of images from museums, art collections, and private clothing collections around the globe. These pages are purely educational and strive to represent both an accurate and objective view of the history of Western fashion.
Culture, political movements, religion, and economics all play a major role in the history of fashion. American clothing in particular has a wide variety of nuances just too numerous to discuss in pages like these. Therefore, additional information on specific historical clothing topics will be available onour blog. Just search for fashion history.
Whether you are an educator, student, scholar, or enthusiast- it is my sincerest hope you will find these pages of assistance in your quest toward gaining a broader understanding of the history of fashion!
A note about researching on the web:
With the advent of social networking and the popularity of web publishing, there is now more information than ever regarding fashion history. However, unlike traditional publications, no one has to approve or verify the content of this information before it is made public. Therefore, it is your job as a researcher to evaluate the information you find and determine whether it is reputable, accurate, and unbiased. Information from museums, educational institutions, and individuals with training in thehistorical clothing and textilesfield are the most credible.
Posted in Fashion History, Historical Sewing, Research