Understand the main features of steel structures.
The steel structure has the advantages of light weight, high strength, good overall rigidity, and strong deformability. The weight of the building is only one-fifth of the brick-concrete structure, which can withstand a hurricane of 70 meters per second, so that life and property can be effectively protected.
The roofs of low-rise villas are mostly sloping roofs, so the roof structure is basically a triangular roof truss system composed of cold-formed steel members. When the structural board and the gypsum board are sealed, the light steel components will form a very strong "slab rib structure system". The structural system has strong seismic performance and horizontal load resistance, and is suitable for buildings in areas where the seismic intensity is above 0 degrees.
The sound insulation effect is an important index for evaluating the residence. The windows installed in the light steel system are all hollow glass. The sound insulation effect is good, and the sound insulation is more than 40db. The sound insulation effect of the composite wall of light steel keel and thermal insulation material gypsum board can reach 60db.
The thermal insulation material used in the steel structure is mainly glass fiber cotton, which has a good thermal insulation effect. The use of thermal insulation boards on the external walls can effectively avoid the "cold bridge" phenomenon of the wall, thereby achieving a better thermal insulation effect. The thermal resistance of R15 insulation cotton with a thickness of about 100mm is equivalent to that of a brick wall with a thickness of 1m.
Dry construction can reduce environmental pollution caused by waste. The steel structure materials of the house can be 100% recycled, and most of the other supporting materials can be recycled, which is in line with the current environmental awareness. All materials are green building materials, which meet the requirements of ecological environment and are beneficial to health.
The residential structure of light steel structure adopts cold-formed thin-walled steel component system, and the steel frame adopts super anti-corrosion high-strength cold-rolled galvanized sheet, which can effectively avoid the influence of steel corrosion during construction and use, thereby increasing the service life of light steel components.
The light steel wall adopts a high-efficiency energy-saving system with breathing function, which can adjust the dry humidity of indoor air; the roof has a ventilation function, which can form a flowing air room above the house to ensure the ventilation and heat dissipation requirements inside the roof.
Leave a Massage