House Judiciary Hearing of Tuesday, July 28, 2020
Attorney General William Barr is a patriot and strong advocate for the rule of law. His favorable place in History is assured, while his tormentors will be soon forgotten. July 28, 2020 was such a day of mindless torment for Mr. Barr but he appeared amused by the committee’s antics and survived unscathed.
TheHearing exposed most of the Democrats on the committee as true children of post-modernity. If you are not sure what post-modernity, or postmodernism, is, there are two good definitions, one for kids and one for graduate students. Take your pick.
Definition of Postmodernism for Kids
Postmodernism is a way of thinking about culture, philosophy, art and many other things. The term has been used in many different ways at different times, but there are some things in common.
Postmodernism says that there is no real truth people can know. It says that knowledge is always made or invented and not discovered. Because knowledge is made by people, a person cannot know something with certainty – all ideas and facts are ‘believed’ instead of ‘known’. There may or may not be some sort of ultimate truth, but we cannot know it. People often believe they know the truth, but their opinion will change later. This is different from traditional views of ‘objectivity’, which say there is a single knowable truth independent of anyone’s observation or opinion. https://wiki.kidzsearch.com/wiki/Postmodernism
Definition of Postmodernism for Graduate Students.
The late French cultural theorist, Jean Baudrillard (July 27, 1929 – March 6, 2007), is famous for his work on the “meaning of meaning.”
Here is his definition of post-modern ideology:
“Postmodernity is said to be a culture of fragmentary sensations, eclectic nostalgia, disposable simulacra, and promiscuous superficiality, in which the traditionally valued qualities of depth, coherence, meaning, originality, and authenticity are evacuated or dissolved amid the random swirl of empty signals.”
Baudrillard was not a fan of Americans. But his ideas have been picked up by academics and are taught in University courses whose names end in “studies.” Many in Congress are now influenced by his ideology.
The the hearing was not a hearing. That implies somebody was listening.
The members did not want to hear AG Barr. They wanted to puff their feathers up in front of the camera, ask Mr. Barr questions, and then refuse to let him answer. Reclaiming their time, they themselves provided the answers they wanted to hear.
It was an obvious display that most of the Democrats on the committee are deeply influenced by post-modern ideas. When ideas attain the emotional quality demonstrated the hearing, it is known as ideology.
Depth, Coherence, Meaning, Originality, and Authenticity
The ranting members of the committee clearly displayed their preference for an alternative reality as they preened in front of the camera, believing that their precious constituents would be watching and cheering approvingly.
Attorney General Barr on the other-hand patiently endured their abuse. He displayed the traditionally valued qualities of coherence and meaning. His message was simple. He takes his oath of office seriously and he is faithfully enforcing the law without regard to political or outside influence.
When asked a question under penalty of perjury and then not allowed to answer, he forcefully insisted on answering.
Entire Five Hours of the Hearing
If you are interested in skipping through the entire 5 hours of the hearing, you will see how toxic the political environment has become.
Watch Ms. Mucarssel-Powell (D-FL) show riots in Venezuela to accuse the administration of gassing “peaceful” protesters in the U.S. Her insufferable bullying includes accusing President Trump and Mr. Barr of allowing her constituents to die.
Throughout the hearing you will see the unflappable patience of the Attorney General. We have little doubt that history will treat Mr. Barr with admiration, while the miscellaneous temporary players on the congressional stage will fade like Shakespeare’s characterization of Life in Macbeth:
Life’s but a walking shadow, a poor player
That struts and frets his hour upon the stage
And then is heard no more: it is a tale
Told by an idiot, full of sound and fury,
(SCENE V. Dunsinane. Within the castle.)
Community DiscussionBe respectful, but please speak your mind! We want a healthy discussion. There are no right or wrong answers here.