Yes, they can. The only time blood type is an issue is when the mother has a negative blood type and the father has a positive.
No; type O+ (O positive) can donate to any blood type that is positive but not to those that are negative. Type O- (O negative) is the universal donor. Type AB can receive A, B, or O blood.
A positive and A1 positive (usually written as A plus sign and A1 plus sign) refers to the antigens in the blood. People with the A blood type contain A antigens. People with A positive blood refers to the presence of both A antigens and Rh-positive antigens.
Yes, it is quite possible for an O negative parent to have an O positive child. However, in order for this to occur, the other parent needs to have positive blood.
The father can have any variety of blood type. The only rare complication could occur if the father had A or B group blood, where after birth the mothers immune system attacks the babies red blood cells if it is either A or B. However, this is rare and not usually serious. You may be concerned about "Haemolytic disease of the Newborn" this mainly happens in Rheus D Negative mothers i.e. blood types A, B, AB or O negative if the baby is Rhesus D positive e.g. O positive. Plus the mother must have previously been exposed to Rhesus D positive blood e.g. previous chilbirth. But in this day and age it is very uncommon as it can be prevented both before and after birth. So you can have a baby no matter what blood type the father is.
No it equals negative. (-)+(+)=(-)
Negative answer if the negative number is bigger. Positive answer if the positive number is bigger.
Because "minus a negative" is tha same as "plus a positive". So, a positive minus a negative is a positive plus a positive which is a positive.
A positive plus a positive will equal a positive. However a negative minus a negative will not equal a negative. It will equal a positive.
1 plus negative 10 is equal to -9.
6 + (-1) positive and negative will equal negative. so it's 6-1 that would equal 5. positive and positive= positive positive negative= negative negative negative = positive negative positive= negative
You could be A positive, A negative, O positive or O negative.
No, it equals a positive. (+)+(+)=(+)
The answer is negative 3.
A negative number.