Accounting principles were established to help keep accounting information accurate, relevant and to help keep accountants and other financial officers in a business from mishandling the numbers in a business regardless of its size. There are certain rules that apply to accounting known as generally accepted accounting principles, or GAAP, for short. The basic tenents of these rules are typically incorporated into basic accounting practices for small businesses to help streamline business functions.
Small-business owners have several basic accounting functions that take place daily. All business owners need to keep a general ledger. This important document organizes the daily accounting transactions that take place in any business. This is the most essential component of a financial record, whether a small business does a traditional paper accounting process or runs a computer financial accounting process such as QuickBooks.
A small business will use a double-entry accounting system in most cases vs. the single-entry accounting system. The double-entry accounting system uses debits and credits and allows a business to record a transaction entry on one side of the general ledger while making a second entry on the other side of the ledger, or financial statement. This allows for balanced financial record-keeping. This is typically the way a computer keeps track of financial records.
Basic accounting practices also require that financial representatives track the way money flows into a business. Money can either come in or come out. Typically a business will track money coming into the business through the sale of products and services or by the proceeds generated from loans or investments. Money goes out of the business by way of purchases, whether that is purchases of assets, equipment, inventory or by the way of expenses that a small business may incur.
A small business will also have a balance sheet. This provides a business owner with a small picture of how well the business is doing financially at any one point in time. It provides a look at how much the business has, in terms of current assets and fixed assets. Fixed assets include property and equipment that a business owns. Current assets include cash or items that may be converted to cash. The balance sheet also contains information about who in a business owns what. The balance sheet contains two sides, which must always balance out, hence the name balance sheet.
All business owners should also have an income statement, which is also known as a profit and loss statement. This statement shows how much income the business has earned and how many expenses the business has incurred at any point in time. The difference between these two numbers results in the net profit of the business, which is basically all of the money the business has after it has subtracted its expenses. The equation to calculate net profit equals the gross margin minus the fixed operating expenses of the business. The gross margin is equal to the sales minus the cost of sales. The income statement will also provide information on the business expenses, which are the fixed expenses. These represent the costs associated with being in business, including salaries, rent, advertising expenses and insurance.
Aanya Rose has been writing since 1998. Her work has appeared in "ADDitude," "Curl," "Diabetes Alternatives," "Fitness," the "Healing Path" and more. She has served as a channel manager for various websites and worked in consultation and training. Rose holds a B.S. and Ph.D.