Physical Exercise and Mental Health the Mind-Body Connection
Article originally published on The Mountaineer Echo.
WACO, Texas– In each new year, gym memberships spike and “losing weight” tops many lists of New Year’s Resolutions. An article published by the National Institutes of Health, however, shows that the benefits of exercise go far beyond the scale. The study authors explored the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on physical activities, based on information published between 2019 and 2021. They found that “…maintaining regular exercise is effective and engaging in alternative modes of physical activity is a key strategy to maintain mental health and well-being.”
“It’s important for women to understand that the social isolation measures implemented to reduce the rapid spread of the COVID-19 may have led to an increase not only in body weight but in stress and anxiety as well,” says Krishea Holloway, Curves president and CEO. “The good news is that regular exercise can improve the tone of both your body and your mind; and sharing that positive experience with other women – in one of our gyms or virtually through our MyCurves On Demand online program – is motivating and empowering.”
With multiple studies citing the concern that people “… experienced a general decline in well-being, deterioration in mental health, and an increase in psychological distress such as stress, anxiety, depression, and feelings of isolation” due to COVID-19 restrictions, the authors reached their conclusions by investigating three central arguments:
First, physical exercises during COVID-19, especially supervised exercises, are conducive to enhancing happiness and improving mental health.
Second, physical exercise reduces people’s anxiety, sadness, and depression during the COVID-19 pandemic.
Third, the maintenance and improvement of mental health are related to the intensity and frequency of physical exercise.
“The authors’ findings that physical activity is helpful in promoting mental health don’t surprise us,” said Holloway. “At Curves, we have always focused on strengthening women inside and out with a regular exercise program, offering members options that range from woman-centric health, wellness, and nutrition programs to 30-minute specialized workouts that focus on women’s health essentials like cardio fitness, boxing, and balance. Our effective 30-minute full-body workout allows women to carve out a time for themselves when they can focus on their physical, mental, and emotional well-being, and share that experience with a community of other women. It’s a unique approach that promotes physical, emotional, and social health.”
To learn more about Curves’ full-body 30-minute circuit training approach to fitness in the gym and the MyCurves on Demand at-home workout, please visit www.Curves.com
For 30 years, Curves has been a leader in women’s fitness, helping millions of women get stronger and healthier. Curves’ mission is to strengthen women by providing fun, fast, and safe programs to help women reach their health and fitness goals. Curves is one of the largest chains of fitness clubs for women in the world, famous for its 30-minute circuit with a coach that works every major muscle group with strength training, cardio and stretching.
Curves Specialty Classes/Circuits focus on providing strength, balance, and flexibility through categories like Balance, Body Basics, Cardio, and Boxing. The Curves Nutrition & Weight Management Program promotes balanced and sustainable nutrition education designed to help decrease body fat, increase lean muscle mass, and improve metabolism when followed with the Curves workout.
MyCurves On Demand brings the Curves trusted 30-minute workout to your own home. Led by real Curves coaches and developed by Curves program experts, MyCurves On Demand is accessible anytime, anywhere on your favorite smart device. MyCurves On Demand + Group Coaching combines the support and accountability of a Curves Coach with the virtual online community of like-minded women.
The Curves Health & Wellness Education Series provides members with education on important health topics impacting women of all ages, so they can make improvements for their own health and wellbeing. For more information on any of Curves program offerings, please visit www.Curves.com. For franchising information visit https://www.curves.com/team/buy-curves