In computer programming, BASIC (an acronym for Beginner's All-purpose Symbolic Instruction Code) is a family of high-level programming languages.
: can you help me on how to associate flash animation with
: actionscript..im developing a GIS using flash and actionscript..can
: you please send me some example???
I wouldn't recommend...
This message was edited by TheNox at 2006-7-3 23:26:59
theRock Open Source Game Engine
New Era Games
theRock is an open source game engine built on multiple frameworks....
I can respect what you are saying here; know what is the most important thing about programming, originality. Python is the loser end of a hack, since it pieces togather the protocalls of the...
We have a commercial product, C-Sharpener For VB, that converts Visual Basic .Net projects to C#. As a service to the Open Source community, we will convert Open Source Visual Basic .Net projects for...
Hmm,no older radeons?Im using a radeon9600 and everything works fine.And YES,opengl is definitly the better choice,in my oppinion its much easier to use than
Why dont you write your own engine? :)
What platform do you targeting?Pure dos with dpmi-interface?What screenmodes should it run in?Im almost sure none of todays APIs (opengl,direct3d,etc) dont...
I m looking for some very basic open source 3d racing game engine, which used to run over old 386/486 machines....also if possible please direct me to some good online resources...
My goal is to create an IDE for a scripting language much like PHP. It'll have syntax highlighting, debugging, code checking, autocompleting, etc. All my previous experience has been in...
: I hope that someone can help me. I have a diploma in Busines Computer Information Systems, and two computers at home. I know the basics in C++, Visual Basic, Linux, and HTML. Basically, my greatest...
I suppose Linux would be easier to do it in. Cos there's so much open source available. Windows, on the other hand, doesn't have that much. However, doing basic things with ports in windows is not...
In Visual Basic there is a function called "FileCopy", if you don't have if, write your own.
source = "d:\main.log"
dest = "c:\MyProg\main.log"
open source for binary as inf
open dest for...
: Could anyone describe the main differences between FreeBSD and Linux?
Well, guess its time to write up a Linux vs BSD post so if anyone asks this question again you can look into it there. I...