How to Write Topic Sentences and Thesis Statements
Well-constructed topic sentences and thesis statements are essential in writing because they are the foundation upon which you build your essay. By spending some preparation time constructing these basic sentences, you can outline a solid and well-organized paper. In a five-paragraph essay, you should have one thesis statement and three topic sentences.
Before you start to write, plan what you will say. Begin by asking yourself, "What do I want the reader to know or to believe after reading this essay?" The answer is the beginning of a thesis statement. Remember that an essay is simply your opinion put on paper. Even in a research paper, you are voicing the opinion that your topic and the facts you include are valuable and worth mentioning.
In a five-paragraph persuasive or expository essay, your thesis statement should include your opinion and at least three reasons that help support it. For example, a thesis statement might read: "Everyone should practice yoga because it increases flexibility and stamina, reduces stress and can heal common aches and pains." This thesis statement is strong because it clearly states an opinion and gives the reader a glimpse at the reasons he should believe it.
Each piece of evidence in your thesis statement can now become a topic sentence and the basis of each supporting paragraph in your essay. For example, if you wrote the aforementioned thesis statement about yoga, then your topic sentences would be: 1) Yoga increases flexibility and stamina. 2) Yoga reduces stress. 3) Yoga can heal common aches and pains. Once you have your topic sentences set, you can play with style and language to avoid sounding repetitive.
Target Your Audience
When you write anything, it is important to remember your audience. Generally, when you write essays, you are writing to an audience of teachers and professors. So you should be careful when selecting a topic or voicing an opinion. Only write a thesis statement that you can support with evidence that comes from reliable sources or directly from the literature. Unless the instructions explicitly allow it, try to avoid voicing conspiracy theories or unsubstantiated beliefs. You can save those for your blog.
Based in Sacramento, Calif., Beth Wenbourne Katz has been writing about education topics since 2006. Katz has taught in the California public schools, working primarily with students with learning, behavioral and emotional challenges. She holds a Master of Arts in special education from San Diego State University.