Technology in healthcare is changing the way disease is prevented, treated and managed at both the patient-level and hospital-level. The digital revolution of healthcare has seen rapid advancements in the past decade. From remote doctor consults to the use of artificial intelligence to provide insights from patient data, the use of digital technology to enhance healthcare systems has proven to be changing the way patients experience healthcare. This was further emphasised during the COVID-19 pandemic that started in early 2020. Movement restrictions and lockdowns have shown the importance of shifting the way healthcare is delivered to the patient. Technological applications and its increased accessibility have made it possible for healthcare professionals and patients to communicate outside of the hospital setting. With a shift in focus from treatment to prevention, digital technologies have allowed better self-management of chronic conditions as well as real-time monitoring by healthcare professionals.
In this issue, APBN looks at how technology and innovation can help evolve the healthcare sector in Asia. Discover the use of digital technologies in helping healthcare providers and organizations better engage and reward healthcare consumers through their journey to becoming healthier. (p. 22) Also, explore how innovation for advance atrial fibrillation treatment can help to improve patient outcomes through early intervention and better management. (p. 28) In the Columns section, Son Pham, Country Manager for GE Healthcare Vietnam and the CEO for GE Vietnam shares how technology has helped healthcare systems in Vietnam during the COVID-19 pandemic. (p. 18)
The presence of comorbidities together with a disease state can affect a patient’s health outcome as well as the need for longer hospitalization. Comorbidities such as iron deficiency in heart failure patients could result in higher re-hospitalization and increased risk of death. Research study by the National Heart Centre Singapore found that intravenous iron therapy has significant improvement in outcomes for heart failure patients. (p. 34)
Deborah Emmanuel SEAH Qing En