About Nikolay STARIKOV ORIENTAL REVIEW
The first airborne troops of the British Army landed in Greece on October 4, 1944. Britain's main objective there, however, was not to defeat the German forces, far from it, but to achieve a rapid advance to meet Marshal Tolbukhin's Soviet troops, who had just successfully carried out an operation to liberate Yugoslavia. Meeting no resistance from the German troops, the English hastened to occupy the liberated territory so as not to let the Russians enter Greece.
Peace did not follow their arrival in Greece. On the contrary, military operations broke out with renewed vigour. The English were opposed to the partisans of the powerful communist movement ELAS. As a result, the British "liberators" began military operations against the Greeks.
Here are some facts about this conflict which, today, is completely ignored:
– In November 1944, General Scobie, commander of the British forces in Greece, gives the order to disarm the ELAS units. The Communist representatives of the Cabinet refused to sign a decree ordering the dissolution of ELAS and, on December 2, they resigned. The next day, a demonstration of 500 men took place in Athens against the actions of the government and the British command. The weapons are used against the demonstrators by the authorities. On December 000, 4, fighting began between ELAS units on one side and British and government troops on the other, and ELAS members took control of Athens and Piraeus. The fact that ELAS units were not evacuated from Piraeus until 1944 December 12 gives an indication of the severity of the fighting. In Athens, British troops were surrounded and only managed to get out towards the end of the month. In addition, two divisions are redeployed to Greece from the Italian front.
As we can see, there were so many ELAS supporters in the Greek capital that they easily took over the whole city. By opening fire on the demonstrators, the British troops had shown which side of the conflict they were on. Remember that it is precisely for these kinds of actions that London condemned Gaddafi and Assad recently.
Here is what Winston Churchill writes in his book “The Second World War”:
“On Sunday, December 3, communist supporters, engaged in a banned demonstration, clashed with the police and the civil war began. The next day, General Scobie ordered ELAS to evacuate Athens and Piraeus immediately. Instead of complying, their troops and armed civilians tried to seize the capital by force. At this point I took more direct control of the business. On hearing that the Communists had already taken almost all the police stations in Athens, murdering the major part of their occupants who were not engaged on their side, and were already half a mile from the government offices, I ordered the General Scobie and his 5 British soldiers who, ten days before, had been received with delight as liberators by the population, to intervene and fire on the treacherous aggressors. There's no point in doing things like this halfway. “
– In total, from December 3, 1944 to January 15, 1945, British aircraft flew 1665 sorties over Greece, destroying 455 automobiles, four artillery pieces and six locomotives.
– The English more or less managed to establish control over the territory of mainland Greece only after six weeks of fierce fighting. On February 12, 1945, an agreement to end the civil war was signed in Varkiza, according to which all ELAS units withdrew from the areas of Athens, Selanik and Patras.
– The majority of ELAS fighters ceased hostilities and returned home. However, the representatives of the democratic government, as well as the human nation of the "free world", violated the agreement and began to arrest them by the hundreds and shoot them without trial.
– In the end, the situation exploded following the so-called “general” elections, which took place on March 31, 1946. The Communists and a number of democratic parties had accused the government of falsifying the results and of pressured voters. It should be mentioned that police brutality did not decrease throughout 1945. The elections served as a pretext for a new confrontation. The first open conflict occurred in July 1946, when government forces attempted to rid the Vermion and Mount Olympus areas of Communists. Despite the fact that those on the offensive were supported by tanks and Spitfires, the attacks failed. ELAS units enjoyed wide support among the country's population, extensive experience in guerrilla warfare against the Germans, and there was also the fact that there were a number of secret allies in the army Greek. A new round of civil war had begun in the country.
– The Greek War lasted until early 1949, a total (with breaks) of five years!
– According to official figures, government forces suffered losses of 12 people killed and 777 soldiers and officers wounded, while pro-communist units suffered losses of 37 killed, and there are no figures on the number of injured. But how many of those killed and tortured were civilians? The country was in ruins; the Germans, withdrawing from Greece, failed to completely destroy their lines of communication, which was done by the Greeks themselves – not without the help of the British and Americans, of course.
The history of the Balkans, and especially of Greece, is a clear example of the misery of a black and white vision of History, a History in which Stalin and the USSR are blamed for everything, while the Occident is always right in everything it does.
Translated from Russian by ORIENTAL REVIEW
Translation : avic - International Network
Photo: Aris Velouchiotis the “Greek Che Guevara – ELAS
Europe from one war to another.
Complete file in PDF
I – The global financial infrastructure: The Bank of England
II – The Global Financial Infrastructure: The US Federal Reserve
III – The Sarajevo Assassination
IV– Who started the First World War?
V – Who financed the Second World War?
VI – Leon Trotsky, father of German Nazism
VII – Britain and France planned to attack the Soviet Union in 1940
IX – How the British “liberated” Greece
X - Who organized the Famine of 1932-1933 in the USSR?
XI – A quarter of a Soviet century (1930-1955)
XII – Why did Great Britain and the United States have no desire to prevent the Second World War?
XIII – Why did London give Vienna and Prague to Hitler?
XIV – How Adolf Hitler became a “provocative aggressor”
XVI– Who signed France's death sentence in 1940?
XVII– Great Britain – the cursed lover of Adolf Hitler
XVIII– How Britain Helped the Soviet Union Fight Hitler
XIX – How Churchill lost and recovered his victory in the Second World War
XX – Who put up the Berlin Wall?
And for good reason, the essentially communist Greek resistance had practically liberated Greece from its Nazi occupier when the British forces set foot on Greek soil not to liberate it but to annihilate the communist resistance.
Nevertheless this article is interesting, because the crushing of the essentially communist Greek resistance by British troops is generally completely ignored.
What is also interesting to underline is that the USSR, whose 2 primary concerns were to inflict defeat on Nazi Germany and to continue to exist in the face of Western evil intentions against it, did not respond positively to the demands of the Greek resistance against the British army. From this followed a schism in the Greek communist movement which lasted at least until the 80s and may still continue.