There are way to many Mama’s boys in this country. We are running short on real men.
Mother’s boy, also mummy’s boy or mama’s boy, is a term for a man who is excessively attached to his mother at an age when men are expected to be independent (e.g. live on their own, be economically independent). A mother’s boy may be effete or effeminate, or might be perceived as being macho, or might have a personality disorder, such as avoidant personality disorder, or might be schizophrenic, so that the mother acts as a caretaker. In any case, a mother’s boy cannot maintain a healthy partnership with a woman (Carruthers, 1998).
Being mother-bonded is sometimes seen as a sign of weakness, and has a social stigma attached to it in many places, although in other places it may be more acceptable or perceived as normal. A mother-bonded man is seen to give control of his own life to his mother, in exchange for a sense of security. If the mother has more than one son, then she will have, at the most, one mother’s boy, usually the eldest or youngest son. The relationship between mother and mother’s boy is thought to be “symbiotic”: the mother enjoys controlling her mother’s boy.
Alternatively, in recent years, some have begun using the term in a milder sense, merely meaning a man who is emotionally attached to his mother. Though this sense of the phrase is still uncommon compared to the original pejorative intent, mothers in particular may state their pride in their “mama’s boy” sons. It is also occasionally used to describe an infant or toddler son who is unusually attached to his mother, even crying or resisting when the father attempts to care for him. In this sense, the ‘mama’s boy’ designation carries little stigma, but is simply an observation of the young child’s primary attachment.
Another definition of Mama’s boys is men who need to man up and get involved with the political activities of their country, state and local government. These are men in ages ranging from 25-50 years old. They go through life expecting others to handle these important matter that will affect their children’s futures and their own. They have no idea how to get involved or to accomplish things as their mother has always been their for them to show them or do it for them.
Have you ever been around a grown man that could make a mess eating and just look at it and walk away. Mama used to clean it up for them. As these men get married they expect their spouse to be the stand in Mommy for them. Clean up and pick up after them. Most of these man/boys could not tell you anything about what is going on in the world out side of sports and who is on the Maxim magazine cover. They are so convinced that the world revolves around them. Usually the marriage will not last as the spouse cannot please him or is sick of living with a self centered pig.
You can go to your local gym and find them or the evidence of them there as the barbells or the equipment are loaded up with the weight plates. Mama was not there to take the plates of the equipment. They can try your patience as you are around this person or on vacation for an extended time. You kindly try to tell them that they need to clean up after themselves and they can get down right nasty as can their mate in defending the Mama’s boy lazy actions. They play it off as he is just having fun and you need to lighten up. You can not carry on an intelligent conversation as they have no intelligent thoughts in their heads.
Mother’s need to let and help their young men break the apron strings and learn to be independent and not be selfish for their own desires off thinking they will be alone. Get your young men involved with what is going on in the world, state and local issues. Expand their minds out side of the neighborhood. Have them read the wall Street Journal news paper, great source of information. Do something that can help someone or make a change for good in your community. Thank God that we have enough strong mother’s and father’s that can suck it up and not give in to their young men and let then ween off their parents and learn to be independent.
Man up Mama’s boys, this country needs real men to lead this country and family’s through this tough economic and social times.
Suck it up Crybaby
John the Baptist
Thank goodness for this article. Mama’s boys are going to be the death of this nation. So, many of them are either in prison or hiding out from manly responsibilites in their mommy’s basement! : (