Electrolytes & the Brain
Your nervous system contains two major types of cells: neurons, the nerve cells that communicate to carry out brain functioning, and glia, the specialized cells that support the neurons’ functioning. A healthy diet plays a key role in your brain’s ability to function, and several nutritional deficiencies can affect your brain. Electrolytes -- minerals found in your body -- play an important role in brain function.
Sodium electrolytes, made by dissolving salt in fluid, play an important role in brain function. Your brain cells contain proteins, called ion pumps, which allow sodium to flow into and out of the cell. A rapid influx of sodium electrolytes gives the inside of the nerve cell an electrical charge, settling off an electrochemical nerve impulse, called an action potential. Without sodium, you brain cannot initiate the electrical impulses your nerve cells require for proper communication.
Potassium plays a central role in the second half of an action potential. After sodium rushes into the nerve cell, potassium electrolytes rush out to neutralize the charged cell, allowing the cell to re-establish its resting state. Without adequate potassium, a nerve cell cannot send more than one electrochemical impulse. After the start of the first action potential, the potassium-deficient cell does not return to its resting state, and thus cannot initiate subsequent action potentials.
The electrolyte magnesium also contributes to brain functioning. One of magnesium’s primary roles is to activate enzymes within your brain. As a result of this enzyme activation, magnesium helps control the flow of sodium and potassium into and out of your nerve cells. Magnesium also contributes to healthy myelin -- a fatty insulation layer that surrounds your nerve cells and allows for the effective transmission of electrochemical signals -- and helps your brain cells activate the energy they need to survive.
Your diet should include enough sources of sodium, potassium and magnesium to meet your recommended daily intake, or RDI, to support continued brain function. Adult women and men require 1,500 milligrams of sodium and 4,700 milligrams of potassium daily, according to the Linus Pauling Institute, while men and women require 420 and 320 milligrams, respectively, of magnesium daily.
Adding bananas, baked potatoes and dried plums to your diet as rich sources of potassium will help you reach this intake goal, while bran cereal, brown rice, shredded wheat and almonds boost your intake of magnesium. Most Americans already consume more sodium than their bodies need, so your diet likely already contains enough sodium to support brain function.
Sylvie Tremblay holds a Master of Science in molecular and cellular biology and has years of experience as a cancer researcher and neuroscientist. Based in Ontario, Canada, Tremblay is an experienced journalist and blogger specializing in nutrition, fitness, lifestyle, health and biotechnology, as well as real estate, agriculture and clean tech.