NYC is one of the most diverse cities in the world and a place where people of different ethnicities, genders, nationalities and backgrounds live. However, there remains a significant lack of diversity, gender equity and inclusion in the NYC workforce. Not only does this inequity raise moral and social justice concerns, but it poses competitive disadvantages to companies and employees because workforce diversity is directly linked to increased productivity, innovation, creativity, employee retention and many other benefits.
Gender equity ensures everyone has access to the same opportunities regardless of gender identity. Gender equity means fairness of treatment for women and men, according to their respective needs. This may include equal treatment or treatment that is different but which is considered equivalent in terms of rights, benefits, obligations and opportunities.
Diversity is the presence of difference within a given setting. In this case, diversity is the presence of different identities, like race, ethnicity, religion, nationality, or sexual orientation.
Inclusion ensures people with different identities are valued and feel welcome within a given setting (e.g., your team, workplace, or industry).
GAME DESIGN PROMPT
The NYC Mayor’s Office of Media and Entertainment has a mission to promote these three principles in the New York City media and entertainment industry. Research current best practices used by teams, companies, and industries to create environments with gender equity, diversity and inclusion. Make a game that teaches people how to create environments with gender equity, diversity and inclusion.
According to data from the Bureau of Labor Statistics, women earn only 78 cents for every dollar earned by men. African-American women earn 61 cents and Latina women earn 55 cents for every dollar earned by a Caucasian man.
Women comprise 46.8% of the US labor force and currently hold 24, or 4.8% of CEO positions at Fortune 500 companies.
According to the New York City Cultural Diversity Report, 67% of New Yorkers identify as people of color, and only 36% work at cultural organizations in the City.
Out & Equal reports that the transgender unemployment rate is three times higher than the national average.
In 2017, 18.7 percent of people age 16 and older with a disability were employed. That compares with 65.7 percent of people without a disability.
Concerned that far too many New Yorkers continue to face discrimination because of their gender, Mayor de Blasio established the Commission on Gender Equity (CGE) in June 2015 to address issues of inequity and discrimination facing girls, women, and transgender and gender non-conforming persons regardless of ability, age, ethnicity/race, faith, gender expression, immigrant status, sexual orientation, and socioeconomic status.
In 2016, Local Law 67 was passed with a mandate to study inequalities facing women and girls and their social and economic consequences and advise the Mayor and City Council on strategies to mitigate those inequities.
The CGE’s Strategic Plan—Advancing Gender Equity in New York City announces the Commission’s goals and strategies to advance gender equity in New York City until the year 2021. The plan also identifies lead initiatives which will be the initial programmatic focus of each strategy. Read the full report here.
Gender Equity Resources for Teens: www1.nyc.gov/site/genderequity/resources/resources.page#forteens
Women in the Workplace 2018 is the largest comprehensive study of the state of women in corporate America. Read the full report here.
As part of Mayor Bill de Blasio’s vision for a more equitable city, the NYC Department of Cultural Affairs launched a major initiative in January 2015 to promote and cultivate diversity among the leadership, staffs, and audiences of cultural organizations in New York City.
In order to work towards implementing strategies and programs to promote equity in the cultural workforce, we need to understand where we stand as a sector. Below are the highlights from the survey findings or download our full overview from the survey here.
Article (Fast Company): How These Top Companies Are Getting Inclusion Right
The DiversityInc Top 50 Companies for Diversity is the leading assessment of diversity management in corporate America and globally. In 2018, over 1,800 companies participated in the survey, completing a free report card that assesses performance based on four key areas of diversity management:
Check out the 2018 top 50 companies for Diversity here.
City of New York Diversity & Inclusion Policy
City-wide Diversity & Equal Employment Opportunity
What is Diversity and Inclusion to the City of New York?
Differences are to be valued. Compliance, alone, is a required action, not a value. The City of New York values all our employees – they are our greatest asset.
No two people are the same. Diversity is the inclusion of people that are different. The power of diversity is that we can use multiple opinions, cultures and backgrounds to drive our best work.
Cultures that ignore diversity and inclusion invite lower productivity, higher absenteeism, and higher turnover resulting in higher costs. A diverse and inclusive organization receives increased productivity, reduced turnover, sustainable leadership and a brand and legacy of relevance to the communities it serves.
For more information on NYC Diversity and Equal Employment Opportunity check out these Resource Links.