Siebengebirge Mountains Drachenfels
Mountains Petersberg Drachenfels Drachenburg Rolandsbogen
Southeast of Bonn, the Siebengebirge arises on the right side of the Rhine River. It is the most northern mountain range on the Rhine River, before the river continues its way into the lower rhenish plain. The Siebengebirge is the oldest nature park in North Rhine-Westphalia and one of the oldest in Germany. A beautiful panorama is presented to the boat trip guest or tourist, once he lets his view slide across the Rhine River. Upon approachment from the north, 7 hilltops present themselves to the eyes. But in reality, the nature park area consits of more than 40 mountains and hills. The following risings count to the Siebengebirge:
The "classical seven" were not responsible for the giving of the names, as one would suggest. It was rather deviated from the name "Siefen" or "Siepen". That is what the canyon-like creek valleys in the Rhineland are called, who have a very frequent appearance in the Siebengebirge.
The Siebengebirge is of volcanic origin and part of the rhenish slate mountains. The largest part of the landscape consists of forests. The good forest grounds are the condition for the abundant kind of Flora and Fauna. Besides the forests, there are also a lot of creeks, quarries, vineyards and fruit lawns that are valuable biotops. Despite of the part use of the landscape through people, nature protection is very important in the Siebengebirge.
The Siebengebirge has been made available through a hiking path net with a total length of about 200 km, which is widely blocked for car traffic. The hiking paths lead through shadowed forests, but also allow beautiful view towards the Rhine River valley, towards the Eifel mountains and the Westerwald forest. Numerous rest and parking areas and protection huts invite the hiker to take a break and to recover. A forest learning path informs about the local animal species and plant species in the Siebengebirge. Besides this, a lot of riding trails allow you to discover the Siebengebirge on horse.
Drachenfels Drachenburg fairy tale castle (Marchenschloss)
532-rame castle hotel Bonn Germany North Rhine Westphalia River
Castle hotel rooms room rates Bonn Germany Rhine River
Meeting hotel conference center seminar room
Wedding destination location celebration
Bonn Godesburg castle Germany Rhine castles
Museum Museums Bonn Germany Rhine River
Siebengebirge Mountains Drachenfels Drachenburg Petersberg Rolandsbogen
Hiking biking swimming horseback riding tennis
Golf in Germany club clubs golf course courses
Bonn Germany Rhine river day boat cruise cruises
Road map of Germany castle hotel airports 1
Road map Northrhine North Rhine-Westphalia 2
Road map Cologne Koln Bonn airport Rhine river 3
Town map Bonn Rhine River main train station 4
Street map Bonn Germany subway station parking 5
|The Drachenburg castle was built in the 12th century by order of the
archbishop of Cologne / Koln. Around 1170, the construction was
finished. The Drachenburg castle was supposed to secure the territorial border to the south to the area of the count from Sayn. The site was in ownership of
the gentlemen of Drachenburg for around 400 years. The teardown of the Trachyt rock, which
features a diamond-like hardness, helped them to great wealthiness. However, the gender
died out in the 16th century. Besides the fortification, the palas with the castle count
living rooms, apartments for the servants, a big festive hall, a kitchen with pantries and
a chapel also belonged to the castle site. After the Drachenburg castle was used as a
quarry in the 19th century, only wall ruins are obtained at present.
But not only the mountain top is a touristic attraction, also the castle Drachenburg, which rises on midway height on the Drachenfelsen rock. Stephan baron von Sarter (1833 to 1902) let the fairy tale castle (Marchenschloss) be built in new gothic style as living residence. In 1881 the foundation stone was laid. But von Sarter never lived on the castle. The present owner is the North Rhine-Westphalia foundation nature conservation, preservation of local and monuments. Alone the numerous towers and figure decorated exterior conformation of the castle invites to a closer survy. In the numerous statues, you can recognize the personalities of different epochs. Especially the monumental wall paintings and artistic glass paintings in the interior are very impressive. Visitors get to know a lot about the changeful history of the castle during guides.
The Drachenfels rock and the castle Drachenburg can be reached from Konigswinter (about 10 km southeast from the 532-rame castle hotel Bonn). First, you will go over the donkey trail on foot to the castle. Two routes lead up to the top. You will find a lot of guest houses and restaurants on the Drachenfels rock for recovery and refreshments after the ascendence. A ride with a donkey is offered as an alternative on Saturdays and Sundays. The most comfortable way up is by the Drachenfels rail, a rack railway, which is in operation since 1883. The oldest mountain railway of Germany drives daily. There is a mid-station at the castle Drachenburg. Neither the panorama view nor the view towards the romantic Rhine River valley is affected by the trip.