Physical and occupational therapists, rehabilitation and pain management specialists, and a host of other medical professionals using warm paraffin wax for the heat treatment of arthritis, inflammation, strains, muscle spasms, and more. What paraffin wax does is, it provide heat to relieve muscle stiffness and joint pain. At the time paraffin wax loses its stored heat, blood vessels will absorb heat and expand. This caused more blood circulation to the affected area.
Increase circulation means more oxygen at the cellular level. A temporary increase in the pain threshold, a decrease in muscle spasms, and an increase in flexibility occur, significantly benefitting the outcome of therapeutic range of motion exercises.
How Paraffin Wax works
When heat is applied through heated paraffin wax, the blood vessels expand, bringing more circulation, increasing healing nutrients and removing waste products that cause inflammation and stiffness. Topical heat provided by paraffin wax also results in an increase in skin pliability. Warm paraffin wax may facilitate all of these heat related benefits and is often prescribed in the post-inflammatory phase of injury and for chronic pain conditions such as arthritis.
Another benefit of warm paraffin wax is its effect on skin. While other forms of heat therapy — especially hydrotherapy — can dry skin out, paraffin wax leaves skin hydrated, soft, and pliable. Applying warm paraffin wax also provides benefit on skin. paraffin wax leaves skin hydrated, soft, and pliable.
Who can use Paraffin Therapy?
As mentioned above, paraffin wax is mainly used in different kind of therapies for the heat treatment of arthritis pain and stiffness, inflammation, strains, muscle spasms, and more.
How paraffin wax is applied?
Paraffin wax is very easy to apply to the extremities. First, paraffin wax needs to be melted completely and must be allowed to be cooled down about few degrees above its melting point. This step is crucial as paraffin wax has excellent heat absorption properties; excessive heated paraffin wax can burn the skin. Then, by using a brush or fabric strips one can apply molten paraffin wax to any part of body. It is notable, the more layer of paraffin wax applied the heat will last longer.
In order to make the paraffin wax heat last longer and maximizing paraffin wax therapy benefits, after applying paraffin wax you can cover it with plastic and/or insulated covers.
What kind of paraffin wax should be used?
To answer this question first we do need to understand what paraffin wax is. In previous articles we described paraffin wax as: Generally, paraffin wax is unbranched alkanes that Solid at ambient temperature and have melting point range of 52 to 70 degree Celsius. Further, they are Thermoplastic in nature and insoluble in water. paraffin wax is soluble in ether, benzene, and certain esters. Most of chemicals do not affect paraffin wax. Burning readily is another characteristic of paraffin wax.
paraffin wax is excellent material in order to restore heat and also paraffin wax electrical insulation property is second best comparing all other material. The only paraffin wax grade can be used in paraffin wax Therapy is FULLY REFINED paraffin wax. Fully refined grade paraffin wax must be food grade and have FDA approval.