Difference Between Sleeping and Dreaming
Dreams and the reason why we sleep have always aroused the curiosity of more than one student. Since ancient times there has been a special interest in dreams and their meaning, to such an extent that some attribute supernatural and mystical qualities to them. Difference Between Sleeping and Dreaming
With the passage of time, some beliefs associated with the acts of sleeping and dreaming have diminished considerably; in part because scientists made significant progress in the past century in studying the factors that make us sleep, as well as those that make us dream.
Now, due to the close relationship between these two terms, there is more than one that gets confused when it comes to understanding what makes them different. If you also have doubts about it or just want a little more information, keep reading, because below we will explain what the difference is between dreaming and sleeping.
SLEEP Difference Between Sleeping and Dreaming
Sleep is one of the basic needs of human beings and many other living beings, so much so that you can die from lack of sleep. This activity has always intrigued people because it is often considered the closest experience to death that can be appreciated while alive.
We sleep because a series of factors cause it, such as neurotransmitters, for example. When we are sleeping our body is in a state of rest and we are not clearly aware of what is happening around us. Our entire nervous system reduces the degree to which it performs its activities.
In humans, sleep has four stages; which are defined by the degree of “depth” of the same or; In other words, how insensitive we are to external stimuli. The first three phases correspond to NMOR or light sleep, while the fourth and last phase is known as REM or Rapid Eye Movements.
On the other hand, the matter of dreams and their study is a bit more subjective; although scientifically it has been possible to explain some elements or phenomena related to them.
Every day we hear people talking about dreams or nightmares they had the night before. Some say they dream that something is chasing them, others dream that they are flying, and there are also people who usually have dreams of the dead . In relation to the latter case, it is observed that sometimes some individuals attribute influences to this type of dreams that go beyond those they actually have.
What happens to us when we are awake is what contributes the most to the content of our dreams, that is why it is impossible to dream of people we have never seen; likewise, our age and gender play an important role in this process.
Finally, our dreams emphasize visual perceptions and emotions at the expense of reasoning and logic. Although we sometimes believe we control them, the truth is that dreams are involuntary and while we have them we do not have our abilities to judge, reflect and think as we do when we are fully conscious.