While dipping your toe into the electric car world, you may stumble upon some common misconceptions. We’ve laid out the most common misconceptions below to assuage your worries.
Myth 1: Safety
Safety is a concern no matter the type of car you’re driving. Just like their internal combustion engine (ICE) counterparts, EVs are rigorously tested by the National Highway Transportation Safety Administration (NHTSA) and the Insurance Institute of Highway Safety (IIHS). For detailed information about specific vehicles, we suggest that you take a look at the aforementioned organizations. Generally speaking, EVs have a lower center of gravity than ICE vehicles, which makes them less likely to roll over and often improves the quality of the ride.
To read more about EV safety, check out our website here.
Myth 2: EVs Are Slow
Some might compare electric cars to their hybrid (no plug) predecessors that had no get-up-and-go, but, have no fear, that is a thing of the past! Electric cars are surprisingly fast. In fact, electric cars accelerate much faster than gas-powered cars because of their instant torque. Still unsure? Check out this video of a Hyundai Kona and Chevrolet Bolt drag racing!
Myth 3: Short Driving Range
Lots of people are afraid of running out of change, but range anxiety is a thing of the past! Manufacturers are consistently turning out electric vehicles that get more than 200 miles per charge (Chevy Bolt, Hyundai Kona, Kia Niro, Tesla anything) and the variety of cars keeps increasing. More than 200 miles of charge are more than enough to do normal weekly activities. Using charging apps like PlugShare and Chargepoint makes it easier to charge your car on the go and combat range anxiety. If you find yourself still worried about range, plug-in hybrids make a great alternative. Plug-in hybrid examples include the Toyota Prius Prime and Toyota RAV4 Prime.
Learn more about charging and range anxiety here.
Myth 4: They're Too Expensive
Electric cars are cheaper than you may think. Because of existing rebates and incentives, the final cost for a new electric car will likely be significantly under MSRP, and MSRPs are decreasing over time as battery prices decrease. In addition,
the federal tax credit can take up to $7,500 off the overall price depending upon your personal tax liability and the size of the car’s battery (Tesla and General Motors cars no longer qualify for this credit).
State rebates can bring down the cost even further. Rhode Island does not have a state rebate, but Massachusetts has the MOR-EV rebate.
Finally, there’s the Drive Green discount. Customers who sign-up to test drive a car through the website are eligible for discounts offered by participating dealers.
All of these incentives really add up; check out Drive Green to see how inexpensive your next electric vehicle can be. (Electric cars have lower fuel and maintenance costs too!)
Myth 5: They're Bad for the Environment
Electric cars are much better for the environment than gas-powered cars. When running on electricity, electric cars have zero tail-pipe emissions, and they’re significantly cleaner even when you take into account electricity generation. A plug-in hybrid plugged into the electric grid in New England is responsible for less than half of the emissions of a gas-powered car, while a pure battery electric vehicle is responsible for less than a quarter!
Plus, the electricity grid is getting cleaner and cleaner every year with laws like the Massachusetts Renewable Energy Portfolio Standard and the Rhode Island Renewable Energy Standard that require utilities to increase the amount of renewables in their portfolio every year.
Still curious? Check-out our page on environment and health.