The health benefits (both physical and mental) of “Nature”, based on numerous studies, have shown our use of experiential learning in the natural environment. To achieve all possibilities, both physical and mental, there is, “Ecotherapy”, which some also call “Green therapy” or “Natural therapy”. This practice consists of the emerging field of “Ecopsychology”, which was developed by Theodore Roszak. In the case of Ecopsychology, it offers people the opportunity to explore the relationship they have with nature.
“Nature Therapy” programs are carried out in a distant natural place, far from civilization, to provide participants with a distancing from everyday distractions, which will promote knowledge, thought and reflections of the experiences in this environment, helping them to focus on the here and now.
The “Earth” connection.
Our connection to the Earth is at the core of Ecotherapy. Many doctors who use nature as therapy believe that the Earth can self-straighten what has strayed from its natural course. This operates through very complex systems of integrated balance, which when people harmonize with nature, they can experience a great improvement for their mental and even physical health.
Nature connected with your mind.
The origin of many diseases lies in the disconnection of people with their environment and with nature; Eco therapy suggests returning to the positive benefits of reconnecting with it. According to studies carried out in this field, it has been concluded that contact with nature activates beneficial effects that come not only from what people see but from what they can experience through all their senses.
Activities or techniques that you can do in nature.
The types of interventions used in this field are many. And some activities can be carried out either by yourself or with the guidance of a therapist, some are done in groups, as a couple, but it is your decision whether you want to do them accompanied.
Meditation: Nature meditation comes in a natural setting, whether in a park, on the beach, or even in your garden. Meditate on your purposes, on your thoughts, the objective is to find yourself, relax, and have that connection with Mother Earth.
Exercises: This can be activities, such as jogging, walking, biking, or doing yoga. They will help you with stress, anxiety, depression, and anger.
Horticultural therapy: Plants or activities related to the garden can be used to promote our well-being. Activities may include digging the soil, planting, pruning, and collecting leaves.
Environmental Conservation: This can help create a sense of purpose, hope, and will help you nurture your connection to the earth.
Finally, it is very significant that people do not require spending as much time in a green environment to achieve the positive effects that nature can provide, since even with a simple vision, perhaps from a window or even through photographs, you can achieve a better state of mind and balanced mental health.