Foods To Avoid In Irritable Bowel Syndrome
IBS or Irritable Bowel Syndrome occurs when the gastrointestinal tract becomes either ulcerated or inflamed. The cause of such occurrence or disorder is brought about by either genetic reasons or environmental reasons. One environmental reason is food consumption. Actually, there are no specific diets that one must follow, especially for those who are diagnosed with Irritable Bowel Syndrome. Every individual is different, yet in spite of these differences, there are lists of common foods that may trigger Irritable Bowel Syndrome:
Avoiding dairy products
Dairy products are known to have casein and protein whey which the human body has trouble digesting and can, therefore, trigger symptoms associated with Irritable Bowel Syndrome. Also, they are high in fat which is another thing that one should avoid.
It is a known stimulant that leads to the contraction of the gastrointestinal system. Beverages that are high in caffeine include coffee and tea. Decaffeinated coffee also contains an enzyme which greatly affects the irritation of the gastrointestinal system. So, it is far better to avoid any caffeinated or decaffeinated beverages to prevent the stimulation of the symptoms of Irritable Bowel Syndrome
Avoiding sugar substitutes and artificial sweeteners
Sugar substitutes and artificial sweeteners are known to trigger diarrhea and also irritate the gastrointestinal system. This is difficult to avoid, for they are present in almost all food. Hence, it is suggested that one reads the labels of the products to alert one of the ingredients that the product has before buying it.
Avoiding Fatty foods
It is far most important that one avoid foods which are high in fats which are unabsorbed by the gastrointestinal tract and results in diarrhea.
Avoiding foods that are fried
Studies shows that when one consumes more fried foods, it is an unhealthy habit and thus is not good for the digestive system.
Avoiding red meat
Red meat is known to contain fats, which, as mentioned earlier, is bad for the digestive system because it cannot be easily digested. Furthermore, it has a free radical fest which forms dead foaming cells and can be carcinogenic in nature.
Avoiding alcoholic beverages
Alcohol is an irritant to the gastrointestinal system, in that it creates acidity. Also, it leads to dehydration and brings about severe attacks of symptoms associated with the Irritable Bowel Syndrome. However, some people who drink beverages moderately can tolerate such symptoms.
Avoiding carbonated drinks
It is known that carbonated drinks contain sugars and artificial sweeteners which are bad for a person having Irritable Bowel Syndrome. In addition, they also cause bloating and gassiness.
Avoiding Insoluble Fiber
Research shows that insoluble fiber can be irritating to a person who is suffering from Irritable Bowel Syndrome. However, insoluble fiber is naturally healthy. There are just some people who find this food bad for their system.
These are the common foods that people should avoid when they have irritable bowel syndrome. As mentioned earlier, each of the individuals suffering from IBS is different. One difference is the triggering foods. In order for the people to avoid such triggering foods, they should write them down or have a diary to keep track of the food eaten and the response of the body to it after consumption. It is suggested that the person reads the label before buying. By managing and controlling the symptoms associated with IBS, one can carry on with daily life normally without worrying.