This is Tempo gives students the skills and knowledge to listen to music in a new way. With their new special vocabulary to define the speed of music, they can actually analyze and create music using their new skills.
Students will listen to selections from musical compositions by Aaron Copland and Charles Ives. They will take their pulse after each piece and record the data in an Excel spreadsheet. Students will use a graphic organizer to record reactions to each piece. This will be used to illustrate the concept of consonance and dissonance. They will then use Excel to create one graph showing their pulse for each piece and another graph comparing their pulse to the class average for each piece.
Students will learn to appreciate the beauty of the instruments in an orchestra, differentiate the sounds created by the instruments and relate the music to artwork Los Tres Musicos by Pablo Picasso, and the following exhibits at the National Cowboy and Western Heritage Museum: The Guitar: Art, Artists and Artisans; The Power of Music - Photographic Portraits of Americans and their Musical Instruments 1860-1915.
After learning about the Great Depression and the New Deal as part of a Social Science unit, students will explore the Works Progress Administration (WPA) Federal One Program that operated from 1935-1943. The Federal Art Project (FAP) was one arm of the WPA and included the Theater Project called "Sing for Your Supper". The song Ballad for Americans (formerly Ballad for Uncle Sam) was written for this project. Students will watch and listen to Paul Robeson sing Ballad for Americans from an online video.
Franklin Roosevelt introduced The New Deal to boost the economy that was shattered by the Wall Street Crash. Students will research the acts and agencies that were to help restore prosperity through expansive government intervention in the economy. Music integration will be in the following components: classical music for the video, poster of the biography of the composer and why he wrote the piece; and analysis of why students choose the classical piece for their video.
The lesson helps the students learn to compare and contrast their current life with the past. It is designed to help them learn to more thoughtfully listen to a composer's piece and write a descriptive paragraph of their interpretation.
This is a series of lessons on Carnival of the Animals by Camille Saint-Saëns, and is the culmination of a science unit on animals. During the animal unit, students learned about the different ways animals move. As an extension to the concept of how animals move, they were introduced to the book that accompanies the music of Carnival of the Animals. Each day we read and listened to one selection from the book and CD. We discussed various musical elements such as dynamics, tempo, and orchestration.
After learning about the discovery of nuclear radiation and the development of nuclear weapons, students will create a claymation video to illustrate nuclear decay, fusion, fission and nuclear chain reactions. Student write scripts and story boards, create backdrops, clay characters, and add music, voice over and text to demonstrate their understanding of the subject.
After learning about the life of composer Ludwig van Beethoven and listening to a variety of musical selections, the students will create an Ode to Beethoven to express their appreciation and knowledge for his life and musical talent. In addition, the students learned about the artist Andy Warhol, and will use this knowledge to create an art piece of Beethoven in the style of Warhol.