|Information Resources for:
|Reference Guides for Specific Branches
Chemical Data Sources
To Table of Contents
The Web version of the Encyclopaedia Britannica is an excellent source
for general articles on scientific topics, and for biographical articles
on noted scientists. Articles contain the full text of the print encyclopedia,
as well as links to some relevant Web sites outside Britannica.
NIST Reference on Constants,
Units and Uncertainty
This National Institute of Standards and Technology has a searchable
and browsable list of the important physical constants with bibliography,
as well as a thorough description of the SI system of units and a description
of methods of expressing degree of uncertainty in measurements. An excellent
The Laws List
This collection of laws, rules and constants in physics, compiled by
Erik Max Francis, includes a number of interest in physical chemistry,
e.g. the gas laws, Rydberg formula, etc.
WebElements is a hypertext-linked collection of property data on the
first 112 elements including (where available): general, chemical, physical,
nuclear, electronic, biological, geological, crystallographic, reduction
potential, isotopic abundances, electronic configurations, ionization enthalpy
data and additional textual information, especially on the history of the
Visual Elements Periodic
This site, created by the Chemical Society, is notable for its artistic
displays of each element and "periodic landscapes" - computer generated
three-dimensional images of various physical properties of the elements.
A history of the periodic table is included, as well as basic physical
properties of each element (the latter require an Adobe Acrobat reader.)
Table Of The Nuclides
The Table of the Nuclides first presents a map of all known nuclides.
Each horizontal row represents one element; colored dots indicate the known
isotopes of that element. A vertical column represents the nuclides with
same neutron numbers. By clicking on a region of the chart, you may see
a more detailed chart section. From the colors on the chart, you can get
an idea of the life time of a nuclide. By clicking on a cell, you can get
properties of the nuclide or atom.
Periodic Table of the Elements
This is a compilation of magnetic resonance data on the elements in
periodic table form, compiled by the NMR facility at Texas A&M University.
This site contains links to the NIST collections of physical data which
have so far been made available over the web, plus a catalog of other NIST
NIST Chemistry Webbook
The NIST WebBook will provide access to the full array of data compiled
and distributed by NIST under the Standard Reference Data Program. The
current edition, the Chemistry WebBook, contains, among other data:
(1) Thermodynamic data on an extensive set of organic and small inorganic
compounds - Enthalpy of formation, Heat capacity and Entropy for over 5000
(2) A large set of ion-energetics data - Ionization potential and Appearance
potential for over 14,000 compounds.
(3) IR spectra, mass spectra and electronic/vibrational spectra data
for thousands of compounds.
(4) Reaction thermochemistry data for over 8000 reactions.
(5) Constants of diatomic molecules (spectroscopic data) for over 6000
(6) Thermophysical property data for 16 fluids
Data on specific compounds may be located by name, formula or CAS Registry
This database, provided by CambridgeSoft, provides basic physical data
and links to websites containing other data for a large number of chemical
compounds. It is searchable by name, molecular weight, molecular formula,
CAS Registry Number or structure (uploaded in SMILES string format).
This set of databases, created by the Computer Chemistry Center at
the University of Erlangen, includes the WWW Chemical Structure Database,
containing more than 2250 automatically collected chemical structures from
the Internet, complete with information about the referring HTML pages.
It is searchable by name, CAS Registry Number, molecular formula and other
data, as well as by structure (uploaded in SMILES string format). Also
available are collections of 3D structure coordinates, GIF and VRML renditions
of molecules and more. An excellent site.
CODATA Key Values
The Committee on Data for Science and Technology (CODATA) has conducted
a project to establish internationally agreed values for the thermodynamic
properties of key chemical substances. This table presents the final results
of the project. Use of these recommended, internally consistent values
is encouraged in the analysis of thermodynamic measurements, data reduction,
and preparation of other thermodynamic tables. The table includes the standard
enthalpy of formation at 298.15 K, the entropy at 298.15 K, and the quantity
° (298.15 K)-H °(0). A value of 0 in the DeltafH
° column for an element indicates the reference state for that
element. The standard state pressure is 100000 Pa (1 bar).
This database, compiled at Virginia Tech and made available by Colby
College, provides physical data on a large number of organic compounds,
including molecular weight, melting point, boiling point, index of refraction
and UV absorption peaks. It is searchable by name, molecular formula or
by data values for the above properties.
of the Properties of 200 Linear Macromolecules and Small Molecules
This resource, maintained by Oak Ridge National Laboratory and the
University of Tennessee - Knoxville, tabulates selected thermophysical
properties for a variety of polymers and some other substances. Properties
are primarily related to glass-amorphous transitions, specific heats, etc.
The tables are a bit hard to decipher, but there are good explanations.
SOLV-DB is a database of physical, chemical, health and safety, regulatory
and environmental fate data on over 100 common organic solvents, provided
by the National Center for Manufacturing Sciences. It is searchable by
name, formula, CAS Registry Number, property data values and so forth.
The Good Scents Co. Information
This commercial site includes an information index on a wide variety
of compounds used in the perfumery industry. The index is divided into
categories, such as "essential oils" and "perfumery raw materials (synthetic)".
Within each category, compounds are listed alphabetically (using ASCII
alphabetization, so compounds whose names begin with "(+)", "(-)" or numbers
gravitate to the top of the lists. Compound records give synonyms, descriptions
of aroma and perfumery uses, and CAS RN's, and physical property data (density,
mp, bp) where available. Unfortunately, the index is not searchable by
name or by property, which would enhance its value tremendously, but the
site is crossreferenced from Chemfinder (see above), so indirect searching
is possible. Still, its information on compound odors is perhaps unique
on the Internet.
IUPAC Chemical Nomenclature
This site, created by G.P. Moss of Queen Mary and Westfield College,
contains a number of IUPAC documents on organic and biochemical nomenclature,
in many cases including sample structure diagrams.
of Organic Chemistry
Another good nomenclature site, easily browsable and searchable, provided
by Advanced Chemistry Development (ACD) Inc.
Hazardous Chemicals Database
This database, created at the University of Akron, will allow the user
to retrieve information for any of over 1300 hazardous chemicals based
on a keyword search. Potential keywords include names, formula and registry
numbers (CAS, DOT, RTECS and EPA).
ECDIN - Environmental
Chemicals Data Information Network
ECDIN is a factual databank, created under the Environmental Research
Programme of the Joint Research Centre (JRC) of the Commission of European
Communities at the Ispra Establishment. Chemicals are searchable by name,
molecular formula or CAS Registry Number. Possible available date include:
Identification, Physical-Chemical Properties, Production and Use, Legislation
and Rules, Occupational Health and Safety, Toxicity, Concentrations and
Fate in the Environment, Detection Methods, Hazards and Emergency. Not
all chemicals listed will have data in all fields.
While this web site does not actually list thermophysical or thermochemical
data, it is an extremely useful index to such data available in a host
of printed data collections (excluding Beilstein, Landolt-Bornstein, the
CRC Handbook and Perry's Handbook), searchable by name of property, class
of compound, specific compound or combinations of the above. Thermodex
is the creation of the Library of the University of Texas at Austin.
Materials Safety Data Sheets Sites
Materials Safety Data Sheets contain basic safety information on the storage,
handling and use of chemicals. Manufacturers are required to provide them
on request for any chemical products they sell. There are a number of Internet
sites which provide electronic collections of MSDS's for quick reference.
To Table of Contents
MSDS related links
from University of Georgia
This web site contains a list of MSDS web sites from a variety of sources.
MSDS from Vermont SIRI
This site from Vermont Safety Resources on the Internet contains a
searchable collection of MSDS from a variety of chemical manufacturers.
It also includes a large collection of links to other Web MSDS sites. Vermont
SIRI also maintains a good collection of links to other health and safety
sites on the Vermont SIRI Web Site.
MSDS from PTCL in Oxford, U.K.
This Web site contains an alphabetically grouped collection of MSDS
from a variety of sources. The collection is maintained by the Physical
and Theoretical Chemistry Laboratory at the University of Oxford.
This site is maintained by Envirocare International, Inc. It is a free
service bringing together MSDS's from a wide range of chemical manufacturers
(over 1000 manufacturers as of 6/99) and public databases. The site includes
a glossary of MSDS terminology and links to sites which explain the how
and why of MSDS's
To Table of Contents
University Chemistry Department WWW sites
The following are links to the web pages of academic chemistry and/or biochemistry
departments in California, the rest of the United States and the world.
Nearly all have contact information, lists of faculty and courses and other
More information about many programs in the United States and Canada
may be found in the ACS Directory of Graduate Research. The 1999 version
is available at DGRWeb.
For rankings of Ph.D chemistry programs in the U.S., see the
News and World Report rankings, last updated for chemistry in 1999.
Rankings are given for chemistry in general and for the specialties of
analytical, bio-organic/biophysical, inorganic, organic, physical and polymer
and Molecular Biology departments are listed separately.
For other information about programs in the U.S. and Canada, see Peterson's
Guide to Graduate and Professional Study or Peterson's
Guide to Undergraduate Colleges
To Table of Contents
These are major collections of World Wide Web information in chemistry.
Some of the sources they link to may duplicate each other or the Infosurf
Chemistry Page, but you will also find unique resources. If you spot any
resources that you think should receive their own listings here, contact
Springboard from Umeå University
This is an excellent collection of Internet resources dealing specifically
with analytical chemistry.
Australian Chemistry Network
WWW Virtual Library at Harvard
This biochemistry resource collection is part of the excellent "WWW
Virtual Library" alliance of sites.
Biomolecular & Biosequence
On the same server as the above, this is one of the best lists of the
ever-growing libraries of biosequence information available on the Web.
This is a pooling of Web resources from the American Chemical Society
and Chemical Abstracts Service, including STNEasy, Chemcyclopedia and more.
It will eventually feature unique resources as well.
ChemDex from the University of Sheffield
ChemDex is one of the premier collections of chemistry sites on the
Web, extremely comprehensive and well organized. See also ChemWeb below.
An excellent recently developed site with a huge collection of links
organized by subject class (unfortunately, the links are identified by
the page title, which isn't always very descriptive), as well as a nice
collection of online tools like a molecular mass calculator, chemical software
links, and job and conference listings.
ChemInfo from Indiana University:
This site, created by Gary Wiggins, chemistry librarian at Indiana
University, is excellent, especially for chemical information instruction
Chemistry : Yahoo
Yahoo's hierarchical collection of chemistry resources is extremely
large, if not very selective or well-maintained.
This site, new for 1998 from the Royal Society of Chemistry in Great
Britain, provides a wide range of chemical resources, especially links
to academic, educational and scholarly society web sites, and a list of
forthcoming conferences and events.
from Nanyang Technological University in Singapore
This site is extensive, very well organized and annotated and attractively
displayed. Well worth a look, especially for newsgroups and Asian resources.
This site is an "Internet club for chemists", containing chat rooms,
forums, a "shopping mall" with links to suppliers, a "library" with full-text
journals from various publishers and databases from MDL Information Systems,
Inc., job postings, its own online magazine for chemists (The Alchemist)
and other services. ChemWeb now includes ChemDex Plus, a searchable version
of the excellent Sheffield ChemDex site. Members must register, but membership
Another hierarchically organized collection; like Yahoo, it is large
but not well maintained.
Chemical Resources: WWW Virtual Library from Karlsruhe
As the name implies, this site focuses on Internet chemical resources
based in Germany. Available in both German and English versions.
A large collection of links to Web chemistry resources, well-classified
and updated. Also available in a German language version.
INFOMINE Physical Sciences from
Not one of the largest physical science sites, but notable for its
use of assigned subject headings and keywords for better searching of the
Information Retrieval in
This interesting new site, maintained at the Institute of Physical
Chemistry, NCSR "Demokritos" in Athens, Greece, is notable for its detailed
subject classification of the numerous sites to which it links.
Chemistry Web (English version)
This site is sponsored by the Organization of American States and hosted
by CINVESTAV in Mexico. It is especially good for addresses and contacts
for Latin American universities and has a host of useful links. It is also
available in a Spanish
Links for Chemists
A superb collection of links maintained by Prof. Michael Barker at
the University of Liverpool Department of Chemistry. "Links" is notable
for its comprehensiveness, frequent updating and identification of new
NIST Virtual Library
Chemistry Subject Guide
This guide to chemistry Web resources from the National Institute of
Standards and Technology is not huge, but does contain a few unique links.
This web site, headquartered in Quebec, Canada, has an extensive collection
of well-selected links to Internet resources in chemistry, entirely in
French. Each of the individual links has been annotated.
Rolf Claessen's Chemistry
This is a very comprehensive, frequently updated collection of links
covering all areas of chemistry.
SciQuest provides a searchable and browsable collection of links to
a vast number of chemical and equipment suppliers. Users may enter as guests,
or register as members free of charge.
Data and Property Calculation Sites on the Web
An extensive collection of thermodynamic data Web sites from the Thermodynamics
Research Lab at the University of Illinois at Chicago.
Wendy Warr & Co.
This web site for the consulting firm operated by renowned chemical
information specialist Wendy Warr includes links to excellent collections
of information on current meetings, combinatorial chemistry and chemical
structure information on the Web.
To Table of Contents
Return to Internet Page
Author: Chuck Huber (firstname.lastname@example.org).
Direct questions or comments about this page to the author or to email@example.com.
This is an
official University of California, Santa Barbara Library web page. Please
read the Mission
Statement and Policies
and Procedures regarding this server. You may also view statistics
for this server.