Find information on common issues.
Ask questions and find answers from other users.
Suggest a new site feature or improvement.
Check on status of your tickets.
In solid-state physics, the electronic band structure of a solid describes ranges of energy that an electron is "forbidden" or "allowed" to have. It is a function of the diffraction of the quantum mechanical electron waves in the periodic crystal lattice with a specific crystal system and Bravais lattice. The band structure of a material determines several characteristics, in particular its electronic and optical properties. More information on Band structure can be found here.
Ranking is calculated from a formula comprised of user reviews and usage data. Learn more ›
13 May 2010 | Downloads | Contributor(s): Chanaka Suranjith Rupasinghe, Mufthas Rasikim
ninithi which is a free and opensource modelling software, can be used to visualize and analyze carbon allotropes used in nanotechnology. You can generate 3-D visualization of Carbon nanotubes, …
Bulk Bandstructure in MATLAB: Pseudopotential Method
08 Feb 2010 | Downloads | Contributor(s): Muhanad Zaki
This code (MATLAB) readily calculates and plots the bandstructure of Silicon (bulk) using the empirical pseudopotential method. Detailed instructions are in the compressed archive. I hope it would …
ECE 539 Report: Study of two-dimensional Shrodinger-Poisson Solver
01 Jun 2009 | Downloads | Contributor(s): Fawad Hassan
We solve the 2-Dimensional Shrodinger-Poisson system of equations using a self consistent scheme (like Gummel Iteration). We study a double gate Silicon Mosfet oriented in the 100 direction using the …
MATLAB Scripts for "Quantum Transport: Atom to Transistor"
15 Mar 2005 | Downloads | Contributor(s): Supriyo Datta
Tinker with quantum transport models! Download the MATLAB scripts used to demonstrate the physics described in Supriyo Datta's book Quantum Transport: Atom to Transistor. These simple models are less …
nanoHUB.org, a resource for nanoscience and nanotechnology, is supported by the National Science Foundation and other funding agencies.