When I was in a language school in Canada, students in the afternoon class discussed differences between one’s own country and Canada. In that discussion, a student spoke about “peeling”.
According to the student (I think she was Japanese), most Canadian people eat apples without peeling. This is not limited in apples but also potatoes, peaches, plums, and other stuff.
In fact, my host mother never peels potatoes, carrots, cucumbers and other vegetables. When I saw that my host mother cooked potatoes without peeling and picking germs which contains toxin, I was quite surprised the habit because it is obvious for Japanese those potatoes germs need to be removed when they cook.
In my case, I peel anything which has skin. When I consider about nutrition, I don’t peel some vegetables though. However, I had never eaten peaches skin until I came to Canada.
A teacher who has stayed Japan as an English teacher argued against it. He said Japanese people peel too much. Believe it or not, the reason comes from plenty of agricultural chemicals according to the teacher, and Japanese have to peel vegetables and fruits skin because of it.
Interestingly enough, the teacher even doesn’t peel kiwi. The fact absolutely couldn’t be for Japanese students. He said only fruit he peels is banana, I am not sure wether he eats watermelons or grape fruits skin or not though.
The reason of peeling habits in Japan comes from fastidious character. Moreover, I think skins of vegetables and fruits in Japan are harder and thicker than Canadian ones what I realized when I compared the differences of fruits between in Japan and Canada. Peaches in Japan for instance have down, and it really bother in one’s mouth, the down is few on Canadian peaches meanwhile. Things are the same in apples. It is really hard to eat Japanese apples with its skin.
I don’t know peeling situation in other countries, but I think there is no country like Japan. Peeling seems to be wasteful for some people because skins contain nutrition.
How about peeling situation in your country? Do you peel?