Cleopatra, the famed Egyptian Queen born in 69 B.C., is shown to have been brought by Roman ruler Julius Caesar at age 18. Caesar becomes sexually obsessed by the 18 year old queen, beds ... See full summary »
A look at the life of Alfred Kinsey (Neeson), a pioneer in the area of human sexuality research, whose 1948 publication "Sexual Behavior in the Human Male" was one of the first recorded works that saw science address sexual behavior.
This is the story of Alan Freed. He was working as a DJ in Cleveland, Ohio, and he discovered how amazing R&B or Rhytym & Blues is, however, the music is considered to be "BLACK" music. So,... See full summary »
Cleopatra, the famed Egyptian Queen born in 69 B.C., is shown to have been brought by Roman ruler Julius Caesar at age 18. Caesar becomes sexually obsessed by the 18 year old queen, beds her, and eventually has a son by her. However, his Roman followers and his wife are not pleased by the union. In fact, as Caesar has only a daughter by his wife, he had picked Octavian as his successor. The out-of-wedlock son of Cleopatra is seen to be a threat to his future leadership. Thus Brutus and other Roman legislators plot the assassination of Caesar. Caesar's loyal general, Marc Antony, and Octavian then divide up the Roman empire. Antony takes Egypt and soon takes up the affair with Cleopatra. However, Octavian soon launches an attack on Antony and ultimately defeats and mortally wounds him. Rather than permitting herself to be humiliated by Octavian, Cleopatra sends her son away to India and she commits suicide by permitting the deadly asp to bite her. Written by
John Sacksteder <firstname.lastname@example.org>
Arsinoe was captured by the Romans, but not strangled by Cleopatra's guards in Egypt as shown. She was taken as a captive to Rome in 46 BC and remained alive, living in a Roman temple until 41 BC, when she was executed on Marc Antony's orders. See more »
The sets, costumes and backdrops are kaleidoscopic with meticulous attention to detail. Timothy Dalton brought his years of stage work to the part and Caesar seemed bigger than life. He has seasoned well in the years since playing 007 and his strong masculine presence, rich baritone and passion carried part 1. He is convincing in his love for Cleopatra and their son. Leonor did her best to educate us to Cleopatra's fierce Patriotism. Her curvy figure in the filmy costumes came to life with a feline fluidity. Billy Zane makes a good choice for the young brash Antony, a loyal soldier/playful child. His huge smile and coltish antics would be difficult not to like. His intense shame at comrades and battles lost, is moving and heartfelt. So what is not to like in this film? Leonor's lack of acting experience drained life from this story. She managed playing the spoiled rich girl well enough. But her many temper tantrums and pouting ways lacked depth. Dalton carried their love scenes. But alas, the sophomoric grappling of Leonor and Zane in part 2 was anything but passionate. It is hard to believe that scene wasn't reshot. They looked like they were playing Twister in drag. Zane did well playing the good soldier, but a man not suited for leadership. For all this, renting this video is well worth the time. Its adherence to history far outdoes the Taylor/Burton film.
And watching the 'love scene' between Leonor and Zane in fast forward mode will always good for a laugh.
5 of 8 people found this review helpful.
Was this review helpful to you?