Copyright © 2009 All rights reserved.
Current Biology, Volume 19, Issue 7, R269-R270, 14 April 2009
News focusAdd/View Comments (0)
- The battle for whale conservation is intensifying ahead of a key meeting in June. Nigel Williams reports.
The outcome of a meeting of the International Whaling Commission (IWC) in Rome last month has strengthened fears of a change of direction by the commission not only towards increased whaling but a weakening of the research and conservation activities to such an extent that the moratorium on commercial whaling, in place since 1986, is threatened.
For several years, the IWC has been working on a detailed scientific plan known as the ‘revised management procedure’ to ensure all catch limits for any future whaling would be within sustainable limits calculated using available population data.
But in Rome, where about half of the 84-member countries attended the ‘intersessional’ meeting between full meetings of the IWC, members agreed to sidestep the scientific process and authorise a Small Working Group of member countries to continue developing a package of proposals for the resumption of whaling relying on ad hoc catch limits set for five years at a time. This would grant Japan permission to hunt minke whales in its coastal waters in exchange for scaling back its ‘scientific’ whaling in the Southern Ocean.
Many nations opposed to whaling were outraged by these developments and frustrated by the lack of scientific data. At the Rome meeting, Australia's environment minister, Peter Garrett, announced a new Southern Ocean Research Partnership to study whales in a non-lethal way.
“This is about building the world's most comprehensive whale research partnership with countries interested in developing an agreed scientific approach to research — one that doesn't involve killing whales,” he said.
A review by the IWC two years ago of Japan's scientific program concluded that the questions they supposedly set out to answer, such as the natural mortality rate, remained unresolved, despite the killing of thousands of whales.
The new Southern Ocean Research Partnership held its first meeting in Sydney almost immediately after the IWC Rome meeting. Countries taking part included Chile, Costa Rica, France, Germany, Italy, Mexico, New Zealand, Peru, South Africa and the US.
Garrett hopes the new partnership will be the first of several regional partnerships that will counteract the bitter split in the IWC between the handful of whaling nations and the vast majority opposed to whaling that have stalled the work of the commission for years.
The new partnership is an opportunity “for us all to examine current Southern Ocean research efforts, discuss research projects, identify knowledge gaps and mark out how to build a scientific research programme based on non-lethal methods,” Garrett said, ahead of the inaugural Sydney meeting.
Many countries were complicit in the destruction of the world's whales during the twentieth century and “nowhere was it greater in scale or intensity than the Southern Ocean, where blue, fin, right, and humpback whales were pursued to the very edge of extinction,” Garrett said. “Australia acknowledges its own involvement in this tragedy and we must learn from mistakes of the past to make sure they are never repeated again.”
Today, some species are showing healthy signs of recovery, with humpback and southern right whales increasing in numbers, but the majority of species have increased from threatened to endangered. “Antarctic blue whales remain at an estimated two per cent or so of their original population size and the endangered fin whales, of which around 750,000 were killed in the Southern Ocean, remain low and far from assured,” Garrett said.
“The Commission's history of gridlock is simply not acceptable. It is taking the cause of whale conservation backwards…”
The final report of the IWC Small Working Group on Japan's plans to hunt local minke whales is due to be published by the middle of next month and presented to the full annual meeting of the IWC on the Portuguese island of Madeira in June where it is likely to be fiercely contested if any relaxation on whaling is suggested.
“Ultimately, we want the IWC to become more science and conservation focused and we believe the Southern Ocean Research Partnership is the best way to achieve this,” said Garrett.
“The Commission's history of gridlock is simply not acceptable. It is taking the cause of whale conservation backwards, and in the spirit of finding a way forward, Australia will continue to listen and discuss all views, standing firm in our opposition to commercial and so-called scientific whaling,” Garrett said.
After a moratorium on commercial whaling since 1986, prospects of its return in whatever form being sanctioned at the Madeira meeting in June are uniting anti-whaling groups in opposition.