History Of Video Games
Games have been with us for a very long time, from board games to physical games (Ex: Football) to video games to the most crazy games, they still been around us like catch. But all games need something to make it a game. Basketball needs a ball, poker needs cards, "Monopoly" needs a board, even video games need electronics like computers or television. Even though the game has to be invented, it could be that you invent it, and that it has its ups and downs. Basketball made it into the streets, but had troubles make a court, track needed to buy land for a field, and computer games needed a computer. the computers they had aren't like the computers we have today. They were very slow and hard to use. It was a bump on the road for video games, but they still tried. Also like every game, someone came up of the idea of making it, but that someone doesn't always do it. But after World War II, computers were moved out of the labs so people can use them for useful things and sometime might do something about it. Some day people who has ideas to do something will. So some day people will invent all kinds of games that they can use. But I'm studying video games.
In the 1950's, Ralph Bauer made the first game console. But like most video game console creator, he wanted a big company to sponsor it so that it can sell. So one day Ralph went to the television company Magnavox and asked them to sponsor it. Then Magnavox took Ralph's invention and used it as there own. They called it the Magnavox Odyssey and put it into stores in 1972. The Magnavox Odyssey wasn't a very popular console. It was not a best seller and sure wasn't that good. You couldn't even see the game on the television. It had bad graphics and horrible game play. Even though video games were in this bad situation, they still tried to make more.
Atari 2600 was the first video game console that became a seller do to the hit game "Space Invaders." I myself like that game allot in the arcade. It was a huge hit and came out in 1977, with a lot of potential. It was the first video game console to shut down some computer games and even close them during this time period. Though it caught on with the system and started to make some new games. It was able to play those new games because it was some kind of wiring to it the helps it play all kinds of games like the all time favorite "Pacman." Even though it had a crash in 1983 it still came back up to entertain more and more people. So video games went on and on even until this day.
With its last console the Atari jaguar, Atari fell out of business. Instead people bought the new Sony play station launched in September 9, 1995 and behind it sega and Nintendo. sega kept at Nintendo's side until Nintendo took out Nintendo 64 and sega was run out of business. Microsoft came out of nowhere with its xbox console and award winning halo1 and 2 games in 2001 and then there's Nintendo still holding up and gaining popularity with its Nintendo game cube console in 2001. But right after play station came play station 2 which you can obviously see kids went for the second play station instead of the first in 2004. Then in 2005, Microsoft upgrades their popular xbox to xbox 360 with a better halo3 game. 2006 was a very popular year for sony and nintendo. Sony unleashed its playstation 3 with its nice game play and very good graphical games. Next to it was nintendo with its new Wii with its very interactive games and exercising motion sensor. I myself have only a playstation2 with probably 30 games but i have still have a dell computer with good MMORPG's(if you don't know what then it means massively multi player online role playing game).