Bible Prophecy Research
Title: California Earthquake 12/22/03
Submitted by: firstname.lastname@example.org
California Earthquake 12/22/03
Ever since I read the article below that states that because of this earthquake planet Earth rang "like a bell" I've been obsessed with trying to find out what exactly this event portends for end-times watchers. Everyone in these circles are usually waiting to the hear the sound of a trumpet/shofar but who would the sound of a bell interest? I have been meditating and praying about this and feel that this earthquake was a warning for the Church; the bell imagery denotes a church steeple as opposed to the Jewish imagery of a shofar and clarifies just who the message is for. Below the two leading articles are a few things that came to mind as I read them (I added the red font) which seem to point to something significant about to happen to/for the body of Christ.
On further prayer and reflection on the meaning of this earthquake I would like to add the following: lately I have been seeing anniversaries of events where people died and they always seem to ring a bell once for each person lost and I thought that that is exactly what happened during this earthquake. This earthquake rang like a bell in memory of the late, great planet earth. This is one time where the poet's words were actually true for everyone living on the earth—"Ask not for whom the bell tolls, it tolls for thee."
Hark can you hear?...only time will tell...
Earthquake collapses historic building, killing 2
Tremors felt along much of California coast
Tuesday, December 23, 2003 Posted: 8:54 AM EST (1354 GMT)
PASO ROBLES, California (CNN) -- Two people died when a historic building collapsed in Paso Robles after a strong earthquake jolted the central California coast Monday and sent tremors from Los Angeles to San Francisco and beyond.
The quake registered a preliminary magnitude of 6.5 when it hit about 11:15 a.m. (2:15 p.m. ET), the U.S. Geological Survey said.
Its epicenter was about six miles northeast of the coastal town of San Simeon, about 240 miles north of Los Angeles and 200 miles south of San Francisco. But it occurred at the relatively shallow depth of about five miles and was felt across a wide swath of the state.
"We have reports of motion being perceptible from way south of Los Angeles to way north of San Francisco," said Bill Ellsworth, chief scientist of the earthquake hazards team for the U.S. Geological Survey in Menlo Park near San Francisco.
About 50 aftershocks with magnitudes of about 3.0 were reported within three hours of the original quake, Ellsworth said.
In about one in 20 earthquakes, an aftershock is more powerful than the original quake, he said and urged area residents not to enter structures that may have been damaged.
Scientists had no warning of the shock, which occurred in an area that has experienced a large number of small earthquakes in recent years, he said.
"It apparently occurred without any significant foreshocks, but this is not unusual."
In Paso Robles, about 30 miles inland, Jennifer Murick, 19, of Atascadero, and Marilyn Zafuto, 55, of Paso Robles, were killed by falling debris from the collapse of the city's landmark clock tower, police said.
Police and fire officials completed a search of the rubble late Monday with cadaver-sniffing dogs and determined that there were no additional casualties.
The tower was on a corner of a two-story building constructed in 1892. It was across from a municipal park and housed a jewelry store, said Madelyn Stemper, an accountant at a nearby office.
"A lot of the buildings across from the park in both directions are pretty well demolished," she said.
In all, 40 people sought medical attention in northern San Luis Obispo County, said Sgt. Bob Adams of the Paso Robles Police Department.
One person who was pulled from a destroyed restaurant called the House of Bread suffered a broken arm, but the other complaints were chest pains, heart and respiratory problems, he said.
The streets were packed with holiday shoppers at the time of the collapse.
"We're fortunate we didn't have any additional fatalities," Adams said.
Firefighters worked Monday night to shore up or tear down some of the 46 buildings damaged in the five square blocks of downtown Paso Robles, he said.
Another Paso Robles resident, Bijan Eskandanian, said he and his wife were walking down the street when the quake hit "like a shock wave in a bomb blast," he said. "It almost knocked us off our feet."
City officials said businesses and homes near downtown were destroyed by the quake, which ruptured gas and water lines. They urged residents to use bottled water for drinking and cooking until the city's water system can be checked and confirmed safe.
A hot springs well came uncapped in the quake, spreading a heavy sulfur smell over downtown.
Elsewhere, hospitals reported no patients arriving with injuries. A spokesman for Pacific Gas & Electric said about 40,000 customers were without power after the quake triggered rock slides that brought down power lines near San Luis Obispo.
No damage was reported at PG&E's Diablo Canyon nuclear plant, about 100 miles from the epicenter. A plant spokesman said operations continued uninterrupted.
Park rangers in San Simeon ordered evacuation of the Hearst Castle, the palatial home built by newspaper magnate William Randolph Hearst.
The castle is now a state historic site. Ruth Coleman, director of California's state park service, said no structural damage had been detected, but some artifacts from Hearst's extensive collection may have been damaged.
Mary Carson, executive director of the Chamber of Commerce in nearby Cambria, said the rolling lasted for what seemed like a minute.
"At first, it felt like a big truck was going by. Then it kind of rolled," she said.
"Things did fall off the shelves, a couple of windows broke and some ceilings came apart. But, as far as I can tell, I haven't heard of any injuries or severe damage."
Templeton resident Tony Vasquez said he was in the shower when the quake hit. He said he heard "a slight rumble, and then this enormous jolt knocked me down and actually sheared off the shower head."
"I never thought I'd have to wear a seat belt in the shower, " Vasquez said.
Brian Lassiege, a USGS geophysicist, said the quake was relatively shallow, striking about 4.7 miles below the Earth's surface. Lassiege said shallower earthquakes tend to inflict more damage.
USGS geophysicist Ross Stein said the last earthquake of similar size occurred along the same coastal area in 1952, but he said he was not sure on which fault the latest shake occurred.
"But we believe the earthquake occurred on the San Simeon fault not far from the Hearst Castle and Cambria," Stein said.
"This fault extends to the south where ... essentially one long fault that kisses the coastline all the way from where California takes its northward bend near Santa Barbara up to the Golden Gate."
Report: Mountains grew a foot in Calif. quake
Wednesday, December 24, 2003 Posted: 12:41 PM EST (1741 GMT)
LOS ANGELES, California (Reuters) -- California's largest earthquake in four years struck on Monday, causing planet Earth to ring "like a bell" and mountains to grow a foot (30 cm) taller, geologists said.
The magnitude 6.5 quake hit near the coastal city of San Simeon almost exactly half way between San Francisco and Los Angeles, setting high-rise buildings swaying in both cities.
Earthquakes relieve pressure between clashing continental plates. The plates float on the earth's mantle, which has a putty like consistency and moves as the earth's core heats it.
On Monday one piece of crust shoved beneath another about 4.75 miles (7.6 km) beneath the surface of the earth and at the intersection of the Pacific and North American plates, U.S. Geological Survey seismologists said
That sent tremors along America's west coast and beyond.
"For an earthquake this size, every single sand grain on the planet dances to the music of those seismic waves," Geological Survey geologist Ross Stein said Monday at a news conference.
"You may not be able to feel them, but the entire planet is rung like a bell."
The Monday earthquake struck on what is believed to be the San Simeon thrust fault. Pressure in a thrust fault is relieved when one piece of earth pushes up on top of another, compared with lateral faults -- like the famous San Andreas -- in which two piece of crust slide next to one another.
Thrust faults produce mountains, and the San Simeon quake probably improved the view from the nearby hills, Stein said because, "mountains have probably been pushed up about a foot or so by this earthquake."
The tremor was the biggest in California since 1999, when the Hector Mine quake crashed through the desert east of Los Angeles, and it packed about half the power of the Northridge earthquake which shook Los Angeles a decade ago.
Earthquake power is measured on a scale which increases exponentially, so at 6.7 the Northridge quake was about twice as powerful as the 6.5-magnitude San Simeon quake.
The Northridge quake was also one of the costliest disasters in U.S. history, causing over $40 billion of damage since it shook a heavily populated area.
Geologists expect smaller aftershocks of magnitude 5 to continue for days, weeks and longer, and there is a 5 percent to 10 percent chance that Monday's quake was a precursor to a bigger one.
The plates have created a patchwork of faults, said Susan Hough, a seismologist at the United States Geological Survey in the Los Angeles suburb of Pasadena.
"The crust is getting mangled over a zone," she said. "As the plates move they are sort of grinding California into ribbons," she said.
Eventually the movement will carve Mexico's Baja California, the peninsula that juts south below San Diego, California, off from the rest of Mexico.
But California is not going anywhere quickly.
From a geological perspective, the area has looked about the same for 5 million years, Hough told Reuters.
"We are not falling into the ocean," she said.
San is Spanish for Saint so San Simeon means Saint Simeon. In the New Testament Saint Simeon was the man who had it revealed to him by the Holy Ghost that he would not die before he had seen the Messiah; he knew how to discern the times:(KJV) Luke 2:21 And when eight days were accomplished for the circumcising of the child, his name was called JESUS, which was so named of the angel before he was conceived in the womb. 22 And when the days of her purification according to the law of Moses were accomplished, they brought him to Jerusalem, to present him to the Lord; 23 (As it is written in the law of the Lord, Every male that openeth the womb shall be called holy to the Lord;) 24 And to offer a sacrifice according to that which is said in the law of the Lord, A pair of turtledoves, or two young pigeons. 25 And, behold, there was a man in Jerusalem, whose name was Simeon; and the same man was just and devout, waiting for the consolation of Israel: and the Holy Ghost was upon him. 26 And it was revealed unto him by the Holy Ghost, that he should not see death, before he had seen the Lord's Christ. 27 And he came by the Spirit into the temple: and when the parents brought in the child Jesus, to do for him after the custom of the law, 28 Then took he him up in his arms, and blessed God, and said, 29 Lord, now lettest thou thy servant depart in peace, according to thy word: 30 For mine eyes have seen thy salvation, 31 Which thou hast prepared before the face of all people; 32 A light to lighten the Gentiles, and the glory of thy people Israel. 33 And Joseph and his mother marvelled at those things which were spoken of him. 34 And Simeon blessed them, and said unto Mary his mother, Behold, this child is set for the fall and rising again of many in Israel; and for a sign which shall be spoken against; 35 (Yea, a sword shall pierce through thy own soul also,) that the thoughts of many hearts may be revealed. Strong's: 4826 Simeon/Simon ="harkening"
Webster's: hark = to pay close attention: Listen
The San Simeon pertinent to this earthquake is most famous for being near Hearst Castle. This building makes me think of the New Jerusalem.San Simeon Chamber of Commerce:
It isn't accurate to say that San Simeon would not exist if it were not for William Randolph Hearst. It is close however. Perhaps the most famous piece of Hearst real estate is La Cuesta Encantada; Spanish for The Enchanted Hill.. After the death of William Randolph Hearst in 1951, it was deeded to the State of California and is now a tourist attraction.
On the Piedra Blanca Rancho, William Randolph Hearst created La Cuesta EncantadaT (The Enchanted Hill) on the historic Piedras Blancas Ranch. The castle includes La Casa Grande (the large house) and adjacent buildings containing art treasures from around the world, beautiful architecture and gardens.piedra=rock
"The Enchanted Hill" with its "large house" sits on the "white rock ranch" not far from the earthquake's epicenter. It was not damaged.Hearst Castle
Site: Hilltop, 5 miles up winding path above the Pacific Ocean shore; 1,600 feet in altitude, above old whaling village of San Simeon.
Construction:Morgan's invoice for cost of construction (1919-1942): $4,717,000. (Boutelle, p. 214).Morgan's fee is estimated at $70,755. She both designed, supervised and ran the job. She made 558 trips between 1919 and 1939 by train for weekend work sessions on the site.
Poured in place reinforced concrete construction, with main building faced in stone.Fireproof and seismic braced construction throughout.
Four stairway towers, 24 feet in diameter, with earthquake-proof design.
Remarkable fine grade of concrete made from rock quarried on site and sand from the shore, with salt washed out, and white sand from Carmel.[Strong's: 03760 Carmel="garden-land"] Work done on site by carpenters, plasterers, stone casters, and skilled wood-carvers, who lived on the site or in village, many houses designed by Morgan. Morgan ran the job.
Siam teak to roof towers and carved to ornament balcony between them.
Program and built features:Main Building and guesthouses: 127 rooms, 58 bedrooms, 49 baths, 18 sitting rooms, 2 libraries.
Outbuildings: greenhouses, hot houses, kennels, switchboard and newspaper offices, her own architectural office (called the shack), zoo animal shelters.
Landscape Features: - pergola (encircling the hill for more than a mile), tall enough for "a tall man with a tall hat on a tall horse".- pools: main outdoor pool, the Neptune Pool, over 100 feet long with 345,000 gallon capacity, surrounded by two semicircular colonnades of marble. (At the center, Hearst installed a Greco-Roman temple facade.); indoor "Roman" pool.
"The engineering of the Neptune pool is as much a triumph as its aesthetic impact. On a site excavated from the steep hillside, the pool is hung by reinforced-concrete beams from the concrete retaining wall in such a way that a seismic movement would let it sway but not break. Water flows in from natural springs above, piped into two reserve tanks of tremendous capacity, one of 345,000 gallons, the other of 1,200,000 gallons. Below the pool is a large room housing a complex filter system based on the purifying power of sand and an electric heating unit used to keep the water at a brisk 70 degrees Fahrenheit." (Boutelle, p. 206).- tennis courts above Roman pool.- terrace for Neptune pool houses 17 dressing rooms with baths and mirrors in foundations. - garden design and planting and supervision of gardeners.
Chamber of Commerce
Paso Robles was originally named by Spanish explorers as El Paso de Robles meaning "the pass of the oaks", most likely for the abundant oak trees that are found throughout the countryside. The Salinan Indians and Mission fathers also knew Paso Robles as Agua Caliente, meaning "hot water" for the many natural underground mineral springs in and around the area.
The area known as Paso Robles was originally part of a Mexican land grant. This grant consisted of 25,993 acres and was held in title by Petronillo Rios, a retired Mexican army sergeant. In 1857, the land was purchased for $8,000 by the Blackburn and James families (Drury James was the uncle of famed outlaw Jesse James).
The partnership of Blackburn and James proceeded to develop the town. The arrival of the Southern Pacific railroad spurred the town's growing prosperity. The Blackburn brothers (Daniel and James) focused on developing the area's natural hot springs into the equivalent of today's popular day spas. As early as the 1860's, Paso Robles became a tourist attraction because of the healing properties of the hot springs and accompanying mud baths. "Taking the cure" became a popular pastime.
In 1891, the Hotel El Paso de Robles was built. Often compared to the finest hotels in San Francisco and featuring hot springs, this grand hotel enticed turn-of-the century world-renowned travelers. Pianist and Polish dignitary Ignace Paderewski discovered the hotel and the curative powers of its hot springs. It was Paderewski's music that often graced the hotels parlors and corridors.
The Paso Robles area has a rich history of winemaking and grape growing, beginning as early as 1797 at Mission San Miguel Archangel and continuing to present day. In addition to winemaking, farming and ranching played a key role in the development of Paso Robles. Grain crops, primarily wheat and barley, were the main source of income for many farmers in the early 1900's. Large cattle ranches also dotted the rolling hills. At one time Paso Robles was known as the Almond City because local almond growers created the largest concentration of almond orchards in the world.[San Miguel Archangel = Named for: The Most Glorious Prince of the Celestial Militia, Archangel Saint Michael. The church is 144 feet long ,27 feet wide and 40 feet tall. The walls are 6 feet thick. (www.athanasius.com)
Almond: A tree and its fruit, called in Hebrew Shaked, the awaker, probably because it is the first tree to blossom in the spring...The cups on the branches of the golden candlestick were modeled after almond blossoms (Exo 25:33,34)...The rod of an almond tree, which Jeremiah saw in his earliest vision, signified Jehovah's wakefulness (Jer 1:11,12). (Davis Dictionary of the Bible)]Paso Robles became incorporated in 1889, with 523 residents and 100 buildings. Today the population is near 25,000 and continues to grow with many newcomers moving here to enjoy the climate and year-round recreation. Of great interest to residents is the historic downtown which has a city park of two square blocks donated by the founders of Paso Robles to be cared for and to be used only for the pleasure of the public and is the home of the 1908 Carnegie Library museum. In addition to the clock tower building of 1892, there are many impressive buildings built in the late 1890's and early 1900's. Stately Victorian homes line Vine Street and are dotted throughout the city's historical west side.
As far back as 1795, Paso Robles has been spoken of and written about as "California's oldest watering place"-the place to go for springs and mud baths. In 1864, a correspondent to the San Francisco Bulletin wrote that there was every prospect of the Paso Robles hot springs becoming the watering place of the state. By 1868 people were coming from as far away as Oregon, Nevada, Idaho, and even Alabama. Besides the well-known mud baths, there were the Iron Spring and the Sand Spring, which bubbles through the sand and was said to produce delightful sensations.
Saturday, December 27, 2003
Quake-struck town trying to clean up
By Sally Ann Connell Los Angeles Times
PASO ROBLES, Calif. - As San Luis Obispo County officials estimated yesterday that damage from this week's magnitude-6.5 earthquake will top $200 million, owners of even the tiniest of this city's businesses were sweeping up, digging out and trying to get back on their feet.
They worked even as stinking sulfuric steam rose from storm drains from the hot spring that was disturbed in the quake, and continues to pump an estimated 500 gallons of hot mud a minute through a growing hole in the City Hall & Library parking lot.
City Manager Jim App described the city's problems with damage from the wayward hot spring inching closer to the 10-year-old City Hall. "Then we have the hole from hell out in the parking lot," App told 80-plus citizens.
Also in the Mastagni Building was Ann's dress shop, where the two women killed Monday, 20-year-old Jennifer Myrick and Marilyn Zafuto, 55, were employees. They apparently tried to escape as the building's roof crashed to the sidewalk. Their bodies were found underneath.
The 111-year-old building, like many other damaged structures downtown, had not been earthquake-retrofitted. Paso Robles has a law requiring owners of buildings with unreinforced masonry to strengthen their structures, but the deadline is not until 2018.
The smell of sulfur still hung over town, the result of a spring that burst from a pipe under the library parking lot during the quake. The pipe used to feed a bathhouse that was once on the site.
"It's about 111 degrees. It is not hazardous," said city building official Doug Monn. "People pay money to lay in that stuff. You can come out and lay in our gutter if you want."
Schwarzenegger promised townspeople that they would be offered as many resources as possible to rebuild.
"At 11 a.m. yesterday, this was an American main street, alive with energy," he said. "Today this is a site of devastation. But we will come together once again as Californians and as neighbors. We will rebuild this town square."
On the north side of Paso Robles, Mission San Miguel Arcangel was closed indefinitely while engineers tried to determine how badly the quake damaged it. For the first time in more than a century, Christmas Eve midnight Mass will be said elsewhere tonight.[I don't know what it means but there are quite a few 11s in this news story.
Webster's: eleventh hour: the latest possible time (seeing the clocktower was demolished?)]
Bethlehem = House of Bread
Diablo Canyon = Devil's Canyon
Earthquake occurred on winter solstice (first day of winter)
San Luis Obispo = Saint Louis the Bishop (bishop=overseer; shepherd to the flock of God)
Last global warning 9/11/01—how many days since?
Lots of big earthquakes SE of Loyalty Islands (the chart above does not take into account earthquakes at that location that were under 5.7. In reality there have been 30 earthquakes there during the period between Christmas day 2003 and January 7, 2004 (half day)). There have been too many events there lately to just shrug them off without a better look-see:
- loyalty = the tie binding a person to something to which he is loyal; see fidelity
- loyal = unswerving in allegiance; faithful in allegiance to one's lawful sovereign or government; faithful to a private person to whom fidelity is due
- fidelity = the quality or state of being faithful; accuracy in details: exactness
- island = a tract of land surrounded by water and smaller than a continent; safety island, safety zone; an isolated group or area, esp: an isolated ethnological group.
- fidelity = see faith; 3. observance of the marriage covenant, as the fidelity of a husband or wife; 4. honesty, veracity, adherence to truth, as the fidelity of a witness.
- faith = to trust; belief
The Loyalty Islands... Lifou, Mare and Ouvea, lands of legend and tradition, mystical islands of unique beauty...
Endowed with fabulous natural wealth, the most sumptuous landscapes that New Caledonia has to offer lie hidden within these islands : long deserted beaches of pristine white sand, enchanting crystal-clear turquoise lagoons, sheer cliffs majestically crowned with colonial pine trees, legendary rocks rising like medieval fortresses, fish and coral fauna found nowhere else in the world, multicolored sea-life unsullied by man...
And finally, the people. The Loyalty islanders have managed to preserve the most powerful traditions of the Territory of New Caledonia, an imaginary environment wrought with myths and legends.
When you visit the Loyalty Islands, you will get to know a people and their beliefs, you will discover Kanak life in all its authenticity, and you will enjoy the natural hospitality of the island people who will receive you like a favoured guest.
Lifou, Maré, Ouvéa.... Set like three precious jewels in the azure fastness of the Pacific Ocean...
Three islands of secret and untouched beauty... Three visions of Paradise, so remote and yet so near....
The Magic of the Loyalty Islands
There are still some secret beauties left to discover on our planet... Lifou, Maré, Ouvéa: the Loyalty Islands. These pearls, like jewels in their Pacific Ocean box, may not give up their secrets easily but will be nonetheless memorable for you.Take a look around at the url above to get more info on the islands. Sounds like heaven on earth! What I found particularly interesting:
- "Endowed with fabulous natural wealth, the most sumptuous landscapes that New Caledonia has to offer lie hidden within these islands..." (New Caledonia = New Britain = New Jerusalem?)
- the name of one of the islands is Maré and one of the islands has a St. Joseph district so Mary and Joseph are there? (maré is really translated as tide or sea but it's close enough to Mary for me!!)
- "The lagoon offers up the transparency of its waters so as to serve as a mirror to the majestic cliffs of Lekine, forming a casket for the tiny jewel like Pleiades which close the lagoon." "...there is a cluster of stars known as the Pleiades. This word, which means the congregation of the judge or ruler, comes to us through the Greek Septuagint as the translation of the Hebrew kimah, which
means the heap or accumulation... "It consists of a number of stars (in the neck of Taurus) which appear to be near together. The brightest of them...has come down to us with an Arabic name--Al Cyone, which means the centre, and has given the idea to some astronomers that it is the centre of the whole universe. The Syriac name for the Pleiades is Succoth, which means booths."
(The Witness of the Stars, E. W. Bullinger)
"The Pleiades...compared by the Persian poets to a bouquet formed of jewels. It is the constellation of seven stars, whose rising and setting determined the commencement and end of their voyages..."
(Keil & Delitzsch Commentary on the Old Testament, volume 4, Job)
"If a star map is superimposed over the Earth with the pole star placed over the terrestial North Pole, we have a celestial clock making one revolution daily. The noon point of that map (like Greenwich) is the Great Pyramid of Giza. Thousands of years ago, Egypt was known as the Land of Khem. The Khema were a group of seven major stars (in the constellation of Taurus), known today as the Pleiades. If the map is placed with the Khema over the Land of Khem (Egypt)-specifically, directly over the apex of the Great Pyramid- then Taurus falls over the Taurus Mountains of southern Turkey; Ursa Major, the Great Bear, rambles over Russia; the head of Draco the Dragon coils up over China; Orion (the warrior) over Iran/Iraq; Aries the Ram over Rome, and Capricorn (identified with the god Pan) falls over Panama, Panuco, and Mayapan (the old name of the Yucatan). Aquila the Eagle spans the United States. The analogies are obvious, and quite impressive. This is one of the clearest examples of the law of 'As Above, So Below.'"
(Beyond Prophecies & Predictions, Moira Timms)
"The Talmud tells us that the Flood started when Heaven's sluices were opened by 'removing two of the Pleiades.'" (The Codes of the Torah and Biblical Interpretation, Jim Long, email@example.com)
- "In the north of the island lies a thick area of scrub riddled with secret caves, like that of Gossanah, which remains forbidden to the common run of people."
- "A stone's throw away, at Eacho, 'The place which smokes'..."
- "Visitors are definitively captivated by the island when relationships are founded with the locals, whose natural warmth is expressed in religious and traditional festivities, and also in everyday life, spent fishing and tending crops that supply all of New Caledonia with fruit of unique colors and tastes."
Many southeast Loyalty Islands earthquakes; Bam where the 6.6 earthquake was, is situated in southeastern Iran.
- "The Sheep-gate, according to Nehemiah's description, should be situated on the south wall of the city, not far from the corner that pointed southeast" (A Commentary on the New Testament from the Talmud and Hebraica) Webster's 1828:
sheep: figuratively, God's people are called sheep, as being under the government and protection of Christ, the great Shepherd (John 10).
- "... in ancient times and under some of the idolatrous kings, the worship of Moloch, the horrid idol-god of the Ammonites, was practiced. To this idol, children were offered in sacrifice. II Kings 23:10; Ezek. 23:37,39; II Chron. 28:3; Lev. 18:21; 20:2. " 2 Kings 23:10 And he defiled Topheth, which is in the valley of the children of Hinnom, that no man might make his son or his daughter to
pass through the fire to Molech. 08612 tpt Topheth to'-feth
AV-Tophet 8, Topheth 1; 9
Tophet or Topheth="place of fire"
1) a place in the southeast end of the valley of the son of Hinnom south of Jerusalem.
- Isa 34:8-10 For it is the day of the LORD'S vengeance, and the year of recompences for the controversy of Zion. And the streams thereof shall be turned into pitch, and the dust thereof into brimstone, and the land thereof shall become burning pitch. It shall not be quenched night nor day; the smoke thereof shall go up for ever: from generation to generation it shall lie waste; none shall pass
through it for ever and ever. Edom=Rome
Commentary Critical and Explanatory on the Whole Bible, 1871, Jamieson, Fausset and Brown:
10. It--The burning pitch, etc. (#Isa 34:9).
smoke...for ever--(#Re 14:11 18:18:19:3).
generation to generation--(#Mal 1:4).
none...pass through--Edom's original offense was: they would not let Israel pass through their land in peace to Canaan: God recompenses them in kind, no traveller shall pass through Edom. VOLNEY, the infidel, was forced to confirm the truth of this prophecy: "From the reports of the Arabs, southeast of the Dead Sea, within three days' journey are upwards of thirty ruined towns, absolutely deserted."
(Lake of Fire)
8 earthquakes in Wyoming. Near Yellowstone? See main page of bbc program on supervolcanoes."It is little known that lying underneath one of America's areas of outstanding natural beauty - Yellowstone Park - is one of the largest supervolcanoes in the world." Read transcript of the show.
Please be advised that this domain (Philologos.org) does not endorse 100 per cent any link contained herein. This forum is for the dissemination of pertinent information on an end-times biblical theme which includes many disturbing, unethical, immoral, etc. topics and should be viewed with a mature, discerning eye.