Definition of Signs
1. Noun. (plural of sign) ¹
2. Verb. (third-person singular of sign) ¹
¹ Source: wiktionary.com
Definition of Signs
1. sign [v] - See also: sign
Click the following link to bring up a new window with an automated collection of images related to the term: Signs Images
Lexicographical Neighbors of Signs
Literary usage of Signs
Below you will find example usage of this term as found in modern and/or classical literature:
1. A Treatise on Universal Algebra: With Applications by Alfred North Whitehead (1898)
"signs. Words, spoken or written, and the symbols of Mathematics are alike signs. ... In the use of expressive signs the attention is not fixed on the sign ..."
2. Poetry by Modern Poetry Association (1916)
"signs in the sundering schools ! signs in disintegrating governments 1 signs in ancient ... signs in alarmed society I signs in quick-arming wealth 1—in ..."
3. Monographic Medicine by William Robie Patten Emerson, Guido Guerrini, William Brown, Wendell Christopher Phillips, John Whitridge Williams, John Appleton Swett, Hans Günther, Mario Mariotti, Hugh Grant Rowell (1916)
"(6) Symptoms and signs Referable to the Respiratory System (1) Laryngismus and ... (e) Symptoms and signs in the Urogenital System (1) Retention and ..."
4. The American Journal of Psychology by Granville Stanley Hall, Edward Bradford Titchener (1916)
""Friendship" complex, exposed by 4 words and 12 signs, as prolonged time, ... This was exposed by 5 words and n signs, much the same as the " Marriage " and ..."
5. Notes and Queries by Martim de Albuquerque (1849)
"I conclude my list of signs referred to in the Calendar of the Chancery Proceedings ... Certain of the names of buildings enumerated are not strictly signs, ..."
6. Legal and Political Hermeneutics: Or Principles of Interpretation and by Francis Lieber, William Gardiner Hammond (1880)
"There is no immediate communion between the minds of individuals, as long as we are on this earth, without signs, that is, expressions perceptible by the ..."