Does God think women are inferior to men?
God made men and women to be different, but equal, nonetheless. Some describe the family as representative of the Trinity--men being like God, the Father in that they are the head; women representing the Holy Spirit by being the comforters and nurturers; and children being an extension of Christ, the Son. All three are different, with different roles and responsibilities, but each one is vital to the whole.
God created man and woman to be co-equal, partners. Through women, God brought forth kings, leaders, prophets, pastors, and even the Son of God. While some religions do teach that women are inferior, the Bible says that God made both of the same flesh. Both male and female reflect His image. Without either sex, we could not fully understand the nature of God.
The only gender distinctions present in the Bible have to do with the culture of the day. There is no mention of spiritual gifts or salvation being different for men and women. God uses women in the ministry just as He uses men. Paul often spoke highly of the female Christians who labored to spread the gospel. Therefore, in God's eyes, men and women are equal in importance and calling.
Leadership or headship, does not assume superiority. It is just a role. God is the head of Christ, yet the two are the same. A husband and wife team is simply that: a team. They are both vital to the health of the family but one has to be the head. God chose man to be the provider and protector and woman to be the comforter and nurturer. It is so unfortunate that modern feminism has caused women to resent their role and to see it as subservient.
"Likewise, ye husbands, dwell with them according to knowledge, giving honour unto the wife, as unto the weaker vessel, and as being heirs together of the grace of life; that your prayers be not hindered" (1 Peter 3:7).
If the Lord thought women were inferior to men, why would he direct Peter to warn husbands to give honor to his wife, to treat her as though she is the weaker [more delicate] vessel? Notice, that Peter does not say that because she is the weaker vessel, but "as" the weaker vessel. If a man is treating his wife with honor, with kid gloves (gently), his view of his wife will not be along the lines of a rug mat (to think of his wife as inferior), but to treasure his wife. A man is to treat his wife with great respect and do anything and everything to make her life better.
Another point well worth noting is the solemn warning issued by Peter to husbands. If a husband is not treating his wife as Peter instructed (with respect and as a fellow heir to our rewards in heaven), then his prayers will be hindered. In the vernacular, his prayers will in essence bounce off the ceiling.
God, in no way views women as being inferior. Instead, God will reward men and women based on how they have served the Lord Jesus Christ while here on earth. Jim Elliot, a martyred Christian missionary once wrote, "Where ever you are, be all there!" Wherever you are in life, serve the Lord Jesus to the best of your ability.
"Who [Christ] gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and purify unto himself a peculiar people, zealous of good works" (Titus 2:14).
Salvation itself, is certainly not determined by our performance. But are you zealous to show your love for the Lord by doing good works for Him?