Diabetes is a disorder that is spreading like wild fire. The main cause for this are faulty diets and lack of exercise. I meet a lot of such cases daily and it is shocking to hear about their food habits. There are innumerable patients who dont even flinch nor are they worried about the consequences of the disorder.
Let us look at a case I had met 2 weeks back.
The lady was diabetic from 2 years and had been referred to me by the consultant doctor. Her blood sugar was 345 mg/dL. She came to my cabin with a very bored look on her face. Her weight for her height was alright. After checking her reports, I took a diet recall and I roughly estimated her daily intake of calories. It was approximately 1800 kCal which was her requirement. But her carbohydrate intake was very high. She was roughly taking about 350g of carbohydrates which was covering about 3/4 th of her caloric intake and this clearly showed the lack of control. Her intake of foods of high glycemic index was very high.
When I was explaining to her about her requirements, she interrupted me and asked ”Why do I need to follow a diet if I am diabetic?” Although this lady was educated, the seriousness of the disorder was not known to her.
I explained to her what are the consequences of Diabetes and its complications such as loss of eye sight, kidney failure, impaired nerve functions such as loss of sensation and cardiac problems.
This information was an eye opener to her. I removed all the high glycemic index foods ( I will write about these foods too) and replaced her diet with a balanced diet with adequate protein, moderate fats and moderate carbohydrates. I advised her on the need of exercise to lower blood sugars and the importance of fiber in her diet.
This morning I received a call from her and she informed me that her blood sugars are 135 mg/dL on fasting and she feels better than ever. Now this has convinced her to continue and come for follow ups on a regular basis. She has started reading about diabetes and is now ready to combat all the consequences of the disorder. Her aim is to maintain her fasting blood sugars between 90- 110 mg/dL which are the desired levels. She has started walking on a regular basis and follows the planned diet. From this case I have learnt about the difference one can do to a person’s life as long as the individual is convinced about themselves and is determined to make changes.