Posts Tagged «microfluidics»
Filtering cancerous cells from your blood, with jellyfish-inspired DNA tentacles November 14, 2012 at 12:07 pm
The holy grail for treating “liquid tumors,” or cancers comprised of circulating blood cells, is to fish them out with some sort of microfluidic sieve. A new device developed by MIT and Brigham and Women’s Hospital in Cambridge, Massachusetts uses short segments of DNA attached to long “jellyfish” tentacles to snare rogue lymphoblast cells.
Harvard cracks DNA storage, crams 700 terabytes of data into a single gram August 17, 2012 at 10:22 am
A bioengineer and geneticist at Harvard’s Wyss Institute have successfully stored 5.5 petabits of data — around 700 terabytes — in a single gram of DNA, smashing the previous DNA data density record by a thousand times.
UCLA develops world’s fastest camera to hunt down cancer in real time July 9, 2012 at 7:34 am
Engineers at UCLA, led by Bahram Jalali and Dino Di Carlo, have developed a camera that can take 36.7 million frames per second, with a shutter speed of 27 picoseconds — by far the fastest and most sensitive camera in the world.
Living organ-on-a-chip could soon replace animal testing June 22, 2012 at 8:03 am
If a team of Harvard bioengineers has its way, animal testing and experimentation could soon be replaced by organ-on-a-chip technologies that replicate the functions of a human organ on a computer chip.
Switching silicon chips on and off using light January 19, 2012 at 7:19 am
Researchers have built a miniature switch that can be controlled using light from almost any distance, be it from a flashlight or the sun.
Glowing bacteria biopixels: The sensor displays of the future January 4, 2012 at 2:41 pm
Genetically engineering e. coli bacteria to do cool things is the latest craze in the science world. With advancements in genetics and microbiology, the stuff of science fiction is fast becoming a reality. Biologists and bioengineers at UC San Diego have proven this with the creation of a living neon sign made of e. coli bacteria that will glow based on triggered reactions, completely in unison.
AI solves complex biology problem from scratch October 17, 2011 at 9:10 am
An interdisciplinary, interuniversity group of scientists from Vanderbilt, Cornell, and CFD Research Corporation have created an artificial intelligence capable of solving complex scientific problems from scratch.
New Silicon Chip Sequences Complete Genome in Three Hours June 14, 2011 at 11:34 am
At a tenth of the price, and many times faster than conventional methods, a new gene sequencer looks set to revolutionize the life sciences.