Every year, millions of animals—including cats, pigs, turtles, and frogs—are dissected in primary schools, middle schools, and high schools and then discarded, many after suffering and dying for nothing more than to satisfy the demand for biological “specimens.”
As the "study of life," biology should foster respect and compassion for animals. Yet dissection encourages neither; animal life is devalued and treated as expendable.
However, more and more students prefer to learn anatomy and physiology using humane alternatives such as computer-based programs, 3-D models, and videos, which are also less expensive to use. Educational research shows that students using humane alternatives learn as well or better than students using animals.
You Can Help
Students and teachers can choose to use alternatives, and our Dissection Campaign Packet provides guidance and materials for students and teachers who want to create a humane biology classroom at their school.
News & Events
April 19, 2012
The disappearance of frogs is a big deal. Simple stuff you can do to help.
September 2, 2011
This school year, middle- and high-school students throughout New York will be reminded of their legal right to choose when it comes to animal dissection.
January 28, 2011
Nominations are currently being accepted for the 2011 Russell and Burch Award, which will be given to a scientist who has made outstanding contributions to animal alternative methods in the areas of biomedical research, testing or higher education.
May 18, 2009
The HSUS urges Connecticut state senators to vote "yes" on House Bill 6565 to allow students to choose alternatives to animal dissection.
June 11, 2013
The U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS) announced a proposal to protect all chimpanzees under the Endangered Species Act.
June 7, 2013
The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency formalized several policy recommendations designed to reduce animal tests in pesticide safety.
January 22, 2013
Expert Advisory Panel Confirms Chimpanzee Retirement from Laboratories to Sanctuary is the Way Forward
The HSUS commends the expert recommendations proposed to the National Institutes of Health by its independent advisory body, the Council of Councils, regarding chimpanzee research and retirement.
January 9, 2013
The Humane Society of the United States applauds Gilead Sciences, Inc., a biopharmaceutical company headquartered in Foster City, Calif., for agreeing to not use chimpanzees for research and development.