Some Parts are not for Sharing
by Julie K. Federico
Travel with a pair of friendly fish as they learn about what parts of our bodies we share with others. Children will learn what the boundaries of appropriate touching are in a very non-threatening way. School Counselor Julie Federico begins the imperative conversation of personal boundaries in Some Parts are not for Sharing. Children will enjoy learning about their bodies as they get some important information from a pair of fish. Parents will marvel at the simple straightforward language and use of sea creatures that create this message all children must hear.
Julie Federico has been a middle school counselor since 1993. She holds a bachelor's degree in social work and a master's degree in counseling from Indiana University. She is also a certified, level III alcohol counselor in the state of Colorado. She knows first hand the ramifications of childhood abuse. Federico wrote Some Parts are not for Sharing as an early intervention strategy for young children, so they would not suffer in silence. Telling a trusted adult is the first step in stopping abuse.
Spanish version available as well.
24 pages - $6.99 (paperback)
This book is also available for purchase as an eBook download.
Welcome to the world of eBooks where instead of receiving a physical paper book in the mail, you will receive access to the eBook file for this complete book. Within minutes you can be reading this book on your computer, PDA, cellphone or a stand-alone eBook reader—at a reduced cost! Unless otherwise noted, all eBooks are in the PDF format which is compatible with most eBook readers including Sony Reader, Nook, Kindle 2, iPad, and iPhone 4. Click the "Order Online" button below to purchase this eBook download today!
Note: the free download of the audio book as part of the eLIVE package is only available when you purchase the physical copy of the book. It is not available when purchasing the electronic version of the book as an eBook.
Read our eBook FAQ for additional information for your specific device.
$5.99 (digital download)