About 4-H Wildlife Nature Club
Members of our parish 4-H clubs visit the center to learn more about wildlife, nature, the environment, and how our behavior impacts the environment. This group participates in many civic activities. If there is a student who expresses an interest in becoming a member of the 4-H Wildlife/Nature Club, please contact the center for more information.
4-H Nature Club collects leaves
4H Nature Club members spent a morning on the Nature Trails collecting native leaves to preserve and mount . Cooperative Extension Regional Forestry Agent, Ricky Kilpatrick assisted youth with collection and identification of native trees and their leaves. Youth learned how to preserve and mount specimens for competing in the leaf collection competition at the State Fair of Louisiana. Youth enjoyed this outdoor activity and now have a greater knowledge of local trees.
Cypress 4-H Nature Club
Cypress 4-H Nature Club held its monthly meeting on Wednesday, March 7, 2012 with nineteen members now enrolled. Officers conducted the meeting, making announcement, and discussing the nature club business. During the program session youth learned about water quality, the importance of the macro-invertebrates that live in our waterways, and how to seine for macro-invertebrates that tell if we have healthy water in our lake. A more in-depth study of water quality will occur in the warmer months when macro-invertebrates are very active. It was determined that due to Easter Break and state testing that Nature Club would not meet during the month of April but will get back on track May 2, 2012 from 4:00 pm - 5:30 pm. 4-Her's come join us for some nature fun!
To see how these youth are learning to serve in our community check out the pictures of nature club in action by clicking on the Cypress 4-H Nature Club page in the left margin. Remember: learn to be a good steward, the Earth will "thank you"!
4-H Nature Club hosts Arbor Day
Arbor Day Fun
Saturday, February 25, 2012 seventy-five volunteers from across the area planted over one hundred trees at Cypress Nature Study Center and Cypress Zoo. Girl Scouts from Troops: #646, #637, #1318, #482, #1198, and Bossier Parish 4-Hers placed thirty-five Bald Cypress and eighty-five oak trees around the nature center arboretum area and zoo habitats during the 2012 Arbor Day Celebration. The Louisiana Department of Agriculture and Forestry and the Walter B. Jacobs grow out station in Blanchard provided the native trees that youth and adults worked side-by-side to put in the ground. These trees will provide wildlife habitat, protect our watershed, and give a beautiful look to the arboretum area and habitats. You can make a difference in our environment by planting trees that provide shade for your home and bring wildlife to your yard. Be a good steward, plant a tree today!
Arbor Day Fun
Arbor Day Tree Planting
Saturday, February 25, 2012; 9:30-11:30
At Cypress Nature Study Center
Cypress 4-H Nature Club will host a tree planting. Everyone is welcome; all you will need to bring is a shovel, gloves and wear appropriate clothes. We will be meeting at the Nature Center at 9:30. Hope you can join us!
Cypress 4-H Nature Club is back in action!
Cypress 4-H Nature Club is back in full swing. The first meeting was held on November 2, 2011 with ten members in attendance. Youth were introduced to who, what, when, where, and why of nature club, taken on a tour of the nature center, and given the opportunity to vote on the programs they would participate in. At the next meeting members voted on new officers for the club. Those members elected to office were 4-H Nature Club: President - Colton Madden, Vice-President - Clint DeLaune, Secretary - Alexis Bearden, Reporter - Rosa Harrell, and Treasurer - Travis Simmons. These youth will be responsible for conducting monthly meetings, organizing demonstrations, and educating others about wildlife, nature, and the environment. At each meeting youth will learn more about recycling, tracking, water quality, and numerous other nature related activities. If you are a Bossier Parish 4-H Member please join us at our monthly meetings hosted at Cypress Nature Study Center.
Here is a schedule of 4-H Nature Club events:
- Saturday, February 25, 2012, 9:30 until 11:30 - Arbor Day Tree Planting – everyone’s invited
- Wednesday, March 7, 2012, 3:45-5:15 - Monthly Meeting
Please joining us at our next event and see how these youth are learning to serve in our community.