Carysa is an accomplished Imperial Agent of the Galactic Empire. After years of training in combat and espionage, Carysa has been sent on her first mission, ordered by Grand Moff Tarkin himself. She is to infiltrate a hidden Rebellion cell on Coruscant, report all information she can, and work to disrupt their operations. Receiving a mission from the Grand Moff himself was both exciting and terrifying; if she was successful, the rewards would be great and would catapult her standing towards the inner circle of the Empire's elite. However, if she were to fail, the punishment would be swift and deadly. But whatever her fears, you do not deny the Grand Moff, and so she agreed to take on the mission. 

After some time through space travel and hours of shuttles, Carysa reaches the seedy underbelly of Coruscant, dressed in rough mercenary garb. Her goal was clear: she was to meet a representative of the Rebellion, make a solid impression, and do whatever tasks they asked of her until she was hired into the Rebellion directly. However, after waiting an hour past when she was supposed to meet the representative, she started to become nervous. It could be that her contact might have met their end from a Stormtrooper patrol, but that would serve to complicate her mission, as this was her only known contact for the Rebellion. Remembering her training and keeping calm, she waited another hour before several figures finally walked out from the shadows. 

There were four of them, both human and alien, dressed in mostly civilian clothes but bearing military-grade blasters. What's worse, those blasters were aimed directly at her, as they glared at her with hostile intent! However, once more Carysa remained calm and began to speak to the rag-tag group. Using a humorous persona, she disarmed their distrust with humor, and as soon as they saw she was not a threat, they lowered their blasters. They explained that they were the contact she was sent to meet, but that it's become too dangerous to meet potential recruits alone, so now they stay within groups. Carysa navigated the conversation well, and soon, she was given her first task from the group: eliminate a Stormtrooper patrol in the local sector, to relieve pressure on Rebellion activities in the area.
