This first historical fiction book in the "Viking Quest" series by Lois Walfrid Johnson is published by Moody Publishers.
Raiders From the Sea is written for kids ages 10 to 14. The age range reflects readability and not necessarily content appropriateness.
Briana O'Toole (Bree) felt that her life was going to change on her 13th birthday. What she did not realize is how drastically this change would be for herself and her whole village. Viking marauders take her and her brother, Devin, to their ship. Both children must figure out how to fight for their freedom, while still trusting that God knows what is happening and has a plan for their lives.
God's provision and faithfulness is the main theme. As Bree and Devin encounter life-changing circumstances, they are constantly reminded of God's provision. He is still there for them and wants to lead them. God leads Bree to a place of forgiveness for the Vikings who have taken her away from all that she knows and loves. Because Bree is willing to forgive, God works through her to perform a miracle for her fellow prisoners and the Vikings. This shows the Vikings how powerful the One True God is.
Devin and Bree have respect for their parents and Brother Cronan who is their teacher. Their parents are God-fearing adults who do their best to raise their children as God wants them to. Brother Cronan does his best to teach the children a love of the Scriptures. Mikkel, one of the Vikings, shows respect for his mentor, Hauk. Originally he disobeys Hauk's orders but then tries to make amends by offering Hauk a gift. Mikkel does not want Hauk to be displeased with him.
During a serious storm, Mikkel, Hauk and the rest of the Vikings call out to their god, Thor. They wonder why he is upset with them, and they offer to throw the prisoners overboard to appease him.
If your children have read this book or someone has read it to them, consider these discussion topics:
Book reviews cover the content, themes and worldviews of fiction books, not their literary merit, and equip parents to decide whether a book is appropriate for their children. A book's inclusion does not constitute an endorsement by Focus on the Family.