Booklets for Children Series
First we wrote a couple of stories for our young friends,
and they liked them -- some even went so far as to tell
us they would like some more. So, one thing led to another,
and now we have a growing list of booklets for children.
1. WHERE IS MY CROSS THAT I MAY FOLLOW HIM?
Our Lord said, "If anyone
would come after Me, let him deny himself, and
take up his cross and follow Me." How can
we do this? What does it mean to take up our cross?
Where is the cross we must take up to be found?
This booklet is the story (fictional) of three
people, born on the same day in the same city,
who spent their lives trying to find the answer.
For older children.
2. THE TWO KINGS: A CAUTIONARY TALE
Story of two kings: a father
and a son. One sees the great prosperity of his
country and uses the riches thereof to ease the
burdens on all, providing a life of comfort for
all people in the kingdom. The other sees a country
gone soft, its wealth fast disappearing, and institutes
a program of strict discipline. What is the outcome
for the two, for the country? Fictional (of course)
3. IS THERE TRULY A KING?
A man does not believe in "the
king," but all creation seems against him
as he searches far and wide for a quiet place
where the shouts of everyone in praise of "the
king" do not ring in his ears. Alas! There
does not seem to be such a place. What can he
do? What will happen? How will the matter be resolved?
4. CONVERSATIONS ON THE SACRAMENTS: WHAT DOES
THE WORD "SACRAMENT" MEAN?
Ten-year-old Elizabeth comes
to her pastor's study to ask about the sacraments.
"I don't even know what the word means,"
she says. And, she wonders about what happens
in baptism -- and in the Eucharist. After their
first talk, she watches a baptism carefully, pays
attention in the eucharistic liturgy -- and comes
back! What will she ask? How will the pastor answer?
Find out when you read this book.
5. CONVERSATIONS ON THE SACRAMENTS: ARE THERE
TRULY JUST SEVEN?
Once more to the pastor's study
comes 10-year-old Elizabeth, this time with her
11-year-old friend David in tow -- for conversations
with him have raised even more questions on the
sacraments. Fearlessly they come, for they are
children and know no such thing as fear.
6. CONVERSATIONS ON THE SACRAMENTS: PRAYER
TO FATHER, SON AND HOLY SPIRIT.
Ten year old Elizabeth and
her eleven year old friend David have encountered
a couple of other students at school (David says,
"I think they're Muslims or something.")
who say we worship three gods because we pray
to Father, Son and Holy Spirit. They are flamboozled
on how to counterattack, so they go once more
to Fr. Mark. Can he solve their dilemma? Is there
a solution? What can he say? In this booklet we
try to answer.
7. CONVERSATIONS ON THE SACRAMENTS: WHY CAN'T
MY FRIEND RECEIVE COMMUNION?
Ten year old Elizabeth brought
her friend Jeanine to the Sunday Liturgy. At the
end her friend asked, "Why can't I receive
communion? I'm a Christian!" Elizabeth could
only think to say, "Well, you can't."
But she wanted to better explain, so she went
to see Fr. Mark. Now, she has graciously granted
us the privilege of reporting their conversation.
8. GOD AND MAN
Eleven year old (yes, she has
grown) Elizabeth and her friend David come once
more to Fr. Mark. Their question is: How can Jesus
be both God and man at the same time. Fr. Mark
points out that he has been teaching on this very
topic. Elizabeth says, "I didn't understand."
Now what will, what can Fr. Mark say?