November Health Awareness
October is National Breast Cancer Awareness Month (NBCAM)
For a listing of NBCAM Collaborating Organizations, click on the following link.
UC Berkeley Guide to Healthy Meetings and Events
A tool for campus event planners
Health Maintenance - From Diabetes Prevention to Heart-Healthy Information
If you or someone you know is dealing with diabetes, or trying to prevent the onset of diabetes, visit the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention diabetes Web site for help at www.cdc.gov/diabetes. You can get information about your own personal diabetes risk, as well as statistics, research, and educational publications.
American Diabetes Association
Are you at risk for diabetes? Healthy eating and regular exercise can help delay or prevent the onset of diabetes. Take the Diabetes Risk Test and get more great information about diabetes at the American Diabetes Association's Web site at http://www.diabetes.org.
National Diabetes Education Program
Get Fit Maryland is about taking small steps toward better health every day. We know it's hard to get started, so just start where you are! To find out how to take those small steps, check out the National Institute's of Health's National Diabetes Education Program at www.ndep.nih.gov. You can learn more about their "Small Steps...Big Rewards" campaign to prevent Type 2 diabetes.
National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases (NIDDK)
If you need help with weight management or you're looking for nutrition information and tips for a healthier lifestyle, another useful link is http://win.niddk.nih.gov. It is the Web site for the Weight Information Network of the National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases (NIDDK).
Fruits & Veggies More Matters
Did you know?
...the eating habits your kids learn now – STICK! Be a role model for your children and give them the tools necessary to decrease their risk of developing weight-related diseases. For more information visit http://www.fruitsandveggiesmorematters.org
Overweight and Obesity
We all know that it is important to Get Fit for Life! For information about the health and economic consequences of obesity, as well as state and national statistics, visit the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention Web site at www.cdc.gov/overweight.
American Heart Association
Healthy eating and regular physical activity can help you keep your heart strong for life. Find out how to lower your cholesterol and triglycerides, which both contribute heart problems, with help from the American Heart Association at www.americanheart.org. You'll find information about a variety of heart-healthy topics, as well as information for parents and children, and a link to the American Stroke Association, a division of the American Heart Association. You can even build a personalized grocery list with certified heart-healthy foods that you can print and take with you to the grocery store.
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention wants to keep you and your heart healthy, too. For more about heart disease, including information about risks, symptoms, and prevention, visit the CDC's heart-healthy home page at www.cdc.gov/heartdisease. You'll find helpful tips, fact sheets, and answers to questions about the most common forms of heart disease. The CDC also has a Web site to help you with stroke prevention. Check out that site at www.cdc.gov.stroke.
American Cancer Society's Great American Health Challenge
With the American Cancer Society's Great American Health Challenge Web site, you can receive a personal health plan to help you Get and Stay Fit! The health plan focuses on tobacco use, alcohol use, your physical activity, nutrition and health history. After completing a brief survey, a detailed personalized plan for a healthy future is outlined for you to print and carry with you. www.cancer.org/gahc
View immunization requirements for back-to-school or college. The Maryland Department of Health and Mental Hygiene (DHMH) has immunization schedules and flu information.
Small Steps (Plan Healthy Meals)
Check out this useful Web site designed for adults and teens, with an option to choose a Spanish version, too! They have their own activity tracker, health tips and an interactive portion control section, with a tour to help you plan healthy meals and Get Fit! www.smallsteps.gov
Maryland Health Information and Data
DHMH maintains records on a variety of health topics, such as county level data on births and deaths. http://www.dhmh.state.md.us/health/info&data.htm
Smoking & Tobacco
If you or someone you know is trying to quit smoking, that's a great first step! Find information on the health effects of smoking and tobacco use at http://www.cdc.gov/tobacco. This Web site has information for children and adults on the dangers of smoking and smokeless tobacco, as well as information on the dangers of secondhand smoke.
Smoking & Tobacco
If you live in Maryland and you're looking to quit smoking, DHMH is here to help! Check out http://www.smokingstopshere.com for information on connecting to a free, "quit coach" and other resources available through a toll-free hotline at 1-800-784-8669.