Extraterrestrial life in Star Trek
There exists a variety of extraterrestrial life in the fictional universe of Star Trek. Much of this life is humanoid, although there are exceptions.
The best-known Vulcan is Spock (played by Leonard Nimoy), the son of Vulcan ambassador Sarek and human mother Amanda. He is the first officer on the U.S.S. Enterprise under Captain Kirk, and later becomes an ambassador like his father. Being part human, Spock struggles with keeping his emotions suppressed.
Vulcans were the first aliens to make contact with humans (this event was depicted in the movie Star Trek: First Contact), and most human-manned starships include one or more Vulcans in the crew. They appear in all Star Trek series. Vulcans live a long time compared to humans, and have the ability to "mind meld", or temporarily join minds with another being. Their greeting "live long and prosper", along with their manner of holding their hand up in greeting with the second and third fingers together and fourth and fifth fingers together forming a "V" shape has entered popular culture. The salute was created by Leonard Nimoy (a neo-orthodox Jew) and is a single handed copy of the two handed gesture used when reciting the Aaronic blessing in Numbers 6:22-27 . The gesture is intended to signify the Hebrew letter shin, the first letter in "Shekhina" or the presence of God. The verbal greeting "live long and prosper" is taken from the same passage.
Klingons are a war-like race from the planet Kronos. In the original series Klingons were often enemies of humans, but in later series a truce has been reached.
The best-known Klingon is Worf, the security officer on the U.S.S. Enterprise of Star Trek: The Next Generation. He also makes appearances in Deep Space Nine.
Romulans are a secretive race from the planet Romulus. Before the events of the original series, humans and Romulans fought in a destructive war, after which a neutral zone was established between their areas of space.
In the original series Romulans were frequently in battles with the U.S.S. Enterprise. In the original series, it was revealed that they were distantly related to the Vulcans.
The Ferengi are an impish race of sexist people primarily concerned with making a profit. Being businessmen is virtually a religion to them. Their Rules of Acquisition is a list of 285 rules ranging from Once you have their money, you never give it back (No. 1) to No good deed ever goes unpunished (No. 285) and include War is good for business and Peace is good for business (Nos. 34 and 35).
The Ferengi first appeared in Star Trek: The Next Generation and the best known is Quark, a resident of Deep Space Nine. They have also appeared in Voyager and Enterprise.
The Borg are not actually a separate race, but a "collective" of beings forcibly "assimilated" from other races and turned into drones with cybernetic implants.
They were introduced in Star Trek: The Next Generation and were also prominent in Voyager, where one rescued drone, Seven of Nine, becomes a member of the ship's crew.
The main Borg type of ship is a massive cube from which they attack other ships and take the crew captive, turning them into Borg drones. They announce themselves with the phrase "resistance is futile", which has entered popular culture.