Japan tries to reassure people of nuclear decontamination
MINAMISOMA, Japan – Trimmed of topsoil to a depth of 2 inches, the baseball field and soccer pitch at Ishigami No. 2 Elementary School will see action again in April, Principal Susumu Honda promises.
The reopening of the school last week after a year-long gap is one example of how Japanese officials are trying to convince a nervous public that nuclear decontamination work is succeeding in an area devastated by radiation leaks.
"To play again on their own baseball field will make a big difference in our students' lives," Honda says.
The earthquake and tsunami on March 11 last year wrecked lives and homes in Minamisoma on Japan's northeast coast and contaminated the area with radiation leaked by the Fukushima Dai-ichi nuclear power plant 12 miles away. The population of 70,000 fell below 10,000 as people fled for safety.
More than 22,000 people died in the quake and tsunami. Many survivors are worried about whether they have truly escaped the disaster.
Radiation is still leaking from the closed Fukushima Dai-ichi plant though at a slower pace than it did a year ago. The scientific community here says the leakage is not an immediate danger, but no one is sure whether the contamination will cause an increase in cancer or other illnesses in the coming years.
Studies have found that cancer risks rise at an annual exposure of 100 millisieverts (the measurement unit of a body's absorption of radiation) or above.
In Fukushima and nearby areas outside the evacuation zone, the annual exposure is 20 millisieverts in some places and as high as 50 in others.
Workers are busy clearing radioactive topsoil and taking other measures in Fukushima prefecture, which is about the size of Connecticut, and the nuclear industry has basically been taken off-line over concerns from regional governments.
Schoolchildren wear dosimeters around their necks to measure exposure to radiation, and some residents doubt the cleanup efforts can effectively cut radiation levels. Some Japanese say the country should rethink its commitment to nuclear energy.
"I wanted to tell the world that the disaster isn't over yet," said Minamisoma Mayor Katsunobu Sakurai, 56.
Sakurai, whose home is in the one-fifth of Minamisoma that remains off-limits, is a prominent anti-nuclear campaigner.
Japan has to import nearly all its oil, and 54 nuclear reactors accounted for about one-third of the country's power before the tsunami. In a bid to restart idled reactors, Japan's Nuclear and Industrial Safety Agency ordered stress tests to determine whether other reactors can withstand disasters.
Such tests concluded in January that reactors at the Ohi nuclear plant in central Japan would survive a disaster similar to the magnitude-9.0 earthquake of a year ago. The United Nations International Atomic Energy Agency said the tests met the agency's safety standards, and experts say Japan's reactors could operate safely if the country modernizes its industry as the USA and other countries have done.
"The Fukushima accident was preventable; Japanese standards and practices lagged significantly behind international best practices and standards," said James Acton, a Japan nuclear expert at the D.C.-based Carnegie Endowment for International Peace.
Toshimitsu Okada can't shake his fear of radiation. His sports-mad son Ryuto, 11, is happy to be back at his old school even though more than half of his classmates have stayed away.
"Radiation comes from the mountainside, so the levels will rise again even after they clear the topsoil here in town," Okada, 40, says. "Our town will become desolate, it won't recover."
Tackling such worries is career bureaucrat Tokio Hayama, a 27-year veteran of Minamisoma City Hall. He won few friends in his last post, cutting costs and government employees.
That job was easy compared with his current one, Hayama sighs.
"There are no precedents, in Japan or the world," he says of the nuclear decontamination work overseen by his team of eight. "It's the first time to clean up a whole city."
The huge and super-costly effort is vital to ensure shattered communities such as Minamisoma have a chance at recovery, says Hayama, whose chief headache is finding somewhere to dispose of contaminated debris. The Japanese government has approved billions of dollars in compensation to evacuated families.
Several times a day, school Principal Honda glances out his office window to check the radiation reading on the large dosimeters installed at the school gate last month.
The levels this week were well within government limits. About 40% of students have returned, and city numbers have recovered to about 45,000, he says.
As the national debate continues over nuclear power, Honda is torn over the issue.
"We should not make anything that we can't keep under our control, but realistically, will Japan have enough electricity without nuclear plants?" he asks.
On a Tokyo street corner, beside the powerful Economy Ministry, a group of anti-nuclear activists has maintained a tent protest since September.
"The government and the power companies do not tell the truth about the radiation levels," says Mitsuro Sudo, 62, a retired publisher. "I am afraid they will reopen more reactors in the future, so we must stay here."
In several "hot spots," radiation levels run higher than they do closer to the failed nuclear plant. The hill village of Iitate, near Minamisoma, is a ghost village, where mechanic Takumi Takahashi, 25, worries about his full-body scan this weekend.
"The government says radiation will only have an impact after several years, and my girlfriend said I should stay away. But without this job, I can't survive," he says. "It's probably impossible that the village will revive in my lifetime, but I still hope it will exist."