Acne: Acne is a skin condition characterized by whiteheads, blackheads, and inflamed red pimples or “zits.” There are many types of acne. The most common is called acne vulgaris. Almost everyone goes through a period of acne at one time or another. Not exclusive to teenagers, many young adults, people in their 20′s and 30′s, have trouble with acne that is hard to control. Just beneath the surface of the skin lie hundreds of tiny glands called sebaceous glands. Their function is to collect and excrete the oily substance called sebum, to keep the skin healthy. However, the tiny pathway for the sebum to escape often becomes clogged, and a bacterium called p. acnes grows inside. In a short time, a pimple forms on the skin. At certain times, this process becomes very active, troublesome and hard to control.
Acne Treatment: There are many treatments for moderate acne – creams, washes and medications that range from mild to very strong.
Actinic keratosis: Actinic keratosis is a precancerous growth on the skin.
Allergic reaction: An allergic reaction is the body’s way of responding to an “invader.” When the body senses a foreign substance, called an antigen, the immune system is triggered. The immune system normally protects the body from harmful agents such as bacteria and toxins. Its overreaction to a harmless substance (an allergen) is called a hypersensitivity reaction, or an allergic, reaction.
Alopecia: Alopecia is the medical term for baldness; there are various types of alopecia, including alopecia areata, a condition that causes a person’s hair to fall out. It is an autoimmune disease; that is, the person’s immune system attacks their body, in this case, their hair follicles. When this happens, the person’s hair begins to fall out, often in clumps the size and shape of a quarter. The extent of the hair loss varies; in some cases, it is only in a few spots. In others, the hair loss can be greater.
Angioedema: Angioedema is a swelling, similar to hives, but the swelling is beneath the skin rather than on the surface. Hives are often called welts. They are a surface swelling. It is also possible to have angioedema without hives.
Areola Repigmentation: Areola repigmentation, is often the final step after breast reconstruction. Also known as micropigmentation or “permanent make-up,” it can also be done to conceal a scar or cosmetically enhance your nipples. For breast cancer patients, this procedure can drastically reduce the appearance of surgery scars. The repigmentaion of the areola’s and nipples can be without their actually being a graphed areola and nipple. This procedure is also a great option for those who are not happy with the size and color of their natural nipple and areola area. Women who have breast feed may have discoloration that an be repigmented very easily.
Atopic dermatitis: Atopic dermatitis is a very common, often chronic skin disease that affects a large percentage of the world’s population. It is also called eczema, dermatitis, or atopy. Most commonly, it may be thought of as a type of skin allergy or sensitivity. The atopic dermatitis triad includes asthma, allergies (hay fever), and eczema. There is a known hereditary component of the disease, and it is seen more in some families. The hallmarks of the disease include skin rashes and itching.
Blistering diseases: A blister is a bubble of fluid that forms beneath a thin layer of dead skin. The fluid is a mixture of water and proteins that oozes from injured tissue. Blisters that develop as part of a systemic (bodywide) disease may start in the deeper layers of the skin and cover widespread areas. These blisters heal more slowly and may leave scars.
Many diseases and injuries can cause blistering, but three autoimmune diseases—bullous pemphigoid, dermatitis herpetiformis, and pemphigus vulgaris—are among the most serious.
Blu Light Treatment: There is now a new treatment for acne available that doesn’t depend on medication. It’s called the BLU-U® Blu Light Photodynamic Therapy Illuminator Model 4170. The BLU-U® is a very special blue light that can kill the p. acnes bacteria in your skin. Treatments are simple you simply sit with your face close to the light for a short time at a schedule set up by your doctor, usually a 15 minute session about once or twice per week. The treatments may go on for five weeks or so. It’s very safe, it’s not hot, it’s not painful at all. After some weeks, the blue light can control your acne, or clear it up for a very long period. The BLU-U® was cleared by the FDA in 2003 for the treatment of moderate inflammatory acne vulgaris.
Basal cell carcinoma: Basal cell carcinoma is a type of nonmelanoma skin cancer, and is the most common form of cancer in the United States. Basal cell carcinoma starts in the top layer of the skin called the epidermis. It grows slowly and is painless. A new skin growth that bleeds easily or does not heal well may suggest basal cell carcinoma. The majority of these cancers occur on areas of skin that are regularly exposed to sunlight or other ultraviolet radiation. They may also appear on the scalp.
Blister: A blister is a bubble of fluid that forms beneath a thin layer of dead skin. The fluid is a mixture of water and proteins that oozes from injured tissue. Blisters most commonly form in response to a specific injury, such as a burn or irritation, and usually involve only the topmost layers of skin.
Botox®: Botox® Cosmetic is a prescription medicine that is injected into muscles and used to improve the look of moderate to severe frown lines between the eyebrows (glabellar lines) in people 18 to 65 years of age for a short period of time.
Botox® for Hyperhidrosis (Sweating): When injected into the sweat glands, Botox® acts to prevent the glands from releasing perspiration. Botox® treatment for hyperhidrosis is usually performed most frequently in the underarm area, but may be used in other areas of the body where excessive perspiration is a problem.
Chemical Peels: Chemical peels, also known as chemexfoliation or derma-peeling, are a technique used to improve the appearance of the skin. In this treatment, a chemical solution is applied to the skin, which causes it to “blister” and eventually peel off. The new, regenerated skin is usually smoother and less wrinkled than the old skin. The new skin also is temporarily more sensitive to the sun.
Cherry Angioma: Cherry angioma is a cherry-red to purple colored benign skin tumor of unknown origin that appears most frequently after age 40.
Congenital nevi: A congenital nevus is a mole that is present at or develops shortly after birth.
Cryosurgery: Cryosurgery is a method of superfreezing tissue in order to destroy it. The technique is used to treat tumors, control pain, and control bleeding.
Cutaneous skin tags: Cutaneous skin tags are small, usually benign skin growths. The only symptom is a growth on the skin. The growth (tag) is usually small, although some may be up to a half-inch long.
Dark spots/Age spots: Age spots are also known as sun spots, liver spots, lentigos, or lentigines. These lesions are flat, tan, brown, or dark brown spots on sun-exposed skin. As people age, sun spots most commonly appear on the backs of the hands, the forearms, neck, chest, and face. Sun spots are associated with cumulative sun exposure. The pigment producing cells in the skin are activated to produce more pigment (melanin) by ultraviolet rays. While these spots are not themselves cancerous, you may be at risk for skin cancer if you have them.
Dry skin: Ordinarily, dry skin (xerosis) isn’t serious, but it can be uncomfortable and unsightly, turning plump cells into shriveled ones and creating fine lines and wrinkles. Most dry skin results from environmental factors that can be wholly or partially controlled. These include exposure to hot or cold weather with low humidity levels and excessive bathing.
Eczema (atopic dermatitis): Eczema is term for a group of medical conditions that cause the skin to become inflamed or irritated. The most common type of eczema is known as atopic dermatitis, or atopic eczema. Affected areas usually appear very dry, thickened, or scaly. Although there is no cure, most people can effectively manage their disease with medical treatment and by avoiding irritants. The condition is not contagious and can’t be spread from person to person.
Evolence: a collagen-based structural dermal filler for the correction of moderate to deep facial wrinkles and folds, such as nasolabial folds.
Facials: A facial cleans, exfoliates and nourishes the skin to promote clear, well-hydrated skin. A facial is the second most popular spa service after massage. It is sometimes called a “deep-cleansing facial” or or “deep-pore cleansing” facial because of extractions.
FotoFacial: This procedure uses a machine which emits intense pulses of light that penetrate to all levels of the skin, causing collagen and blood vessels beneath the epidermis to constrict. Fotofacials are especially good for: fine lines, particularly around the eyes and mouth, shallow acne scars, age spots and pigmented lesions, broken blood vessels, Rosacea and sun damage. This procedure is thought to reduce the appearance of large pores and dark circles around the eyes, and is especially effective in reducing chronic facial redness. It also can be used to treat sun damage and weathered areas on the neck, arms and chest, as well as the back of the hands.
Fraxel Laser Treatment: Fraxel treatment is a laser treatment where microscopic laser columns penetrate deep into the dermis to create tiny wounds, which trigger your body’s natural response system to heal those wounds. This process expedites your body’s remodeling of collagen and elastin, which results in tighter, fresher, more youthful-looking skin.
Frown lines: Frown lines are the result of gathering or knitting the tissue between the eyebrows into a fold. These unattractive folds and furrows are caused by the repeated action of underlying muscles associated with facial expression. Years of squinting and frowning tend to leave deep wrinkles in the skin between the eyebrows and on the bridge of the nose, across the forehead and at the corners of the eyes. On many people, frown lines produce and angry or sad look that detracts from a pleasant facial appearance. Dermatologic surgeons can now improve these wrinkles and lines without surgery, without scars and usually without any “down time” by a simple injection of botulinum toxin.
Granuloma annulare: Granuloma annulare is a chronic skin disease consisting of a rash with reddish bumps arranged in a circle or ring.
Glycolic Peels: Glycolic acid is a chemical peel used in cosmetic treatment of skin conditions such as works as wrinkle-reduction, clearing acne scars and hyper-pigmentation and provide substantial improvement for skin conditions such as seborrheic keratosis, actinic keratosis and hyperkeratosis. Glycolic acid is a powerful exfoliating agent that works on multiple layers of skin, destroying the binding lipids in order to release dead skin cells.
Hair loss: It is normal to shed some hair each day as part of the hair cycle. However, some people may experience excessive (more than normal) hair loss due to hormonal changes, illness or a major surgery, medicines, certain infections and underlying disease. Hair loss can affect men, women and children.
Hemangioma: Hemangiomas are strawberry-colored “birthmarks”. They are not rare and vary from tiny to large multiple tumor-like growths. They are mostly not seen at birth, but start in infancy and then begin to grow.
Hives: Hives are raised, often itchy, red welts on the surface of the skin. They are usually an allergic reaction to food or medicine. When you have an allergic reaction to a substance, your body releases histamine and other chemicals into your bloodstream. This causes itching, swelling, and other symptoms. Hives are a common reaction, especially in people with other allergies such as hay fever.
Hyperhidrosis: Hyperhidrosis is a medical condition in which a person sweats excessively and unpredictably. People with hyperhidrosis may sweat even when the temperature is cool or when they are at rest.
Hypertrophic Scar: A hypertrophic scar is an elevated scar that is typically raised, erythematous (red, pink, or purple) and stiffer than the surrounding skin. Hypertrophic scars are more commonly found in areas of high skin tension, or on people with darker skin tones.
Juvéderm: Recently approved by the FDA, Juvéderm™ injectable gel is a “next-generation” dermal filler. The smooth consistency gel helps to instantly restore your skin’s volume and smooth away facial wrinkles and folds, like your “smile lines” or “parentheses” (nasolabial folds—the creases that run from the bottom of your nose to the corners of your mouth). Juvéderm™ is a smooth consistency gel made of hyaluronic acid—a naturally occurring substance in your skin that helps to add volume and hydration. Your healthcare professional eases Juvéderm™ injectable gel under the skin to provide a smooth, natural look and feel—so everyone will notice (but no one will know)!
Keloids: Keloid scarring is the result of an overgrowth of dense fibrous tissue that usually develops after healing of a skin injury. The tissue extends beyond the borders of the original wound, does not usually regress spontaneously, and tends to recur after excision.
Laser Genesis: Laser Genesis Skin Therapy uses advanced science to achieve vibrant, even skin tone and smooth texture in both men and women. Light penetrates deeply into the skin where collagen is manufactured, stimulating an increase of new collagen production. Unlike harsher methods, this is done without destroying the upper layers of skin (non-ablative). The Laser Genesis procedure safely, discretely and effectively treats scars, uneven textures, fine line wrinkles and large pores. The result is skin with smoother texture and a healthier appearance.
Laser Hair Removal: Laser hair removal is a medical procedure that uses a laser — an intense, pulsating beam of light — to remove unwanted hair. During laser hair removal, a laser beam passes through the skin to an individual hair follicle. The intense heat of the laser damages the hair follicle, which inhibits future hair growth.
Laser Skin Resurfacing: Laser resurfacing is a treatment for reducing facial wrinkles and skin irregularities, such as blemishes or acne scars. The technique directs short, concentrated pulsating beams of light at irregular skin. Laser skin resurfacing removes skin very precisely, layer by layer. This popular procedure is known by several other names, including lasabrasion, laser peel or laser vaporization.
Medi-Spa: A medical day spa (medi-spa for short) is different from other day spas. Medical day spas perform medically based consultations and treatments by licensed health care professionals or medically trained aestheticians and therapists. Medical day spas must be managed by physicians with a licensed health care professional located on the premises.
Melanage Peel: The Melanage Skin Lightening System is a superficial peel designed to improve the texture and appearance of hyperpigmented skin, which involves a medicated masque and an at-home regimen.
Melanoma: Melanoma, the most serious type of skin cancer, develops in the cells that produce melanin — the pigment that gives your skin its color. Melanoma can also form in your eyes and, rarely, in internal organs, such as your intestines. The exact cause of all melanomas isn’t clear, but exposure to ultraviolet (UV) radiation from sunlight or tanning lamps and beds increases your risk of developing melanoma. Other factors, such as your genetic makeup, likely also play a role.
Microdermabrasion: Microdermabrasion is a popular skin treatment that may improve signs of aging and sun exposure. It’s a non-invasive procedure for the skin on your face, neck, or arms, with virtually no recovery time.
Mohs Surgery: Mohs surgery, also known as Mohs micrographic surgery, is a highly effective surgical technique for the removal of skin cancer. Mohs surgery differs from other skin cancer surgery in that the surgeon also serves as the pathologist allowing for immediate and, most importantly, complete microscopic evaluation of removed cancer.
The method employed to examine the tissue allows for better elimination of cancer roots.
Molluscum contagiosum: Molluscum contagiosum is a viral skin infection that causes raised, pearl-like papules or nodules on the skin.
Nail disorders and infections: There are several types of nail disorders. A fungal infection is the most common, usually affecting the toenails. Nail disorders are caused by infections, skin diseases, benign or malignant tumors and certain system-wide diseases. They also may be self-induced.
Narrowband UVB: “Narrowband” UVB is a phototherapy treatment for psoriasis, vitiligo, atopic dermatitis (eczema) and other photoresponsive skin disorders.
Permanent Cosmetics: Permanent makeup is a cosmetic technique which employs tattoos (permanent pigmentation of the dermis) as a means of producing designs that resemble makeup, such as eyelining and other permanent enhancing colors to the skin of the face, lips, and eyelids. It is also used to produce artificial eyebrows, particularly in people who have lost them as a consequence of old age, disease, such as alopecia, chemotherapy, or a genetic disturbance, and to disguise scars and white spots in the skin such as in vitiligo. It is also used to restore or enhance the breast’s areola, such as after breast surgery.
Photodynamic Therapy: Photodynamic therapy (PDT) is a medical treatment that uses a photosensitizing drug (a drug that becomes activated by light exposure) and a light source to activate the applied drug. The result is an activated oxygen molecule that can destroy nearby cells. Precancerous cells and certain types of cancer cells can be treated this way.
Port wine stain: (naevus flammeus) is a vascular birthmark consisting of superficial and deep dilated capillaries which produce a reddish to purplish discoloration of the skin.
Precancerous lesions: These precancerous lesions are changes in skin that are not cancer but could become cancer over time. Because precancerous lesions carry the risk of turning into skin cancer, they are a preliminary stage of cancer. Precancerous lesions can have several causes; UV radiation, genetics, exposure to such cancer-causing substances (carcinogens) as arsenic, tar or x-ray radiation.
Psoriasis: Psoriasis is a common skin disease that affects the life cycle of skin cells. Psoriasis causes cells to build up rapidly on the surface of the skin, forming thick silvery scales and itchy, dry, red patches that are sometimes painful. Psoriasis is a persistent, long-lasting (chronic) disease. You may have periods when your psoriasis symptoms improve or go into remission alternating with times your psoriasis worsens.
Psoralen plus ultraviolet light therapy (PUVA): PUVA combines a type of medicine (psoralen) with ultraviolet A (UVA) light to treat atopic dermatitis. The psoralen makes the skin more sensitive to the ultraviolet light. PUVA can be an effective treatment for severe atopic dermatitis and clearing psoriasis.
Radiation Therapy: Radiation therapy is a type of cancer treatment that uses beams of high-energy X-rays or particles to kill cancer cells. Radiation therapy is also called radiotherapy or X-ray therapy. The term “radiation therapy” most often refers to external beam radiation therapy. During this type of radiation, the high-energy beams come from a machine outside of your body that aims the beams at a precise point on your body. Radiation therapy damages cells by destroying the genetic material that controls how cells grow and divide. And while both healthy and cancerous cells are damaged by radiation therapy, the goal of radiation therapy is to destroy as few normal, healthy cells as possible.
Rosacea: Rosacea is a chronic skin condition involving inflammation of the cheeks, nose, chin, forehead, or eyelids. It may appear as redness, prominent spider-like blood vessels, swelling, or skin eruptions similar to acne.
Salicylic Acid Peels: : Salicylic acid is a chemical peel used in cosmetic treatment of skin conditions such as works as wrinkle-reduction, clearing acne scars and hyper-pigmentation and provide substantial improvement for skin conditions such as seborrheic keratosis, actinic keratosis and hyperkeratosis.
Scars: Scars are a natural part of the body’s healing process. A scar is a permanent patch of skin that grows over a wound. It forms when your body heals itself after a cut, scrape, burn or sore. You can also get scars from surgery that cuts through the skin, from infections like chickenpox, or skin conditions like acne. Scars are often thicker, as well as pinker, redder or shinier, than the rest of your skin.
Scar Removal: New surgical procedures, skin resurfacing technologies, and other treatments are making it possible for facial scars and scar tissue to be successfully erased or minimized, greatly improving the skin’s appearance
Sclerotherapy: Sclerotherapy is a medical procedure used to eliminate varicose veins and spider veins. Sclerotherapy involves an injection of a solution (generally a salt solution) directly into the vein. The solution irritates the lining of the blood vessel, causing it to swell and stick together, and the blood to clot. Over time, the vessel turns into scar tissue that fades from view. Sclerotherapy is a well-proven procedure and has been in use since the 1930s.
Seborrheic dermatitis: Seborrheic dermatitis is a common skin disorder that mainly affects the scalp, causing scaly, itchy, red skin and stubborn dandruff. For infants, seborrheic dermatitis of the scalp is known as cradle cap. Seborrheic dermatitis can also affect the face, upper chest, back and other oily areas of the body.
Seborrheic keratosis: Seborrheic keratosis is one of the most common types of noncancerous (benign) skin growths in older adults. In fact, most people develop at least one seborrheic keratosis at some point in their lives. A seborrheic keratosis usually appears as a brown, black or pale growth on the face, chest, shoulders or back. The growth has a waxy, scaly, slightly elevated appearance. Occasionally, it appears singly, but multiple growths are more common. Typically, seborrheic keratoses don’t become cancerous, but they can look like skin cancer. These skin growths are normally painless and require no treatment. You may decide, however, to have them removed if they become irritated by clothing or for cosmetic reasons.
Shingles: Shingles (herpes zoster) is a painful, blistering skin rash due to the varicella-zoster virus, the virus that causes chickenpox. After you’ve had chickenpox, the virus lies inactive in nerve tissue near your spinal cord and brain. Years later, the virus may reactivate as shingles. Although shingles can occur anywhere on your body, it most often appears as a band of blisters that wraps from the middle of your back around one side of your chest to your breastbone.
Skin cancer: Skin cancer is the uncontrolled growth of abnormal skin cells. If left unchecked, these cancer cells can spread from the skin into other tissues and organs.
There are different types of skin cancer. Basal cell carcinoma is the most common. Melanoma is less common, but more dangerous.
Skin Cancer Surgery: Complete surgical removal (excision) is the most successful and the most common treatment for melanoma. The lymph nodes may also need to be removed (lymphadenectomy) in stages II and III melanoma.
Skin Care Consultation: This is a consultation process to help you find the best treatment and products for your skin. You will be evaluated by one of our medical professionals and a course of action will be determined based on your individual needs.
3D Skin Rejuvenation: 3D Skin Rejuvenation from Cutera offers LimeLight Facial or Photo Genesis, Laser Genesis and Titan, resulting in noticeable improved skin tone, texture and tightness.
Skin Resurfacing: The UltraPulse© Laser Resurfacing Procedure is the latest technologically advanced way in which to remove undesired wrinkles, scars, and uneven pigmentation. The UltraPulse© laser resurfacing procedure is one of the latest technologically advanced ways in which to reduce undesired wrinkles, scars, and uneven pigmentation. The laser works through a “layer by layer” vaporization of the superficial portions of the skin. The advancement of this laser is due to its high energy, shortened pulse waveform which limits the heat damage to the surrounding regions of the actual wrinkle. This allows for a more even and clean resurfacing procedure and minimizes the risk of scarring and pigmentary changes.
Solar Purpura: Solar Purpura is a non-curable affliction that is seen in many Caucasian patients over 60. This disorder is cause by ultraviolet A (UVA) irradiation to the areas involved over many decades. The UVA rays penetrate to the deeper skin regions and thin the epidermis, dermis, and subcutaneous fat. Under these tissue planes lie small veins that are fragile and now easily torn. Without the normal skin surface and padding for protection, minor bumps, pressure, and glancing blows open these blood vessels and cause slow oozing of blood. The purpura typically resolves in several weeks leaving normal skin color.
Spider veins/unwanted blood vessels: Spider veins are small superficial blood vessels that appear red or blue in the skin. They commonly occur on the legs, but are also found on the face or other areas of the body. These dilated blood vessels may be short, unconnected lines, each about the size of a large hair, or connected in a “sunburst” pattern. They may look like a spider web or a tree with branches. Spider veins can occur in a small area where they are not very noticeable, or they can cover a large area of skin and be very unattractive. Spider veins are progressive, and usually increase in number and visibility with age.
Squamous cell carcinoma: Squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) is skin cancer that may appear as a bump or as a red, scaly patch. It often is found on badly sun-damaged, fair skin, and because of this often develops on the rim of the ear, the face, and the lips. (SCC is the second most common form of nonmelanoma skin cancer following basal cell carcinoma.
Sun damage: Excessive sun exposure is responsible for most of the sun damage associated with aging skin. This sun damage accumulates slowly over time and starts at an early age. While some of the sun damage is merely cosmetic, other effects, such as skin cancer, are more serious.
Tattoo Removal: Every day, we see patients from every walk of life that have second thoughts about their tattoos. What once seemed like a good idea just doesn’t fit your new image, and you wish it would just go away. Now we can make your wish come true. Using our advanced laser system, we can remove your tattoo safely without leaving a scar.
Titan Skin Tightening: Titan is a skin treatment device meant to tighten skin and improve skin tone. The Titan treatment involves application of a handpiece that generates infrared light energy. Using light energy to stimulate new collagen growth deep beneath your skin’s surface, Titan can tighten skin on your face, arms, abdomen, and legs.
UltraPulse© laser resurfacing: The UltraPulse© laser resurfacing procedure is one of the latest technologically advanced ways in which to reduce undesired wrinkles, scars, and uneven pigmentation. The laser works through a “layer by layer” vaporization of the superficial portions of the skin. The advancement of this laser is due to its high-energy, shortened pulse waveform, which limits the heat damage to the surrounding regions of the actual wrinkle. This allows for a more even and clean resurfacing procedure and minimizes the risk of scarring and pigmentary changes.
Varicose veins: Varicose veins are large, raised, swollen blood vessels that twist and turn. They usually develop in the legs and can be seen through the skin.
Vein Therapy: The oldest and most common treatment for spider veins on the legs is sclerotherapy. This involves injection of a sclerosing agent into the veins, which irritates the vessels, causing them to scar and become less noticeable. Some surgeons use a concentrated (hypertonic) saline solution, while others use different sclerosing agents. Often, the veins do not actually go away, but become less visible because of the reaction around the walls of the vein. The injections may sting a bit, especially if saline is used, but the discomfort does not last long. Another treatment, which is sometimes effective, is the use of a laser. This is especially true in the facial area, where the laser may be the preferred method of treatment. Deep veins and varicose veins are not effectively treated with these methods. In order to treat varicose veins, surgery is usually performed for optimal results.
Waxing: Waxing is a method of semi-permanent hair removal which removes the hair from the root. New hairs will not grow back in the previously waxed area for two to eight weeks.
Wrinkles/Premature aging: Wrinkles are a natural part of aging. As you grow older, your skin gets thinner, drier and less elastic. And it becomes less able to protect itself from damage. As a result, wrinkles, lines and creases form in your skin. Although genetics are the most important determiner of skin texture, a major contributor to wrinkles is spending too much time in the sun. Smoking also can cause premature aging of your skin.
If you’re looking for a term that is not in this Glossary, click here.