Reading-(including Language, Spelling and Writing Skills)
1. Identify the sound at the beginning, middle, and end of a spoken word.
2. Combine sounds or word parts to form a spoken word.
3. Delete, add, or substitute the sound at the beginning, middle, or end of a spoken word to form a new word.
4. Use consonants, consonant blends (e.g., tr, bl, sm), and vowel sounds to read unknown words.
5. Use word patterns (e.g., ight as in light) to read unknown words.
6. Read grade-level text accurately with expression.
7. Read high-frequency and sight words correctly.
8. Can expand word choices to communicate effectively.
9. Display mastery of reading strategies used before, during, and after reading text.
10. Determine a purpose for reading.
11. Make a predictions or ask a question based on background knowledge.
12. Make a connection between what he or she knows and what he or she reads.
13. Retell a story; recall facts from books read.
14. Respond to reading through discussions, retellings, and in writing.
15. Revisit the text to clarify understanding.
16. Read for different purposes: literary experiences (e.g., stories, plays, poems) and to be informed (e.g., articles and directions).
17. Selects and independently reads at least 25 grade-level-appropriate books.
18. Use a basic idea of the writing process (prewriting, first draft, revising, editing/proofreading, publishing).
19. Write for a purpose (to express personal ideas, to inform, and to persuade).
20. Begin to make simple revisions and edit writing.
21. Write independently using simple and compound sentences.
22. Spell sight words and words that follow a beginning phonetic concept correctly.
23. Print using correct size, shape, slant, and spacing
24. Demonstrate active listening strategies.
25. Speak clearly enough to be heard and understood in a variety of situations for a variety of purposes.
26. Follow multistep directions.
1. Is able to read grade-level text for different purposes: literary experiences (e.g., stories, plays, poems) and to be informed (e.g., articles and directions).
2. Can apply reading strategies used before, during, and after reading text.
3. Uses surrounding words or sentences to determine word meanings.
4. Begins to explore multiple-meaning words.
5. Acquires new vocabulary through reading.
6. Can understands characters, setting, problem/solution, and plot when reading for a literary experience.
7. Explain how text features (e.g., captions, labels, headings, table of contents, index) help the reader comprehend when reading informational text.
8. Can summarize text.
9. Uses the writing process (prewriting, first draft, revising, editing/proofreading, publishing); as well as determining the purpose and audience for writing. Revision mastery applies.
10. Responds to reading comprehension questions in writing.
11. Selects and independently reads at least 25 grade level books.
12. Demonstrates active listening strategies (makes visual contact, asks questions, follows directions, responds to questions and clues)
1. Shows mastery of reading and easily reads grade-level text accurately, and with expression.
2. Responds to reading through discussion and with critical thought.
3. Spells commonly used words correctly.
4. Writes using multiple paragraphs and maintains a focus for writing.
5. Edits writing using correct simple and compound sentences, standard punctuation, and capitalization
6. Learns Cursive letter formation.
7. Can plan and deliver an oral report.
8. Reads chapter books roughly 70-80 pages, and of various genres, such as fables, mysteries and historical fiction.
1. Understands and uses word parts, root words, synonyms, antonyms, homonyms, etc.
2. Identifies authorís message.
3. Understands inferences, cause and effect, etc. as it relates to grade level text.
4. Reads and understands informational texts.
5. Uses strong beginnings to engage the reader when writing. Inaddition, follows the writing process and corrects punctuation errors, etc.
6. Can utilize a dictionary, thesaurus, and an encyclopedia to research.
7. Determines a speakerís point of view by tone of voice and body language; can plan and deliver an effective oral presentations.
8. Reads effectively longer chapter books, 100+ pages.
9, Shows ability to read independently and enjoy a variety of literature.
1. Understands a wide range of vocabulary.
2. Identifies tone and intent of an author.
3. Compare and contrast characters, settings, etc.
4. Uses the writing process wit ease- prewriting, first draft, revising, editing/proofreading, and publishing.
5. Understands the concept of persuasion in writing.
6. Grasps meaning of text at a literal and figurative level.
7. Is ready to read and comprehend Science Fiction and Memoir Genres.
Here are some wonderful resources for teaching Reading, Phonics and Spelling: