Each year there are thousands of spiritual seekers use use an ancient rite of passage called the vision quest to tap into the wonder and mystery of nature. This is traditionally a Native American Indian tradition that is being revived throughout the world.
In the vision quest, 'questers' as they are known sit within a circle alone in nature for 4 days and 4 nights. Depending upon the tradition, the questers will sometimes go without food for the entire vision quest process.
The idea behind being alone and without food for 4 days during the vision quest ceremony is that it puts the participants in direct communication with the creator to find a vision for their life's purpose.
This tradition has been used for thousands of years by the Native American Indians. Traditionally it was first used as a rite of passage for boys who were about to enter adulthood. The transition from boyhood to adulthood was usually marked by the vision quest ceremony.
The vision quest traditionally had three main phases. The first phase of the vision quest is known as the separation phase. This is where participants pack all they need to go alone into nature. They also get clear on their intention for going on the vision quest as well as say goodbye to their usual lifestyle, friends and family.
The second phase of this ancient tradition is known as the threshold phase. This is when participants enter the wilderness to a place they feel drawn to. It is during this stage of the vision quest when participants will get insights and messages from nature and the creator around the intentions they had set. Traditionally questers would also call for a vision. This is when they would put energy into finding out what their life was to be about and what their purpose in the tribe was to be.
The final stage of the vision quest is known as the integration phase. This is when the questers would talk to the medicine man about the visions they received and get clear about how they could bring these visions into their daily life.
Given the disconnection between modern society and nature, it is no wonder this ancient tradition is being revived and growing in popularity throughout the world. People from virtually every continent are using this four day ceremony to tap into the essence of their being and getting clear on why they are on the planet and what they are meant to contribute back to society.
Not only is there a revival of the vision quest process but each year thousands of people from around the world are participating in a groundswell of other ancient rites of passage. Hopefully one day the vision quest and rite of passage process will become an integral part of Western civilization to bring a deeper meaning to our everyday existence.
To find out more about the vision quest process, please visit the website as shown in this Press Release. The website is http://www.davidstyles.com/vision-quest/