This article provides for tips as to how ferment your own wine at home. The actual fermentation process that is involved in wine making is based around a chemical reaction which occurs when turning raw grape juice into an alcoholic beverage called wine. Some consideration should be taken into account when considering the exact timing and lengths of the fermentation process prior to beginning. This is mainly a way to protect the final integrity of the product and the wine itself.
A seasoned vintner will have a specific plan in motion before starting the process. Yeast will interact with natural sugars in the fruit juice during the fermentation process creating ethanol, also known as ethyl alcohol. It also creates carbon dioxide as off product. The temperature and timing of the fermentation process is of great importance when fermenting the wine. Great care should be taken to avoid risks of stuck fermentation. It causes a delay in the fermentation process. When stuck fermentation happens it usually delays the process anywhere from five to fifteen days time. This is crucial for the home made wine maker in making a quality product. It could change the entire batch of wine and could produce vinegar if left unchecked.
This drawback of stuck fermentation is usually caused by a number of influences. It happens due to a lack of nutrient content needed in order for yeast to complete its fermentation process. Another cause of this is often low temperatures, or fluctuating temperature changes causing the yeast to stop fermenting early. Finally the alcohol percentage rate could have grown too high as a result of the type of yeast selected to be used in the fermentation process.
The majority of fermentation is often done in stainless steel tanks, open wooden vats, inside wine barrels, or inside the wine bottle itself as seen in the production of many types of sparkling and brut wines. For the home making vintner, these concerns are not large concerns. But often fermenting wine at home will mean a little bit more effort and work from the maker and usually this work is crucial to making a quality wine product.