Though her home sits in the city, Melanie Losey-Mast isn’t surprised to see wildlife outside her door.
Deer, rabbits and other small animals frequently roam her neighborhood. About a month ago, an addition to the menagerie of wild creatures on Jackson’s northeast side appeared.
Losey-Mast spotted a couple of coyotes in the field behind her home. Lately, they have been making themselves more comfortable near her yard.
“He’s a regular,” she said as she watched a coyote move behind her home Tuesday morning.
Losey-Mast said she doesn’t mind the animals, but their presence makes her a little nervous since she worries children walking to nearby Northeast Elementary School and neighbors’ pets could be at risk.
“I’m warning everybody,” said Losey-Mast, who has 10- and 13-year-old daughters. “I’m just trying to make people aware.”
It isn’t unusual to see coyotes in more highly populated urban areas, said Kristin Bissell, a wildlife biologist for the Michigan Department of Natural Resources. Coyotes are highly adaptive animals and can easily survive in cities and suburbs, she said.
“We get a lot of calls about coyotes in the area because people who haven’t seen them and start to are shocked,” said Bissell, who works in a region that includes Jackson, Hillsdale, Lenawee and Washtenaw counties. “They don’t realize how common these animals are and adapted to urban situations.”
Coyotes usually are not a threat, but they could be considered dangerous if they approach people or homes, she said.
“If they come toward you, that’s a problem,” Bissell said. “The problem is when animals lose fear of people and view people as a source of food.”
Animals usually lose their fear of humans after people feed them, she said.
To avoid attracting coyotes or other animals, pet food should not be left outside near the house and trash should be taken out the day it will be picked up, rather than the night before, Bissell said.
Coyotes are scavengers and can weigh up to 60 pounds. They normally eat animal carcasses, food left in the trash or small animals such as rodents, snakes and sometimes stray cats, Bissell said.
Attacks on humans or dogs are unlikely, but people should make sure to keep an eye on their pets while they are outside, Bissell said.
The DNR does not track the coyote population, Bissell said, but the animals are known to live throughout the state.
Residents in rural areas can shoot and kill coyotes year-round if they are believed to be a threat, but city residents must call a wildlife control company, she said.
William Masson, owner of Alpha Wildlife Services, 4537 Matthews Road in Spring Arbor Township, said he regularly receives calls for coyotes, but has not heard complaints from city residents.
Coyotes are on the move in the fall, when pups separate from their parents, so people are more likely to see them then, he said.
Losey-Mast said she has never seen the coyotes near her home act aggressively and she doesn’t want them to be killed, but wants the neighborhood to remain safe.
For now, they are a captivating distraction and a welcome exterminator of rodents.
“They’re fascinating,” Losey-Mast said. “I feel more in the country now than I did when we lived in the country.”