Studies show that food intake (and presumably hunger) increases in the days before menstruation. Metabolism can jump as well, up to 16 per cent. Why? The hormone progesterone that’s released before menstruation causes the body to heat up and expend more energy, resulting in a need for more fuel. If you’re like the average women, you consume an extra 300 calories a day in the week before your period. And you may need every morsel, so don’t hold back make meals full ad snacks substantial.
So, your body needs to eat more before/during period AND you burn calories faster, so give your tummy what it’s begging for!
Scientists have discovered the fountain of youth—it’s running. Studies continue to find that hitting the roads improves health and well-being. “The biggest benefits come from vigorous exercise like running,” says JoAnn Manson, M.D., chief of preventive medicine at Brigham and Women’s Hospital. Here are the latest reasons to lace up.
People who run more than 35 miles a week are 54 percent less likely to suffer age-related vision loss than those who cover 10 miles a week.
Keep the Beat
Runners who log a weekly run of 10 miles (or more) are 39 percent less likely to use high blood pressure meds and 34 percent less likely to need cholesterol meds compared with those who don’t go farther than 3 miles.
Men who burn at least 3,000 calories per week (equal to about five hours of running) are 83 percent less likely to have severe erectile dysfunction.
Running strengthens bones better than other aerobic activities, say University of Missouri researchers who compared the bone density of runners and cyclists. Sixty-three percent of the cyclists had low density in their spine or hips; only 19 percent of runners did.
British workers were surveyed on a day they worked out and a day they didn’t. People said they made fewer mistakes, concentrated better, and were more productive on the day they were active.
A study in the Journal of the American Geriatrics Society reported that women who were active as teenagers were less likely to develop dementia later in life.
Insomniacs fell asleep in 17 minutes on days they ran, compared to 38 minutes on days they didn’t. They also slept for an extra hour on days they exercised.
People who exercise for an hour a day are 18 percent less likely to suffer upper-respiratory-tract infections than those who are inactive, according to a study from Sweden. Moderate activity boosts immunity.
Researchers had asthmatics do two cardio workouts and one strength session a week. After three months, they reported less wheezing and shortness of breath.
A review of 22 studies found that people who work out 2.5 hours a week are 19 percent less likely to die prematurely than those who don’t exercise. A separate study found that active people have a 50 percent lower risk of premature death.
- Runner’s World
OK folks, Lawson (@intenseintent) was right. Who needs mashed potatoes when cauliflower mash is even better??
Since going Paleo I have been missing mashed potatoes like woah, so I made this last night:
- Step 1 - Remove stems and leaves from full head of cauliflower
- Step 2 - Steam for 10-15 mins.
- Step 3 - Add 1/4 c. coconut milk, 1 tbsp. butter and spices of your choice [I used Mrs. Dash Garlic & Herb mix and a little parsley for garnish].
- Step 4 - Blend in food processor or blender until you reach the consistency of mashed potatoes. [I like mine a little chunkier, not mush like baby food.]
- Step 5- Enjoy!
I am SO making this once I have my own kitchen.
Today, as part of Food and Nutrition Week on HeyKiki, we’re taking a look at some ways you can enjoy the benefits of good nutrition by developing healthier eating habits.
The first step is by making simple lifestyle changes that will effect the way you approach choosing and preparing food, cooking, and eating, all of which you’ll see in the video below.
How To Develop Healthy Eating Habits
In addition to the tips above, you’ll want to keep some things in mind about the foods that you currently include in your diet, and how much of them you eat. Nutritionists and dietitians agree that the keys to healthy eating revolve around three main components, which are balance, variety, and moderation. Below you’ll find 10 tips that can help you rethink what foods, and how much of them, you’re incorporating into your diet.
1. Eat a variety of high-nutrient foods - Your mind and body need over 40 different nutrients to maintain good health. Since no single food supplies them all, your daily food selection should include bread and other whole-grain products; fruits; vegetables; dairy products; and meat, poultry, fish and other protein foods. Eat according to your calorie needs, and remember to check the Food Guide Pyramid or the Nutrition Facts panels on food labels as a reference.
2. Eat plenty of whole grains, fruits and vegetables - Are you eating 6-11 servings from the bread, rice, cereal and pasta group, 3 of which are whole grains? Or 2-4 servings of fruit and 3-5 servings of vegetables? If not, you should be!
3. Maintain a healthy weight - Depending upon sex, height, age and heredity, this number will vary, but remember that excess body fat increases your chances for high blood pressure, heart disease, stroke, diabetes, some types of cancer and other illnesses, and that being too thin can increase your risk for osteoporosis, menstrual irregularities and a variety of other health problems. In addition to diet, regular exercise also can help you stay in shape, and if you’re constantly losing weight and gaining it back, you should consult with a registered dietitian for help in developing eating habits that work specifically for you.
4. Eat moderate portions - If you keep your portion sizes sensible, you’ll be able to eat more of the foods that you want to eat and stay healthy at the same time. Did you know that a recommended serving of pasta is half a cup or that a serving of cooked meat should only be about 3 oz? Now you do, so next time think the serving dishes are being passed around the dinner table, take what you want, but keep moderation in mind!
5. Eat regular meals - Skipping meals can lead to out-of-control hunger, which then can lead to overeating. Snacking is okay between meals, but don’t let your snacks turn into meals themselves.
6. Reduce certain foods (no need for elimination) - If you favorite foods include ice cream, cookies, fried chicken, potato chips, or anything else that’s high in fat, salt, or sugar, it’s still okay to be healthy and to eat for pleasure at the same time, but just make sure to moderate the amounts of these foods that you eat.
7. Balance your food choices over time - Not everything you eat has to be “perfect,” but when you’re eating foods high in fat, sugar, or salt, just make sure to select various other foods that are low in those ingredients. If you miss a food group on a particular day, it’s okay to make up for it the next. You’ll start to see your food choices fitting together in a healthy pattern.
8. Know your diet pitfalls - Before you can improve your eating habits, you first need to know what’s wrong with them. Write down everything that you eat for three days and then check your list according to these previously mentioned tips above.
9. Make changes gradually - Don’t expect to completely transform your eating habits overnight. In fact, changing too much too fast can get in the way of your success. Start with modest changes to your eating excesses or deficiencies and over time you’ll develop more and more good eating habits to last throughout your lifetime.
10. Remember, foods are not good or bad - Choose foods based on your own individual eating pattern, not because you’ve heard “this is good” and “that is bad.” If you love bacon cheeseburgers or chocolate cake, you can still eat them. Just remember to do it in moderation, and choose other foods to provide balance and variety that are essential to good health.
Hopefully, the tips above are enough to get you started on the path to healthier eating. If you want to take it another step further, then search on HeyKiki to find great local nutrition and cooking instructors and classes in your area.
“To understand what trans fats are, picture a bottle of vegetable oil and a stick of margarine. At room temperature, the vegeatable oil is a liquid, the margarine a solid. Now, if you baked cookies using vegetable oil, they’d be pretty greasy. And who would want to buy a cookie swimming in oil? So to create cookies—and cakes, nachos, chips, pies, muffins, doughnuts, waffles, and many, many other foods we consume daily—manufatures heat the oil to very high temperatures and infuse it with hydrogen. That hydrogen bonds with the oil to create an entirely knew form of fat—trans fat—that stays solid at room temperature.”
look out for this deadly ingrediant on your food labels. usually labeled as ”PARTIALLY HYDROGENATED OIL”
Commercially manufactured baked goods
Any food with partially hydrogenated oil on its list of ingredients