MW 12:30-1:50; PY 202
“Representative English novels with focus on the development of the genre, major themes, and techniques.” This course will follow the development of the novel as a legitimate genre in the eighteenth century to the development of literary/film adaptation in the twentieth-century. We will consider the historical contexts of each work and will examine the influences of politics, gender, class, commodity culture, and the developing notion of authorship shaped each work. Our list of works is by no means comprehensive, but it is meant to provide the class with an overview of the complexities of the novel as a form. Accordingly, we will study the Gothic novel, the epistolary novel, psychological thrillers, historical fiction, national tales, the novel of manners, the social novel, detective fiction, the modern novel, and will finally conclude with a twentieth-century textual “adaptation” of a nineteenth-century novel.
Horace Walpole, The Castle of Otranto (1757), Broadview Press
Frances Burney, Evelina, or, The History of a Young Lady’s Entrance into the World (1778),
Norton Critical Edition
Maria Edgeworth, Castle Rackrent (1800), Penguin Classics
Jane Austen, Pride and Prejudice (1813), Penguin Classics
James Hogg, Private Memoirs and Confessions of a Justified Sinner (1814), Broadview press
Elizabeth Gaskell, Mary Barton (1848), Broadview press
Wilkie Collins, The Moonstone (1868), Penguin Classics
Virginia Woolf, Mrs. Dalloway (1925), Harcourt
Helen Fielding, Bridget Jones’ Diary (1996), Penguin
Adaptation papers (2- 10% each) 20%
Article Presentation 15%
Critical Response Paper 20%
Final Paper 30%
Class Activities, Quizzes 15%
F: 0-59, D: 60-69, C: 70-79, B: 80-89, A: 90-100
Unless otherwise specified, essays should be typed, double-spaced on bond paper, according to MLA referencing guidelines. Papers that are not stapled or paper clipped will not be accepted.
Completion of Assignments and Late Papers
You must complete all assignments in the sequence outlined on this syllabus in order to receive a passing grade in this course.
You are required to submit assignments to me in class on due dates listed on this syllabus. Late submission of assignments will result in a deduction of 10 points per day late. Papers submitted outside of class (for example, left under the door or left in the wrong office) will receive a grade of zero.
"As an MSU Student, I pledge not to lie, cheat, steal, or help anyone else do so."
From the Student Handbook
“Academic Dishonesty: Cheating, collusion, and plagiarism (the act of using source material of other persons, either published or unpublished, without following the accepted techniques of crediting, or the submission for credit of work not the individual’s to whom credit is given). Additional guidelines on procedures in these matters may be found in the Dean of Students office.
a. The term “cheating” includes, but is not limited to: (1) use of any unauthorized assistance in taking quizzes, tests, or examinations; (2) dependence upon the aid of sources beyond those authorized by the instructor in writing papers, preparing reports, solving problems, or carrying out other assignments; or (3) the acquisition, without permission, of tests or other academic material belonging to a member of the university faculty or staff.
b. The term “plagiarism” includes, but is not limited to, the use, by paraphrase or direct quotation, of the published or unpublished work of another person without full and clear acknowledgment. It also includes the unacknowledged use of materials prepared by another person or agency engaged in the selling of term papers or other academic materials.
c. The term “collusion” means collaboration with another person in preparing work offered for credit of that collaboration is not authorized by the faculty member in charge.”
For additional Policies please see the print version of the syllabus.