Simply begin typing or use the editing tools above to add to this article.
Once you are finished and click submit, your modifications will be sent to our editors for review.
component of communication model
...is neither the only model of the communication process extant nor is it universally accepted. As originally conceived, the model contained five elements—an information source, a transmitter, a channel of transmission, a receiver, and a destination—all arranged in linear order. Messages (electronic messages, initially) were supposed to travel along this path, to be changed into...
...the mid-1970s there has been a proliferation of cable-television systems offering special services. Besides bringing high-quality signals to subscribers, the systems provide additional television channels. Some of these systems can deliver 50 or more channels because they distribute signals occurring within the normal television broadcast band as well as nonbroadcast frequencies. A...
The channel is the medium that carries the message. The channel might be wires, the air or space in the case of radio and television transmissions, or fibre-optic cable. In the case of a signal produced simply by banging on the plumbing, the channel might be the pipe that receives the blow. The beauty of having an abstract model is that it permits the inclusion of a wide variety of channels....
Two kinds of optical channels exist: the unguided free-space channel, where light freely propagates through the atmosphere, and the guided optical fibre channel, where light propagates through an optical waveguide.
...into the allotted time slot between successive signal samples. The circuitry would become more costly, and the bandwidth of the system would become correspondingly greater. Some transmission channels (telephone wires are one example) may not have the bandwidth capability required for the increased number of binary samples and would distort the digital signals. Thus, although the accuracy...
...having a wavelength between 0.1 and 1 m and a frequency between 3,000 and 300 megahertz. UHF signals are used extensively in televison broadcasting. UHF waves typically carry televison signals on channels 14 through 83.
...10 metres and a frequency between 300 and 30 megahertz. VHF signals are widely employed for television and radio transmissions. In the United States and Canada, television stations that broadcast on channels 2 through 13 use VHF frequencies, as do FM radio stations. Many amateur radio operators also transmit on frequencies within the VHF band.
What made you want to look up "channel"? Please share what surprised you most...