By John Solomon
How the government's punishing of the exposure of official wrongdoing can linger for years
Independent voices from the TWT Communities
), is a country south of the Sénégal River in western Africa. It owes its name to the river that borders it to the East and North and that originates from the Fouta Djallon in Guinea. Senegal is externally bounded by the Atlantic Ocean to the west, Mauritania to the north, Mali to the east, and Guinea and Guinea-Bissau to the south; internally it almost completely surrounds The Gambia, namely on the north, east and south, exempting Gambia's short Atlantic Ocean coastline. Senegal covers a land area of almost 197,000 km², and has an estimated population of about 14 million.The climate is tropical with two seasons: the dry season and the rainy season. - Source: Wikipedia
Talk about a computer error: One couple intending to fly from Los Angeles to Dakar, Senegal, was mistakenly taken to Dhaka, the Bangladesh capital, which is 7,000 miles from their planned destination — and on a different continent.
Not well known, until now, is Cape Verde's status as the onetime home to many Moroccan Jewish emigrants, whose cemeteries are being restored, thanks to the determined effort of a D.C. woman who stumbled upon this aspect of the diaspora a few years ago.
Senegal women seem to be facing an identity crisis of sorts. Recent advertisements and posters aimed at teaching black women how to bleach their skin — and go lighter, or whiter — have now been met by a backlash of activists.
The latest terrorist warning of "earth-shattering" attacks on the West shows Islamic extremists are still focused on the United States and Europe, but many analysts doubt that they have the capacity to follow through on their threats.
An Ethiopian court has sentenced 10 men to prison terms for between three and 20 years for plotting terrorist attacks with Islamist extremist rebels from neighboring Somalia.
Jayne Cortez, a forceful poet, activist and performance artist who blended oral and written traditions into numerous books and musical recordings, has died. She was 78.
Louisville has had enough of losing to Kentucky.
After prayers at the mosque, Ibrahim Lo is off to do some last-minute Christmas shopping. Soon he is eyeing the rows of dolls wrapped in plastic bags on a wooden table as he searches for gifts for his four children.
The street level of Ousmane Ndiaye's building features a fabric shop. He and his family live in a posh apartment on the second floor. Their upstairs neighbors? His beloved ram Billal and 10 other sheep.
Hey, referee! That was a goal! Or it was very, very close.
Military action will be needed to push radical Islamists out of northern Mali, where they have carried out amputations and public whippings since seizing control of the region earlier this year, a top U.S. official said.
Egypt's president will visit the United States next month, an aide said Wednesday. The visit could serve as a step toward cementing Egypt's longtime alliance with Washington.
Apple, Hewlett-Packard and Intel have become "pioneers of progress" through their efforts to avoid purchasing minerals that fund armed groups in Central Africa, an advocacy group said Thursday.
Intel, Motorola Solutions, HP and Apple have become "pioneers of progress" through their efforts to avoid purchasing minerals that fund armed groups in Central Africa, according to a report released Thursday.
The rumors started to swirl around Ghana in June: President John Atta Mills was ill, maybe too sick to seek re-election, and he was going abroad to seek medical treatment.