American Heritage® Dictionary of the English Language, Fourth Edition
- adv. About where; in, at, or near what location: Whereabouts do you live?
- n. Approximate location: Her whereabouts are still unknown.
Century Dictionary and Cyclopedia
- n. the general location where something is
- whereabout + -s (Wiktionary)
“Anyone with information about his whereabouts is asked to call Plainfield Detective Edwin Maldonado at (908) 753-3415 or Detective Manny Rivera at (908) 753-3008.”
“Of course, her only lead to its whereabouts is given her by Thomas Oscar Morrow, who we learn for the first time (I never heard it anyway) here is not his real name.”
“Meanwhile, a businessman desperate to find his missing two-year-old grandson in "Suicide Watch" must determine whether the horrifying tale his junky son tells him about the boys whereabouts is a confession or a sick test.”
“Leaving the state unattended for five days when nobody knows your whereabouts is deriliction of duty.”
“Not providing the 2nd in charge with his 24/7 whereabouts is a State Security Issue that needs to be dealt with by the state legis.”
“Keeping track of its whereabouts is what worried me more than the weight: early Anheiser's.”
“(This deus ex machina solution to the problem of the pearl's whereabouts is among the boldest examples of coincidence, and there are many from which to choose, in London's fiction.)”
“Maybe the best way to find her whereabouts is to contact the foreign doctors who might have contact with the Chinese doctors.”
“I know I can look it up, but whereabouts is Mexhapati?”
“A man's vigilance over his partner's whereabouts is likely to be a key signal of violence against her.”
These user-created lists contain the word ‘whereabouts’.
Nouns that are common in plural form but are non-existent or rarely used in singular form.
Listening to this as an audio book for the second time. Tim O'Brien uses simple words and phrases to great effect. Very few unfamilar and big words . The writing style reminds me of words from Joh...
Words from a 2007 'St. Trinian's' film.
Where words go to die.
The opposite of the ABC list (prompted by my recent discovery of the awesome word ecballium)
Looking for tweets for whereabouts.