This past weekend, my thoughts turned to birthdays and coincidences for several reasons. First of all, Saturday was July 4th. Happy 233rd birthday, America!
Like many of you, I spent the weekend celebrating the holiday with family and friends. Whenever people get together and the conversation turns to birthdays, you often get exclamations like “Imagine that!” or “What a coincidence” as people find they have birthdays in common. These expressions of surprise generally show how much our intuitions mislead us when estimating probabilities.
In our case, we had a group of 21 people, and one had a July 4th birthday. Should I have been surprised? In science, a result is considered to be statistically significant if there is a less than 5 percent probability that it happened by chance. Was this statistically significant?
Consider a more historical case. John Adams, Thomas Jefferson and James Monroe all died on July 4. That’s three of the first five United States presidents! Surely that is statistically significant! How significant? Suppose I had a theory that in their last days, humans can hold on to life by sheer force of will so that they can reach a particular landmark date or occasion one last time. Would the historic triple coincidence cited above support this theory? To make sensible judgments about such things is notoriously difficult, sometimes even for experts. But I am sure that Times readers will be able to explain the most sensible way of looking at this.
This week’s formal challenge is a variation on the famous birthday problem: what is the smallest number of people in a group such that there is an even chance (or greater) that two of them will share a birthday? If you haven’t heard this problem before, you can start with this. Even if you have no interest in figuring it out, take a guess. You may be surprised when you find out the answer.
Our variations are as follows:
1. How large does a group of people need to be so that there is an even chance or greater that any two of them will have a birthday within a day of each other? (People will ooh and aah about that too.) This answer may also surprise you.
2. Can you generalize the birthday problem to more than two people sharing a birthday? How many people need to be there before there is an even chance or greater that three of them, or four of them or n of them will share a birthday? This problem may be a lot thornier than you expect, so be warned.
(For all today’s problems, assume that it is equally likely for a person to be born on any day of the year. This is not exactly true, but it’s close enough to the truth.)
For word-puzzle lovers, take a look at these questions with “echo answers.”
Q: What is the best time to give the birthday girl the present?
A: The present!
Q: What’s that on the road ahead?
A: A head!
The answer echoes the last few words of the question but uses them in a different sense. There are some English poems that use this as a literary device, and I am sure that it is used in other languages too. For instance, in Sanskrit, there are poems of questions and answers in which the entire question is also the answer – the words take on entirely different meanings, merely by a change in inflection. (It’s no coincidence that Sanskrit is the language of mysticism.)
Can you come up with your own examples of echo answers? Remember, the words must take on a different meaning so as to reveal something unexpected in the answer, or else it is not interesting.
As usual, you can submit answers as comments here. The weekly prize, a copy of “Mathematical Puzzles of Sam Loyd” (edited by Martin Gardner), will go to someone who comes up with an especially interesting answer or to someone who proposes a sufficiently intriguing puzzle for Lab readers to solve. (To submit a puzzle, send an email message with “NEW LAB PUZZLE” in the subject line to firstname.lastname@example.org. Please include the solution to the puzzle and indicate whether or not the puzzle is original.)
We apologize that we are a little behind in announcing the solutions and prizes for puzzles from the previous few weeks, but we hope to catch up shortly.