No excuse not to ban youth from tan beds
Re: Proposed youth tanning bed ban fires up teens, Sept. 20.
The Canadian Cancer Society is renewing its call for the province to support Bill 74, the Skin Cancer Prevention Act, which aims to restrict youth under 18 years of age from using indoor tanning equipment.
In 2009, the world’s foremost authority in identifying the causes of cancer, the International Agency for Research on Cancer, classified ultraviolet radiation (UVR)-emitting devices, including tanning beds, as a known carcinogen proven to cause cancer.
The skin damage caused by UVR is cumulative over a person’s life, meaning the earlier you start tanning, the greater your risk of developing skin cancer later in life.
In July, an expert review of current research published in the British Medical Journal showed people who first started using indoor tanning equipment before the age of 35 have an 87-per-cent increased risk of melanoma skin cancer.
There is no excuse for the Ontario government not to pass Bill 74. In other parts of Canada, the governments of Quebec, Nova Scotia and British Columbia, are all taking pro-active steps to address this pressing issue by introducing legislation to restrict youth from indoor tanning salons.
In August, the Town of Oakville became the first municipality to enact such legislation in Ontario.
The indoor tanning industry continues to misrepresent its product to the public. No tan is a safe tan. Melanoma skin cancer is one of the most common forms of skin cancer in young Ontarians aged 15 to 29 and is one of the most preventable.
Indoor tanning equipment can emit ultraviolet radiation at levels that are five times stronger than the mid-day summer sun.
We know that voluntary guidelines do not work.
Investigative reports by media and audits conducted by the Canadian Cancer Society and Public Health, show that those in the indoor tanning industry are not consistently following Health Canada’s voluntary safety guidelines.
We also know parental consent does not work as many parents are introducing their kids to indoor tanning and paying for their tanning sessions.
Regulating the indoor tanning industry will save lives and help reverse the rising cost of skin cancer on our already exhausted health care system.
The Canadian Partnership Against Cancer estimates the total economic burden of skin cancer in the country will rise to $922 million annually by 2032.
We already have age-specific laws related to smoking, drinking, gambling and bike helmets.
We need to take action now. I encourage residents to join the fight against skin cancer and send a letter to your MPP Julia Munro by visiting www.takeaction.cancer.ca or join the conversation on Twitter via #tanbedban.
Canadian Cancer Society