Province is located on the southwest boundary of the People's
Republic of China. The south part of Yunnan Province is on
the belt of the Tropic of Cancer. The widest distance from
the east to the west is 864.9 kilometers and the longest distance
from north to south is 900 kilometers with a total area of
394,000 square kilometers, it accounts for 4.1% of the total
area of China. In the entire province, about 84% area is mountainous
region, 10% area is plateau and hilly land and 6% area is
basin and valley. The average altitude of the province is
around 2,000 meters above the sea level. The highest point
is 6,740 meters and the lowest is 76.4 meters above the sea
Yunnan borders on Guizhou province and Guangxi
Zhuang Autonomous Region in the east, Sichuan province in
the north, Tibetan Autonomous Region in the northwest, Burma
in the west and Laos and Vietnam in the south. Geographically,
Yunnan is connected to the rest of the Asian Continent in
the north and faces the Southeast Asian Peninsula between
the Pacific Ocean and the Indian Ocean in the south. Because
of its geographical location, Yunnan is affected by the Southeast
Monsoon and Southwest Monsoon as well as weather conditions
from the Tibetan Plateau. As a result, Yunnan has a diverse
favorable natural environment.
the 4,060 kilometers long border between Yunnan and the neighbouring
countries, the Sino-Bumese section covers 1,997 kilometers,
Sino-Laotian section 1,353 kilometers. Yunnan has long been
a gateway from China to countries in Southeast Asia. There
are over 20 roads leading to these countries. There are 15
ethnic groups in China where people of the same ethnic origin
live in adjacent countries on both sides of the border.
Altogether Yunnan Province has total 16
prefectures, among which there are 8 ethnic minority autonomous
prefectures (Chuxiong Yi Nationality Autonomous Prefecture,
Honghe Hani and Yi Nationality Autonomous Prefecture, Wenshan
Zhuang Nationality Autonomous Prefecture, Xishuangbanna Dai
Nationality Autonomous Prefecture, Dali Bai Nationality Autonomous
Prefecture, Dehong Dai and Jingpo Nationality Autonomous Prefecture,
Nujiang Lisu Nationality Autonomous Prefecture, Diqing Tibetan
Nationality Autonomous Prefecture), 3 Prefectures (Simao,
Lijiang and Lincang), and 5 cities directly under the jurisdiction
of the provincial government (Kunming, Qujing, Yuxi, Baoshan,
Zhaotong). Yunnan province has 128 cities and counties, among
which there are 29 ethnic minority autonomous counties.
Basic Data Of Yunnan
1. Name: Yunnan Province
2. Area: 394,100 square kilometers
3. Population: 42.88 million (the 2000 population
census), of which the 25 ethnic nationalities take up over
14 million. Of all the ethnic group, the Yi nationality enjoys
the largest population, 4.47million. Other ethnic groups with
a population respectively exceeding 1 million include the
Bai Hani, Zhuang and Dai.
4. Capital: Kunming
Geography: Yunnan is located in southwestern China, between
97° 31' 39" - 106° 11' 47" east longtitude
and 21° 8' 32" - 29° 15' 8" north latitude;
surrounded by Guizhou, Guangxi, Sichuan and Tibet, and bordering
Myanmar, Lao People's Democratic Republic and Viet Nam. It
is a highland province with a terraced topographical feature
stretching from the northwest to the southeast, resulting
in a diversity of elevations and climates.
6. Natural Resources: As one of the largest
provinces in China, Yunnan abounds in land resources; the
per capita land area is about 16 mu (15 mu = 1 hectare). However,
cultivated land constitutes only a small part of the total,
owing to steep mountains. In addition, Yunnan has large areas
under forest cover, although they are distributed unevenly.
Furthermore, it has 230 million mu of grassland. Yunnan is
rich in mineral resources, especially non-ferrous metals.
With the greatest number of wild animal species in China,
Yunnan is known as a "kingdom for wild animals".
Xishuangbanna, with its picturesque landscape and rich wildlife,
is a major tourist attraction.
7. Economy: In 2000, the province's GDP
amounted to 195.509 billion Yuan, total industrial and agricultural
output value reached 227.022 billion Yuan, total import and
export volume nearly US$1.8 billion, fiscal revenue 43.295
billion Yuan and grain output 14.678 million tons. A major
hallmark of Yunnan is the multi-ethnicity of its inhabitants.
Burdened by a large population, Yunnan is one of the poorest
provinces in China.
a plateau and mountainous province, Yunnan belongs to the
southward extension part of Qing-Zang Plateau. With an average
elevation of around 2000m, Yunnan enjoys huge elevation differences.
The highest point is 6740m, the Kawagebo Peak, the main peak
of Meili Snow Mountain in northwestern Yunnan, while the lowest
point is only 76.4m, the confluence between Nanxi River and
Yuanjiang River in Hekou County which borders Viet Nam. With
over 600 rivers and streams of different sizes in its territory,
Yuannan has comparatively developed water systems. The number
of major rivers is 180, who are mainly the upper reaches of
rivers emptying into seas. They respectively belong to the
6 river systems of the Ayiyawadi River, Nujiang River, Lancang
River (Mekong), Jinshajiang River, Red River and Pearl River.
Climate Of Yunnan
With exceptionally rich climatic resources,
Yunnan belongs to the climatic type of sub-tropical plateau
monsoon. "Four seasons can be found along the same mountain
slope and different weather conditions can be witnessed over
a short distance of 10 li." Is the vivid description of vertical
and diversified climate in Yunnan. The average temperature
in summer is 19-22 degrees centigrade.
is the province with the richest variety of plants in China.
Of the 30,000 odd species of higher plants in China, over
17,000 are found in Yunnan, accounting for 62.9% of China¡¯s
total. Thus, Yunnan has always been dubbed as the Kingdom
of Plants, Hometown of Spices, Natural Garden, and Treasure
house of Medicinal Herbs. With 1737 species of vertebrate
being found here, accounting for 58.9% of China's total, Yunnan
is a rare Gene Bank of Wild Animal Species. Some wild animals
can only be found in Yunnan. 46 species are listed as first-class
animals under State protection while 154 are listed as second-class
animals under State protection. Yunnan is rich in mineral
resources and has always been dubbed as the Kingdom of Non-ferrous
Metals. In addition to non-ferrous metals, chemical engineering,
energy, black metals and nonmetallic minerals for building
materials enjoy significant positions in China. Precious metal
resources also have favorable prospects. 142 kinds of minerals
have been found in Yunnan while the reserves of 92 minerals
have already been proved and 274 places have mineral reserves.
special geological and climatic conditions, numerous ethnic
groups and long history and splendid culture have created
the the exceptionally rich tourism resources in Yunnan. The
whole province enjoys 11 state-level tour routes, 57 state
and provincial scenic areas, 22 states and provincial forest
parks, 5 nature reserves, 9 state and provincial famous cities
of history and culture and 187 relics units under key protection.
A batch of tourism development zones have been preliminarily
formed, which are featured with mountain gorges, modern glaciers,
plateau lakes, stone forest, karst caves, volcanoes and geothermal
phenomena, primitive forest, tropical rain forest, flowers,
relics and historic sites, traditional gardening and ethnic