"ONE OF THE MOST BRUTAL & HORRIFIC CRIMES IN HISTORY-AGAINST BLACKS"
On July 25, 1946, a group of armed men pulled two black couples out of a farmer's car, tied them to trees and shot them in three volleys of bullets so many times their bodies were barely recognizable. President Harry Truman sent the FBI to the area to investigate, but the agents were met with a wall of silence.
The events leading to the Moore's Ford incident unfolded 11 days earlier when Roger Malcom (above) was placed in jail for stabbing a white farmer, Barnette Hester. Witnesses told the FBI that Malcom suspected Hester of having sex with his wife, Dorothy, who was seven months pregnant. Malcom was drinking at the time he stabbed Hester in the chest.
Dorothy Malcom and her brother, George Dorsey, asked a farmer Loy Harrison, for whom Roger Malcom sometimes worked, to bail him out of jail. At first, Harrison flatly refused to help.
Then Harrison, who was reportedly a member of the Klu Klux Klan and a known bootlegger, suddenly changed his mind. He picked up Dorothy Malcom, George Dorsey and his wife Mae Murray Dorsey and took them to the Walton County jail.
He paid $600 to bail out Roger Malcom. He later told authorities that he wanted them to work on his 1,000-acre farm. It was rumored at the time that George Dorsey, a World War II veteran, was secretly having an affair with a white woman.
Harrison then drove the two black couples toward his farm across the Moore's Ford Bridge, a direction investigators noted was not the most direct route to his farm. At the bridge, Harrison's car was blocked by another vehicle and a group of men -- described in various accounts as "at least a dozen" and "from 20 to 25" or "up to 30" armed men.
"A big man who was dressed in a double-breasted brown suit was giving the orders. He pointed to Roger and said, 'We want that ni**er.' Then he pointed to George Dorsey, my ni**er, and said, 'We want you, too, Charlie.' I said, 'His name ain't Charlie, he's George.' Someone said 'Keep your damned big mouth shut. This ain't your party.'"
The men dragged the Malcoms and the Dorseys from the car then beat and shot the two men. Realizing that the two women could identify some of them, they then shot and killed the two women, according to previous investigations.
One of the lynching mob pulled out a knife and cut the unborn child from Dorothy Malcom's body.
Harrison told investigators that he did not recognize anyone in the group of men who stopped his car. For years, no one in Walton County would talk with authorities about the case. When a 1946 grand jury failed to identify any suspects, the FBI pulled out of the active investigation.
In 1991, more details of the crime came to light when Clinton Adams, a white man who was a 10-year-old boy hiding in the bushes near Moore's Ford during the lynching, told investigators he was a secret witness to the events that unfolded on June 25, 1946. His account is examined in Laura's Wexler's book, "Fire In A Canebreak."
No arrests have ever been made in this case. This case remains unsolved.
In 2000, Robert Johnson, founder
of BET cable network, sold the network to Viacom for close to $3 billion dollars,
this deal made him a instant billionaire. In December 2002, Johnson made
history by becoming the first minority with a majority ownership in a basketball
franchise. As the director of Hilton Hotels Corporation, Johnson became
the first African-American to obtain a Nevada gaming license. Johnson
currently owns and operates several Hilton Resorts. His current wealth
is estimated at $1.5 billion dollars.
The two most powerful women
in the world are of African-American descent. Condoleeza Rice and Oprah
Winfrey. Winfrey reached billionaire status last year. She has the
most successful talk show in history, she nets over $100 million per year off
of her talk show alone. She has produced a string of hits through HARPO
productions and her book club is the most successful book club in the world.
Her magazine "O" is the most successful publication in publishing
history. Her current wealth is estimated at $1.2 billion dollars.
Jamaican born Michael Lee
Chin is a self-made billionaire. He acquired AIC Limited in 1987.
Over the years he has built the organization into Canada's leading mutual fund
company. In 1998, the company grossed a staggering $12 billion dollars.
Chin and Johnnie Cochran recently co-founded a sports and entertainment agency.
His current wealth is estimated at $1.7 billion dollars.
Dr. Sheila Crump Johnson is
the co-founder of the BET network. Sheila and her ex-husband Robert split
$3 billion in proceeds right down the middle prior to their divorce. She
became the first African-American woman to built a luxury resort on property
she paid $7 million dollars for. She owns 13 show horses and she is the
President of Washington International Horse Show, Johnson also has extensive
real estate holdings. She is also a designer and a photographer.
Her current wealth is estimated at $1.5 billion dollars.
Reginald Lewis would have
become the first black billionaire if he would not have succumbed to brain cancer
at the age of 50 in 1993. At the time of his death, he was the richest
African-American in U.S. history. Lewis started out as a attorney and
became the first black man to head his own law firm on Wall Street. In
1987, he mastered a $1 billion dollar purchase of TLC Beatrice, a giant food
distributor with 64 companies in 34 countries. Lewis would go on to run
a business empire spanning four continents.
In his spare time, he mentored
African-American students and entrepreneurs. Lewis donated $1 million
dollars to Howard University and $3 million to Harvard Law School where a building
is named in his honor. He holds the distinction of the being the only
African-American with a building named in his honor on a Ivy League campus.
In the early 90's, Lewis tried
unsuccessfully to buy the Baltimore Orioles. After his death, his brother
and his widow Loida ran TLC Beatrice, they would eventually sale the company
for billions. At the time of his death, Reginald Lewis was worth $500
is based on a society founded at Yale University called "Skull & Bones."
This Yale Fraternity yielded U.S. Presidents, Supreme Court Justices, Governors,
Senators, athletes and actors. Some of the most powerful men on the planet
are members of "Skulls & Bones." The "Boule" is
the black equivalent of "Skulls & Bones."
was founded on May 15th, 1904 by Dr. Henry Minton, the "Boule" was
the first black fraternity in America. The "Boule"currently
has 101 chapters in the world and 4,100 members who make up the wealthiest black
men on this planet.
It is difficult
and nearly impossible to get members to comment on this secret society of wealthy
black men. It is even harder to become a member. This organization
operates in a veil of secrecy.
Arthur Ashe, Whitney Young, Benjamin Mays, Maynard Jackson and Carter G. Woodson
all died without ever commenting on the "Boule."
include: Vernon Jordan, John H. Johnson, Earl Graves, Bill Cosby, Jesse Jackson,
Lynn Swann, Elgin Hayes, David Dinkins, Hank Aaron and L. Douglas Wilder.
Ada Smith was born a saloon
singer in Chicago. She was nicknamed "Bricktop' because of her red
coloring and freckles. She gave Duke Ellington his first break and she
took Josephine Baker under her wing and she worked with a young busboy named
Bricktop accepted a singing
engagement in Paris. She loved Paris; especially the night life, friends
talked her into launching her own club. The club "Bricktop"
became the rage of Paris. Patrons included: Frank Sinatra, Ava Gardner,
Lena Horne, Bill "Bojangles" Robinson, Jelly Roll Morton, Orson Wells,
F. Scott Fitzgerald, Edward G. Robinson and Cole Porter. Porter became
Bricktop's best friend and confidant, Porter and his friends created a protective
shield around Bricktop to protect her from racism. Bricktop was also friends
with Ernest Hemingway and T.S. Eliot. Bricktop often gave "Charleston"
dance lessons to European royalty at Porter's house.
When Martin Luther King arrived
in Paris to accept his Nobel Peace Prize, as soon as he got off the plane, he
said, I'm not leaving Paris until I meet Bricktop. The character
of "Dominique Deveraux" portrayed by Diahann Carroll on "Dynasty"
was based on Bricktop.
Bricktop would open a chain
of nightclubs throughout Europe and Mexico, quite a accomplishment for a African-American
woman in the 1920's, the clubs were financed by a mystery investor, we will
reveal the identity of the investor towards the end of this article.
Bricktop died of heart failure
on January 31st, 1984 in New York City, she was 90 years old.
Isaac Murphy may be the most
successful jockey in history. Murphy received his jockey apprentice license
when he turned 12. He began his career as a exercise rider. His
skills were exceptional, he didn't require a whip to motivate horses.
Murphy won his first victory
in Louisville in 1875. By 1882, Murphy was earning $10,000 per year and
was considered the top jockey on the race horse circuit, black or white.
In 1884, Murphy won six races with four different horses.
Murphy also had the distinction
of being the first jockey to win three Kentucky Derby's, a record that stood
until 1948. Murphy died of pneumonia in 1896, he was 35. The "Isaac
Murphy Award" is given to the rider with the highest winning percentage
Bessie Coleman was born in
Texas, she was one of thirteen children. After reading about World War
1, she became interested in flying. She went to Europe to learn to fly. She received her license on June 15, 1921 making her the world's first licensed
She returned to the U.S. and
began teaching African-American women to fly. She gained fame as a barnstorming
air circus performer, she was nicknamed "Queen Bessie."
On April 30th, 1926, while
practicing for a show in Orlando Florida, Coleman was thrown from the plane
and fell to her death, she was 34 years old.
Shortly after her death, Bessie
Coleman Aero Groups were formed by William J. Powell. The Aero Groups
performed a air show on Labor Day 1931 making it the first all-black air show
Paul Revere Williams is one
of the most successful architect's in history. He designed homes for:
Frank Sinatra, Lucille Ball, Lon Chaney, Anthony Quinn, Zsa Zsa Gabor and Barbara
Williams also designed the
Saks Fifth Avenue building in Beverly Hills, Shrine Auditorium, Los Angeles
International Airport, The L.A. County Courthouse and the MCA building.
Despite his success, he was
a victim of racial discrimination. He once said "I designed the most
beautiful home for a client today, sometimes I dream of living in this home,
I could afford such a home but this evening leaving my office, I returned to
my small inexpensive home in an unrestricted undesirable section of Los Angeles
because I am a Negro."
Paul Revere Williams died
at the age of 86 in 1980.
Doris Duke was the richest
woman ever. When she died, her net worth was estimated at $6 billion dollars,
her investments netted her $1 million per day. Duke University is named
after the Duke family who made their fortune in tobacco.
Doris Duke was always comfortable
around African-Americans. As a teenager she often went to the black nightclubs
in Harlem against her family's wishes. She sang in black choirs and she
played the piano for black churches. When black churches were burned down
in the South, Duke financed the reconstruction, she also gave generously to
black organizations and charities. She would hire black teenagers to work
on her properties during the summer months.
Duke is the mysterious investor
who financed Bricktop's nightclub chain in the 1920's. She often stated,
America should be ashamed on how they treat African-Americans in this society.
The love of her life was a
man of color, Hawaiian swimmer and Olympic gold medalist Duke Kahanamoku.
Duke became pregnant by Kahanamoku, she lost the baby, they never married due
to racial discrimination. Doris Duke died on Oct. 28th, 1993.
"BLACK MAN WHO PIMPED OUT BLACK & WHITE PROSTITUTES KILLED BY KLAN"
by: Stanley Nelson
James Buford Goss was calm by the time he talked to Vidalia's police chief at the old Concordia Parish Courthouse on the morning of Friday, July 10, 1964. He had been furious the night before.
Goss told the chief that Joseph "Joe-Ed" Edwards, a black porter at the Shamrock Motel, had assaulted his close friend Iona Perry, a 22-year-old white woman who worked as a registration clerk at the motel. He said Edwards had grabbed the arms of Perry, who suffered from a crippling disease, and kissed her against her will.
Goss said that when he checked into the Shamrock the night before, Perry began to cry and told him what had happened. She begged him not to tell anyone, and Goss had no intention of telling a soul. He planned to take matters into his own hands and give Edwards a beating. But unable to locate Edwards, his anger had dissolved somewhat by the next morning and he determined that rather than take the law into his own hands, he should report the matter to police.
Chances are Goss, who was 44, would have done some damage had he found Edwards. He had a massive frame, standing 6 ft-6 in., and weighing 265 pounds. He towered over Edwards who was a foot shorter and 105 pounds lighter.
Goss was a Louisiana Probation Officer, and was known as an outgoing man who never met a stranger, according to his daughter, Kay Goss of Shreveport. Joseph Edwards, according to family and friends, had an outgoing personality, too, liked to have fun, enjoyed gambling and loved being with women.
Two days after the alleged kiss, Joseph Edwards disappeared and hasn't been seen in 46 years. The FBI initially considered Goss a prime suspect but that would change. In time, local police and the Ku Klux Klan seemed the likely culprits, according to FBI documents.
Goss told the FBI that when he filed his complaint to Vidalia Police Chief Bud Spinks at the courthouse, that some Concordia Parish sheriff's deputies and the sheriff were at the courthouse then, too. Two of the deputies -- Bill Ogden and Frank DeLaughter, who later became two of the FBI's prime suspects -- would blame the murder of Edwards on Goss.
Until he died 11 months ago in June 2009 at the age of 89, James Buford Goss cursed the names of Ogden and DeLaughter. Goss' daughter, Kay, said when her dying father thought of the deputies he would speak two words: "Those bastards."
Iona Perry, who is married and has a different last name today, declined to talk about Joseph Edwards with The Sentinel. She is presently undergoing medical treatment in South Louisiana, according to her husband.
"She said she told what she knew back then," her husband told The Sentinel. "Whatever she said then is all she knows."
Goss, according to FBI records and a three-year Sentinel investigation, may have unwittingly filed his complaint a few days after law enforcement officials in the parish learned that Edwards may have secretly been seeing a white woman at the Shamrock. In 1964 Concordia, that made Joseph Edwards a problem.
Three years later, James Goss described to the FBI the events which led to his complaint about Edwards to the Vidalia police chief. The FBI, records show, would find plenty of suspects and would conclude that Edwards was abducted and murdered in a local Klan/law enforcement action. What put Edwards on the police and the Klan's radar, however, was not the unsolicited kiss he allegedly gave Iona Perry, but it was the death of a four-year-old boy in the Shamrock swimming pool just days earlier. The boy was the son of the white woman with whom Edwards was allegedly involved.
Joseph Edwards was a man, friends and family recall, who loved life and was always on the move. Cousin Hattie Thompson Bethley of Clayton remembers him always being "jolly, joking all the time. He liked to play, he put his clothes in the cleaners, dressed nice and liked nice things."
Cousin Carl Ray Thompson, who said he and Edwards became best friends when they were children, grew up together in Sibley, Miss., attended school together and "stayed together."
Edwards' sister, Julia Dobbins of Bridge City, La., said her brother enjoyed gambling and "was always carrying on."
Many friends of Edwards told The Sentinel that Edwards like to flirt with women and during his brief employment at the Shamrock began spending a lot of time with a white woman. These friends say they warned him of the dangers during the tumultuous times of 1964 when black men were being kidnapped, beaten and murdered by Klansmen, but they said Edwards appeared unfazed by their warnings.
Edwards, as it turns out, could not have been at a worse place at a worse time. At the very same time Edwards was working at the Shamrock, a violent Klan cell known as the Silver Dollar Group (SDG) was organizing at the Shamrock cafe, according to FBI records. Earcel "Sonny" Boyd Jr. of Portland, Ore., who says his father was a member of the Silver Dollar Group, has told The Sentinel that he ate a hamburger at the Shamrock cafe in April 1964 and visited with Joseph Edwards while Boyd's father and other Silver Dollar Klansmen met in an adjoining room.
In 1967, when the FBI began a probe into Edwards' disappearance, documents show that employees at the Shamrock said Edwards was involved in some questionable activities. One male employee told agents that Edwards was prostituting black women to white male guests of the Shamrock. The employee said Edwards told him he was earning a $5 tip for every trick.
At a time when blacks were denied access to public places and public facilities, the employee told agents that the black prostitutes gained access to the motel from a side street and that Edwards had a pass key that he secretly used to unlock empty guest rooms for this activity.
This worker and a female employee said Edwards was also pimping white women for Nellie Jackson, the black madam who for decades operated a legendary brothel on Rankin Street in Natchez called "Nellie's."
Yet Edwards' alleged involvement in prostitution and with a white woman came into clearer view on June 27, 1964, when a four-year-old white child named David Anthony Dodd drowned in the Shamrock pool. The Concordia Sentinel reported in its July 3, 1964, edition that the child's mother, identified as Mrs. Herbert Rushing of Yuma, Ariz., along with her husband, the child's step-father, were guests at the motel when the four-year-old's body was discovered in the pool.
While the boy's body was being transported across the Mississippi River Bridge from Vidalia to Natchez, Adams County Sheriff Odell Anders told the paper that the "child's eyes opened" on the Mississippi side of the bridge, giving Adams County authorities jurisdiction in the child's death. The child never regained consciousness and died. A coroner's inquest determined that David Anthony Dodd died of an accidental drowning.
But in 1967, when the FBI was taking a closer look at Edwards' disappearance, agents learned more about the drowning. Documents show that Mrs. Herbert Rushing, the child's mother, told agents that her husband, the child's step-father, "had made several prostitution dates for her through" Joseph Edwards at the Shamrock.
Nellie Jackson, the brothel owner in Natchez, told agents that although she didn't know Edwards, she did know Mrs. Rushing and that Mrs. Rushing told her that Edwards had attempted to save the child but almost drowned himself and she (Mrs. Rushing) had to save Edwards. Jackson told agents that Mrs. Rushing told her that she "deeply appreciated" Edwards' attempt to save her little boy, that she had attended school with black students and that she "did not think Negroes inferior."
Retired FBI agent Billy Bob Williams of Portland, Ore., who worked in Natchez in the mid-1960s, told The Sentinel that "word filtered back (from informants) that Edwards had been with a white prostitute at the time her child had drowned at the Shamrock pool. We learned that the Klan had found out about it and that they got him later."
"WHITE WOMAN WHO SEDUCED MALE SLAVES-INVOLVED IN POLITICAL ASSASINATION"
Jereboam Orville Beauchamp (center) was a lawyer who murdered Kentucky legislator Solomon P. Sharp (third photo), an event known as the Beauchamp–Sharp Tragedy. In 1821, Sharp was accused of fathering the illegitimate still born child of a woman named Anna Cooke (1st photo). Sharp denied paternity of the child, and public opinion favored him. In 1824, Beauchamp married Cooke.
During Sharp's 1825 campaign for a seat in the Kentucky House of Representatives, the issue of Cooke's child was again raised, and handbills printed by Sharp's political opponents claimed he denied paternity based on the fact that the child was a "mulatto," the child of a Cooke family slave.
Anna Cooke was known to sleep with various male slaves on her property. She allegedly seduced them. They were reluctant but allegedly, they were threatened, "if you don't comply to my sexual demands, I'll say you raped me!" No one was surprised when she became pregnant. She practically lived in the slave quarters (targeting well built black men). After rumors circulated that she was pregnant by a black man, the community shunned her and she became a recluse. She allegedly slept with so many black men, she had no idea who the father was (Maury Povich candidate). Sadly, she gave birth to a stillborn baby.
Having heard tales of Cooke's beauty and accomplishments from a mutual friend, Jereboam Beauchamp became determined to gain an audience with her. At first, she rejected all requests to keep company, but eventually Beauchamp was allowed in under the guise of borrowing books from Cooke's library.The two eventually became friends, and in 1821, began courting. Beauchamp was eighteen years old; Cooke was at least thirty-four.
In 1821, when the topic of marriage was breached, Cooke told Beauchamp she would only marry him on the condition that he kill Sharp (because Sharp told everyone-the father of her baby was Black). Beauchamp consented to this condition.
Against Cooke's advice, Beauchamp traveled immediately to Frankfort, where Sharp had recently been named attorney general. According to Beauchamp's account of the meeting, he found Sharp and challenged him to a duel, but Sharp refused because he was not armed. Beauchamp, who wielded a knife, produced a second knife and offered it to Sharp. Sharp again declined the challenge.
When Beauchamp offered the challenge a third time, Sharp began to flee, but Beauchamp caught him by the collar. Sharp fell to his knees and declared his life to be in Beauchamp's hands, begging him to spare it. Beauchamp kicked him, cursed him for a coward, and threatened to horsewhip him every day until he consented to the duel.
Eventually, Beauchamp caught up with Sharp and plunged a dagger into his heart, killing him instantly.
The night before her husband's execution, Anna Beauchamp took a dose of laudanum but was unable to keep it down. On July 7, 1826, the date of Beauchamp's execution, Anna Beauchamp requested that the guard give her privacy to dress. Once the guard left, Anna produced a knife she had smuggled into the cell, and both she and her husband stabbed themselves with it. Anna died.
Beauchamp was hanged the next day.
BLACK HISTORY: (BLACK MAN BEHIND GROOMING, CARE & EXERCISING OF SECRETARIAT)
Secretariat (Triple Crown Winner) remains the greatest race horse in history! Few people know that a black man (Eddie Sweat) contributed to his success! Penny Chenery (Secretariat's owner) hired Sweat. He was the only black man working as a professional horse groomer in the 1960's-1970's. Not only did he groom the horse but he was in charge of feeding Secretariat the right mix of food to increase stamina. He also assisted with horse breeding and he was in charge of supplement and medication schedules as well as exercising the horse. Oddly, Secretariat took his first steps after he was born, unusual for a horse.
When Chenery (a housewife with four kids) first took possession of Secretariat, her father's farm was $6 million dollars in debt. After Secretariat won several races, instead of selling Secretariat for $8 million dollars, instead, she came up with an ingenious idea. She decided to sell syndicated breeding shares in Secretariat for $190,000 per share. After the richest man in the world bought shares, others followed and she was able to pay off the debt.
Penny Chenery became the first woman admitted to the Jockey Club and an annual award is named in her honor.
Born in Holly Hill, South Carolina, Eddie Sweat was one of nine children of an African-American sharecropper. Hall of Fame trainer Lucien Laurin maintained a Thoroughbred horse farm and he offered Sweat a job after he saw the wide-eyed teen frequently peeking at the horses through a fence to the property. In 1957, the then eighteen-year-old Sweat accepted the offer of full-time work as groom for the Laurin stable of racehorses with a small fixed salary plus 1% of the horse's earnings.
One of the first highly successful horses placed in Sweat's care was the 1958 American Champion Two-Year-Old Filly Quill. In 1966, Sweat was part of the Laurin stables' first American Classic win when Amberoid captured the Belmont Stakes. Six years later, Sweat gained national media attention for his abilities in handling Thoroughbreds when sportswriter William Nack spent many hours with him during 1972 and 1973 outside the Laurin stable stalls of Kentucky Derby winner Riva Ridge and the horse who would become an American legend, Secretariat.
In a Sports Illustrated feature article, Nack said he took notes compulsively, endlessly, feeling for the texture of the life around the horse. Secretariat was voted the 1972 American Horse of the Year, an extraordinary feat for a two-year-old, and leading up to and through the horse's winning of the 1973 Triple Crown, all of the key people involved with Secretariat received massive national and international attention. Interviewed and photographed countless times, Sweat appeared on television and was on the covers of both Ebony and Jet magazines.
Following Lucien Laurin’s retirement, Sweat worked for his son, Roger Laurin, and in 1984 once again received considerable national media attention with Chief's Crown. The colt won the Breeders' Cup Juvenile, was voted the Eclipse Award as American Champion Two-Year-Old Colt, and was the betting favorite for all three of the 1985 Triple Crown races.
Sweat made his home in St. Albans, Queens, New York, a short drive from the Belmont Park racetrack. After forty-one years in the business, he died of leukemia in 1998.
Widely recognized for his talent, dedication, and important contributions to Secretariat's racing career, Sweat was the subject of a 2006 book by Lawrence Scanlan, titled "The Horse God Built: Secretariat, His Groom, Their Legacy."
There is a life-size statue at the Kentucky Horse Park of Eddie Sweat (above) leading Secretariat and jockey Ron Turcotte to the winner's circle after winning the 1973 Kentucky Derby.
To read Black History
Month 2006, click here Black History Month