Liang Shuming (1895-1988) is one of the most important Chinese philosophers in twentieth century China. Generally considered to be a Confucian, and even the last Confucian, the author argues that he was in fact a Buddhist. Liang’s thoughts are analysed within the background of the intellectual debates on religion in republican China. He reshaped the Western concept of religion from the standpoint of Yogācāra Buddhism. Yet, he advocated for the present time Confucianism as the ethical religion that would lead ultimately to the Buddhist liberation. Examining Liang’s religious belief sheds new light on his fascinating life, particularly his involvement in the Rural Reconstruction movement of the nineteen-thirties. It also explains why Liang was the only intellectual who dared to publically oppose Mao in the nineteen-sixties and seventies.
The Religious Philosophy of Liang Shuming
Yvonne Schulz Zinda
This is both a work-immanent analysis of Lun dao, and an introduction to Jin’s thought. It begins with the problem of induction, which is the study’s central theme, and proceeds to outline Jin’s ontological response. In addition, it also considers his epistemological response to the problem.
This book explores a pivotal dimension of Mou Zongsan’s philosophy—that is, his project of reconstructing a moral metaphysics based largely on a dialogue between reinterpreted Chinese thought and Kantism—and thoroughly analyzes a number of his most paradigmatic concepts.
N. Serina Chan
The first thorough study in English of the multi-faceted system of Mou Zongsan, this book examines key influences on the New Confucian thinker and introduces his Kantian- and Mahāyāna Fo-inflected moral metaphysical reading of the Lu-Wang Learning of the Mind.
Jason T. Clower
This highly accessible book provides a comprehensive unpacking and interpretation, suitable for students and scholars in all fields, of towering philosopher Mou Zongsan’s understanding of Buddhist thought and his Confucian appropriation of Tiantai Buddhist ideas.
This book analyzes the discovery of Chinese logic as a paradigmatic case of the epistemic shifts that have shaped interpretations of China’s intellectual heritage. Reconstructing the transcultural genealogy of a modern discourse, it adds a neglected chapter to the global history of philosophy.
No additional information