By Alison Fairbrother for TakePart.com
The average woman uses between 10 and 15 personal care products, averaging 120 chemicals per day.
If you enjoy an invigorating daily exfoliation with soap that contains microbeads, your morning routine may actually be harming wildlife.
The reason? When you rinse those beads down the drain, they end up in local waterways where they collect as microplastics and threaten ocean life. Animals can mistake bits of plastic for food (see TakePart’s Ocean Horror Show), accidentally blocking their digestive tracts. Plastics often carry toxic additives, which can act as hormone disruptors in fish and seabirds.
Luckily for aquatic life, microbeads just got the boot. Unilever, the company that makes Dove soaps, Pond’s cream, and Vaseline, has just announced that it is phasing out plastic microbeads—they will be off the market by 2015.
“It’s really encouraging that Unilever has decided to remove plastic microbeads. They are among the many plastics that pollute our waters and build up in wildlife,” says Lisa Archer, former director of the Campaign for Safe Cosmetics, who is now a director at Friends of the Earth.
Unfortunately, Archer says, microbeads are just the tip of the iceberg when it comes to personal care products causing serious problems for the environment. Americans have famously complex beauty routines using products that can be toxic, and even carcinogenic, to ocean life.
Common fragrances in shampoos and body washes can interfere with the ability of marine animals to naturally remove toxins from their bodies. Researchers at Stanford University found that synthetic fragrances caused irreversible biological damage to California mussels downstream from where synthetic musks were casually being washed down household drains.
Fifty seven percent of all personal care products contain chemicals that act like estrogen, including paraben preservatives, alkylphenols, and estrogenic sunscreen ingredients, according to a 2004 report by the Environmental Working Group. Exposure to even small amounts of extra estrogen can have deadly consequences for the oceans—producing male fish with female sex organs, for example, or rendering entire populations unable to reproduce.
Read the rest of this article at http://www.takepart.com/article/2013/01/08/beauty-products-are-laced-secret-toxins