What causes hurricanes, thunderstorms, and severe weather? How are weather forecasts made? Are weather and climate changing? What type of research is being done currently in the atmospheric sciences? Learn the answers to these and other weather or climate questions AND earn NW credit from a course in ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES:
ATM S 101: Weather (5) NW SLN 10593
MTWTh 10:30-11:20 – Th or F Quiz times vary; KNE 220
General overview of weather, climate, and atmospheric phenomena (clouds, hurricanes, global weather patterns, etc.) Prerequisites: None. Open to all undergraduates Prof. Jerome Patoux, firstname.lastname@example.org
ATM S 111: Global Warming (5) NW SLN 10603
TTh 10:30-12:20 – Th or F Quiz times vary; KNE 210
Scientists predict severe environmental consequences from global warming unless the energy basis of the world’s economy is rapidly and dramatically transformed. This course will examine the scientific basis of those predictions and the role of science in developing policy responses. Prerequisites: None. Open to all undergraduates
Prof. Cecilia Bitz, email@example.com
ATM S 211: Climate Change (5) NW SLN 10612
MTWTh 10:30-11:20 – F Quiz times vary
Intro to the science of climate change and its causes. Suitable for non-science majors. Students with interests in environmental science and/or policy, the life sciences and engineering are encouraged to enroll. Prerequisites: None. Open to all undergraduates. Prof. David Battisti, firstname.lastname@example.org
ATM S 212: Air Pollution (5) NW SLN 19741
MTWThF 10:30-11:20; ATG 310C
Intro to air pollution on local, regional, and global scales. We will focus on the sources, transformation, and dispersion of pollutants responsible for urban smog, acid rain, climate change and the stratospheric ozone hole. We will examine the health and environmental effects of air pollutants, as well as current (or potential) technological solutions and international policy regulations. Prerequisites: None. Open to all undergraduates.
Becky Alexander, email@example.com
Please join us:
Date: Wednesday, December 7th
Time: 4:00pm – 6:00pm
Location: Fishery Sciences Building (FSH) room 107 http://washington.edu/maps/FSH
ESS is offering a new course–being taught at ESS 490 A for winter quarter:
Introduction to Geological GIS with Dr. Steven Walters (No pre-reqs)
PLEASE NOTE: This course will be offered as ESS 420 in future quarters.
There is plenty of space in some of our 100-level ESS courses!
ESS 100 Dinosaurs (2) NW
Biology, behavior, ecology, evolution, and extinction of dinosaurs, and a history of their exploration. With dinosaurs as focal point, course also introduces the student to how hypotheses in geological and paleobiological science are formulated and tested.
ESS 101 Introduction to Geological Sciences (5) NW
After taking this course students will never look at the Earth the same! Students will learn about how the Earth evolved from primordial dust to form the compositionally zoned planet upon which life now exists. Students will learn about the unifying concept of plate tectonics, which will provide them with a framework to understand the why and where of earthquakes, volcanoes, mountain belts, ocean basins and rock types in their surrounding world. Students will become amateur geologists and drive their friends and families crazy with their new-found knowledge. Students will also learn about time and its importance to the geologic record. Students will learn that geologists pay more for their dates than Hollywood’s most elite stars! This course will provide students with important information about geologic hazards, which will perhaps one day save lives or personal property. If students love the outdoors, this course will give them many opportunities to visit spectacular geologic sites around Washington state through the ESS 101 optional weekend field trip program. PLUS: check out an awesome video about ESS 101! http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IkO5qzuizM8&feature=youtu.be
ESS 102 Space and Space Travel (5) NW
Explores powering the sun, making of space weather conditions, observations from space and from Earth, Earth’ s space environment, radiation belts and hazards, plasma storms and auroras, electron beams, spacecraft requirements, tooling up for manned exploration
ESS 103 Minerals and Gems (3) NW
Introduction to the nature of minerals: composition, structure, physical properties, and origins, with emphasis on gem minerals. Focuses on topicsof particular interest in gemology, such as mechanisms of color, history and lore of gems, and uses of gems. Hands-on laboratories using about one hundred representative gems and minerals.
ESS 104 Prehistoric Life (3) NW
Fossils and how they are preserved. What fossils tell us about past life and environments. How the history of life unfolded and what caused the great events in biological evolution. Open to non-science majors, but also lays a foundation for higher-level geobiology courses.
Anyone who enjoyed ESS 101 with Dr. Terry Swanson can take his course this winter:
ESS 315 Environmental Earth Science (5) NW
Analysis of geologic constraints upon human activity and the environmental consequences of such activity. Topics include hillslope processes, fluvial and groundwater processes, earthquake and volcanic hazards, and environmental aspects of deforestation and atmospheric pollution. (Pre-req: ESS 101)
The Environmental Health Research Experience Program (EHREP) is a funded nine week, summer experience for undergraduates with interest in an interdisciplinary field that uses the tools of science to solve human health problems related to the environment. EHREP provides students with hands on experience in laboratories of leading researchers, introduces them to key environmental and occupational health issues while offering research exposure that will help them become competitive for graduate school. Students will work full-time under the supervision of a faculty mentor and will receive a stipend of $5,200.
The program is meant for students underrepresented in the sciences. The deadline for student applications is February 15, 2012.
Program website: http://www.ehrep.washington.edu
EH REP is made possible by a grant from the National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences (NIEHS). Environmental and occupational health is the study of human health in the environment. The field concerns itself with maintaining a safe supply of food and drinking water; discovering the mechanisms of environmentally related diseases; treating and disposing of solid and toxic wastes; reducing air, water, food, and noise pollution; and controlling workplace hazards.
ATTENTION Ocean Enthusiasts!
Are you interested in helping to engage and inspire the next generation of ocean scientists? Become an Orca Bowl Volunteer!
Please join us for Orca Bowl Orientation on Wednesday, November 30th – 5:30-7:00pm. Where: Marine Sciences Building (MSB) Room 123, University of Washington, Seattle Campus. Prizes will be available!
This orientation aims to provide new volunteers (or those interested in learning more about the competition) with introductory information about the Orca Bowl and an overview of different roles volunteers play during the competition. Come and learn more about how you can get involved and why volunteers like you are key to Orca Bowl’s success!
If you decide to continue with us as a volunteer, this session will count as one of your 2 required trainings for the competition. An interactive campus map can be found at http://www.washington.edu/maps/. Metered street parking is available along Boat Street.
Snacks will be provided. Please RSVP to firstname.lastname@example.org so we know how much food to bring.
Mark your calendars, the Orca Bowl competition is Saturday, March 3, 2012 and will be held at the University of Washington – Seattle Campus.
If you have volunteered for Orca Bowl in the past, please a) let us know you are interested in volunteering again and b) mark your calendar and RSVP for the volunteer practice dates listed at the end of this message (we ask that you attend at least 2 prior to the competition). You do not need to attend the orientation session.
Orca Bowl is March 3, 2012
What is the Orca Bowl, you ask?
Orca Bowl is one of 25 regional components of the National Ocean Sciences Bowl (NOSB). Its Washington’s regional ocean sciences bowl competition for high school students.
When and where is the Orca Bowl in 2012?
Saturday, March 3, 2012 8 a.m. – 5 p.m. at the University of Washington campus, Seattle
Orca Bowl is fun – and it can’t happen without its volunteers – that means YOU!
Your contribution enables high school students from the across the state to demonstrate their knowledge, meet ocean scientists and professionals (you!) and enjoy the activities surrounding the regional competition at the UW.
What do volunteers do?
You may sign up as a competition official or as a general volunteer. General volunteers assist with logistics up to and on the day of the competition. For information on the roles of competition officials, go to: http://www.nosb.org/volunteers/. All volunteers must attend at least TWO training dates (see dates below) and be available on the day of the competition March 3, 2012. New volunteers should attend one Orientation Session and at least one Training Session.
How do I learn more about Orca Bowl?
Check out our website at http://www.wsg.washington.edu/education/events/orca/get_involved.html or contact Maile Sullivan at email@example.com.
How Do I Sign Up?
Just reply to firstname.lastname@example.org. Tell us which volunteer role you’d like, or wait and learn more at the kick off and the first training session before you pick your role. We’ll do our best to accommodate your preference. Scheduled training dates are listed below.
We hope you will join us as a volunteer this year!
Training Session, Wed. January 11 from 5:30-7:30 Location TBD
Training Session, Tues. January 24 from 5:30-7:30 Location TBD
Training Session, Thurs. February 2 from 5:30-7:30 Location TBD
Training Session, Wed. February 15 from 5:30-7:30 Location TBD
Question Review Sessions, required for moderators and science judges: TBD in February 2012.
If you have a few minutes, check out the latest Atmospheric Science Outreach video featuring a cameo by our chair, Dale Durran… This is the third in the series, all are available on the Outreach YouTube Channel (http://www.youtube.com/user/UWAtmosOutreach).
FISH 497 A: Scientific Writing and Communication will provide students with experience reading, writing, and presenting scientific papers. It is designed for undergraduate students early in their careers, and will focus on both the principles and mechanics of scientific communication.
Student learning goals
Read scientific papers in a critical and efficient manner.
Formulate and refine scientific hypotheses.
Write and edit scientific papers, including use of text, tables, figures, and references.
Present scientific information verbally.
Understand ethical issues regarding scientific communication, including acquisition of data, acknowledgement of assistance, and referencing of work done by others.
General method of instruction
Class will involve extensive interactions between the instructor and students, and among the students, including small writing assignments, oral presentations, web searches, extensive use of computers, and peer editing.
Udergraduate standing and a desire to improve communication skills.
Class assignments and grading
Numerous small assignments including writing, editing, web searches, and presentations. Participation and improvement will be emphasized because students may differ in background, command of English, and other attributes related to writing ability. A paper in scientific format and an oral presentation will be major components of the grade.
Interested in environmental education?
Thinking about what to do during Spring Break?
Want to work with amazing young people across the state of Washington?
Apply for Pipeline Project’s 2012 Environmental Alternative Spring Break (EASB) program!
The Pipeline Project is sending two teams of five students to two Washington state schools (Quileute Tribal School, La Push & Brewster Elementary School, Brewster) during UW’s spring break from March 18th-March 23rd to work on an environmental education project. UW students will facilitate environmental science lessons with elementary and middle school students and learn about the local ecology and environmental issues of the region. This project is a part of the larger Pipeline Alternative Spring Break Projects that facilitate literacy/arts projects across the state of Washington.
Environmental ASB members will enroll in a 2-credit EDUC 401 preparation seminar during Winter quarter 2011 (Thursdays from 4:30-5:50 pm) to plan, design and practice an inquiry-based, hands-on environmental science curriculum to be taught during spring break. Students will also explore issues of rural and tribal education in addition to the field of environmental education. In addition, students will tutor in a local environmental education program or classroom during the winter quarter for 2 – 2.5 hours/week.
Interested? Apply now! Applications due on Monday, November 14th at 5:00 pm. Please visit our website for application instructions and materials:
Here is a list of all environmentally related courses of interest appropriate for freshmen and non-majors for Winter Quarter 2012:
- ATM S 101 – Weather (NW)
- ATM S 111 – Global Warming (NW)
- ATM S 211 – Climate Change (NW)
- ATM S 212 – Air Pollution (NW)
- ATM S 220 – Exploring the Atmospheric Sciences Seminar
- CEP 200 – Introduction to Community & Environmental Planning (I&S)
- ENV H 580 – Environmental and Occupational Health Sciences Seminar
- ENVIR 100 – Introduction to Environmental Studies (I&S/NW)
- ESRM 100 – Introduction to Environmental Science – online (I&S/NW)
- ESRM 190 – Sustaining Our Environment (I&S/NW)
- ESRM 429 – Water Center Seminar
- ESRM 455 – Wildlife Seminar
- ESS 100 – Dinosaurs (NW)
- ESS 101 – Introduction to Geological Sciences (NW)
- ESS 102 – Space and Space Travel (NW)
- ESS 103 – Minerals and Gems (NW)
- ESS 104 – Prehistoric Life (NW)
- ESS 106 – Living with Volcanoes (I&S/NW)
- FISH 101 – Water And Society (I&S/NW)
- OCEAN 102 – The Changing Oceans (I&S/NW)
- OCEAN 121 – Deep Sea Exploration (NW)