A Call to Action on Earth Day: How to Detoxify the Body from Environmental ToxinsIn recent years, we have seen society embrace the concept of "going green" dedicating more time to finding solutions for the sustainability of the planet. People are doing their part by turning off unnecessary lights, shutting off running water and driving cars that are considered better for the environment. And while many individuals are trying to help the environment and preserve our natural resources, unfortunately there is still a lot of work to do to prevent exposure to potentially damaging elements. As more toxins and pollutants contaminate the air, people need to address the detrimental effects the environment is having on the body. Turning to a superfood called chlorella, which is already popular in Japan, may be just the answer. Chlorella has an amazing way to counterbalance the rate at which people ingest toxins, and regular consumption can help detoxify heavy metals and toxins from the body. With Earth Day just a few months away, one company, Sun Chlorella USA, the world renowned leader in Chlorella products, wants everyone to understand the effects of environmental toxins and how to best go about detoxifying the body.Chlorella is a whole food from a lineage of pure green algae that has existed naturally on earth for thousands of years. As Mother Earth's own Superfood, the powerful combination of nutrients works naturally with your body to nurture your health from the inside out. Sun Chlorella, which is considered to be "Nature's Perfect Superfood," is quickly becoming one of the most powerful healing foods on the planet. With its key vitamins and antioxidants and 18 essential amino acids, Sun Chlorella helps not only remove potentially toxic metals from the body, but also boosts the immune system, helps aid in more efficient digestion, and most importantly energizes and reinvigorates the body.A key component used in Sun Chlorella products is the Chlorella Growth Factor (CGF)-a nucleotide-peptide complex of substances produced by chlorella during the intense photosynthesis process that enables chlorella to grow so rapidly. In fact, it actually gives the chlorella cell the ability to quadruple itself every 20 to 24 hours. This natural CGF may help to enhance your body's natural defense system activity, help to remove the multitude of impurities in your body, and renew cellular strength and integrity.Finally, after years of research on the effects of chlorella, it has come to light that chlorella is one of the most essential supplements in the positive progression and maintenance of overall health. Air pollution is the source of many toxic metals that enter the bloodstream through the nose, mouth, skin, and the digestive tract. Sun Chlorella binds to and absorbs these heavy metal and toxic substances in the gastrointestinal tract and acts as an ion exchange resin, escorting the toxins right out of the body.As the green in chlorophyll in Sun Chlorella closely resembles human blood it is able to cleanse, detoxify, and purify. Chlorophyll inhibits bacterial growth, increases wound healing, detoxifies the liver and other organs, deodorizes the body, and inhibits radiation and the metabolic activation of many carcinogens. With the alarming rate at which people are being exposed to harmful pollutants ever increasing society needs a dependable product that can help prevent the resulting damage, which is why taking Sun Chlorella is an amazing way to counterbalance ingested toxins. The fiber in chlorella's tough outer cell helps to push these harmful substances out through the digestive track. Once the detoxification occurs, toxins from other body tissues more readily migrate into the intestines stimulating the body's natural ability to cleanse itself. Consumers experience the powerful effects of chlorella firsthand-energy levels are restored and overall well-being is improved.Dr. Michael Rosenbaum, physician, author and health pioneer speaks on the nutrient dense superfood, "The more I learned about it, read about it, I became convinced that it was a fabulous nutritional supplement. Sun Chlorella is very rich in antioxidants... and it has the highest single protein content (over 50%) of any food that I know.""Chlorella is also a highly photosynthetic plant that efficiently converts carbon dioxide, into oxygen. By growing chlorella in outdoor pools under strict sanitary conditions instead of in tanks, we are making a sizable contribution to improving the global environment," says Yoshi Nishimaki, President and CEO of Sun Chlorella USA. In this way, even the growth process alone contributes to the "Going Green" theory as the Sun Chlorella group strives to answer the call of our times by improving the global environment.Sun Chlorella has manufactured their products in such a way as to make it easy for people to incorporate the nutrient rich superfood into their diets. One of the most unique ways of doing so is adding the Sun Chlorella granules into the daily intake of food and drinks. The granules are filled with vital nutrients and may be used in foods such as pasta sauces, ice cream and soups. The granules are perfect for those folks on-the-go as they can easily be included into a beverage like a smoothie. In addition to the granules, the Sun Chlorella tablets also contain high concentrations of vitamins, minerals, dietary fiber, nucleic acids, amino acids, enzymes, and protein. In fact, one serving of Sun Chlorella is equivalent to one serving of fresh green vegetables (without the pesticides)! Regular consumption of Sun Chlorella is not only beneficial to overall health but more importantly it is easy to incorporate into any diet.Society has made an effort to clean up and better the earth, so why not clean up and better the body? For more information on Sun Chlorella, please visit www.sunchlorellausa.com. For examples of studies documenting the benefits of chlorella, go to http://www.superhealth.com/studies/.