Two new exhibits opened in the Experiencenter, The Dayton Art Institute
s interactive gallery for families and young people: "Investigation Destination: Science and Math in Art" and "The Art Place for Young Learners".
The intersection of science, math and art are the focus of the exhibition Investigation Destination: Science and Math in Art. Most people see an immediate connection between math and science, but they rarely add art to the mix. Investigation Destination: Science and Math in Art invites families to investigate this connection through three themes:
Art that Moves, which focuses on the kinetic energy that makes mobiles move.
The Geometry of Patterns, which focuses on the properties of geometric transformations, as seen in African textiles and Persian tiles.
Keeping Art Ageless, which focuses on art conservation and the materials artists use.
Each theme is supported by art from the museums permanent collection, along with a site-specific work created by visiting local artist Terry Welker. The exhibition also includes hands-on activities, gallery guides, museum hunts, and take-home activities.
As part of Investigation Destination: Science and Math in Art, the museum has partnered with two local schools, Patterson-Kennedy School and the Dayton Regional STEM School, to directly involve students in grades 6-9 and their teachers in the development of the exhibition.
Terry Welker, a local sculptor and architect who is renowned for his mobiles, facilitated workshops that taught students about the science connected to the creation of mobiles. Student work created in these sessions is incorporated into the exhibition.
By involving students and teachers in the development of the exhibition, as well as related workshops and classroom learning activities, Investigation Destination: Science and Math in Art teaches students that the creative, innovative skills involved in producing art are the same skills needed by scientists and mathematicians.
The Art Place for Young Learners, a permanent space in the Experiencenter designed for children ages 3 to 6. Aware of how quickly our world is changing, the museum is committed to providing opportunities for developing creative thinking skills in young learners. This permanent space supports the growth and development of young minds through creative play and problem solving activities. As new exhibitions are installed in the Experiencenter, the activities and design of this space will reflect the theme of each new exhibition.