The following info from a Eurocentric weblog shows the uselessness of arguing over haplotypes and genetics without physical anthropological foundations:
“A back migration from Asia to Africa took place around 15,000 years ago, with a group of R1b1* people moving to Egypt, Sudan and spreading in different directions inside Africa to Rwanda, South Africa, Namibia, Angola, Congo, Gabon, Equatorial Guinea, Cameroon, Nigeria, Ivory Coast, Guinea-Bissau. The hotspot is Cameroon. R1b1* was observed at a frequency of up to 95% in some tribes of northern Cameroon (like the Kirdi), and about 15% nationwide. It is probably where the early R1b people first settled, then spread south and east along the coast.”
The problem a lot of people are unaware that most Cromagnon and paleolithic, mesolithic and neolithic people around the Mediteranean including in North Africa were not biologically or not closely affiliated represented by modern Europeans. 15,000 years ago the majority of people in North africa were Mechtoids and other “Cro-Magnon” type people with craniofacial traits that were strongly tropical. These people had very little direct connection to modern European peoples or those called “Eurasian in the Middle East. in fact they were closer to modern sub-Saharan Africans.
This has been known for many decades by anthropologists and modern physical anthropologists using genetic based traits have basically confirmed the earlier conclusions. Thus, the study done by Brace and several other reputable physical anthropological specialists who wrote and edited the paper proving the unrelatedness of most modern Europeans with ancient pre- Bronze Age Europeans showed very strong tropical and “Negroid” traits well into the neolithic. It also concluded many Bronze Age people were apparently not closely connected genetically to modern Europeans based on 24 well-tested craniofacila traits including the Mahalonobis statistic. “The surprise is that the Neolithic peoples of Europe and their Bronze Age successors are not closely related to the modern inhabitants, although the prehistoric/modern ties are somewhat more apparent in southern Europe. It is a further surprise that the Epipalaeolithic Natufian of Israel from whom the Neolithic realm was assumed to arise has a clear link to Sub-Saharan Africa.”
However the unrelatedness of ancient stone age Europeans to modern Europeans has long been known thus we hear from the following specialists earlier. Professor Willis Boughton in 1896, The History of Ancient Peoples 334-337: “Archeologists have found remains of three races in Europe. Two of these are generally classed as blacks, may be known as the Constant and the Cro-Magnon Race.”
“The discoveries of abundant prehistoric remains all over Europe particularly France. These with one accord tended to show that European aborigines of the Stone age were not Mongoloid like the Lapps, after all but the exact opposite. In every detail they resembled rather the dolicocecephalic Negoes of Africa.”” William Z. Ripley, Races of Europe p. 436
“The importance of the skeleton of the Cro- Magnon type is that in stature, prognathousm and shape of the orbits they exhibit approximation to the negro type more than any other which have been found in Europe.” P. 96 in Isaac Taylor, The Origin of the Aryans, first published 1889.
And in 2005 the Brace paper asserts – “If this analysis shows nothing else it demonstrates that the oft repeated European feeling that the Cro-Magnons are ‘us’ is more a product of anthropological folklore than the result of the metric data available from the skeletal remains.” see “The Questionable contribution of the Neolithic and Bronze Age to European Craniofacial form”, Loring Brace, Noriko Seguchi, Conrad B. Quintyn, Sherry C. Fox, A. Russell Nelson, Sotiris K. Manolis, by the National Academy of Sciences, which basically shows how weak the physical link is between modern Europeans and most ancient Europeans including pre-Bronze Age Eurasiatic, regardless of what haplotype or other dna traits went where. This is due to the prevalence of African looking people in Europe and Asia until the neolithic. Something that early specialists before pseudoanthropological musings of Coon. (And even he classified the bulk of the small “Mediterranean Neolithic people as noticeably “Negroid” in craniofacial character.)
Brace’s study found that only a couple of populations in neolithic Germany to have some connection to the modern Europeans and Middle Easterners, including the modern Gaunches and Basques, and northward Berber speakers (also mainly mesocranic and brachycephalic peoples) unlike ancient Africans and modern Africans and ancient paleolithic and most neolithic Europeans and Eurasians.
In addition, recent studies have again shown as Lepsius had in the past that ancient Egyptians had essentially tropical traits.
Thus we read in another recent article, “The raw values in Table 6 suggest that Egyptians had the “super-Negroid” body plan described by Robins (1983).. This pattern is supported by Figure 7 (a plot of population mean femoral and tibial lengths; data from Ruff, 1994), which indicates that the Egyptians generally have tropical body plans. Of the Egyptian samples, only the Badarian and Early Dynastic period populations have shorter tibiae than predicted from femoral length. Despite these differences, all samples lie relatively clustered together as compared to the other populations.” (Zakrzewski, S.R. (2003). found in “Variation in ancient Egyptian stature and body proportions”. American Journal of Physical Anthropology 121 (3): 219-229.
Finally it should understood that, just because certain haplotypes or other dna traits came to be carried by a variety of modern populations says little about where a modern population or physical type originated. What it does suggest, however, is that many modern Europeans and the affiliated modern Eurasian populations have asorbed previous non-Europoid populations that were present in European, North African and Eurasian regions. The Greeks, Kabyles and other European-like types may be a good example of this.