Back to Top
- Members of Ancient Tribes Escaped (CBS News)
"The last few dozen remaining members of an ancient indigenous tribe in the Andaman and Nicobar Islands said they raced up a mountain to escape a devastating tsunami — and avoid extinction."
"And contrary to speculation by some anthropologists, she said the Great Andamanese did not sense the impending arrival of the tsunamis."
"Anthropologists believe five tribes of the southern Indian archipelago — including the Jarawas, Shompens, Onges and Sentinelese — date back 70,000 years.1-05
- Ancient Tribes May Have Known (CBS News)
"Members of the ancient Jarawa tribe emerged from their forest habitat Thursday for the first time since the Dec. 26 tsunami and earthquakes that rocked the isolated Andaman and Nicobar Islands, and in a rare interaction with outsiders announced that all 250 of their fellow tribespeople had survived."
"According to varying estimates, there are only 400 to 1,000 members alive today from the Jarawas, Great Andamanese, Onges, Sentinelese and Shompens. Some anthropological DNA studies indicate the generations may have spanned back 70,000 years. They originated in Africa and migrated to India through Indonesia, anthropologists say."
"Government officials and anthropologists believe that ancient knowledge of the movement of wind, sea and birds may have saved the indigenous tribes from the tsunami." 1-05
- Editorial: Genetic Mutation in the Brain Changed Humans (StanfordAlumni.org)
"Most anthropologists agree that modern behavior emerged around 45,000 years ago, dramatically changing how people thought and lived." 03-06
- Review of Apocalypto as Mayan History (MSNBC News)
"There’s plenty to argue about in Mel Gibson's 'Apocalypto' – and we’re not just talking about the actor/director’s bad behavior and controversial views. Anthropologists and modern-day Mayans are arguing about how much truth there is in Gibson’s gripping, violent tale of an ancient civilization on the brink."
Elin Danien, a researcher at the University of Pennsylvania Museum of Archaeology and Anthropology disagreed with Mel Gibson's view of the Maya as depicted in the movie. " 'His view that the Maya were corrupt from within and were saved by the Spaniards is nonsense,' she said. 'The Spaniards destroyed everything they encountered. Yes, it's true that the cities of the Peten, of what we call the Classic Maya period, were abandoned in the 10th century. But there were cities in the Yucatan, there were cities on the Pacific coast of Guatemala that were going full blast when the Spaniards arrived.' " 12-06
Send comments to
[Dr. Jerry Adams at firstname.lastname@example.org.]