The first story
How it spread
Cell phones=death to bees=DOOM
So did they test their theory with a cell phone a mile away? I know fire will kill bee's and even if you put it next/under the hive. I'm sure a lot of things we have created would cause alarm if you test your theory within a short amount of distance. The true test would be max length cause I really dont see ppl living next to bee hives everyday.
The question is: Overall, what effect does the large amount of radiation we're putting into the environment have on the bees?
And yeah, it's very tricky to evaluate.
They've tried tests near cell phone towers, and in this case they put cell phones right NEXT to the hives. But this is all just preliminary, to see what effect, if any, BIG exposures have.
1) Human beekeepers have cell phones. Should they take them out of their pockets when they work with the hives?
2) Bees fly miles on their rounds as they gather pollen. Will brief close encounters with cell phones screw up their navigation, preventing them from returning home?
3) There is SO MUCH low-lever radiation permeating our environment now... could 10,000 small signals cause as much trouble as 1 strong one?
We just don't know what the answers are.
But we DO know that SOMETHING is screwing up the bees. And without bees, a WHOLE lot of our food supply is in trouble, because without bees to pollinate them, they won't grow.
I don't know much about bees; I wrote a kids' book about a squirrel. But I am always glad to see coverage like this in the news. These are issues we should be aware of and thinking of. Not only should we be studying them and finding out the effects we cause as humans, but we should be teaching our children to care about the same. Using the picture from the bee movie in your blog prompts parents to talk about this with their kids, just as using a squirrel as the hero character for a book prompts them to talk to their kids about deforestation and the effect on animals of our use of the environment.
So though the point of this artical seems to be more the effect of faulty journalism than the effect of the disappearance of bees, im sure most are familiar with the notion that when the bees die, the earth dies. This being said, lets support humane bee hiving. Discounts on bee's wax candals can be found here -half off! http://www.organicsoul.com/offers/19-for-40-to-spend-on-100-pure-beeswax-candles/ So there. Peace.