If you enjoy this site
please consider making a donation.
Add Your Story
Life on Home Front
Those Who Served
Central Powers Army
War in the Air
Prisoners of War
The Royal Navy
Central Powers' Navy
Women at War
Day by Day
Can you Answer?
World War Two
How to add Memories
Add Your Story
Printable Memories Form
Help & FAQ's
Our Facebook Page
Great War Books
Research your own Family History.
World War 1 One ww1 wwII greatwar great
1/6th Battalion, The Royal Warwickshire Regiment
1/6th Battalion, The Royal Warwickshire Regiment was a territorial with HQ in Birmingham in 1914, serving with the Warwickshire Brigade, South Midland Division. The units of the Division had just departed for their annual summer camp when war broke out in August 1914 and they were at once recalled. They mobilised for war service on 5 August 1914 and moved to concentrate in the Chelmsford area by the second week of August 1914 and commenced training. They proceeded to France, from Southampton, landing at le Havre on the 22nd of March 1915. The Division concentrated near Cassel. on the 13th of May 1915 the formation was renamed 143rd Brigade, 48th (South Midland) Division. In 1916 They were in action in the Battle of the Somme, suffering hevy casualties on the 1st of July in assaulting the Quadrilateral (Heidenkopf). They were also in action at The Battle of Bazentin Ridge, capturing Ovillers, The Battle of Pozieres Ridge, The Battle of the Ancre Heights and The Battle of the Ancre. In 1917 the Division occupied Peronne during the The German Retreat to the Hindenburg Line and were in action in the Third Battles of Ypres. On the 21st of November 1917 they entrained for Italy. In 1918 they were involved in The fighting on the Asiago Plateau and The Battle of the Vittoria Veneto in the Val d'Assa area. At the Armistice the Division had withdrawn and was at Granezza. Demobilisation began in early 1919.
Can you add to this factual information? Do you know the whereabouts of this unit on a particular day? Which battles they took part in? Or any other interesting snipts?
AnnouncementsWanted: Great War Newspaper clippings
If you have any news clippings from the Great War, please could you scan them and upload a copy
Looking for help with Family History Research?
Please read our Family History FAQ's
We are now on Facebook. Like this page to receive our updates, add a comment or ask a question.
If you have a general question please post it on our Facebook page.
May 2013World War 1 One ww1 wwII greatwar great
Please note we currently have a backlog of submitted material, our volunteers are working through this as quickly as possible and all names, stories and photos will be added to the site.
Those known to have served with 1/6th Battalion, The Royal Warwickshire Regiment during the Great War.
Select a story link or scroll down to browse those stories hosted on this site.
- Pte. Richard Fountain (d.22th May 1916) Read their Story.
The names on this list have been submitted by relatives, friends, neighbours and others who wish to remember them, if you have any names to add,, or any recollections or photos of those listed, please get in touch.
Pte. Richard Fountain 1st/6th Battalion Royal Warwickshire Regiment (d.22th May 1916)Richard Fountain arrived in France on 22nd March 1915. He was wounded and died of his wounds at the CSS at Gezaincourt on 22nd May 1916.
Available at discounted prices.
Can you help us to add to our records?
The names and stories on this website have been submitted by their relatives and friends. If your relations are not listed please add their names so that others can read about them
Did your relative live through the Great War? Do you have any photos, newspaper clippings, postcards or letters from that period? Have you researched the names on your local or war memorial?
If so please let us know.
Do you know the location of a Great War "Roll of Honour?"
We are very keen to track down these often forgotten documents and obtain photographs and transcriptions of the names recorded so that they will be available for all to remember.
Help us to build a database of information on those who served both at home and abroad so that future generations may learn of their sacrifice.
Celebrate your own Family History
Celebrate by honouring members of your family who served in the Great War both in the forces and at home. We love to hear about the soldiers, but also remember the many who served in support roles, nurses, doctors, land army, muntions workers etc.
Please use our Family History resources to find out more about your relatives. Then please send in a short article, with a photo if possible, so that they can be remembered on these pages.
The Wartime Memories Project is a non profit organisation run by volunteers.
This website is paid for out of our own pockets and from donations made by visitors. The popularity of the site means that it is far exceeding available resources.
If you are enjoying the site, please consider making a donation, however small to help with the costs of keeping the site running.
Website © Copyright MCMXCIX - MMXII
- All Rights Reserved