Why Exercise Is So Important
|1.||Improved heart muscle performance!|
|2.||Reduces oxygen demands on the heart!|
|3.||Improves oxygen utilisation by other body tissues!|
|4.||Reduces body weight!|
|5.||Increases HDL cholesterol levels (the good type)!|
|6.||Lowers Triglyceride levels!|
|7.||Reduces LDL cholesterol levels (the bad type)!|
|8.||Slows, and even reverses atherosclerosis!|
|9.||Reduced stress levels!|
However undertaking an exercise programme which has shown significant benefits in the form of improved fitness levels, weight loss, and the stabilisation of lipid factors (blood cholesterols), is obviously superior to traditional forms of exercise. The clinically proven results obtained from the Nu-Life Cardiac Programme have been achieved by exercising only three times a week for less than half an hour per session for a period of six weeks, coupled with appropriate diet modifications.
The Nu-Life Cardiac Interval Training Programme is based on achieving and not exceeding certain target heart rates or measurable work loads during your endurance phases of exercise. The exercise may be undertaken by walking, on a treadmill, an exercise bicycle, arm ergometer or swimming. Your target heart rate will vary according to which type of exercise you choose. It is however not recommended that you use an exercise apparatus which uses two form of work together, like an exercise bicycle coupled with arm movement, as it is essential that you are able to monitor your heart rate during your exercise. This may be done by a number of methods:
1. Palpation – by feeling your pulse either at the radial artery at the wrist or the carotid artery in the neck , counting the beats for fifteen seconds and then multiplying the number by four.
2. By using an efficient heart rate meter which continually monitors your heart rate during the exercise.
3. By the use of the HeartTel™ Monitor. This device allows you to record a segment of your heart’s electrical activity (an elcectrocardiograph, or ECG) at the start of exercise and then again at peak exercise. This recording is then uploaded electronically via telephone to Neocardia’s Central Monitoring Service.
This system also has the significant advantage that should you feel any untoward cardiac symptom (eg. pain or palpitations) you can download your ECG at any time for interpretation – not only during your exercise segment. It is strongly recommended that patients with heart disease or who have high risk factors should avail themselves of this facility.
If you decide to use our ECG monitoring service during the programme we will advise you each week of your progress and give advice regarding increasing your exercise levels. Copies of your ECG and its interpretation will be forwarded separately to your doctor. In the unlikely event that some abnormality has been detected in your heart recording, we will contact you and your doctor as a matter of urgency with appropriate recommendations from our Cardiologist Team.
Whilst initially used in patients with pre-existing cardiac disease the Nu-Life Cardiac Programme may be used effectively by ANY individual, particularly those with low exercise tolerance or obesity.
Gentle exercise is beneficial and enthusiastic very hard exercise (whilst increasing your endorphans) may be dangerous particularly when undertaken without medical approval. At this level of exercise the tissues become anaerobic increasing levels of lactic acid in the body which reduces the heart’s response to catecholamines (the adrenalines).
The National Heart Foundation and other authorities recommend that before undertaking an exercise programme you should consult your family doctor particularly if you are over forty or have a family or past history of heart disease. Indeed, Neocardia REQUIRES that you provide us with your Local Doctor’s contact details, and that you give us permission to contact and share information with your Local Doctor. You are strongly advised to discuss this programme and seek the agreement of your family doctor or cardiologist before commencement.
The Neocardia Team will prescribe an individualised interval exercise and diet programme that takes into consideration the prior medical history, risk factors, and lifestyle factors you provide us.
*The exercise is individually designed either from the results of a formal exercise study or based on target heart rates derived from body characteristics.
*The level of exercise is controlled by heart rates.
*The exercise is interesting and the level is increased during the programme.
*It requires only three sessions per week for less than half an hour. The results are scientifically proven.
*Facilities for monitoring your progress through the programme is available to maximise benefit and reduce risk of adverse reactions.