George Washington's Acts of Congress
Did you know that George Washington wrote in the margins of his personal copy of the Acts of Congress? See this book on display around the country as it travels from its home at Mount Vernon to each of our Presidential Libraries.
What's Cooking, Uncle Sam? The Government's Effect on the American Diet
Explore the records that trace the ways that food has occupied the hearts and minds of Americans and their Government. From Revolutionary War rations to Cold War cultural exchanges, these documents and images reflect many of our current concerns about food safety and nutrition.
Discovering the Civil War
For 150 years, researchers have been finding new insights in the records of the Civil War. They're not finished yet. You can join them in "Discovering the Civil War."
The National Archives: Documented Rights
The exhibit's selected documents, photographs, and original testimonies exemplify the range and depth of National Archives holdings chronicling the evolution of human and civil rights in the United States.
The Digital Vaults
A portal into the heart of the National Archives, the Digital Vaults uses visual records such as documents, photographs, and popular media, and illustrates how these materials can come together in unexpected ways to tell the story of our country.
View More Online Exhibits
The Charters of Freedom
The Declaration of Independence, the Constitution, & the Bill of Rights.
Designs for Democracy
Explore more than 100 designs highlighting 200 years of Government drawings.
The National Archives Experience: Digital Vaults
Exploring the Digital Vaults is easy. You can browse through the hundreds of photographs, documents, and film clips and discover the connection between some of the National Archives' most treasured records.
Gripping eyewitness accounts—in the form of letters, diaries, audio and film recordings—chronicle dramatic moments in U.S. history.
John H. White: Portrait of Black Chicago
View Pulitzer-Prize winning photographer John H. White's images of 1970s Chicago.
The Way We Worked
Work and workplaces have gone through enormous transformations between the mid 19th and late 20th centuries. View these changes through photographs.