- This article is written by PWP-Reader Craig Dremann from Redwood City, California, United States of America
Monsoon and Dust Battle on August 4
August 4, the atmospheric dust cloud is successfully keeping the monsoon away from Pakistan, and the mini-Dust Cloud in India, is acting like a rock in a stream, and forcing the monsoon moisture to split as the monsoon moves westward.
The paradox of the Dust Cloud, is where grazing has removed vegetation, that is the home of the Dust Cloud, which then creates more severe drought conditions, and starts a feed-back cycle, to create more severe drought, as more dust gets airborne, etc.
When grazing the home of the Dust Cloud, leaving a few centimeters of standing vegetation to remain, instead of grazing to bare ground, would begin to cure the Dust Cloud.
One permanent cure, would be to revegetate the Dust Cloud homelands with the original native perennial grasses and local native trees, and to pay the local people to protect those areas as Ecological Restoration preserves, instead of using the Dust Cloud lands for animal fodder.
Fixing the Dust Cloud homeland vegetation cover is essential for the peoples of western India, Pakistan and the United States, because we all depend on the monsoonal moisture to grow our crops each year.
August 8: Brewing Condition!
Today a huge battle between the Dust Cloud and the monsoon is taking place at the Pakistan-India border, that you can see from the attached image. The monsoon may be able to go around the Dust Cloud, by moving to the north and then westward through the weak portion of the cloud.
August 11: The American Drought
I was noticing today, as well as the Dust Clouds in Pakistan and Arabia causing drought in Pakistan and the USA, it is also causing the worst drought in 100 years in the Amazon, if you Google <drought Amazon August2012>. You can see this impact by watching http://www.ssec.wisc.edu/data/comp/latest_cmoll.gif. Only central America is getting rainfall this summer so far.
Send your weather articles, research, ideas, videos or pictures on email@example.com Your article would be published on Pakistan Weather Portal (PWP) with your name and city, without any changes. So you could also be the part of Portal Interactive!