How many CH kitties do we have here all together? Lets' put them all in one place. For the new people who do not know what this is ...
The cerebellum is the portion of the brain responsible for the control of motion. When a puppy or kitten is born with an underdeveloped cerebellum, the condition is known as congenital cerebellar hypoplasia. There are infectious causes of this condition in both cats (panleukopenia infection prior to birth) and dogs (herpes virus infection prior to birth). Improper development of the cerebellum may occur due to injury, poisoning or just from an accident in development in the uterus. It is generally possible to see signs of this condition almost as soon as the puppy or kitten is born. Affected animals have tremors and unusual jerky movements or may fall down when they try to move. The symptoms do not get worse as they age. As the kitten or puppy grows it will learn to compensate for its condition but there are usually lifelong signs of a decreased ability to coordinate movement. Almost all dogs and cats with congenital cerebellar hypoplasia can live happily as pets with a little special care to compensate for their disabilities. This condition can be confused with cerebellar abiotrophy, a different disorder in dogs in which the puppy has a normal cerebellum at birth but it gradually dies. Signs of disease identical to cerebellar hypoplasia occur but the timing is different. Puppies with this condition seem normal at birth but usually start to show signs of problems after they are 2 months or more of age.
It effects each cat to different degrees. You can see how it effects my sweet little Amy by clicking the link in my siggy. These are some that are on You Tube..
Don't let these videos make you sad for them, They are healthy, happy normal kitties, they are just so much more special than a regular kitty and leave far bigger imprints on your heart. The first time some people have met Amy, it brought tears to their eyes and they felt sorry for her until they got to know her and saw what a little wonder cat she is, now she is everybody's favorite. I have been Amy student for going on about 5 years now and the lessons she has taught me have been amazing. I have long been past the feeling sorry for her stage and am just in AWE of her now. WHAT A AMAZING little girl she is!
Post you CH kitties and their stories here, pictures and video's if you have them!