|All great social
movements have their memorials: Abolition and Civil Rights, Suffrage
and Women's Rights, Labor and the Environmental and Peace Movements
are among them. The Animal Rights Movement stands alone without a
symbol to represent humanity's cherished dream of a cruelty-free world.
"The greatness of a nation
and its moral progress can be measured by the way its animals
- Mahatma Gandhi 1869-1948
there has been extensive reference to a "Peaceable Kingdom" in which
people live in harmony with other animals in nature. Sadly, humans
have greatly deviated from this ideal, and have pursued lifestyles
that have been disastrous for the earth, animals and humanity itself.
"The assumption that animals
are without rights is a positively outrageous example of Western
crudity and barbarity. Universal compassion is the only guarantee
- Arthur Schopenhauer, 1788-1860
|The Peaceable Kingdom
is an idea whose time has come. It will acknowledge the injustices
animals have endured and serve as an urgent call to humanity, a cry
that compels us to hear the voices of those who cannot speak on their
"Nonviolence leads to
the highest ethics, which is the goal of all evolution. Until
we stop harming all other living beings, we are still savages."
- Thomas A. Edison, 1847-1931
will inspire us to respect and appreciate other animals, as well
as to envision a peaceful and compassionate world for all the earth's
inhabitants. Designed with beautiful animal statues, the memorial
will be accompanied by bronze plaques that express the compassionate
sentiments of such great historical thinkers as Pythagoras, Leonardo
Da Vinci, Leo Tolstoy, Dr. Albert Schweitzer, Mahatma Gandhi, Peace
Pilgrim and others. Lado Goudjabidze, an internationally acclaimed
artist and sculptor, has been commissioned to design this monument.
Lado is considered a "national treasure" in his native Soviet Union
where he was appointed to rebuild and beautify parks and cityscapes.
by the country's first "Pacifist Memorial" (a tribute to world peace efforts),
Peaceable Kingdom is a joint project of The Peace Abbey, an interfaith
center, and Farm Sanctuary, an animal protection organization. The
memorial will be located in the Los Angeles area.
you to join us in creating the Peaceable Kingdom, America's first
animal rights memorial.
information, or to make a donation, please contact:
A Project of:
3100 Aikens Road
Watkins Glen, NY 14891
The Peace Abbey
Two North Main Street
Sherborn, MA 01770
The Peace Abbey at
Two North Main Street, Sherborn, Massachusetts 01770
Phone : (508) 650-3659 Fax : (508) 655-5031 E-mail