/out (C# Compiler Options)
The /out option specifies the name of the output file.
On the command line, it is possible to specify multiple output files for your compilation. The compiler expects to find one or more source code files following the /out option. Then, all source code files will be compiled into the output file specified by that /out option.
Specify the full name and extension of the file you want to create.
If you do not specify the name of the output file:
An .exe will take its name from the source code file that contains the Main method.
A .dll or .netmodule will take its name from the first source code file.
A source code file used to compile one output file cannot be used in the same compilation for the compilation of another output file.
When producing multiple output files in a command-line compilation, keep in mind that only one of the output files can be an assembly and that only the first output file specified (implicitly or explicitly with /out) can be the assembly.
Any modules produced as part of a compilation become files associated with any assembly also produced in the compilation. Use ildasm.exe to view the assembly manifest to see the associated files.
The /out compiler option is required in order for an exe to be the target of a friend assembly. For more information see Friend Assemblies (C# and Visual Basic).
To set this compiler option in the Visual Studio development environment
Open the project's Properties page.
Click the Application property page.
Modify the Assembly name property.
To set this compiler option programmatically: the OutputFileName is a read-only property, which is determined by a combination of the project type (exe, library, and so forth) and the assembly name. Modifying one or both of these properties will be necessary to set the output file name.
Compile t.cs and create output file t.exe, as well as build t2.cs and create module output file mymodule.netmodule:
csc t.cs /out:mymodule.netmodule /target:module t2.cs