|[This is a MPIWG MPDL language technology service]|
Hang (v. i.) To suspend; to fasten to some elevated point without support from below; -- often used with up or out; as, to hang a coat on a hook; to hang up a sign; to hang out a banner.
Hang (v. i.) To fasten in a manner which will allow of free motion upon the point or points of suspension; -- said of a pendulum, a swing, a door, gate, etc.
Hang (v. i.) To fit properly, as at a proper angle (a part of an implement that is swung in using), as a scythe to its snath, or an ax to its helve.
Hang (v. i.) To put to death by suspending by the neck; -- a form of capital punishment; as, to hang a murderer.
Hang (v. i.) To cover, decorate, or furnish by hanging pictures trophies, drapery, and the like, or by covering with paper hangings; -- said of a wall, a room, etc.
Hang (v. i.) To paste, as paper hangings, on the walls of a room.
Hang (v. i.) To hold or bear in a suspended or inclined manner or position instead of erect; to droop; as, he hung his head in shame.
Hang (v. i.) To be suspended or fastened to some elevated point without support from below; to dangle; to float; to rest; to remain; to stay.
Hang (v. i.) To be fastened in such a manner as to allow of free motion on the point or points of suspension.
Hang (v. i.) To die or be put to death by suspension from the neck.
Hang (v. i.) To hold for support; to depend; to cling; -- usually with on or upon; as, this question hangs on a single point.
Hang (v. i.) To be, or be like, a suspended weight.
Hang (v. i.) To hover; to impend; to appear threateningly; -- usually with over; as, evils hang over the country.
Hang (v. i.) To lean or incline; to incline downward.
Hang (v. i.) To slope down; as, hanging grounds.
Hang (v. i.) To be undetermined or uncertain; to be in suspense; to linger; to be delayed.
Hang (n.) The manner in which one part or thing hangs upon, or is connected with, another; as, the hang of a scythe.
Hang (n.) Connection; arrangement; plan; as, the hang of a discourse.
Hang (n.) A sharp or steep declivity or slope.