Genesee Course Catalog
Official Course Information
|Please select a Course Section from the List below or use the Search box on the right if you know the Title.|
|HIS204 - United States History 2: 1865 to the Present|
Catalog Description: Surveys United States history from Reconstruction to the present. Focuses on the role of the United States among the community of nations and on the ideas and events that have shaped the development of our culture, government and institutions since 1865. Examines the following themes: Reconstruction, industrialization and its effects on American society, immigration and urbanization, progressivism, World War I, social and cultural changes of the Twenties, the Great Depression and the New Deal, World War II, postwar affluence and social change, the Cold War and its end, the civil rights movement, Watergate, the Reagan Revolution, and the war on terrorism. Introduces techniques of historical research and critical writing about the modern history of the United States.
Lecture: 3 hrs.
Course Student Learning Outcomes (CSLOs):
At the conclusion of the semester, as documented by examinations, papers, oral presentations and class discussions, students will be able to
1. Demonstrate knowledge of the basic narrative of modern American history on American politics, public policy, and society after the Civil War, covering such topics as foreign and domestic policy, elections, radical protests, wealth and poverty, corporations, the mass media, labor and America's impact on the world.*
2. Demonstrate knowledge of the common institutions in modern American society and how they affected different groups in post-Civil War America.*
3. Identify the influence of specific global forces on the course of modern American history and then analyze the connections of these global forces to local and national developments.
4. Discuss in three distinct ways the role that geography played on the development of the United States.
5. Analyze at least three current issues in American society in their historical context.
6. Read, interpret, and then explain by referencing at least three different types of primary evidence in American history, the historical perspective and context that influenced the substance of those types of primary evidence.
7. Evaluate history as an interpretive discipline with a diversity of viewpoints through the detection and appraisal for bias and point of view within at least three pieces of historical writing.
8. Demonstrate an ability to formulate, organize and defend an historical argument in a written or oral presentation(University of Chicago style guide format) based upon library research involving a minimum of three scholarly references utilizing online full-text databases (information management).
*This course objective has been identified as a student learning outcome that must be formally assessed as part of the College's Comprehensive Assessment Plan. All faculty teaching this course must collect the required data (see Assessing Student Learning Outcomes form) and submit the required analysis and documentation at the conclusion of the semester to the Office of Assessment and Special Projects.
I Impact of the American Civil War
II Reconstruction, 1865-1876
III The West
IV The Emergence of an Urban/Industrial America
V Politics in the Late Nineteenth Century
VI Imperial America 1877-1914
VII The Progressive Era
VIII World War I and American Society
IX The 1920's
X The Great Depression and the New Deal
XI World War II
XII The Onset of the Cold War
XIII Affluence and the Triumph of Liberalism
XIV The Turmoil of the 1960's
XV Crisis of Confidence 1968-1980
XVI Reagan and the Conservative Resurgence
XVII Foreign Policy After the Cold War
XVIII America in the 21st Century
Effective Term: Fall 2009