FCTC is accepting applications for the massage therapy day class in St. Augustine and a new night class in Palatka. Both begin Aug. 20 and financial aid is available to those who qualify.
Guard against mosquitoes
The Florida Department of Health (DOH)/St. Johns County Health Department reminds Floridians and visitors to take simple preventive measures to protect against contracting mosquito-borne illnesses. The mosquito population grows in the summer which coincides with the time of year many residents and visitors are outdoors enjoying Florida’s natural landscape. Floridians can take simple steps to combat mosquitoes and prevent mosquito-borne illness.
“Mosquito populations are likely to increase after recent rains,” said Dawn Allicock, M.D., M.P.H., Director of the St. Johns County Health Department. “It’s important that Floridians and visitors are informed that the risk of mosquito-borne disease is minimized by implementing precautions.”
DOH encourages three basic precautions to help limit mosquito bites and exposure to mosquito-borne illness:
■ Drain any standing water to stop mosquitoes from multiplying.
■ Cover skin with clothing or repellent.
■ Cover doors and windows with screens to keep mosquitoes out of your residence.
■ If outdoors at dusk or dawn, be cautious as mosquitoes are most active during these times.
Floridians who are traveling internationally need to remember to use mosquito repellent to avoid mosquito bites, as communicable diseases often return to the United States after traveling abroad. DOH continues to conduct statewide surveillance for mosquito-borne illnesses, including West Nile virus, Eastern equine encephalitis virus, St. Louis encephalitis virus, malaria and dengue.
Symptoms of mosquito-borne illnesses may include headache, fever, fatigue, dizziness, weakness and confusion. It can take 2 to 14 days to become sick after being bitten by an infected mosquito. Anyone suspecting they are sick should contact their physician immediately.
For more information on mosquito-borne illnesses, visit DOH’s Environmental Health Website.
Board certified neurologist David Karaffa, MD, has joined the medical staff at Florida Hospital Flagler.
He is an experienced neurologist who can treat a variety of conditions including seizure disorders, Parkinson’s disease, Alzheimer’s, strokes, migraine, back pain, neuropathy and more.
Karaffa earned a bachelor of arts in biology from University of Virginia in Charlottesville. He completed both his medical degree and residency from the Medical College of Virginia in Richmond, where he also served as chief resident in neurology. He is an active member of the American Academy of Neurology.
The following blood drives are planned in the St. Augustine area by the Blood Alliance:
For Immediate Release
■ Today: 10 a.m. to 1 p.m. — Coggin Honda, 2898 U.S. 1 South.
■ Friday: 8 to 11 a.m. — Winn-Dixie, Beach, 2905 A1A South.
■ Friday: 1 to 4 p.m. — Courtyard Marriott, 2075 State Road 16.
■ Tuesday: Noon to 3 p.m. — St. Augustine Alligator Farm, 999 Anastasia Blvd.; free admission to all donors.
■ Wednesday: 10 a.m. to 2 p.m. — American Legion, 1 Anderson Circle, Downtown St. Augustine.
■ July 6: 10 a.m. to 1 p.m. — Castillo de San Marcos, 1 Castillo Drive.
■ July 6: 9:30 a.m. to 12:30 p.m. — Coquina Crossing, 4536 Coquina Crossing Drive.
■ July 6: 2 to 5 p.m. — St. Johns County Main Library, 1960 N. Ponce de Leon Blvd.
■ July 6: 5 to 8 p.m. — Act II Boutique, 130 King St.