|What exactly is a Phantom item
or Assembly means?
Can anyone plese tell me what exactly is a phantom item or assembly
How does it affect the MRP process?
A phantom assembly is used when you want to be able to structure a BOM
so it is easy to understand, but don't want to create too many production
Assume an auto Engine. There are hundreds of components. You might structure
them as: Engine block and parts, camshaft and parts, and 6 piston assemblies.
But you don't want to create 3 production orders, too much hassle. So you
want to issue the components for the piston assembly in the same production
order as the Engine block. So you create a new material number for the
Piston assembly, but you mark it as a phantom assembly. That means that
when you create the bom for the Engine assembly, you only have two assemblies,
the Engine block and the Camshaft. You add the phantom assembly for the
Piston Assembly to the Engine block BOM, saying it requires 8 of the phantom
assembly. When the production order is created for the Engine block, the
picklist will also include all of the components of the 8 piston assemblies.
1) When to use, or not use a phantom assembly?
If you need to do cost accounting on how many hours it takes to assemble
a piston assembly, it cannot be a phantom assembly, because as a part of
the Engine block assembly, the labor costs are included in the Engine block
production order, and therefore in the standard cost.
2) Can the assembly people pick out the parts for the phantom assembly
from the all of the components in the Kit?
If the guy assembling the Engine Block gets confused because of all
of the components for the Piston assemblies are there, then it cannot be
a phantom assembly. But if they can seperate them easily, go for it. A
printed circuit board assembly should never be a phantom assembly, because
all of those little parts for each type of PC board must be kept separate.
3) Do you usually build 100 piston assemblies, put them into stock,
then issue 8 at a time to build an Engine Assembly?
If so, it is not a phantom assembly. If the Piston assembly is a phantom,
you only build the 8 you need while you are building the Engine Block assembly.
You normally do NOT store a piston assembly (phantom assembly) in stock.
4) However, sometimes a customer calls and wants you to send them
all of the components for One Piston Assembly.
By having it set as a phantom assembly, even though you don't usually
create seperate production orders, in this case you CAN create a production
order for one, pull the components, close the PO, and send the parts off
to your customer.
5) You complete a Engine Assembly.
As you are walking it back to the stockroom, you drop it on the floor,
and it breaks! Damn, but you can still save the piston assemblies. Since
they do have a SAP material number, you CAN put those back into stock.
Most MRP systems WILL recognize that you happen to have 8 piston assemblies
in stock, and will issue those whole assemblies to the next order for a
Provide a link between BOM component and Storage Location
to link BOM component to storage location?
Get help for your SAP PP Problems
Do you have a SAP PP Question?
SAP PP Books
SAP Production Planning
SAP Basis, ABAP Programming and Other IMG Stuff
All the site contents are Copyright © www.erpgreat.com
and the content authors. All rights reserved.
All product names are trademarks of their respective
companies. The site www.erpgreat.com is in no way affiliated with
Every effort is made to ensure the content integrity.
Information used on this site is at your own risk.
The content on this site may not be reproduced
or redistributed without the express written permission of
www.erpgreat.com or the content authors.