Moving your hand back and
forth in a steady motion creating a wiggy-wiggy sound; usually takes
two minutes for DJs to learn .
Remixing a song live by playing
with the instrumentation of a song on one turntable while the dj
plays the same song on the other turntable.
To introduce songs that the
mass media have overlooked.
Riffs or beats used as the
percussive foundation for hip-hop songs, for example, Aerosmith's
"Walk This Way"
A sharp scratch that sounds
like a bird chirp, like a faster baby scratch, but entails pulling
the record back really fast to create a hiccup sound.
The switch that alternates
the sound between the left and right turntable.
Scratching the record and
manipulating a song by using two copies of the same song and remixing
Anchoring your thumb on the
crossfader while tapping the other four fingers on it, vibrating
A scambled scratch, an advanced
version of the "transform"; this takes about two months
for a dj to perfect.
The art of quickly mixing
records into a non-stop medley.
Taking two copies of the
same record, playing a percussion break on one, while moving the
needle to the beginning on the other.
Taking an existing song and
manipulating it with your hands in a rhythmic way; some DJs spell
Tensing your hand onto the
record to create a hard vibrating noise.
Putting a record on the turntable
and letting it play to the end.
Jabbing the record in a stabbing
motion by pushing the record and pulling it back to cut off the
reverse sound; creates a staccato boom-boom sound.
A DJ no-no. When two records
are mixed off-beat, the kicks don't match up with the kicks and
the snares don't match up with the snares.
Cutting the sound in and
Using the record player as
an instrument and developing compositions off of it. Some DJs can
create a cool song, for example "Rockit" by Herbie Hancock.
DJ Terms Source: Paulo
Bello, an instructior with the DJ School and Turntable Academy
in Campbell, Shortkut from the San Francisco DJ Crew Triple Threat,
DJ Edit. Some changes edited by DJ Daniel, Bay Area DJ disc jockey