Seth Kellogg Birds of the Air: Astonishing swarm of snow geese just one of many wonders of northern Vermont
Every fall for 10 years we have spent a weekend in Vermont, searching for the waterbirds and raptors that migrate through the Champlain Valley. As always, on the first day, we visited the islands of northern Vermont, working hard to find the ducks and hawks. Our highlight was a rare species of songbird, a flock of Bohemian waxwings that were eating wild serviceberries at the edge of a swamp.
The next morning we headed south until the high Adirondack Mountains loomed to our west. The Champlain waters shimmered below, covered in whitecaps whipped up by the frigid northwest wind. We searched for coves that were sheltered from the wind, and hoped the sea ducks were also sheltering there.
An early stop was the familiar, cozy confines of McNeil Cove, where a small ferry still runs across the narrowing lake to New York. There the buffleheads had gathered, a raft of 50 of these small ducks floating like black and white corks. In teams of two or three, they dove below the surface in search of small fish.
We edged southward into an area new to us, Thompsons Point, a narrow, wooded peninsula that jutted toward a rocky ridge on the opposite shore. It was rocky here as well, but dozens of older summer homes were nestled in the woods. At the point we scanned the lake, hoping to find a rare Pacific loon reported to be there.
One loon seemed a good candidate, but common and Pacific loons look very similar, and the bird was too far away to be certain. The main difference is the size of the bill, the Pacific loon's bill being smaller and shorter. This and other subtle distinctions are hard to detect, especially at a great distance.
In search of a closer view, we drove around the bays and over Little Otter Creek, landing at Kingsland Bay State Park. We trudged across the deserted park to a rocky, wooded promontory called McDonough Point, another unfamiliar spot.
The trail followed the top of the sheer rock cliffs, the waves lapping against the rock base below. It was a wild and wondrous scene, but it offered few clear openings to scan the bay. Despite this, we found rafts of scoters as well as scaups and loons and grebes. The Pacific loon was not seen.
Now the flat fields of Dead Creek awaited, late autumn home to dabbling ducks and the dazzling sight of snow geese as they feed and fly. We turned down the road that winds past the marsh and saw hundreds of tiny green-winged teal dabbling among the hordes of mallards. Among them were a few pintails, wigeons, gadwalls and coot.
We lifted our gaze from the close waters and studied the fields beyond. A canopy of white stretched across the brown and green meadows like a giant bedsheet. Our field scopes turned the sheet into a thousand or more snow geese, most bending to graze on the grass, many raising their necks to a sentinel stance.
Suddenly they rose in a great swarm of wings, a sea of white, dotted with islands of black, the color of their wingtips. They paused for a second before moving over the ground like an immense wave that settled slowly to earth. Small lines of geese broke off to circle farther afield before landing.
We saw many raptors over the two days, mostly red-tailed hawks, almost always perched quietly in a tall tree on the margin of a meadow. A few times these large hunters rode the wild winds, floating steadily along as they studied the grass below.
Several fierce-looking accipiters hunted near the road, using speed and stealth, to surprise an unwary songbird. In a tree near the Dead Creek marsh, a peregrine falcon surveyed the sky for a passing pigeon or duck. We stopped to study a huge raptor circling high overhead. The over-all dark coloration and flight pattern allowed us to call it a migrating golden eagle.
The trip was coming to an end, but we had one more stop to make, the marsh where we had seen a family of sandhill cranes the previous five years. We studied the cattails for a long time, but could not pick out the stately necks of these cranes. It was a small disappointment in a weekend of pleasant surprises.
Seth Kellogg can be contacted at firstname.lastname@example.org