Salmon Kill Creek watershed is located in the northwest corner of Connecticut. Salmon Kill Creek, also locally known as Salmon Creek, flows through the town of Salisbury, Conn. Salmon Creek is formed by several headwater streams (Wachocastinook Brook, Factory Brook and Moore Brook), flowing for five miles from its source to the Housatonic River above Connecticut's Wild Trout Management Area #1.
TU is working with the U.S. Department of the Interior, Fish and Wildlife Service, private landowners. TU will coordinate restoration activities working with local agencies, organizations and schools to complete the restoration work.
Threats to Brook Trout
The forested headwater streams of Salmon Creek contain cold, clean water due to the undeveloped conditions of the upper watershed, providing habitat for brook trout. Downstream of Salisbury, Salmon Creek meanders through open agricultural lands where historical land practices has led to a decrease in riparian canopy cover and the introduction of nonnative plant species. The lack of riparian cover results in elevated stream temperatures, an incised channel and eroding streambanks limiting suitable instream trout habitat. TU's Salmon Kill Creek Project is designed to restore and enhance the riparian corridor and instream habitat of 1.8 miles of Salmon Kill Creek in the lower watershed.
TU is working with private landowners to assess Salmon Creek and design restoration projects to improve trout habitat. The restoration work will consist of both instream and riparian restoration activities. The instream work will work to improve instream habitat and reconnect the stream with the floodplain. The riparian restoration will consist of stabilizing erosive streambanks by reestablishing a forested riparian buffer.
Partial funding for this project is supported by a cooperative agreement from the U.S. Department of the Interior, Fish and Wildlife Service, on behalf of the Natural Resource Damage Assessment and Restoration programs of the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration and the Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection.
For more information on the Salmon Kill Creek Project, contact Tracy Brown, TU's Northeastern Restoration Coordinator., at (413) 854-4100.