says you’re happy like a big, bright smile. If you want to
have a lifetime of sparkling pearly whites, then you better get
in sync with your dental hygiene. That’s right, dental
hygiene is a major portion of your overall health—and something
you need to focus on at least twice a day, sometimes even more.
As a teen, you’re at a risk for developing unhealthy teeth.
Do you love to drink soda, eat sweets and ice cream with your friends
on Friday afternoons, skip brushing at sleepovers, and maybe even
forget to floss? Well, if any of this sounds familiar, visualize
yourself without any teeth. You’d look pretty funny, wouldn’t
you? That’s why it’s so important to take care of the
teeth you have now. By your teen years, you probably have all of
your adult teeth (if you’re 14 and still have some “baby
teeth,” talk to your dentist). So make your teeth happy by brushing and flossing
regularly and avoiding sugary snacks so that you can smile wide
when you are happy!
You’ve heard it from your dentist, and probably from your
parents … “Brush your teeth twice a day.” Well,
that’s something you really need to listen to. In the morning
when you wake up, or after you have some breakfast, brush those
teeth. Same thing again, before you go to sleep. If you feel like
brushing your teeth after lunch, go ahead. In fact, you can brush
after you eat every time throughout the day. When you brush, remember
that most dentists recommend that you brush for over two minutes
at a time. If you’re in a rush, don’t cut corners at
the sink. Also, hold the toothbrush firmly and make sure you get
every tooth, in the front and the back. Use a toothpaste with fluoride,
so that while your toothbrush wipes off the plaque, it's also delivering
a repair team of fluoride to help undo the damage caused by bacteria.
But brushing isn’t enough. In order to get the plaque and
gunk out from in between your teeth, you have to get out that floss.
Flossing may seem like a huge inconvenience, and it can even be
painful and cause some bleeding the first few times you do
it, but keep it up. In just a couple of days your gums start getting
healthier and your breath better. The plaque that gets stuck in
the un-brushable places is the major culprit in causing cavities
and tooth decay. So, unless you like getting drilled at the dentist,
stick to flossing and do it once a day.