Traces of black drink, a highly caffeinated drink indigenous to the southeastern United States, were found in beakers like these from Cahokia, an ancient city outside current-day St. Louis, Missouri. Image: Linda Alexander/Illinois State Archaeological Survey
In the 1600s, Europeans exploring the American southeast wrote of a purification ritual practiced by the native people, involving dancing, vomiting, and large amounts of what the travelers called black drink. Served from shell cups, the highly caffeinated tea was brewed from the shrub Ilex vomitoria, a species of holly. In a new study, researchers have found the first direct evidence of black drink — not in shells from Florida or Mississippi, but in ceramic beakers at the ancient city of Cahokia outside what’s now St. Louis, Missouri. The finding hints at a trade network that flourished centuries before Christopher Columbus landed in the New World, in which caffeinated drinks had Starbucks-like importance and possibly religious significance.
Cahokia sprang up almost overnight around 1050 C.E. and vanished almost as abruptly 300 years later. In the meantime, it was the largest and most sophisticated metropolis north of Mexico. According to archaeological evidence, the central part of the city covered about 14 square kilometers, making it larger than London was then. The 15,000 inhabitants built a wooden version of Stonehenge that charted eclipses; a stockade surrounding the city could be dismantled and rearranged according to an invader’s position. Excavation sites also yielded distinctively patterned, mug-shaped beakers.
A mysterious stone monolith jutting from the ground near Manchester, England probably served as a crude seasonal calendar for Stone Age farmers.
The moss-covered monolith has three faces and appears to be roughly 4,000 years old, based on dating of other relics sprinkled about the site, which is called Gardom’s Edge.
“The stone is a singular, very striking feature in contrast to the landscape,” said astronomer Daniel Brown of Nottingham Trent University in the UK. “It’s definitely not a Space Odyssey alien relic. It’s far more mundane and tricky.”
Rather than a precise sundial, Brown thinks people used the 7.2-foot-long monolith to “enhance the importance of the site for seasonal gatherings or ceremonies.” Brown presented his group’s preliminary findings about the Gardom’s Edge monolith March 27 at the National Astronomy Meeting in Manchester, UK.
LIDAR planes map in "strips" that are stitched together by computer. (Topoflight)
By Curt Hopkins, Ars Technica
“This is it — the paradigm shift,” archaeologist Chris Fisher told Ars. “Just like the advent of radiocarbon dating, LiDAR will have the same impact.”
LiDAR, or “light detection and ranging,” acts as a sort of radar with light, painting the target area with lasers and recording the time it takes to reflect back to the instruments.
An archaeologist specializing in Western Mexico, Fisher studies the way environments affect and change cultures. LiDAR has helped him repaint the picture of ancient Mexico, bringing the little-known Purepecha empire a lot more historical prominence.
The Vikings may have used the ancient equivalent of polarized glass to navigate in cloudy weather, suggest new reports on a long-hypothesized but never-tested “sunstone compass.”
Archaeologists know Vikings used sundials to steer between Norway and Greenland, but this method could only have worked in sunshine. How Vikings found their wayin clouds or fog remains a mystery.
In the 1960s, Danish archaeologist Thorkild Ramskou suggested that the Vikings used a “sunstone” to filter sunlight so that it all had the same polarization, or direction.Polarized sunglasses work in a similar way. The explanation was plausible, even elegant, but untested.
“This theory of polarimetric Viking navigation is accepted and frequently cited, in spite of a total lack of experimental evidence,” wrote researchers led by optics expert Gábor Horváth of Hungary’s Eötvös University in apaper published online Jan. 31 in Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B.“Since these claims were never tested, we decided to investigate.”
Early Celtic rulers of a community in what’s now southwestern Germany liked to party, staging elaborate feasts in a ceremonial center. The business side of their revelries was located in a nearby brewery capable of turning out large quantities of a beer with a dark, smoky, slightly sour taste, new evidence suggests.
Six specially constructed ditches previously excavated at Eberdingen-Hochdorf a 2,550-year-old Celtic settlement, were used to make high-quality barley malt, a key beer ingredient, says archaeobotanist Hans-Peter Stika of the University of Hohenheim in Stuttgart. Thousands of charred barley grains unearthed in the ditches about a decade ago came from a large malt-making enterprise, Stika reports in a paper published online Jan. 4 in Archaeological and Anthropological Sciences.
Stika bases that conclusion on a close resemblance of the ancient grains to barley malt that he made by reproducing several methods that Iron Age folk might have used. He also compared the ancient grains to malt produced in modern facilities. Upon confirming the presence of malt at the Celtic site, Stika reconstructed malt-making techniques there to determine how they must have affected beer taste.