Frog Or Toad? What Is The Difference?
Is it a frog or is it a toad? How can you tell and do you want it as a pet?
Frogs and toads are from the order Anura, which literally means "no tail," and the zoological class Amphibia. Recently, zoologists have given increased attention to this species, which has been neglected (compared to birds and mammals) in the past.
These animals are mainly nocturnal and secretive and are confined to remote areas making it difficult for observation. Herpetologists specializing in amphibians have been cataloguing the variety of species in recent years and have labeled more than 3500 types of anurans.
On initial inspection, all species of frogs and toads are similar in shape. They are squat in form and have long powerful hindlegs used for jumping and swimming. They usually have webbed toes and sometimes webbed fingers. They lack a tail except for one breed of tailed frog, which has what looks like a tail but is really a copulatory organ.
There is no hard and fast difference between frogs and toads. In the past, "frog" was used to describe those with smooth, wet skin, and "toad" was used for the dry, warty type. However, large numbers have been found to fit in neither category. Experts now use the word "Anuran" to describe both frogs and toads, or they just use the word "frog" for both types.
If you plan to keep anurans, the accommodations must be set up well in advance. It is best to keep anurans in different habitats since some species can't withstand the temperament or the body secretions of others. Some species will not only eat other species almost as large as themselves, but they will even eat their own brothers and sisters.
In order to have the proper accommodations for an anuran, the owner must know something about the breed's habits and native habitat so as to provide as near natural conditions as possible. Some anurans require aquariums (all water for aquatic species), some require terrariums (land dwelling species), and some require aqua-terrariums. This is essential information before the enthusiast considers the pet. Pet stores have supplies and will suggest the best for the type of anuran you have. Tropical and subtropical species can also be kept in greenhouses (depending on the temperature). Native species and those from similar climates can be kept in an outdoor pond or enclosure.
When housing them in a container, it is also important to consider lighting, temperature, ventilation, and humidity. Each of these can be artificially provided. Anurans are ectothermic, adjusting their body temperatures by moving among a range of external temperatures. Each species has its own preferred optimum temperature, need for light and ventilation, and proper humidity level. The container where the anuran lives must be cleaned regularly, and bedding must be replaced.
Most anurans have enormous appetites and will eat only live bait. They respond to the movement. The enthusiast must either catch a large supply of insects or purchase the live bait from a pet shop. Foods include mealworms, crickets, grasshoppers, locusts, flies, earthworms, and whiteworms. Some require non-live food as well. All anurans should be supplied with food and vitamin supplements.
Anurans are not an ideal pet for someone unwilling to regularly supply live bait or clean the habitat. However, they are an unusual pet and extremely interesting to observe and enjoy.