Historical Film Footage
Browse all Photographs
Members of the Amarillo family pose outside their home in Salonika.
Bride and groom Laura Uziel and Saul Amarillo (center) pose with their extended families during their wedding.
A Farewell to Arms, 1929 cover
Ernest Hemingway in ambulance corps uniform, ca. 1918
Ernest Hemingway in Paris, ca. 1928
Ernest Hemingway on safari, ca. 1933
Ernest Hemingway, ca. 1950
Portrait of Karl Marx
Streetcar in Belgrade bearing the sign: "Forbidden to Jews." Belgrade, Yugoslavia, 1941-1942
Gavra Mandil and his family narrowly escaped death in German-held Yugoslava by fleeing to Italian-occupied Albania.
During a roundup for deportation in eastern Poland in 1942, Gitta Rosenzweig—then three or four years old—was sent into hiding.
Parting from one's child was a difficult experience for parents who placed their offspring with foster families.
Portrait of three-year-old Estera Horn wrapped in a fur coat.
Portrait of Tsewie Herschel seated in a chair, taken while he was living in hiding.
Augusta Feldhorn stands next to a nun while in hiding.
Some Jewish children survived the Holocaust because they were protected by people and institutions of other faiths.
Jewish child Hans van den Broeke (born Hans Culp) in hiding in the Netherlands.
Denunciations of Jews to German authorities came from a variety of different sources, sometimes even from their "protectors." In
After the war, thousands of Jewish children ended up in orphanages all over Europe as a result of the Holocaust.
A young girl in a home for Jewish infants waiting for their families to claim them or be adopted.
Eva, Alfred, and Leane Munzer. Infant Alfred survived in hiding; his sisters were discovered and killed in Auschwitz.
Cover of an antisemitic German children's book titled "Trust No Fox in the Green Meadow and No Jew on his Oath." Germany, 1936.
Cover of a German antisemitic children's book, Der Giftpilz (The Poisonous Mushroom), published in Germany by Der Stuermer-Verla
Propaganda cartoon warning of a worldwide Jewish conspiracy.
Portrait of a preschool class in Copenhagen.
Interior view of prisoners' barracks at the Ohrdruf subcamp of the Buchenwald concentration camp.
A view of the double row of barbed-wire fences that surrounded the Ohrdruf camp, a subcamp in the Buchenwald camp system.
German civilians conscripted from nearby towns dig graves for some of the victims of the Ohrdruf camp.
A watchtower and barracks at the Ohrdruf subcamp of the Buchenwald concentration camp.
General Dwight D. Eisenhower (center), Supreme Allied Commander, views the corpses of inmates who perished at the Ohrdruf camp.
General Dwight D. Eisenhower (center, right) views the corpses of victims of the Ohrdruf camp.
A US army officer (far right) poses with survivors of the Ohrdruf camp, a subcamp in the Buchenwald camp system.
A survivor shows US Generals Eisenhower, Patton, and Bradley how inmates at Ohrdruf camp were tortured.
While on an inspection tour of the newly liberated Ohrdruf concentration camp, American soldiers view the charred remains of pri
A Dutch survivor of the Ohrdruf camp shows the camp's gallows, which the Germans used to execute prisoners, to US forces (includ
A view of one of the watchtowers and part of the perimeter fence at Orhdruf, part of the Buchenwald camp system, seen here after
American soldiers of the Fourth Armored Division survey the dead at Ohrdruf, a subcamp of the Buchenwald concentration camp.
During an official tour of the newly liberated Ohrdruf concentration camp, an Austrian Jewish survivor describes to General Dwig
General Dwight D. Eisenhower (third from left) views the charred remains of inmates of the Ohrdruf camp.
View of a watchtower and prisoner barracks at the Ohrdruf subcamp of the Buchenwald concentration camp, soon after US forces lib
General Dwight D. Eisenhower visits with paratroopers of the 101st Airborne Division just hours before their jump into German-oc
After the liberation of the Wöbbelin camp, US troops forced the townspeople of Ludwigslust to bury the bodies of prisoners kille
Survivors in a barracks at the Wöbbelin concentration camp.
An American soldier views the bodies of prisoners piled on top of one another in the doorway of a barracks in Wöbbelin.
Survivors in Wöbbelin board trucks for evacuation from the camp to an American field hospital for medical attention.
On May 2, 1945, the 8th Infantry Division and the 82nd Airborne Division encountered the Wöbbelin concentration camp.
The fenced perimeter and an entrance to the women's camp at Wöbbelin.
Survivors of the Wöbbelin camp wait for evacuation to an American field hospital where they will receive medical attention.
A survivor in Wöbbelin. The soldier in the foreground of the photograph wears the insignia of the 8th Infantry Division.
Survivors waiting for to be evacuated from the Wöbbelin concentration camp to receive medical attention at a field hospital.
Copyright © United States Holocaust Memorial Museum, Washington, DC
About the Museum