About ALF >
ALF 1979 - 1993
According to the U.S. Department of Justice, between 1979 and 1993 there were over 313
incidents of break-ins, vandalism, arson and thefts committed in the name of animal rights
in the U.S. Attacks on medical research continue today, resulting in millions of dollars
worth of damages and delays in the development of new treatments and cures. Following are
some of the most destructive incidents in recent years:
University of Minnesota
Vandals broke into research facilities at the University of
Minnesota, stole 116 research animals, ransacked a dozen research laboratories, and
destroyed computers, microscopes and one-of-a-kind medical equipment. In addition to the
millions of dollars worth of physical damage, the vandals also destroyed or delayed
important research projects. Research that had developed mice to mimic traits found in
Alzheimer's patients was delayed; possibly as long as 2 years, human cancer cells taken
from brain tumor patients, critical to developing a vaccine against cancer, were
destroyed, scientific information that was being compiled to be sent to the U.S. Food and
Drug Administration to begin clinical trials of a human cancer vaccine was lost, and
animals used in research for Parkinson's disease, cerebral palsy, Huntington's disease and
various forms of cancer were stolen. April 5, 1999
The Animal Liberation Front broke into the laboratory of a
Cornell University professor and released dozens of woodchucks into the wild. Woodchucks are ideal laboratory animals in which to study liver cancer and
hepatitis. The university breeds them for use in trials of anti-viral drugs and
vaccines. The ALF communique reported that in addition to releasing the animals, the
raiders engaged in economic sabotage by removing data cards on cages, destroying log books
and allowing vials of serum to spoil at room temperature. July 5,1998.
The Animal Liberation Front set fire to Cavel West, a horse
rendering plant in Redmond, Oregon causing $1 million in damages. Cavel West provided
horse tissue to the Pacific Coast Tissue Bank in Los Angeles which treats skull bone birth
defects in children. Medical procedures at Pacific Coast have been postponed indefinitely.
July 21, 1997.
More than 50 animal activists were arrested when they tried to
force their way into Yerkes Regional Primate Center during a protest. Police officers were
forced to spray mace and tear gas to gain control of the situation after the activists
rammed a police barricade through the back windshield of a police car. Activists were
charged with criminal interference with government property, trespassing and obstruction
of police. April 26, 1997.
Carolina Biological Supply Company
According to the Animal Liberation Front (ALF) Worldwide Diary
of Actions, a deliberately set fire in a chemical storage building at the CBSC's
Burlington campus forced the evacuation of 1000 workers and residents for fear of toxic
chemicals being released. CBSC is one of the USA's largest suppliers of animals for
dissection in schools, and for research in labs. May 10, 1994.
Utah State University
The ALF claimed responsibility for the arson at USU's farm
where coyotes are housed. Researchers were studying the behavior of the coyotes to
determine ways to protect them in the wild. The fire was started with an incendiary
device. Estimated damages $100,000. October 24, 1992.
Michigan State University
The ALF set a MSU researcher's office on fire and vandalized a
laboratory where mink are kept. Damage estimates to the office ran as high as $100,000,
not including the 32 years of medical research data that were lost. Damage to the research
facility was estimated at $20,000 to $25,000. February 28, 1992.
Oregon State University
An anonymous telephone call claimed the ALF set the fire that
destroyed a single-story building at the Malecky Mink Ranch in Yamhill, Oregon. Malecky
Ranch's owner claimed his business was destroyed. The Ranch works with the Oregon State's
research on mink breeding and nutrition. December 22, 1991.
Washington State University
The ALF claimed responsibility for the break-in and damage
caused at WSU's Bustad Hall. Overall, one mink, ten mice and seven coyotes were set free
from their cages. Substantial damage was caused to documents and interior facility
fixtures. August 13, 1991.