To: Supervisor@company.com
From: Employee@company.com
Subject: Halcyon Project Questions

Hello sir,

I have some points about the Halcyon Project that I need clarification on.

First, I noticed the start date for the project will be next month (September 1). I also noticed that I am not scheduled to work on that day, despite being assigned to the project as one of the leads. Do I need to request a change of shift to ensure I am at work and able to start the project? Is work-from-home allowed for this project, and if so, will I receive the same compensation rate on that work-from-home day or will I be paid a differential as well? If I am not allowed to work from home or change my shift, do you have someone in mind who will be taking the lead on that particular day, and if so, will that person relay the information to me to enable me to "catch up" with them and the rest of the team?

Secondly, I was looking at the details for the project and saw that one of the milestones on the list (the one listed for October 1) details that the project should be completed up to Phase 2, which is the packaging design phase. Did we already have a packager in mind, and have we contacted said packager to inform them of the start of this project? From previous experience working on similar projects, I've learned that packagers request at least a month of lead time to ensure they are prepared to meet the production demands of their clients, so if the intended date for the October 1 milestone is the completed packaging design, and no packagers have been contacted as of yet, it would be wise and prudent to contact them immediately to give them a heads up.

Finally, I see that Raymond is assigned to Group B for this project. Given that Raymond is a product design specialist and that scanning the names of Group B reveals there are 3 design specialists to Group A's one design specialist, it may make more sense to have Raymond transferred to Group A to balance the teams out.

Please advise me on how you would like me to proceed.

Thank you,
Employee
