Sure! 
Here are four ways that you can make eggs more fulfilling for breakfast without scrambling them! 

1. Add a “sunny side up” egg to a bowl of grits. 

When you have a heaping helping of grits in the mornings, put an over-easy egg on top. Then break the yolk and mix it around until bits of runny yolk and cooked egg whites are dispersed throughout the grits. The richness of the egg yolks combined with the buttery goodness of the grits will give your tastebuds an oomph of flavor and satisfying texture. 

Additionally, grits are rich in iron while eggs are dense with protein and good fats. It’s a nutritious, tasty breakfast all around! 

2. Deviled eggs are quick, yummy on-the-go foods. 

To make deviled eggs, you boil whole eggs, peel them, and cut them in half, then scoop out the semi-solid yolks. Mix the yolks with mayonnaise, salt, pepper, sweet pickle relish, and a hint of yellow mustard. Then spoon the yolk mixture back into the center of each egg half. Sprinkle with paprika and voila – a delicious, nutritious, more flavorful way to eat eggs!

3. Poach an egg and put it over an English muffin with hollandaise sauce. 

This method of eating eggs is called Eggs Benedict and it’s a savory way to enjoy a hearty breakfast. 

Using water and a tablespoon of vinegar, crack an egg into the liquid and allow it to boil for 3 minutes, then scoop the egg out of the water with a slotted spoon. You can then place it on top of a toasted half of an English muffin with a spoonful of hollandaise sauce. To increase the flavor, you could also add smoked salmon between the egg and muffin before you spoon on the sauce. 

4. Toast, avocado, and eggs – simple, easy, and delicious. 

Sometimes the best, most fulfilling breakfast is the simplest and easiest to prepare. Toast a couple of slices of bread to your liking and add sliced avocado on top. Then add an over-easy egg over your avocado. To spice things up, you could use a sprinkle of everything bagel seasoning on top of your eggs. Enjoy! 

Side note: Make sure you have a napkin handy since this play on eggs and toast can get a little messy when the egg yolks burst.
