How do you keep kids safe online?
A common cybersafety rule is that the computer stays in the living area. Photo: Phil Carrick
Is cybersafety a parent's responsibility?
Kids went back to school this week, which means they’ll probably be using the internet in the classroom and at home. I think parents need to set ground rules about using computers at home, along with other internet-enabled gadgets such as smartphones and tablets. It’s also worth asking about the school’s cybersafety policies.
As far as I’m concerned cybersafety is primarily a parent’s responsibility, just like teaching about stranger danger or how to cross the road safely. The fundamentals of cybersafety are no different to the real world; don’t wander off, don’t talk to strangers, don’t reveal too much about yourself and call a parent if you’re unsure of something.
Some parents might complain that it’s all too complicated, but it’s not if you take an interest in your children’s activities and take the time to learn the basics. Talk to them about computers and the internet. Ask them what they’re learning at school and what they’re doing at home. Take an interest, just as you should in their other activities.
A common cybersafety rule is that the computer stays in the living area, positioned in such a way that anyone who walks into the room can see what’s on the screen. If notebooks are permitted in the bedrooms for studying, perhaps it’s on the condition that they recharge on the kitchen bench at night. The same rule can apply for mobile phones, which can also help combat cyberbullying.
You can split cybersafety into two key areas. The first is protecting young children from accidentally stumbling across inappropriate content. This isn’t hard if you can set up a list of appropriate bookmarks and trust your kids not to wander. Installing an ad and pop-up blocker offers an extra layer of protection. If children can’t be trusted not to wander, even by accident, you might consider a whitelist plug-in for your browser, which lets you limit access to a specific list of sites.
The second area of cybersafety is hindering older children who are deliberately seeking inappropriate content. This area is much harder to deal with, as smart and determined kids will find a workaround to just about any security measure (remember, help is only a Google search away).
There’s a big market for desktop filtering software, but don’t walk away and trust it to do a parent’s job. In my experience it tends to cripple your computer, but your mileage may vary. If you do want to restrict internet access, look at services that are independent of your end device - particularly useful if your house contains a variety of internet-enabled gadgets.
It’s worth investigating the filtering options built into wireless routers. Some let you create blacklist and whitelists, or switch off the internet at specific times. You could even run a separate wireless network for the children, making it easier to control their access without affecting your own. Another filtering option is DNS-level services such as OpenDNS.
A determined kid might resort to proxy services and VPNs to bypass your restrictions, so you might find it necessary to just kill their internet access at night (which is easier if they’re using a separate wifi network). Of course if your child has access to a smartphone they might bypass your home network and connect directly to the mobile broadband network. Alternatively they might even look for nearby unlocked wifi networks, as you'll find one in most streets. It’s a game of cat and mouse, but at the end of the day cybersecurity relies more on education and trust than technological hurdles.