Damage from cell phones comes from two sources. The first damaging source occurs from the Near-Field Plume of radiation generated by the cell phone’s antenna. This plume of radiation extends out a distance of six or seven inches from the antenna in all directions. The near-field plume has been studied most extensively and contains the most intense energy. It is able to penetrate deep into biological tissue. This radiation is absorbed when the cell phone is held in close proximity to the body.
The second form of damage comes from a radio wave called the information-Carrying Radio Wave, or ICRW. The cell phone signal is made up of two parts. The first part of the signal vibrates at 600 to 2500 megahertz. This wave is moving much too fast for the body to recognize and, as far as we can tell, is not causing any harm. However, when a person speaks or sends a text message the information is “piggy-backed” or packeted onto the first radio wave. This creates a second wave or signal which is called the information-carrying radio wave, or ICRW. It vibrates at a frequency down in the hertz range. In this range the ICRW is recognized by the body and it is this wave that is causing damage. Data Sourced From Report “The Cell Phone Poisoning Of America” Written by Lynn Quiring, Rph CCN, NMD – Logical Health LLC
WHAT HAPPENS TO YOUR BODY WHEN IT IS EXPOSED TO EMF RADIATION?
Your cellular energy is now used for protection rather than metabolism. Cell membranes weaken keeping nutrients out and waste products in.
This causes waste to accumulate inside the cells creating a higher concentration of free radicals, leading to both disruption of DNA repair (micronuclei) and cellular dysfunction.
THE DANGER: Unwanted cell death occurs releasing the micronuclei from the disrupted DNA repair into the fluid between cells (interstitial fluid) where they are free to replicate and proliferate. This, says Dr. Carlo, is the most likely mechanism that contributes to cancer.
Damage occurs to proteins on the cell membrane resulting in disruption of intercellular communication. When cells can not communicate with each other, the result is impaired tissue, organ, and organism function. In the blood-brain barrier, for example, cells can not keep dangerous chemicals from reaching the brain tissue, which results in damage.
WHAT DO THE EXPERTS SAY?
Dr. George Carlo: The cellphone industry’s own research program concluded cellphone radiation was damaging to consumer’s health. Dr. George Carlo, was the cellphone industry’s Director of Research who was hired to run their $28 million dollar, 7 year research program to find out if cellphones were dangerous. Dr. George Carlo presents and reveals how the information-carrying radio waves from cell phones and other wireless technology are causing biological harm. Dr. Carlo says that when our cells are hit by EMF radiation, the cells regard the information-carrying radio waves as unrecognizable foreign toxins. This causes the cell membranes to weaken and shut down the transport channels between cells. As a result, nutrients donít get in and waste products donít get out. Among these waste products are free radicals that cause disruption of the cellular respiratory function. The cells become further energy-deficient, eventually triggering programmed cell death. The free radicals also interfere with DNA repair, a factor in the development of micronuclei and tumor formation.
Vanuatu, Port Vila,
Costa Rica, San Jose,
Mongolia, Ulan Bator,
City of Fairfield, Australia,
Mount Isa, Queensland,
Grand Rapids Michigan USA
Click on any of the pictures below
to learn more
Date posted: Saturday, August 25th, 2012 8:48 am | Under category: Uncategorized
RSS 2.0 | Comment | Trackback