The History of Beekeeping
The earliest artificial bee hives were made out of pottery, clay vases and bowls, and straw baskets resembled the trees and rock crevices that the bees were drawn to in nature. Early beekeepers learned how to capture swarms of bees in these containers. Once trapped the bees proceeded to turn the containers into a bee hive.
Evidence that many ancient civilizations, such as the Myans, raised bees and collected their honey.
Aficionados of Roman history know that bees and honey played a role in the Roman culture. The Goddess Mellona, was the protector of the bees.
The Greeks also had a great deal of respect for the honey bees. On Mt. Olympus, the home of Zeus, they sipped the nectar provided by the gods (experts believe that the nectar that the Greeks referred to was honey). Greek mythology claims that bees were responsible for building Apollo's second temple. When he wrote his book, The History of Animals, Aristotle wrote about how bees were able to locate flowers.
In the period of time between the 1500's and 1851 was an evolutionary time for beekeeping. The first critical change in beekeeping happened late in the 1500's. It was during this time that information was learned about the life cycle of the honey bee. Once beekeepers understood the way that bees lived they were better able to take care of the winged insects.
Adaptations to artificial hives started taking place. As beekeepers, agricultural enthusiast, and scientists, yearned to learn more about the life cycle of bees, beekeepers look for ways to design a hive that would allow them to easily see inside the hive.
An American, Lorenzo Langstroth, designed the first mobile bee hive.
By the time the 1850's got here the European honey bee was introduced to California. After California the honey bees were introduced to Oregon and Canada.
It is believed that there are over 210,000 beekeepers currently in the United States. Collectively these beekeepers keep and maintain over three million active bee hives.
A very good article, it is worth sharing! !thank you for your sharing!Louis Vuitton Handbags - By Louis Vuitton Handbags - Homepage
8th June 2012 - 6:59am
chaussures louis vuitton pour homme,basket louis vuitton femmemarque polo homme,polo ralph lauren solde,You see, if your website sale includes physical stock, you got to include that information.How can you tell if what they are selling is real? How do you know if the handbag is the right choice for you? Here are some of our thoughts: .The only kind of hat pin used to be the one that ladies put in their hat to keep it in place and to add some fashion.For example, if you offer professional services then LinkedIn may be your best bet as it already has a large number of professionals and is the place to go to for clients who want pros for certain jobs.As opposed to standard jeans that incorporate 12 / 13 stitches per inch, all True Religion Jeans have 5 / 7 stitches per inch.chaussures nike requin nike requin pas cher nike requin 2010 cheap jordans - By air max blanche et rose - Homepage
24th June 2012 - 6:03am
My ArticlesThe Biology Of Bees
Beekeeping And The Apple Orchards
The Science And Technology Of Beekeeping
The Life Cycle Of The Honey Bee
Packaging Your Honey
Selling Honey To A Local Market
California's Almond Orchards
Beekeeping In Different Areas Of The World
The History Of Beekeeping
History Of Beekeeping
Harvesting The Honey
The Things A Beekeeper Uses
Starting Your Own Beekeeping Business
Training To Be A Beekeeper
Transferring Your Bees To Their New Home
Family Owned Beekeeping Companies
How To Make A Honey Extractor
Processing Raw Honey
Curbside Honey Sales
How To Market Your Honey