The Triangle Trade, though morally reprehensible, was integral to the
growth of the economies of the United States and Great Britain. The
last leg of that trek, known as the Middle Passage, retains the infamy
of having been a horrific journey for Africans who had been free in
their countries but were being enslaved in the Americas. The Middle
Passage is synonymous with intense human suffering, degradation, and
Through the video series, FREEDOM: A History of US and
the companion Web site http://www.pbs.org/historyofus utilized in this
will explore the economic importance of the Triangle Trade and the
experience of enslaved Africans who were forced to endure the Middle
Passage. They will examine primary sources, such as written accounts
of slave ship experiences, to understand the experiences of enslaved
Africans, slaveholders, and abolitionists.
Students will be able to:
- Demonstrate an understanding of the economic factors surrounding
slavery in the United States, such as the Triangle Trade.
- Demonstrate an understanding of the experience of Africans who
were brought to this country as a part of the American slave trade.
- Use primary sources, such as narrative accounts and pictures, to
gather information about the Middle Passage and the slave trade in
the United States.
- Examine prevailing political, moral, and economic philosophy regarding
the slave trade.
National Standards for History
5A The student is able to identify issues and problems in the past and
analyze the interests, values, perspectives, and points of view of those
involved in the situation.
5B The student is able to marshal evidence of antecedent circumstances
and current factors contributing to contemporary problems and alternative
courses of action.
Era 2, Standard 1
The student understands how diverse immigrants affected the formation
of European colonies. (The student will be able to trace the arrival
of Africans in the European colonies in the 17th century and the raid
increase of slave importation in the 18th century.)
Era 2, Standard 3C
The student understands African life under slavery. (The student will
be able to: Analyze the forced relocation of Africans to the English
colonies in North America and the Caribbean; Explain how varieties of
slavery in African societies differed from the chattel racial slavery
that developed in the English colonies; Assess the contribution of enslaved
and free Africans to economic development in different regions of the
National Standards for Social Studies
5 Social studies programs should include experiences that provide for
the study of interactions among individuals, groups, and institutions.
6 Social studies programs should include experiences that provide for
the study of how
people create and change structures of power, authority,
New York State Social Studies Standards
1 Students will use a variety of intellectual skills to demonstrate their
understanding of major ideas, eras, themes, developments, and turning
points in the history of the United States and New York. (NYS SS 1)
5 Students will use a variety of intellectual skills to demonstrate their
understanding of the necessity for establishing governments; the governmental
system of the United States and other nations; the United States Constitution;
the basic civic values of American constitutional democracy; and the
roles, rights, and responsibilities of citizenship, including avenues
of participation. (NYS SS 5)
FREEDOM: A History of US #5 "A Fatal Contradiction"
This video segment provides the viewer with an abundance of information
about the early history of slavery in the United States. It examines
the political and economic aspects of slavery up to the election
of President Lincoln.
FREEDOM: A History of US
This is the companion Web site to the FREEDOM: A History of US video
series. The sixteen Webisodes reflect the topics in each segment of
the video series with additional historical information, sound clips,
pop-up biographies, images, timelines, glossary, and many primary source
- Chalkboard, whiteboard, or poster paper
- Appropriate writing utensil for your writing surface
- Tape (necessary if you are using poster paper so that you can
display the students' work)