FALLS CHURCH, Va. — Vaccines are one of the most important medical breakthroughs in history and protect children from diseases that, in the past and around the world today, caused serious illness and often death.
Along with protecting a child from preventable diseases, vaccines also protect communities.
Infant immunizations give children a healthy start in life and while vaccine-preventable disease rates are very low in the United States, the diseases still exist in other parts of the world.
Continued vaccination is the best way to protect everyone in the community from potential outbreaks.
Vaccine-preventable diseases include Hepatitis A and B, diphtheria, tetanus, pertussis (whooping cough), bacterial meningitis, pneumonia, polio, rotavirus, influenza, measles, mumps, rubella and varicella (chicken pox).
Tricare covers the age-appropriate vaccines recommended by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and are administered by a primary care provider.
The current vaccine schedule recommends that infants be protected against 14 diseases before the age of 2.
The CDC works with the American Academy of Pediatrics to create the vaccine schedule, and recommends vaccines at the ages when children’s bodies will best accept the vaccine and give them the most protection.
Vaccines are an integral part of Tricare’s well-child benefit that covers all routine care for children, up to age 6.
Well-child check-ups include comprehensive health promotion and disease prevention exams, and developmental and behavioral appraisals.
Tricare’s well-child care also covers eye and vision screenings at birth and 6 months, and two eye exams between 3 and 6 years old.
Vaccines are thoroughly tested by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration before they are recommended for use.
Any out-of-the-ordinary responses to vaccines are reported and monitored by doctors and public health officials.
Parents are encouraged to discuss any concerns about vaccines with their pediatrician.
Immunizations required for school attendance•DTaP/DTP/Td (diphtheria/tetanus/pertussis)•Polio•MMR (measles, mumps, rubella)•Hepatitis B•Hib (Haemophilus influenzae type b)•Varicella (chicken pox)•Tuberculosis test
Recommended vaccinations•H1N1 / Seasonal flu (updated yearly)