- Plains Indians
For many tribes of Plains Indians whose bison-hunting culture flourished during the 18th and 19th centuries, the sun
dance was the major communal religious ceremony . . . the rite celebrates renewal - the spiritual rebirth of
participants and their relatives as well as the regeneration of the living earth with all its components . . . The ritual,
involving sacrifice and supplication to insure harmony between all living beings, continues to be practiced by many
- The American Dream
The American Dream
It is the intent of this paper to prove that the "American Dream" can best be explained as a "ciity upon a hill." "Ciity upon a hill" meaning being above and superior over those below. The Civil War, the imperialistic race of the 19th century, the Korean War, the KKK, and the Gulf War are all examples of the "American Dream" of superiority playing a part in American History. Each American has a different idea of this superiority, but nonetheless strive to achieve it, whatever...
- Declaration Of Independence
Declaration Of Independence
The Declaration of Independence was written to show a new theory of government, reasons why they were separating from England, and a formal declaration of war. It gave the 13 colonies freedom from England's laws. The man responsible for writing the Declaration was Thomas Jefferson. He wrote the Declaration between June 11, 1776 and June 28, 1776. Benjamin Franklin and John Adams looked at what Jefferson had written and made some changes to the Declaration. On July 4,...
- Japanese Colonialism In Korea
Japanese Colonialism in Korea
North and South Korea are nations that while filled with
contempt for Japan have used the foundations that Japan laid during
the colonial period to further industrialization. Japan's colonization
of Korea is critical in underezding what enabled Korea to
industrialize in the period since 1961.
Japan's program of colonial industrialization is unique in
the world. Japan was the only colonizer to locate various heavy
- Slavery - Slavery And Human Decency
Slavery - Slavery and Human Decency
Discrimination is very old in its origins. From the earliest periods of human existence, groups developed prejudices toward others and then discriminated against those whom they regarded as different or inferior. Many attempts were taken to maintain or increase power, prestige, or even wealth; groups found it easy to invent or accept the idea that others were somehow inferior to them and thus not deserving of equal treatment. Among the many differences that ...
- Confucianism And Japanese Growth
Confucianism and Japanese Growth
Many factors helped aid in the dynamic growth that occurred
in Japan and the four little dragons during the post-World War 2
period. Some of these factors were situational factors unique to the
time but some of the factors were cultural. The legacy of Confucianism
in Japan and the four little dragons helped to further the goals of
industrialization that these nations had. The traditions of
Confucianism provided for Japa...
- Egyptian Pyramids
When most people mention Ancient Egypt the first thing that
comes to mind is the Pyramids. To construct such monuments required a
mastery of art, architecture and social organization that few cultures
would ever rival. The pyramids are said to have built Egypt by being
the force that knit together the kingdom's economy. Their creations
were so subeztial, that the sight of these vast pyramids would take
your breath away. Today, the ...
History 101 - Fast Forward
SUBMITTED: September 30, 1996
Charlemagne, or Charles the Great, King of the Franks (742-814), was a strong
leader who unified Western Europe through military power and the blessing of the
Church. His belief in the need for education among the Frankish people was to
bring about religious, political, and educational reforms that would change the
history of Europe.
Charlemagne was born in 742 at Aa...
- Freedom In The United States
Freedom in the United States
No other democratic society in the world permits personal freedoms to the degree of the United States of America. Within the last sixty years, American courts, especially the Supreme Court, have developed a set of legal doctrines that thoroughly protect all forms of the freedom of expression. When it comes to evaluating the degree to which we take advantage of the opportunity to express our opinions, some members of society may be guilty of violating the bounds of t...
- ADOLF HITLER
Adolf Hitler changed the course of history. His childhood strongly shaped his
personality. There were many deciding factors that determined the kind of person Hitler
Adolf's father was Alois, an illegitimate child, his mother was Marie
Schickulgruber. Alois took his fathers name Hitler before Adolf was born. Alois was
already a successful border guard when he was 18, and later became an Austrian customs
official. He retired in 1849 after 40 y...
- Frederick Douglass
On an unknown date in 1817, on a slave plantation in Tuckahoe Maryland,
Frederick August Washington Bailey was born. Frederick was raised in a house on
the plantation with all the other slave children. At the age of seven, like
many other slaves, Frederick was put to work in the fields. As a young child he
would wonder why he was a slave, and why everyone can't be equal. His thoughts
frequently came back to him, leaving him with a great hatred for slavery. In
- The 1960ís
The 1960ís was a decade that forever changed the culture and society of America. The 1960ís were widely known as the decade of peace
and love, not because the world had become a utopia but, in my opinion,
because of the heavy use of t...
- Native Son: Reviews
Native Son: Reviews
Native Son, by Richard Wright, was hailed by reviewers as an instant
classic upon its release in 1940. The novel was an instant bestseller, having
been included in the book-of-the-month-club. Due to its proto revolutionary
themes it was the subject of many reviews. Two such reviewers are Clifton
Fadiman and Malcolm Cowley.
Clifton Fadiman, writer for The New Yorker declared that Native Son was
the most powerful American novel since the Grapes of Wrath. He is posit...
- Seneca Indians: Allies And Enemies
Seneca Indians: Allies and Enemies
Seneca are among the most respected and feared. The Seneca are
culturally similar to their Cayuga, Onondaga, Oneida, an Mohawk confederates.
The five tribes were known as the Five Nations or the League of Five Nations.
Sometime between 1715 and 1722 the Tuscaroras from North Carolina joined the
confederacy and changed the name to the Six Nations.
In their relations with white settlers the Seneca played the role of an
independent power and were this way...
- American Labor Movement: Development Of Unions
American Labor Movement: Development of Unions
The American Labor Movement of the nineteenth century developed as a result of the city-wide organizations that unhappy workers were establishing. These men and women were determined to receive the rights and privileges they deserved as citizens of a free country. They refused to be treated like slaves, and work under unbearable conditions any longer. Workers joined together and realized that a group is much more powerful than an individual when pr...