Facts about Strontium
Facts about Strontium - Element included on the Periodic Table
Facts about the Definition of the Element Strontium
The Element Strontium is defined as...
A soft, silvery, easily oxidized metallic element that ignites spontaneously in air when finely divided. Strontium is used in pyrotechnic compounds and various alloys.
Interesting Facts about the Origin and Meaning of the element name Strontium
What are the origins of the word Strontium ?
This was named after the Scottish town of Strontian.
Facts about the Classification of the Element Strontium
Strontium is classified as an "Alkaline Earth Metals" which are located in Group 2 elements of the Periodic Table. An Element classified as an Alkaline Earth Metals are found in the Earth’s crust, but not in the elemental form as they are so reactive. Instead, they are widely distributed in rock structures.
Brief Facts about the Discovery and History of the Element Strontium
The mineral strontianite was recognised by Adair Crawford in 1790 and it was named after the Scottish town of Strontian. Klaproth and Hope discovered strontium itself in 1798 and the metallic strontium was first isolated by Sir Humphrey Davy in 1808 by the use of electrolysis. It does not occur naturally, is very soft and scratches easily.
Occurrence of the element Strontium in the Atmosphere
Obtained from celestite and strontianite
Found in 0.034% of all igneous rock in the form of the sulphate mineral celestite and the carbonate strontianite
Common Uses of Strontium
Producing ferrite magnets
Strontium ranelate, aluminate, chromate, nitrate, chloride, aluminate
The Properties of the Element Strontium
Name of Element : Strontium
Symbol of Element : Sr
Atomic Number of Strontium : 38
Atomic Mass: 87.62 amu
Melting Point: 769.0 °C - 1042.15 °K
Boiling Point: 1384.0 °C - 1657.15 °K
Number of Protons/Electrons in Strontium : 38
Number of Neutrons in Strontium : 50
Crystal Structure: Cubic
Density @ 293 K: 2.54 g/cm3
Color of Strontium : silvery
The element Strontium and the Periodic Table
Find out more facts about Strontium on the Periodic Table which arranges every chemical element according to its atomic number, as based on the periodic law, so that chemical elements with similar properties are in the same column. Our Periodic Table is simple to use - just click on the symbol for Strontium for additional facts and info and for an instant comparison of the Atomic Weight, Melting Point, Boiling Point and Mass - G/cc of Strontium with any other element. An invaluable source for more interesting facts and information about the Strontium element and as a Chemistry reference guide.
Facts and Info about the element Argon - IUPAC and the Modern Standardised Periodic Table
The Standardised Periodic Table in use today was agreed by the International Union of Pure Applied Chemistry, IUPAC, in 1985 which includes the Strontium element. The famous Russian Scientist, Dimitri Mendeleev, perceived the correct classification method of "the periodic table" for the 65 elements which were known in his time. The mineral strontianite was recognised by Adair Crawford in 1790. The Standardised Periodic Table now recognises more periods and elements than Dimitri Mendeleev knew in his day but still all fitting into his concept of the "Periodic Table" in which Strontium is just one element that can be found.
Facts and Info about the Element Strontium
Information Facts about the Strontium Element