Anxiety Treatment and Research Program
What is Obsessive Compulsive Disorder?
Obsessive Compulsive Disorder (OCD) is a relatively common anxiety disorder characterized by upsetting and unwanted intrusive thoughts and repetitive behaviors the person feels compelled to perform. Symptoms of OCD may include unwanted doubts; anxiety-provoking thoughts about harm, contamination, sex, health, or religious themes; and rituals that feel necessary, such as excessive washing, cleaning, checking, praying, or counting. Oftentimes, the symptoms also include special, mental acts or thoughts designed to counteract or un-do upsetting, unwanted, or fearful thoughts. To learn more, please read our Obsessive Compulsive Disorder FAQ.
What is Social Anxiety Disorder?
Social Anxiety Disorder is a common anxiety disorder characterized by fear and avoidance of various social situations. In many respects, Social Anxiety Disorder resembles an extreme form of shyness. Unlike shyness, however, Social Anxiety Disorder interferes significantly with an individual's functioning. People with Social Anxiety Disorder often become anxious in and avoid social situations such as speaking in public, meeting new people, or dating. To learn more, please read our Social Anxiety Disorder FAQ.
Project SOS: FREE Online Treatment Program for Obsessive Compulsive Disorder
Drexel University offers a FREE online treatment program (using Skype) for adults (ages 18-65) suffering from obsessive compulsive disorder. Please visit the Online Treatment for OCD section of our website for more information. All results are confidential.
Social Anxiety In-Person Treatment Program
Drexel University offers a FREE in-person treatment program for adults (ages 18-65) suffering from social anxiety disorder. If you are an adult who has these problems and you live in the greater Philadelphia area, please visit the Social Anxiety In-Person Treatment section of our website for more information.
Internet Self Help Treatment Program for Social Anxiety
Drexel University is conducting a research study that offers an Internet-based self-help treatment program for adults (ages 18-65) suffering from social anxiety disorder. Please visit the Internet Self-Help Program for Social Anxiety section of our website for more information.
Disclaimer: We are not able to answer specific treatment questions for individuals or their families. Please talk to a mental health professional in your area for assistance. The material presented on this site is provided for information purposes only and not for medical purposes. We cannot attest to the quality of any of the services listed by those other than Drexel University. In the event of an emergency, please go to your nearest hospital emergency room or call 911.