Genetics and psychiatry: a proposal for the application of the precautionary principle.
Summary of "Genetics and psychiatry: a proposal for the application of the precautionary principle."
The paper suggests an application of the precautionary principle to the use of genetics in psychiatry focusing on scientific uncertainty. Different levels of uncertainty are taken into consideration-from the acknowledgement that the genetic paradigm is only one of the possible ways to explain psychiatric disorders, via the difficulties related to the diagnostic path and genetic methods, to the value of the results of studies carried out in this field. Considering those uncertainties, some measures for the use of genetics in psychiatry are suggested. Some of those measures are related to the conceptual limits of the genetic paradigm; others are related to present knowledge and should be re-evaluated.
Bioethics Unit, IRCCS Centro San Giovanni di Dio Fatebenefratelli, Brescia, Italy, email@example.com.
This article was published in the following journal.
Name: Medicine, health care, and philosophy
- PubMed Source: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22460929
- DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11019-012-9408-6
Medical and Biotech [MESH] Definitions
A subspecialty of psychiatry concerned with the mental health of the aged.
Branch of psychiatry concerned with problems related to the prevention, diagnosis, etiology, and treatment of mental or emotional disorders of Armed Forces personnel.
Psychiatry in its legal aspects. This includes criminology, penology, commitment of mentally ill, the psychiatrist's role in compensation cases, the problems of releasing information to the court, and of expert testimony.
Branch of psychiatry concerned with the provision and delivery of a coordinated program of mental health care to a specified population. The foci included in this concept are: all social, psychological and physical factors related to etiology, prevention, and maintaining positive mental health in the community.
Methods for controlling genetic SEX of offspring. It may include SEX DETERMINATION (GENETICS) and other means.
The emergence of synthetic biology holds the potential of a major breakthrough in the life sciences by transforming biology into a predictive science. The dual-use characteristics of similar breakthro...
Psychopaths show a profound lack of morality and behavioral controls in the presence of intact general intellectual functioning. Two hallmarks of psychopathy are the persistent violation of social con...
Renal hypoxia plays an important role in the development of contrast-induced nephropathy. The purpose of the PRINCIPLE study is to investigate the effect of pretreatment with intravenous n...
This study examines the best way to teach genetics to family medicine residents. First year family medicine residents at the University of Toronto will be taught basic clinical genetics as...
Online consulatations through videoconference in the field of psychiatry given to general practitioners will reduce costs of medical treatment and improve service.
This is the second phase (Phase B) of the main project "Bank for Thoughts", which has the following aims: 1. Improvement of software for secured (encrypted and access-controlled) asynch...
This study will describe the experience of patients with visible physical abnormalities in the genetics clinic when they are involved in teaching others about their condition. Information...