Skip to main content
More Search Options
A member of our team will call you back within one business day.
Your child has a heart problem that includes a hypoplastic ventricle. This means the ventricle is either too small or absent. The most common treatment for this problem is heart surgery. This is often done in three stages. This sheet explains what is done during the second stage (stage II). The surgery cannot repair your child’s heart problem. But it can help relieve your child’s symptoms. It may also increase your child’s chances of living a more normal life. The doctor can answer your questions and tell you more as needed.
Stage I. Make the single working ventricle the main pumping chamber of the heart. This will let it send oxygen-rich blood to the body.
Stage II. Decrease the workload of the single ventricle.
Stage III. Separate the circulation of blood in the heart. This is so oxygen-poor blood and oxygen-rich blood don’t mix.
Arrhythmia (abnormal heart rhythm)
Problems in the lungs
Problems with the nervous system
Abnormal buildup of fluid around the heart or lungs
The second stage of the surgery is called the BDG procedure. It is most often done when a child is 3-6 months old. A hospital stay of 5-7 days may be needed. The procedure provides low-pressure blood flow to the lungs. And it helps reduce the workload of the single ventricle. During the surgery, the doctor:
Separates the superior vena cava (SVC) from the heart. The SVC is the large blood vessel that brings oxygen-poor blood from the upper body to the right atrium. This blood vessel is cut from the right atrium. The end closest to the right atrium is closed off. The other end is sewn to the pulmonary artery. This allows oxygen-poor blood from the upper body to flow to the lungs. There, it receives oxygen.
Removes any additional source of blood flow to the pulmonary artery. If a shunt, band, or other device was placed during a previous procedure to direct blood to the lungs, it is removed at this time.
Call the doctor right away if your child has any of the following:
Increased redness, draining, swelling, or bleeding at the incision site
Fever 100.4°F or higher
Shortness of breath
Cough that won’t go away
Nausea or vomiting