The Daily Five: Fostering Literacy Independence in Third and Fourth Grade (Virtual Tour)
The Daily Five is described and how each component is used in the classroom. Selecting Good Fit books are discussed. Students use word collectors to record new words and use them in their writing. This is a great resource to help enhance and to expand literacy instruction in the classroom. (2:03)
01.08.2012 – Langsam gesprochene Nachrichten
Trainiere dein Hörverstehen mit den Nachrichten der Deutschen Welle von Freitag – als Text und als verständlich gesprochene Audio-Datei. *** Die Menschenrechtsorganisation Amnesty International hat dem syrischen Regime von Präsident Baschar al-Assad die Tötung zahlreicher friedlicher Demonstranten und Passanten in der Wirtschaftsmetropole Aleppo vorgeworfen. Etliche junge Männer, aber auch Kinder sowie ältere Personen seien von Regierungstruppen oder verbündeten Milizen erschossen wo
Writing workshops with Microsoft Word
Microsoft Word's reviewing functions enhance communication as students revise drafts of their writing projects.
Seminar 6 Army War College Class of 2012 distance education program
Description not set
Seminar 10 Army War College Class of 2012 distance education program
Description not set
Young Students Explore the Life of Scholarship
A summer camp at Duke for middle and high school students aims to instill an interest in scholarly research. Learn more at http://www.thenetwork.ssri.duke.edu.
Reuters Breakingviews: Europe's situation not all bad
Aug. 3 - European markets have reason to be downcast, but pessimism should not be all-pervasive; things can still be done, says Reuters Breakingviews Assistant Editor, Peter Thal Larsen.
PRINTABLE GRAPH & GRID PAPER OF ALL SIZES It can be hard to find simple graph or grid paper when you need it in the classroom or if you are working at home. So I have made up a variety of common sized graph paper for you to download and use for FREE. These can be used for a variety of maths, science or desi
It can be hard to find simple graph or grid paper when you need it in the classroom or if you are working at home. So I have made up a variety of common sized graph paper for you to download and use for FREE.
These can be used for a variety of maths, science or desi
Upper Intermediate S5 #16 - What Does Neck Positioning have to do with your Fortunes in Japan?
Learn Japanese with JapanesePod101.com! You have been waiting on the edge of your seat to find out whether you have passed the entrance exam to attend a Japanese graduate school. If you don’t get in, you’re not sure what you’ll do. Maybe you’ll take the year off and travel around Japan or the world. Or [...]
Temporal Dynamics of European Bat Lyssavirus Type 1 and Survival of Myotis myotis Bats in Natural Co
Many emerging RNA viruses of public health concern have recently been detected in bats. However, the dynamics of these viruses in natural bat colonies is presently unknown. Consequently, prediction of the spread of these viruses and the establishment of appropriate control measures are hindered by a lack of information. To this aim, we collected epidemiological, virological and ecological data during a twelve-year longitudinal study in two colonies of insectivorous bats (Myotis myotis) located i
Basic Triangle Proofs Module, Example 2 - Khan Academy
Sal offers another example of a proof using congruent triangles. (02:53)
The BRCA1/2 pathway prevents hematologic cancers in addition to breast and ovarian cancers
Background The present study was designed to test the hypothesis that inactivation of virtually any component within the pathway containing the BRCA1 and BRCA2 proteins would increase the risks for lymphomas and leukemias. In people who do not have BRCA1 or BRCA2 gene mutations, the encoded proteins prevent breast/ovarian cancer. However BRCA1 and BRCA2 proteins have multiple functions including participating in a pathway that mediates repair of DNA double strand breaks by error-free methods. In
Jamaica's Coronation Market
Coronation Market in downtown Kingston is also known as "the stomach of Jamaica." The cacophony of the market is the first thing that assails the visitor in this bustling warren of produce vendors. Vendors, called "higglers" in Jamaica, arrive on weekends and swell the market beyond capacity, selling their calabaza, okra, and a wide range of root vegetables. For recipes, visit http://www.ciaprochef.com/WCA7.
Synthesis of Nanomaterials for PV and PEC Water Splitting II
By: icamp2012school Nathan Neale, National Renewable Energy Laboratory
Waldron's Rule of Law [The Rule of Law and the Measure of Property • By Jeremy Waldron • Cambridge University Press, 2012 • xiv + 118 pages] Studying Languages in Higher Education - booklets and a presentation to help guide students, parents Meet Mrs. Steinacker
Studying Languages in Higher Education - booklets and a presentation to help guide students, parents and teachers.
[The Rule of Law and the Measure of Property • By Jeremy Waldron • Cambridge University Press, 2012 • xiv + 118 pages]
Studying Languages in Higher Education - booklets and a presentation to help guide students, parents
Meet Mrs. Steinacker