When the English departed Arrohateck town the second time, Navirans, Ashuaquid's young brother-in-law, accompanied them as a guide. Newport's party reached Jamestown on May 27 and found that more than 200 members of the Paspahegh tribe had attacked it the previous day, killing one man and wounding twelve others, one of them fatally. During the next few days the Indians made several small assaults on the colonists. Told of this attack by Navirans, Ashuaquid sent messengers to inform the Englishmen who their enemies were and to advise them to cut down the high weeds around the fort so that the attackers could be seen more easily. In the early months of the English colonizing effort Ashuaquid thus proved a firm, though perhaps not very important, friend.
By the autumn of 1609, perhaps due to attempts to establish a fort upriver, the Arrohatecks had become less friendly toward the English and were no longer willing to trade with them. Crowded by new English settlements and perhaps already weakened by exposure to European diseases, the Arrohateck population began to dwindle. The tribe is last mentioned in William Strachey's record of his visit to Virginia in 1610. By September 1611, when Sir Thomas Dale undertook to found the town of Henricus near the falls of the James, the Arrohateck town site had been deserted. The surviving Arrohatecks were probably assimilated into another tribe, perhaps that was headed by Parahunt closer to the fall line. The personal fate of Ashuaquid is unknown. He may have fallen victim to a disease caught from, or died in a skirmish with, the Englishmen he had once welcomed to his town.
May 21, 1607 - Christopher Newport sets out from Jamestown with a small company of men to explore the upper reaches of the James River.
May 23, 1607 - Christopher Newport and a small company of men exploring the upper reaches of the James River arrive at the the Arrohateck village, a town on the north bank of the James River about thirteen miles below the fall line. The tribe's chief Ashuaquid gives them lavish entertainment, complete with ceremonious hospitality.
May 25, 1607 - Christopher Newport and a small company of men exploring the upper reaches of the James River return to Ashuaquid's Arrohateck village, and another feast takes place.
1609 - William Strachey records the name of the Arrohateck tribe in his record of his visit to Virginia. This is the last mention of the tribe.
September 1611 - By this date, the village once occupied by Ashuaquid and the Arrohateck tribe is deserted.
Cite This Entry
- APA Citation:
Rountree, H. C., & the Dictionary of Virginia Biography Ashuaquid (fl. 1607). (2013, April 15). In Encyclopedia Virginia. Retrieved from http://www.EncyclopediaVirginia.org/Ashuaquid_fl_1607.
- MLA Citation:
Rountree, Helen C. and the Dictionary of Virginia Biography. "Ashuaquid (fl. 1607)." Encyclopedia Virginia. Virginia Foundation for the Humanities, 15 Apr. 2013. Web. READ_DATE.
First published: June 8, 2010 | Last modified: April 15, 2013
Contributed by Helen C. Rountree and the Dictionary of Virginia Biography. Helen C. Rountree is professor emerita of anthropology at Old Dominion University, and author of Pocahontas's People: The Powhatan Indians of Virginia Through Four Centuries (1990) and Pocahontas, Powhatan, Opechancanough: Three Indian Lives Changed by Jamestown (2005).