Least concern to critically endangered
There are 14 different species
A tree climbing kangaroo?
Tail length: 40-87cm
Weight: up to 14.5kg
Montane tropical foresst
Indonesia, Papua New Guinea, Australia
Population & Distribution
Tree kangaroos have suffered from loss of habitat, and many species have suffered severe reductions in their range. The Wondiwoi tree kangaroo is critically endangered (possibly extinct) with as few as 50 individuals remaining. Similarly, the critically endangered dingiso has suffered a population decline in excess of 80% over the last 30 years.
Living in the trees, the tree kangaroo eats mostly leaves and fruit, although they will also collect fruit that has fallen to the ground. The animals will also eat other items such as grains, flowers, sap, eggs, young birds, and even bark.
What are the main threats?
Tree kangaroos have been hunted for food by indigenous communities across their range. For a number of species, this factor alone has contributed to a sharp decline in population numbers.
Habitat loss and degradation means that many species now inhabit a restricted range. Habitat has been removed for logging and timber production, or converted to coffee, rice or wheat production. This loss of habitat can also expose tree kangaroos to predation by domestic dogs.
What is WWF doing?
- Reducing deforestation and loss of habitat caused by illegal logging, including support for FSC certified wood and wood products.
- Raising awareness of habitat loss and the effects of hunting
- Promoting and managing protected areas
- Reducing illegal hunting through programmes such as TRAFFIC
WWF works closely with PNG's Department of Environment and Conservation (DEC) on its national planning framework for biodiversity strategy and action planning, ensuring the necessary resources are in place to implement sustainable use and managed protection programmes. Specific projects include:
How you can help
- Support WWF's efforts to preserve tree kangaroo habitat - only buy wood or wood products that come from properly managed and sustainable forests which have been certified by the Forest Stewardship Council (FSC).
- Spread the word! Click on the button to share this information with others via email or your favourite social networking service.