Obsessive Compulsive Disorder (OCD) is an apprehensive disorder wherein you will experience having thoughts that easily give you distress. This situation is often called as an obsession. However, the same actions happen habitually, so compulsions begin. People get obsessions when they have fears or phobias, while they get compulsions when they keep on doing things repeatedly.
Fact 1: For almost a century, it has been proven that almost two percent of the entire population in the whole world often acquire Obsessive Compulsive Disorders (OCDs).
Fact 2: In the field of medicine, the causes of Obsessive Compulsive Disorder (OCD) have not yet been discovered. However, most doctors believe that it might be caused by biological and environmental factors.
Fact 3: Obsessive Compulsive Disorder (OCD) often begins at the age of 19 but becomes more pronounced by the age of 30. However, the symptoms often start to be seen during the adolescent stage when they often have obsessions and compulsions.
Fact 4: One of the disorders that is not treated or cured with medical procedures is Obsessive Compulsive Disorder (OCD). It is not detected through medical examinations rather through observations made by psychiatrists or psychologists.
Fact 5: Based current research, 60% of OCD sufferers get better with medication as it lessens the symptoms.
Fact 6: OCD is sub-categorized into four groups namely, OCD with dirt and cleanliness, OCD with hoarding, OCD with sex and religion, OCD with order and being organized.
Fact 7: Obsessive Compulsive Disorder (OCD) is twice as common with men than with women.
Fact 8: OCD is different than OCPD (Obsessive Compulsive Personality Disorder). People having OCD does not mean that they have OCPD and vice versa. OCPD people are not that distressed as compared with OCD sufferers.
Fact 9: For OCD sufferers, it is better to have therapies rather than taking medicines to treat the disorder. Therapies are more likely to relieve the symptoms.
Fact 10: The severe effects of Obsessive Compulsive Disorder (OCD) is suicide. Therefore, one percent of the population with OCD commits suicide.