A thyroid uptake and scan is a test that uses a radioactive substance and a scanning tool to evaluate the thyroid gland. The scanner picks up where and how much the radioactive substance was taken up by the thyroid. This helps determine the structure, location, size, and activity of the gland.
The scan may be ordered to:
Thyroid scans are associated with very few risks. Tell your doctor if you:
The procedure is done by a trained technician in the radiology department of a hospital. You will be given a radioactive substance by mouth. Once the substance has had time to collect in the thyroid, the scan begins. You will lie on your back with your head tilted back. You will be asked to lie very still at certain times. A scanner will take pictures of your thyroid from different angles. The camera is not an x-ray machine. It does not expose you to more radiation. You may need to return to the radiology department after 24 hours for additional pictures.
You will be able to leave after the test is done.
Because of the very low dose of radioactive substance used, the majority of the radioactive substance will leave your body within a day or two. You are not at risk for exposing other people to radiation. You can interact normally with them.
The scan itself takes about half an hour. The radioactive substance needs time to be absorbed before the scan. You may need to wait 4-6 hours if you take the substance by mouth.
There is no pain associated with a thyroid scan. There may be times when you find it uncomfortable to lie still with your head tilted backward.
The pictures of the scan take about an hour to develop. A radiologist will examine them. Based on the results of the test, further studies or treatment will be recommended.
Call your doctor if you experience any unusual pain or discomfort.
In case of an emergency, call for medical help right away.
American Thyroid Association, Inc.
Thyroid Foundation of America, Inc.
Public Health Agency of Canada
The Thyroid Foundation of Canada
Beers, MH, Fletcher AJ, Jones TV, et al. The Merck Manual of Medical Information: Second Home Edition . Whitehouse Station, NJ: Merck Research Laboratories; 2003.
Diagnostic tests: thyroid scan. Harvard Medical School Family Health Guide website. Available at: http://www.health.harvard.edu/fhg/diagnostics . Accessed August 2005.
Thyroid-Cancer.net: what is a thyroid scan? Johns Hopkins Thyroid Tumor Center website. Available at: http://www.thyroid-cancer.net/topics/what+is+a+thyroid+scan . Accessed August 24, 2005.
Thyroid nodule. EBSCO DynaMed website. Available at: http://www.ebscohost.com/dynamed/what.php . Accessed August 24, 2005.
Thyroid nodules: symptoms, causes, diagnosis, treatment. American Thyroid Foundation website. Available at: http://thyroid.org . Accessed August 24, 2005.
Thyroid nuclear medicine scan. Dr. Joseph F Smith Medical Library website. Available at: http://www.chclibrary.org/micromed/00068040.html . Accessed August 24, 2005.
Thyroid scan and uptake. RadiologyInfo.org website. Available at: http://www.radiologyinfo.org/en/info.cfm?pg=thyroiduptake . Updated February 2010. Accessed November 19, 2010.
Last reviewed December 2011 by Lawrence Frisch, MD, MPH
Last Updated: 12/30/2011
Copyright © 2013 EBSCO Publishing All rights reserved.
Sponsored by iHerb.Com
Positively the best overall value for natural products!