Preschool puppets can help encourage imaginative play for preschoolers. There are many educational puppets for kids. There are animal puppets that teach children about different farm animals, pets and animals in the wild. Kids love to make animal sounds and touch the different textures of fur, feathers, or scales that different animal puppets have.
There are people puppets that come in all different types of occupations like a doctor puppet, a policeman puppet or a construction worker puppet. People puppets let children pretend and get to know about different jobs and people in their community. There are other characters that children love that can be puppets too like a princess puppet or a fairy godmother puppet.
Some fun preschool puppets are the Gund puppets series of Sesame Street character puppets. There are educational puppets like the Baby Einstein puppets which are featured in the Baby Einstein series of DVDs and videos. Preschoolers can watch along with the DVD or video and play with their puppets too.
As you can see there are many puppets for kids to choose from. Playing puppets with your baby or preschooler is a great way to interact with your child and help them learn. The different colors, shapes, sizes and textures of preschool puppets are exciting for children. The movements and voices that you make with the puppets can teach children language development, social interaction and understanding emotions.
There are many wonderful stories that you can tell with puppets that teach morals and values to children.
You can also use preschool puppets to teach the alphabet or numbers. You can also use puppets to teach helpful behaviors like eating healthy foods, brushing your teeth and potty training.
Puppets can also help children with difficult issues like fear of the dark or separation anxiety or adjusting to having a new sibling. A puppet can be a child’s favorite toy to carry around or at bedtime or naptime too.
There are many ways to enjoy puppets that you and your child will discover as you fill their childhood with educational fun.