Many of us may have non-stick cookware like frying pans or baking sheets in our kitchens. The special coating used in these products has been around since the late 1930s, but it has recently been criticized for alleged links to cancer. Is the special coating harmful and should we beware of our non-stick cookware?
How it all began
Non-stick coatings were discovered by accident by Dr. Roy Plunkett, a chemist in the United States. The chemical compound known as polytetrafluoroethylene, or PTFE, was later branded "Teflon". While the coating had larger uses in industry and even war efforts, it wasn't until 1954 that it was used to create non-stick cookware.
As far back as the 1960s and before its widespread use, Teflon's safety was evaluated by the United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA). These days the compound is used in a range of materials, from stain-resistant carpets and furniture to pizza boxes and microwave popcorn bags.
Chemicals in cookware: a cause for concern?
PTFE is used when making non-stick coating, but it is actually destroyed before the cookware is finished, meaning that none is left by the time the cookware is used in our homes. This was demonstrated in a 2005 study published in the journal Analyst, where Charles Powley and his colleagues found no detectable levels of these compounds when the cookware's coating was extracted and tested. This is good news for the consumer concerned about the use of chemicals in cookware.
A 2012 study found that, in Canada, most exposure to non-stick chemicals is through paper products such as pizza boxes, microwave popcorn bags, and French fry containers. Even though these are common items, the volume of chemicals to which most of us are exposed long-term is well within acceptable levels. Other research studies have concluded that current levels of non-stick chemicals (from food-based sources) do not pose a risk to human health.
The use of non-stick cookware is recommended as a way to promote healthy cooking and eating. These pans require little to no added oil or butter for cooking, unlike pans made from stainless steel, where food is prone to sticking. You can stir-fry or sautée with minimal added fat in a non-stick pan at medium heat and reap the health benefits of less added fat and fewer calories.
Safety and high heat
Concerns have arisen about the safety of non-stick coatings like Teflon when non-stick pans are exposed to high heat. At extremely high temperatures, the coating gives off fumes. There are some anecdotal reports that these fumes are harmful to pet birds.
The available evidence indicates that non-stick cookware containing PFTE should not be heated to more than 500°F (260°C). Any higher and the coating can break down and release toxic gases. Remember, though, that most of us do not regularly cook at extreme heat for any length of time, as doing so renders most food inedible. In fact, many fats, such as butter and cooking oils, will start to smoke and break down when heated to 400°F (204°C).
If you are still wary of using PTFE-produced cookware, you can find non-stick cookware on the market that uses other coatings. One type uses a titanium and ceramic combination.
Using non-stick cookware safely
Non-stick cookware can still be a part of your healthy eating lifestyle if you take a few precautions:
- Avoid using Teflon-coated pans for extremely high-heat cooking such as searing.
- Stay close to your stove when using any type of cookware.
- When heating a pan before use, place a small amount of water or oil in it to prevent fumes.
- If you have pet birds, minimize use of high heat cooking with any cookware. Fumes, or smoke, can damage birds' sensitive respiratory systems.
- Discard any cookware that has chips, scratches, or peeling pieces of coating.
- Use your kitchen fan to ventilate any smoke from food or cookware.
You don't have to dump your non-stick cookware completely, but follow the manufacturer's safety advice to use it properly. Until the long-term effects are clearer or proven, non-stick cookware may be sticking around for a while yet.