Pre-Algebra Problem of the Week
Math problems for students learning algebraic reasoning, identifying and applying patterns, ratio and proportion, and geometric ideas such as similarity. The goal is to challenge students with non-routine problems and encourage them to put their solutions into words. A a href= /pow/support/ Teacher Support page/a is available for each problem.
This applet allows the user to make pie charts.
This Planet Really Rocks
This ThinkQuest Junior site contains information and activities about rocks and minerals. Included is information about what a rock is, the major characteristics with examples of sedimentary, metamorphic, and igneous rocks, the rock cycle, the differences between rocks and minerals, how to identify minerals (color, luster, streak, cleavager, hardness, and specific gravity), and the Mohs Scale. Facts about common minerals and their properties, how rocks and minerals are important, and their uses
Observe an animation showing evidence of the carbon cycle
In this visual resource about the carbon cycle, students are presented with an animation and accompanying text that focus on carbon and plants. The text addresses how plants fit into the larger carbon cycle, including how carbon enters and leaves the biosphere, and it explains what students are viewing in the animation. The animation shows false color images on a flat map of the world. When the viewer clicks on the image (or the play button), the animation plays, and color patterns reveal change
Our Solar System
This site contains information about the nine planets, the sun, and the moon. Included is each planet's size compared to the sun. Students can click on a picture to discover the following information: the diameter, mass, temperature, number of rings, what it's made of, can life exist there, and other interesting facts. Included for each planet are the number of moons, length of a day and year, and the average distance from the sun. Students can enter their weight to find out how much they would
The Pythagorean Theorem
This math site has students try to figure out the Pythagorean Theorem by themselves. Included are review pages, five clues to help them find the relationship, a section that compares their results to other students, a section that gives historical information, and examples and activities for students to solve. Each clue page allows students to check to see if they have the formula correctly relating to the three sides of the right triangle. A template page that contains figures used in three of
Helping Children Learn Mathematics
Results from national and international assessments indicate that school children in the United States are not learning mathematics well enough. Many students cannot correctly apply computational algorithms to solve problems. Their understanding and use of decimals and fractions are especially weak. Indeed, helping all children succeed in mathematics is an imperative national goal. However, for our youth to succeed, we need to change how were teaching this discipline. Helping Children Learn Math
Drift Seeds And Drift Fruits : Seeds That Ride The Ocean Currents
This essay explores seed dispersal by water and describes some of the physical adaptations that evolution has produced in the seeds and fruits that travel this way. There is a background essay, discussion questions, state and national standards, and links to related Teacher's Domain resources.
Examine the graph of two points in the plane. Find the slope of the line that passes through the two points. Drag the points and investigate the changes to the slope and to the coordinates of the points.
How can a quarter be removed from the bottom of a stack of quarters without lifting or moving the other coins? This material is part of a series of hands-on science activities designed to arouse student interest. Here students investigate the properties of inertia and Newton's first law of motion. The activity includes a description, a list of science process skills and complex reasoning strategies being used, and a compilation of applicable K-12 national science education standards. Also provid
This article and audio file from National Public Radio highlights the work of Manjul Bhargava, a professor at Princeton University. He is an expert in number theory and a master of the tabla, a small Indian hand drum used to create music with rhythmic, precise patterns. In this article, Bhargava describes the mathematical and improvisational aspects of classical Indian music. The article is part of a Morning Edition series exploring the intersection of art and science. An audio file lets visitor
Nice introduction to high performance liquid chromatography that includes information on the modes of separation, a comparison of normal vs. reversed phase separations, identification of analytical, semi-prep, and preparative scale LC and a very nice large glossary that includes definitions of terms related to chromatography.
Winning secrets to teaching excellence
Using quirky metaphors, inspiring student questions and working day and night — these are some of the winning strategies that have led three Simon Fraser University professors to clinch an SFU 2010 Excellence in Teaching award. See also: http://at.sfu.ca/cwcBOy
King Leads the March on Washington
the March on Washington (3:10) On August 28, 1963, a quarter million people gather to support civil rights, and share Dr. King's "dream" of equality. This video is highlighted by King's "I have a dream speech" and the reaction to it. The efforts of the federal government to enforce civil rights is explained as well as how the March was organized and where.
The Vale of Rheidol Light Railway
Description not set
Implementing Biomimicry and Sustainable Design with an Emphasis on the Application of Ecological Pri
This unit provides students with an opportunity to study ecological relationships with an emphasis on the Sonoran Desert. Students appreciate the complexity and balance that supports the exchange of energy and matter within food webs. Species adaptations are examined. Students then apply these natural relationships to the study of biomimicry and sustainable design. They study the flight patterns of birds and relate their functional design to aeronautical engineering. They are presented with a Ch
Designing a Medical Device to Extract Foreign Bodies from the Ear
Students learn the engineering design process by actually utilizing the steps, from identification of the problem to designing a device and evaluating its efficacy and areas for improvement. A quick story at the beginning of the activity reveals the problem: a small child put a pebble in his ear and we don’t know how to get it out! As biomedical engineers, the students are asked to design a device to remove it. Each student pair is provided with a model ear canal and a wide variety of classroo