Unix is command based operating system, currently it is takeover by Linux. but still some group of Peoples and students are directly or indirectly related to Unix. but Unix beginners always have a question that how to install Unix operating system or how to install Unix beside Windows xp or windows 7 ?. Today I will teach you step by step that how to install Unix in your windows xp or any windows operating system.
We will use Unix beside windows with cygwin framework package.
Resources Required :
Windows Enabled PC
Working Internet Connection
Basic Software Installation and Internet Knowledge.
Note : This is safe and not affect registry files.
Step 1 :
Click here to download the Unix setup file. ( Size: 549 KB )
Step 2 :
Now run the installation file and follow the step by step .
Start the setup and click next, then it will ask you to whether download or install.
Click on Download Without installing option. (see the image below.)
Then select your directory where you want to store downloaded files.
Click on Direct connection from the option and click next.
Next screen will ask you to use mirror site for fast download, select any servers from it and click on next.
After that process the installation program will download some required files and will present a one screen for you as below.
Without wasting a bit of time click on next. Now your download process is on the go, it is approximately 20 MB.
After completion of download Start setup again which you have downloaded in step 1.
Now choose the option “Install from local directory” as below image and click on next button.
It will present another screen for you, that is in which directory you want to install Unix . keep default value in it and Just press next.
Now you should select local package directory of downloaded Unix files, select it and press next.
Click on Next And wait till whole installation complete.
Now Unix install is complete On Your Windows PC.
Step 3 : (How to RUN Unix ?)
It’s very easy, installation generated a folder in Start Menu and Desktop shortcut, If Desktop shortcut is not available then Follow steps below to run Unix command line.
Start > All Programs > Cygwin > Cygwin Bash Shell
See The Screen Shot Below that how Unix Appears in Windows Operating System.
If you are facing any Problems yet related to it, do comment below.