10% of women around the world are affected by endometriosis. Does it just happen to them? The good news is that there are efficient ways to successfully alleviate or at least deal with the discomfort, intense pain and sexual trauma that endometriosis can cause.
What is endometriosis?
Endometrial cells form the lining of a female womb. When patches of these cells develop elsewhere in the body, we call the condition endometriosis. Normally if menstrual blood or endometrial cells should accidentally escape from the womb and land up in the pelvic cavity or lymphatic system, they are immediately detected and removed, broken down or reabsorbed. This is a natural safety measure, undertaken by a healthy immune system. But now an increased load of toxic chemicals, wayward hormones and especially solvents present in our food, cosmetics and the air we breathe seems to be affecting the spread of endometriosis. Masses of endometrial tissue develops into cysts, growths and lesions around the ovaries, fallopian tubes, the bladder, bowel wall and perineum. This causes intense pelvic pain, but not predominantly uterine pain or even intense menstrual bleeding. For some, sex or even going to the toilet becomes unbearably painful, due to growths on the inner wall of the perineum (pelvic floor). This condition affects mostly fertile women of any age but may be responsible for over 30% of the infertility statistics.
Are there different causes of endometriosis?
There are more theories than facts but according to research and results, the two most plausible and treatable types of endometriosis are: a condition you are born with or one that you can acquire from a parasitic infestation of flukes. Others claim that is can be caused by misplaced cells from leaking of menstrual blood into the fallopian tubes and out into the pelvic cavity or from cells into the lymphatic system. There is also the possibility that cells mutate when DNA is damaged by toxins, infections or hormone imbalances. But whether implanted or mutated; endometriosis is certainly not a form of cancer.
1 The congenital endometriosis theory: Doctor Redwine of Oregon Medical Centre has been successfully treating hundreds of women suffering from endometriosis with Near-contact laproscopy since 1979. He calls it “a congenital birth defect”. His high success rate proves that a thorough removal of all types of growths within the pelvic cavity clears up the condition or at least alleviates pain and discomfort in over 95% of the cases. If only the very dark patches and the chocolate cysts that are filled with old blood are treated, then all the remaining material will still cause a lot of pain because fibrous tissue affects the function and structure of the ovaries, fallopian tubes, vagina, bladder, etc. He believes the predominant symptom of endometriosis to be pelvic pain and not menstrual problems, bleeding or infertility. This is because the problem is outside of the uterus! The fault begins before birth: endometrial cells that are destined for lining the womb often find their way into the pelvic area and attach to developing ovaries, fallopian tubes and the inner side of the perineum. Because they are rapidly dividing cells, they develop into cysts or patches of endometrial tissue resulting in painful ovulation or bowel habits and sex becomes a nightmare if the perineum is involved.
Although people believe all this wayward tissue actually performs monthly menstrual bleeds, it is a matter of opinion. But oestrogenic activity goes on, no matter where the patches are situated. This causes cell proliferation due to the stimulation of the endometrial receptors. They respond to changes in the menstrual cycle and are affected by swelling and the premenstrual build up. Women on birth control pills, IUD devices or HRT can be severely affected due to imbalances of the 2/16 oestrogen ratio. We can use hormone balancing protocols to deal with this type of oestrogen overload.*
2 The parasite invasion: Cases of endometriosis that clear up successfully after an intensive parasite treatment and result in successful pregnancies are proof enough that even if you do not have a birth defect, you certainly can be the victim of parasites like flukes! This is a very plausible theory put forward by Hulda Regher Clark. By treating the fluke problem and avoiding the solvents involved, she has helped to clear up many cases of endometriosis. A lady who had undergone 7 laproscopic surgical treatments was only finally cured once the flukes had been removed.
Why does this happen? In our world we are exposed to many solvents. When fluke eggs are present: and they are in just about every area of or bodies, they will hatch in the presence of a solvent we have been exposed to. In the case of methyl ethyl ketone (MEK) and methyl butane ketone (MBK) the uterus becomes a secondary host to flukes. They reach adult stage by feeding on endometrial cells. They travel to other areas of the body, taking along their endometrial load to cause havoc in your lungs, brain or just about anywhere they please and the immune system is helpless against an invader of such a size. At best, a cyst may form around it over a period of time.
Symptoms of endometriosis caused by parasites:
Menstrual difficulties with pain and heavy bleeding. Painful intercourse and perineal involvement is not as evident as are uterine problems and infertility issues. The uterine wall may also have patches of endometrial cells embedded in it.
Nuke the flukes!
If you are trying to fall pregnant: the safest and quickest option is vibrational medicine and therapists using the BEST system excel at this. The frequency of the fluke can be detected and temporarily destroyed. You will then receive a bottle of tincture for follow up treatment of flukes. You can keep taking it to keep flukes and their thousands of offspring at bay. I personally recommend this form of consultation to help root out other obstacles to your ability to conceive! Alternatively, QX, Scio or Rife practitioners can help you. A zapper, as recommended by Hulda Regher Clark is a sure way to eliminate microbes and parasites on a continuous basis. This inexpensive home device resonates to all the frequencies common to most offending microbes and parasites that affect us from day to day without affecting one's ability to fall pregnant.
For general use: Herbal parasite treatments used on a regular basis will get rid of flukes. You can make your own out of artemesia and olive leaves or use recipes containing walnut husk, etc. Common de-worming remedies from the chemist may not be adequate against flukes. Drugs like praziquantel are a quick one-off treatment, but remember that eggs will still hatch a few days later. Consider side effects of using toxic pharmaceutical drugs and their safety and efficacy should be discussed with a qualified expert.
A simple way to control the fluke and worm egg stage is to take a knife-tip of clove powder mixed in a little honey a few times a week. Try to avoid exposure to solvents as far as possible. Endometriosis caused by flukes results from exposure to methyl ethyl ketone (MEK) and methyl butane ketone (MBK), making your uterus a secondary host.
Fumes come from: paraffin wax candles, household cleaning agents: window and tile sprays stain removers, pesticides, paint thinners and especially something ladies use: acetone for removing nail varnish! Wear a mask or run a mile from these fumes. People living near industrial sites that convert coal into oil and gas are especially vulnerable to fumes. But all of us are exposed to solvents that contaminate our air, food, water and cosmetics.
3 Other theories and treatments:
Menstrual leakage up the fallopian tubes? Retrograde menstruation, said to be caused by tampons among other things. Even yoga instructors warn ladies not to do inverted poses when they are menstruating, so it is possible for blood to exit the uterus via the fallopian tubes. If you have a gynaecologist that insists this is the case, look at their success rate in treating endometriosis and work out a suitable strategy. (This occurrence is usually handled by the immune system.) For women who no longer wish to conceive, there is the option of using hormones to produce the cessation of menstruation and bring on an early menopause. Some believe that removing all the reproductive bits will get rid of your misery, but it has to be a well informed decision before you resort to surgery or hormonal intervention. Purveyors of natural progesterone claim a very effective rate in treating endometriosis. There is a danger that it can convert to even more of the potent types of oestrogen should the liver be congested and you are not controlling your 2/16 oestrogen ratio.* Meanwhile, all the parasites are adding to the burden of growing cysts and thickening of connective and scar tissue in the pelvic cavity, so consider the hormonal route very cautiously and try to find somebody who has conquered endometriosis in this way.
1 Prescription for nutritional healing by Balch & Balch. Publisher: Avery publishing group. ISBN 0-89529-429-X
2 The well woman's self help directory by N Bradford. Publisher: PARRAGON ISBN 0-75251-821-6
3 The cure for all diseases by Hulda Regher Clark. Publisher: Promotion Publishing ISBN 1-887314-02-4
4 Passage to Power by Leslie Kenton. Publisher: Random house ISBN 0 09 181594 0
5 The chemotherapy of human parasitic disease by V Bozdech & P Mason. Publisher: University of Zimbabwe ISBN 0-908307-26-8