World's first 'biocellar' to be built in Cleveland's Hough neighborhood (videos)
on November 20, 2012 at 6:00 AM, updated November 20, 2012 at 6:02 AM
More specifically, the permaculture designer sees the world's first "biocellar," a term she coined in 2006 to describe her idea of reusing abandoned homes by carefully tearing them down, then reinforcing the existing basement and topping it with a slanted, greenhouselike roof that would make it possible to grow crops inside.
It's the latest project in an urban agriculture movement that's sweeping Cleveland, contributing to the city's growing national reputation as an innovator in this area.
No doubt a biocellar would be a talker -- a futuristic-looking structure that would anchor neighborhood gardens and produce its own food.
Even in the dead of winter, the temperature below the frost line of the biocellar would be at least in the mid-50s, making it the perfect place to grow mushrooms or strawberries, or raise tilapia fish.
It could even be used for something like a community "health hut," complete with a sauna, aromatherapy and medicinal herbs.
A small amount of electricity, which could be used to power lights and pumps, will be generated by people peddling an exercise bike and then stored.
"We've got this problem with too many empty houses," Loria said last week as she walked outside the three-story house that's in such bad shape it has become a safety threat to the Hough neighborhood. "We just keep tearing everything down and filling these basements in.
"This is an example of where the problem is the solution," added Loria, head of Upstream Permaculture. "It's architecture plus biology. I'm very excited about it. I'm expecting to be eating gourmet mushrooms from it by summer."
The idea may seem farfetched, but no more so than the vineyard her partner, Mansfield Frazier, envisioned years ago on the three-quarter-acre corner lot next door. Frazier -- a community activist, writer, doer -- heads the nonprofit Neighborhood Solutions Inc.
Today, the vineyard that he and others built cattycorner from his home on East 66th Street and Hough Avenue is beginning its third growing season with 294 vines of red and white grapes set in 14 rows on the formerly foreclosed property. It's dubbed "Chateau Hough," and nearly a hundred supporters turned out in the rain last month to try its first glasses of wine.
"We had to blend them because we didn't get enough of the grapes," winemaker Manny Calta told visitors who sampled the wine as they ate cheese and chocolate-covered strawberries. "But it's very close to the taste of what we'll get from our grapes here next year."
Calta and Frazier beamed last week when talking about the vineyard -- and their plans to open a winery on Chester Avenue nearby -- but the biocellar is "much more of a game changer," Frazier said.
"The vineyard has a lot of cachet," said Frazier. "But it actually has led to the idea of the biocellar, where you can raise crops. You know, growing wine grapes is one thing, but growing food, that's totally different."
Frazier is expecting to break ground on the biocellar in the spring and thinks that it could be built in about six weeks. But, he adds, "I'm guesstimating. Never built one. Never seen one. And neither has anybody else."
He believes it will cost $50,000 to $60,000 with much of the labor and materials being donated. He acknowledges that cost could easily jump significantly with his wish-list add-ons, including a wind turbine and cistern.
With help from the Burton Bell Carr Development Corp., he's applying for a three-year U.S. Department of Agriculture grant worth nearly $300,000. But he vows to build the biocellar with or without the federal assistance.
"We are getting close," he added, "probably within striking distance."
Though no one knows for sure, the Hough biocellar appears to be the first of its kind in the world, experts say.
It's the result of a partnership between permaculture designer Loria, who came up with the idea, and Terry Schwarz, director of Kent State University's Cleveland Urban Design Collaborative, which spent more than two years developing the concept in two reports that detailed how biocellars could be built and how they would fit into Cleveland's urban landscape.
Midway through the process, vineyard owner Frazier approached the women and said he wanted to build the first.
Schwarz said last week she was excited that Loria and Frazier were moving forward with the project, but added that her group concluded that the biocellar could cost $120,000 or more if you pay full freight for labor and materials.
"So cool idea, actually works," said Schwarz. But is it worth the pricetag? she asked. "I don't know."
"One way or another Mansfield's going to get one up and running," she said. "But our interest is to see whether this model . . . can be replicated.
"We're demolishing more than 1,000 houses a year, so it would be nice to have more than one biocellar, to get something useful out of this traumatic process of demolition, vacancy and abandonment that's happening across the city in a way that preserves the fabric of neighborhoods and also complements this growing urban agriculture movement that's really strong in Cleveland."
For her part, Loria acknowledges that the project will evolve. What's important, she said, is that it will be permanent and will be shaped by residents' needs.
"It's really about neighborhoods, about creating a source of food, something green to look at in the winter, a shared community space that's safe."
She looks up at the boarded-up three-story house, pieces of which are falling toward East 66th Street. "I think it's doable," she said. "This will be the flagship."