This is the fifth set of Axioms in the Axioms of Economics. There are two sections of Axioms included in this set titled Survival, Economics & Freedom. The first section includes the Axioms covering Production and Survival. The second section includes the Axioms covering Economics and Freedom.
Freedom in Economics is the basic right of all individuals to produce. It includes the right to own all they have produced. This would be in goods and services they have produced and in money they have produced along with any value, energy, wealth, power and capital.
Production and Survival:
108. Production is the basic thrust of all life toward the goal of survival.
109. The thrust to survive always, knowingly or unknowingly, involves applying economic principles; this applies to all life forms.
110. Low production brings about low survival in an individual, family, society, mankind, in all life forms and the environment.
111. Production is not only basic to the nature of mankind but production is basic to the nature of sane groups and sane individuals.
112. If you don’t produce you don’t survive. If you are surviving and you are not producing, you are living off the backs of Producers and you are lessening the survival of the Producers.
113. Standards of living are directly related to increases or decreases in production rates and production efficiency.
114. The basic thrust and purpose of all life is to produce, in order to achieve the goal of survival and expansion.
115. Prosperity has always been achieved by rewarding the Producers and the Producers have always created the Prosperity.
Economics and Freedom:
116. Freedom in general is directly related to economic freedom.
117. Economic freedom is the basic freedom. Without economic freedom no other freedoms can exist.
118. As economic freedom increases, freedom in general increases.
119. As economic freedom decreases, freedom in general decreases.
120. Economic freedom is achieved by applying the Axioms of Economics.
Economic freedom is achieved by following the razor thin road laid down by applying the Axioms of economics. Producer Rewarded Open Market Economics follows the razor thin road laid down with the application of the Axioms of Economics.
121. With the absence of economic freedom an individual has “no freedom” in the physical universe.
122. A Democracy, in order to survive, must have guaranteed production rights for every individual in the society and country.
123. Morale is directly related to the amount of economic freedom in the society.
Morale is confidence, enthusiasm and discipline of a person or group at a particular time.
124. Increased economic freedom increases morale and decreased economic freedom decreases morale.
125. Production is the most basic and the most important right in an individual’s thrust for freedom.
126. The rate of technological advancement is directly related to the level of economic freedom and the level of production being rewarded.
127. The Producers in a society are its life blood.
128. Producers create all the survival one sees in a society.
129. Producers create all the prosperity one sees in an individual, family, company, society; nation, mankind and the environment.
130. Every individual has the basic right to produce.
131. No one has the right to ever prevent another individual from producing, no matter how noble the reason may be.
132. Not only must every individual have the right to produce but the Producers must be rewarded in full for their production.
133. When a Producer is not rewarded with the money he created through production, this situation gives him the apparency of not having produced when he has in fact produced.
134. An individual’s level of production falls off when he is not rewarded with the money he created through production.
135. Producers have all pro-survival rights associated with a Democracy.
136. Non-producers and counter-producers have no rights at all except the rights connected with the act of production.
Once they have achieved the class of a Producer, they have all of the pro-survival rights associated with a Democracy.
137. Non-production or counter-production must not be held against a non-producer or a counter-producer by any sort of artificial punishment. Non-production and counter-production are heavy enough penalties, in themselves, when not rewarded.
138. Death is the final penalty for non-production and/or counter-production.
This would be a non-producer/counter-producer self inflicted death. Non-production brings about a condition of no energy flow, this leads toward succumb. Counter-production brings about a condition of a negative energy flow, this leads rapidly toward succumb.
139. Production level is directly related to the amount of economic freedom in a Society.
140. When an economy starts to fall into a steep recession or an Economic depression the non-producers/counter-producers have taken charge of a large part of the economy and put it into a free fall.
The Producers with their motivation and determination hold the razor thin line of Producer Rewarded Open Market Economics. They remove the non-producer and counter-producers from power and recreate a pro-survival economic system.
An Economic System is really and exclusively made up of Producers. The Producers create the Economic System and operate it. They create the survival and prosperity for the societies. Any non-producer or counter-producer activity is destructive to Economic Systems. The non-producers and counter-producers destroy survival and prosperity for themselves, Producers and societies.
Producers are in or inside the workings of a pro-survival economic system. They create and generate the energy for the economic system. They give it life and survival. They apply the rules of a pro-survival economic system. The non-producers/counter-producers are outside of the economic system, they take the energy out of the system and destroy the system. They refuse to follow or use pro-survival rules or laws in economics. Economic systems with the presence of non-producers and counter-produces are Deflating Systems. These economic systems sink into recessions and depressions. The non-producers and counter-producers take the life and survival out of an economic system.
We will look at economic systems and review how they came into existence through the directed energy thrusts of the Producers.
We have seen the evolution of how money value is created and backed. We have also seen the importance of maintaining a Constant Money Supply. Let’s review the evolution of the economic model. The economic model is a step by step evolution on how money is created and why it is important to maintain a Constant Money Supply.
First: There are individuals in a group of people producing goods and services.
Second: The people in the group need and want each others goods and services.
Third: At first these goods and services were exchanged in ratios to each other among the members of the group. This is called bartering.
Fourth: These ratios define the exchange rates or exchange values of the goods and services.
Fifth: It became apparent that a symbol was needed to represent the exchange value of the goods and services. A medium of exchange was developed.
Sixth: A symbol was created to represent the exchange value and it was called money. This symbol became the medium of exchange and it is used in trading goods and services on the Open Market.
Seventh: This symbol represents the exchange value of goods and services, in defined terms, called money units.
Eight: Continued production creates more exchange value and this exchange value backs the symbol called money. The exchange value gives money its value, energy and power.
Ninth: Increasing production increases the exchange value inherent in each money unit and in the money supply.
Tenth: It became obvious that when the money supply is held constant the Constant Money Supply standardizes the money unit as a unit of measure. This standardized unit of measure is used to estimate, assess or ascertain the exchange value of goods and services. It is also discovered that the economic system becomes secured and standardized when the money supply is held constant. A Constant Money Supply provides security preventing the transfer of exchange value, money value or money energy away from the Producers without an exchange returned for it. A Constant Money Supply prevents the non-producer/counter-producer from stealing the value and energy away from the economic system and from the Producers of the value and energy.
There are standardized units of measure for length, weight, volume etc. These standardized measures allow the Producers to function efficiently. These standardized measures lend efficiency to the Open Market and the economic system. They protect the Producers of the goods and services against the non-producers and counter-producers. It is unimaginable to conceive a society or an economic system without standardized units of measures for length, weight or volume. It is also hard to conceive an economic system without a standardized unit of measure for exchange value, the money unit. The money unit must be standardized in order for Producers, families, societies, nations, mankind and the environment to prosper and survive.
There are very few if any Constant Money Supply nations or economic systems remaining on the planet today. The lack of Constant Money Supply nations and Economic systems is the source of much of the economic turmoil experienced on the planet today. In an economic system lacking a Constant Money Supply, the non-producers and counter-producers have a field day expanding money supplies. As they expand the money supply they steal the exchange value straight out of the money units, already in existence, and out of the economic system. They steal the value, energy and power out of the economic systems. A lack of a Constant Money Supply gives non-producers and counter-producers a huge opening into the economic system and into the wallets and purses of the Producers.
A nation or economic system lacking a Constant Money Supply is like having a bank without doors, windows or walls. The non-producers and counter-producers have almost total free rein in stealing the exchange value, energy and power out of the money units and out of the economic systems as they expand the money supply.
A nation or an economic system with a Constant Money Supply is like having a bank with very secure doors, windows and walls along with absolute explosive proof vaults. The non-producers and counter-producers have no access to money by expanding the money supply. They are sealed out of the economic system and out of the wallets and purses of the Producers. The only way they can have access to money is when they become Producers. They become Producers by creating goods and services and marketing these goods and services on the Open Market in exchange for money units. This is the only way anyone can be in an economic system.
Eleventh: Gold was settled on as the most stable material to use when creating a Constant Money Supply. It is fairly rare. It is difficult to bring more gold into existence, making it difficult to expand the money supply.
After the money unit concept came into practice another problem developed. That problem was, “How are we going to find a money unit symbol that is set at a specific number of money units in circulation at one time?” Gold was eventually settled upon. Gold wasn’t 100% set at a specific number of money units but it was as close as they could get at the time. There are no absolutes in this universe. Gold was used because it was as close as they could get as an absolute for maintaining a Constant Money Supply. Establishing a Constant Money Supply with gold created a high level of stability and consistency in the money unit and the economic system.
There are times when the supply of gold was not held constant. This caused economic collapses to occur. There are examples of where the gold money supply was expanded causing failed economic systems.
After Spain’s discovery of South and Central America, they brought huge sums of gold over to Spain from the Americas. Their gold money supply was greatly expanded. The expansion, of the gold money supply, lead to a great inflation. Spain invested this new gold into building a great Navy and military power, leading to an economic collapse in Spain. (This is taken from the History of Economics publication.)
It is noted here that over-spending on military is counter-production. It is destructive to the society that has to carry such a heavy burden.
Gold had been used to maintain a Constant Money Supply. In Spain the Constant Money Supply construct was violated. This became an instance of non-producers and counter-producers stealing the value out of the money units in circulation, transferring the value to the new introduced gold. This led to a great devaluation of the gold in Spain and a failed economic system. Non-producers/counter-producers took much value out of the gold by expanding the amount of gold in circulation without exchanging production for it.
The Producers over time developed economic systems. Step by step, they brought economics systems to more efficient, secure, standardized and pro-survival levels. Unfortunately the non-producer/counter-producers continued to follow along, covertly and overtly, developing counter-survival methods used to steal the money value and money energy out of the economic systems and from the Producers.
The technology developed here in Producer Rewarded Open Market Economics has given us tools we can use to create a pro-survival economic system. We can also use this technology to protect and secure the Producers and their production. This technology can be used to standardize economics systems and money units. Applying the technology of Producer Rewarded Open Market economics will bring about efficient and secure pro-survival economic systems where the Producers can prosper; where families can have a bright and secure future; where societies can grow and expand in prosperity; where Nations can live and exist side by side without the presence of war or the threat of war. Mankind can have a future filled with hope and survival. We will find environments free of the poisons and destruction laid down by the non-producers and the counter-producers.
Producer Rewarded Open Market Economics
The Science of Economics
By: RP Obrigewitsch
July 22, 2012
In the previous article we started to deal with the Capital Destroying Class of Capitalism. We discussed the fact, earlier, that there are two classifications of Capitalism. There is the pro-survival classification and there is the contra-survival classification. The pro- survival classification is Capital Producing Economics. Producer Rewarded Open Market Economics is a Capital Producing Economics System. The contra-survival classification is Capital Destroying Economics, a capital destroying economic system.
Capital as used in economics means; the amount of money or property that a company or a person uses in carrying on a business. Capital also means; national or individual wealth as produced by industry and available for reinvestment in the production of goods.
Destroy or destroying means: D1. to break to pieces; make useless; spoil; ruin: 2. to put and end to; do away with. Destroy means: to make useless by breaking to pieces, taking apart, killing, or in any other of many ways.
When non-producers take money without an exchange for it they cause the value and energy in money to be less. Money loses purchasing power when non-producers take it without an exchange, of an equal production value, for the money. Rewarding non-producers causes money to have less value and energy per money unit; they spoil and ruin the value and energy in money. When Banks expand the money supply, they cause money to have less value and energy per money unit. They spoil and ruin the value and energy money possesses.
The Capital Destroying Economic system is predominantly being used, today, on planet earth. This system of Economics causes wild fluctuations between prosperity, recessions and depressions in the field of Economics. Much confusion is caused when attempting to produce Capital and survival using Capital Destroying Economics, a covertly destructive and chaotic system of economics. Anytime prosperity is achieved, the Capital Destroying Economic system eventually goes into a self-destruct mode and collapses the economic prosperity.
This economic collapse is brought about by allowing non-producers into the Marketing system, into the Money Supply and in believing that we should allow people to take money without an exchange or not enough exchange for it. An economic collapse is also brought about by believing we need people in the emotional states of chronic anger, hostility and covert hostility running our Companies, Corporations and Political Systems. On the Planet today, people of the emotional tones of chronic anger, hostility and covert hostility are mistaken for sane and able people. After all, they appear to “know,” with such “force and/or smoothness!” They appear to know what they are doing and they appear to be “right!”
People in the emotional states of chronic anger, hostility and covert hostility are anti-social. They, because of their negative emotional state, are non-producers. Their product is the destruction of the companies they work for and the countries they run politically. They are destroyers of Capital! They hire and promote people of their own emotional tone; chronic anger, hostility and covert hostility. The companies, corporations and nations that do survive, survive despite the counter-efforts of the leaders in the emotional tones of chronic anger, hostility and covert hostility because they have a few Super Producers working in key positions in the Organizations. These Super Producers make production happen despite anything. They are very able individuals; they don’t let the anti-social leaders destroy the Organization. They produce and produce and find ways to get around the counter-efforts of the anti-social non-producing leaders. Usually they get promoted to a certain level and don’t get promoted any farther even though they carry the Organization on their backs. The chronically angry, hostile and covertly hostile non-producers, leading the Organizations, believe it is leading by anger and hostility that is causing the success of the Organization. However, when the Super Producers leave the Organization, the Organization collapses. The antisocial angry, hostile and covertly hostile non-producing leaders can’t understand what caused the collapse. They are usually clueless because they live off the back of the Super Producer.
You can spot the chronically angry, hostile and covertly hostile person (leader or worker) by observing how they communicate and by what they do in their activities. They communicate in generalities. They are very often out sequence and non-sequitur in their discussions. They can be very literal in their interpretation of a piece of communication. They can be found involved in excessive alcohol and drug use. They can be found to be involved in unusual sex practices, such as with prostitutes and with many partners. The Producer and Super Producer will overlook and compensate for the faults of the chronically angry, hostile and covertly hostile leader and worker. Meanwhile the company, corporation or nation suffers and follows an economic decline as Capital gets destroyed.
In many Organizations on Planet Earth; when you find the Organization prosperous, you will find a few Super Producers holding it up despite all the counter-efforts of the anti-social leaders and workers in the Organization. In many Organizations on Planet Earth you will find a Super Producing Leader maintaining a high prosperity level despite the counter-efforts of some anti-social non-producing workers inside the Organization.
Steve Jobs is an example of a Super Producing Leader. The Board of Directors of Apple fired him. The company almost died. He came back and brought it back to prosperity. When you find an Organization being led by Super Producers, the Organization is usually doing very well. The trick is to get all positions in an Organization filled with Producers or Super Producers.
Over many, many years, Capital Destroying Economics has brought about much suffering and hardship for many people, families, societies and Nations. Capital Destroying Economics in its basic form rewards non-production. It provides for the concentration of wealth along with the power derived from wealth to be placed into the hands of a small group of non-producers. These non-producers have not created products that can be exchanged on the Open Market for the wealth. Capital Destroying Economics provides for the transference of wealth, created by the Producers and Super Producers in an Organization. The wealth is transferred from the Producers and Super Producers into the hands of the chronically angry, hostile and covertly hostile leaders of an Organization. Wealth is also transferred from the Producers and Super Producers into the hands of all other non-producers existing in a Capital Producing Organization.
The concentration of Capital into the hands of a few non-producers has given them tremendous power. They have used this power to take over the political system. With these political systems, Communism, Fascism, Right Wingism and even Left Wingism, they establish laws that create a legal structure they use to funnel much of the Capital created by Producers into their hands.
Production is the action of doing and converting energy into a product. Marketing is the action of exchanging products for products among Producers. This is basic Marketing; exchanging products for products. Barter is exchanging products for products. In more advanced Marketing, Products are exchanged for money units. When products are exchanged for money units, money units are being used as a medium to transport value from the product into the money unit. We take this one step further; we say money is also a symbol in which the energy generated to create products is transported to the money unit during Marketing.
The energy used to create the products continues to flow in a society as long as products are “always” exchanged for money units. More and more energy is being created and added to the Open Market. As this energy level grows we see money velocity increase. This increase in money velocity means money is changing hands more rapidly in the society. This energy can be felt when a society achieves prosperity. The individuals and the society are much more alive and vibrant. Non-producing Capital destroyers don’t like this high energy level. Producers love this high energy level, they revel in it!
When money is taken from the Market with no exchange in production, energy is being removed from the Market. When this energy is removed from the Market it gets destroyed disappears or vanishes. The money units, that are the symbols for this energy, lose value. This is where money (Capital) gets destroyed. Money velocity slows. Money value and the amount of energy in each money unit decreases. A recession starts, if ever so slightly. With the out-exchange increasing, more and more money value or money energy (Capital) gets destroyed. Money loses value and energy causing money velocity to slow. Money value and energy, as Capital, is being destroyed. All other forms of Capital start to lose value. What we are describing here is a state of Capital Destruction.
Banks expanding the money supply, speculators who exchange nothing for the huge sums of money they take are huge destroyers of Capital. Excessive military spending and wars are huge destroyers of Capital. Any out-exchange activity is a destroyer of Capital. Monopolies are destroyers of Capital. Many of the most ardent advocators of Capitalism practice Capital Destroying Economics. They are engaged, in a big way, in the destruction of Capital.
You ask, “Why is Capital Destroying Economics so destructive?” Capital Destroying Economics destroys prosperity, it eats up wealth and Capital, it consumes prosperity until a society literally dies and if it doesn’t totally die out it causes tremendous hardship and suffering.
Examples of Capital Destroying Economics at work can be found around the world and throughout history. Almost all wars are the result of Capital Destroying Economics at work. The depressed conditions of Third World Nations are traced to practices of Capital Destroying Economics. The current Great Recession of 2008 is the result of Capital Destroying Economics being practiced. Communism is a Capital Destroying Economic System developed as a solution to past practices of Capital Destroying Economics. Communism came into existence as an answer to Capital Destroying Capitalism. Desperate people under the rule of the Capital Destroying class of Capitalism agreed to accept Communism. They had two choices, death or Communism. They chose Communism which wasn’t any better than Capital Destroying Capitalism. They are still mired in a Capital Destroying Economic system. Communism is a Capital Destroying Economic System. They went from one Capital Destroying Economic System into another Capital Destroying Economic System.
Now that we have seen the consequences of Capital Destroying Economics we can see why we need to insist on working toward a pure Capital Producing Economic System. It is self evident that Capital Destroying Economics slows money velocity and destroys Capital. It also is self evident that Capital Producing Economics, Producer Rewarded Open Market Economics, increases money velocity, increases the value and energy in Capital and money and leads to abundant prosperity.
Producer Rewarded Open Market Economics
The Science of Economics
By: RP Obrigewitsch
March 13, 2012
We are talking about money velocity here. Money velocity is the flow of survival energy that flows throughout a society. Money is a symbol that represents production value and production energy. In this article we will look at money as a “symbol of production energy.” Production energy is the survival energy for an individual, family, a society and mankind. In a society, money velocity increases and decreases depending on the production level and on the Producers pay or reward for their production. When rewarded production increases, money velocity increases. When production decreases, money velocity decreases. When production increases and the Producer is not rewarded for creating the production, money velocity decreases. When rewarding non-producers increases, money velocity decreases. Money velocity is the rate at which money changes hands in a society. Money velocity is the rate at which money energy flows through a society. The faster the rate of money energy flow, the more prosperity there is in a society.
- AXIOM 151: Money velocity is the rate at which money changes hands while being exchanged on the Open Market for products (goods and services.)
- AXIOM 151.1: As the flow of money energy increases through the hands of the people in the society when buying and selling products (goods and services), their affluence level increases.
- AXIOM 152: Increased production efficiency increases money velocity.
Early in the research and writing of Producer Rewarded Open Market Economics there has been much attention placed on the rewarded non-producers and the catastrophes caused by rewarding non-producers. As we move into the future and a great enough awareness has been made to the point of not allowing non-producers to have money without an exchange for it in production, we will work on perfecting the Producer Rewarded Open Market Economic System. We will work at perfecting the Producer Rewarded Open Market Economic System with, the purpose of having, a tremendous survival potential for all individuals, societies, mankind and the environment.
Other than natural and/or “God” given causes, the only reason why money velocity slows down and societies find themselves in recessions, depressions and chronic depression stems from and only from rewarding non-producers. This is the action of giving money to non-producers who place no production or not enough production on the Open Market in exchange for the money. The action of rewarding non-producers is giving production or survival energy to non-producers who place no or not enough production on the Open Market in exchange for this energy. The action of placing money (production or survival) energy into the hands of non-producers brings about the destruction of money and energy. This destruction of money and energy slows money and energy velocity rates in a society. Recessions and depressions expand and grow deeper as rates of money and energy velocity slow down.
This type of economic practice is classified as Capital Destroying Economics. Capital Destroying Economics is the contra-survival part of Capitalism. Remember there are two classifications of Capitalism. There is the pro-survival classification and that is Producer Rewarded Open Market Economics, The Science of Economics. There is also the contra-survival or succumb classification of Capitalism and that is Capital Destroying Economics. In the past, Capital Destroying Economics had another name. Capital Destroying Economics was formerly called Capital Consuming Economics. The Capital Destroying Economics sub-classification of Capitalism has been changed from Capital Consuming Economics to Capital Destroying Economics. The reason, I changed the name from Capital Consuming Economics to Capital Destroying Economics, was because rewarding non-production literally destroys money, wealth and money energy. This destruction brings about the destruction of Producing individuals, families, societies, nations, mankind and the environment.
This contra-survival classification of Capitalism, where wealth is concentrated with its power and influence in the hands of a few non-producers, causes undue hardship and suffering.
Communism and Fascism are also contra-survival systems of economics. These two systems also concentrate wealth with its power and influence into the hands of a few non-producers. This activity leads to undue hardships and suffering.
What do these three contra-survival economic systems have in common? The have a money velocity that is flowing very slowly. Their citizens are living under undue hardship and suffering. They are mired in prolonged economic depressions.
We find, in the above three systems, the few powerful non-producers (where the money, power and influence is concentrated) tend to be in hiding. We find these rewarded non-producers in hiding. They hide, grab and hold onto the money, wealth and money energy. They grab and hold onto material objects (Materialism.) They become the money and objects they worship. They become their expensive cars, boats, airplanes, houses and other material objects. It could be said, “These rewarded non-producers are hiding in or as their objects!” Being objects is a very low tone to be in. Hiding is a very low tone, but being objects is lower. They hide grab and hold. Their purpose is to stop the flow of money energy. They have a tremendous negative effect on money velocity and survival in their societies.
These rewarded non-producers are hard to spot. They hide, grab and hold onto money energy, production energy and survival energy. They will never stand up and admit their true purpose. Instead they will hide behind other issues such as abortion, gay rights and “create” enemies of the state to take attention off their real purpose. They will argue issues such as abortion and gay rights but, when they get to power they will not handle these issues, when they have the power to do so. When in political power they will concentrate their attention on grabbing and holding more money energy. They will use the enemies they “create” to promote war. War is another means for the non-producers to transfer more money energy, survival energy and production energy from the Producers, of the energy, to the non-producers.
We find long recessions, depressions and a slowed money energy velocity caused by moving wealth from Producers who create it into the hands of a few powerful non-producers who have not created it.
There are tools to determine: What is production and what is non-production? Who are the Producers? Who are the non-producers? There are tools to determine whether we are Capital Producers or Capital Destroyers.
What is a Product?
A good or a service is classified as a Product when it:
A. is marketed on The Open Market (open to all on equal terms,)
B. is needed and wanted and
C. does not harm the individual, family, society, mankind and/or environment.
Or it can be more fully explained by saying, “it causes the greatest good to the greatest number of people or dynamics.” Another way of saying it is, “it causes the least harm to the greatest number of people or dynamics.”
Definition of dynamics: Dynamics are, of or having to do with, energy or forces in motion. Here we are applying the term dynamics to all the energy and forces involved during the activity of survival by the individual, the family, the society, mankind and the environment.
DEFINITION OF A PRODUCER:
AXIOM 23: A Producer is a person who:
- A. Creates a good or a service, classified as a Product,
- B. The good or service must be needed and wanted,
- C. The good or service must be marketed on the Open
Market (open to all upon equal terms) and
- D. It must enhance or should not destroy the survival
of the individual, family, society, mankind and/or
AXIOM 24: Producers are the main beams, support structure and
back bone of a society and a Nation. The survival of a
Nation rests upon the backs of the Producers.
There is only one way to achieve optimum money velocity and be a Capital Producer and that is to reward the Producers of production. There are many, many ways to place a drag on money velocity and, other than natural causes; they all come down to rewarding non-production. These non-producers are the destroyers of capital.
We can use the Technology in Producer Rewarded Open Market Economics to create and expand our pro-survival economic system on this planet. In the past we have been subject to the grab and hold (hoarders) running our economic systems. This has always slowed money velocity bringing about recessions, depressions and wars. The Producers have always sought to produce energy, money and wealth. The Producers have always sought to increase the money energy velocity. They have sought ways to make sure everyone who produced received their production value and production energy in return or in exchange, in money units, for what they have created.
As Producers, we can move forward with confidence, knowing what we are doing is correct and very right! We can confidently move forward producing survival and energy for ourselves, our families, our societies, our nations, for mankind and for our environments.
Producer Rewarded Open Market Economics
The Science of Economics
By: RP Obrigewitsch
March 4, 2012
Efficiency is the ability to create production without the waste of time and energy. Production efficiency is a much sought after goal. This means the Producer’s, the Laborer’s or the Worker’s goal is to produce the same goods and services in less time and with less energy than was done before. Producers have an innate drive to increase production efficiency. Non-producers do not have an innate drive to increase production efficiency. Non-producers waste time and energy.
Production efficiency plays a large part in money velocity and in prosperity. Anytime Producers can increase their production output, their income will rise provided the producers of the increased goods and services receive all of the increase in money and wealth they have created with this increase in production.
When non-producers are allowed to take this increased money and wealth, which was created by the Producers, Workers or Laborers, an increase in prosperity for the Producing individuals and the society will not be realized. We are currently witnessing the result of this rewarding the non-producer phenomena in the United States and all around the world today in 2012. I am talking about the phenomena of allowing the non-producers to take the wealth and money which was created by the Producers.
Allowing non-producers to steal the wealth created by Producers, Workers or Laborers has a very suppressive effect on the Producers and the society. It tends to squash the morale and incentive thrust of the Producers. It is not good for the survival of the individuals, the families, the society, the Nation or all of Mankind. Allowing the non-producers to take the wealth created by the hard work of the Producers drives the Producers into apathy. When this, rewarding the non-producers, continues too long, or in a more and more extreme pattern, desperation sets in among the Producers. This results in demonstrations, riots and the overthrow of governments. History is riddled with examples of these results of rewarding non-producers.
During the past 30 years the production efficiency for the Producers in the United States has greatly increased. However, income has risen very little, if at all, over that same time period. This country is in a great recession. This recession is a manifestation of allowing non-producers to take the money and wealth created by the Producer’s increased production efficiency.
It is important to remember that Labor and Production create capital. Labor and Production are senior to capital. All Producers are Workers and Laborers. If a person is taking money and is not a Producer, Worker or a Laborer he/she is a non-producer. Non-producers have this concept of “Labor creates capital” reversed. They believe capital is senior to Producers, Workers and Laborers. It is self-evident that capital does not create Production, Work or Labor. Capital by itself has no productive action and no life. Labor is alive and Labor puts the action into production, labor is life. Capital is used by Producers, Workers or Laborers to produce and survive with. Labor puts the action and life, if we can call it that, into capital. Producers, Laborers or Workers survive by using capital to create new production.
“Labor is prior to, and independent of, capital. Capital is only the fruit of labor, and could never have existed if labor had not first existed. Labor is the superior of capital, and deserves much the higher consideration.” Abraham Lincoln
In Producer Rewarded Open Market Economics, production efficiency increases money velocity, where the Producers receive the newly created money. If non-producers receive the newly created money, money velocity tends to decrease. Anytime non-production is rewarded money velocity decreases along with morale and production. Producer Rewarded Open Market Economics Technology, when applied, brings about a pro-survival thrust (incentive) within the producing individuals. This pro-survival thrust (incentive) tends to create technological advances in production, production efficiency and in new more advanced types of pro-survival goods and services. This thrust (incentive), when it creates new more efficient methods of production also increases money velocity which increases the prosperity levels in the societies applying Producer Rewarded Open Market Economics Technology.
As production efficiency increases it leads to increased money velocity. Rewarding the Producers of the goods and services increases money velocity and production efficiency. Rewarding non-producers decreases money velocity, production efficiency and prosperity.
Increases in production efficiency bring about increases in per capita production. Increases in per capita production places more goods and services on the Open Market. This action speeds up the money velocity, leading to increases in prosperity. The faster or swifter this flow becomes the more prosperity we see in a society.
The money velocity cycle, if increased, will bring about greater affluence and prosperity. If the money velocity cycle is decreased, recessions and depressions will be the result. Slight decreases in money velocity bring about recessions. Greater and greater decreases in money velocity bring about deeper and deeper recessions and eventually will lead to depressions.
Producer Rewarded Open Market Economics
The Science of Economics
By: R P Obrigewitsch
January 29, 2012
Capital Consuming or Non-producer Rewarded Economics is Vampire Economics. This contra-survival economic system sucks the life-blood out of a society and/or Nation. Money, the symbol for production value and production energy, is the life blood of a society and/or Nation. Vampire Economics leads to recessions, depressions and even to the death of a Society and/or Nation. If the society and/or Nation doesn’t die under Capital Consuming Economics / Non-producer Rewarded Economics, suffering becomes extreme to the point where Communism and Fascism rise out of the ashes of this failed economic system.
This leads to reigns of terror and suffering until the Producer Rewarded Open Market Economic System makes a come back. Throughout history Producer Rewarded Open Market Economics has prevailed. We would be back in the cave stage of civilization if the Producers hadn’t eventually always prevailed. These periods of suffering and reigns of terror don’t have to take place. We need to stay on the razor thin road of Producer Rewarded Open Market Economics and we will survive over time in very good condition. We will have optimum money velocity and prosperity on this road of rewarding the producers.
Definition 3 of Capitalism covered in the article titled “Capital Producing Economics,” also aligns with Capital Consuming Economics / Non-producer Rewarded Economics. This type of Capitalism like definition 2 leads to much suffering and death. Anytime money is taken from the Producers (creators of it) and given to the non-producers, in any form, production incentives decline causing production to decline along with a decline in money velocity. This will lead to the eventual death of a Society and/or Nation unless the Producers are correctly rewarded. If death does not occur, then we see much suffering and starvation leading to the kicked in the head systems of Communism and Fascism. These types of societies are ruled by rewarded non-producers who are on the road to succumb and are willing to take all with them.
Maintaining an optimum money velocity is achieved by fully rewarding the Producers of the money and wealth in the Society and/or Nation. In the past history of Man’s Economics, the Producers have always saved the day in most cases. Now that we have the Technology of Economics, Producer Rewarded Open Market Economics, written down we can take it and knowingly use it to maintain a high level of production survival and money velocity.
Producer Rewarded Open Market Economics
The Science of Economics
By RP Obrigewitsch
April 4, 1993
Rev: September 1, 2011
Government, what is it? Many people want to rid themselves of Government. They want to get rid of Government. However hard they try they can’t seem to accomplish that task. In order to understand why man has failed to accomplish this task over the past several thousand years you would have to look at man himself.
First of all Government is composed of rules. These rules come from how man lives in order to survive. Certain basic rules are followed by the various groups of man on planet earth. All groups have some rules in common. Each group has some specific rules that apply to their specific environment in which they live.
There is no such thing as “No Government.” There is only one way to have, “No Government” and that way is to have no human being alive on planet earth. As long as we have just one human being alive on the planet there will be a Government. This Government is composed of the rules by which this individual lives in order to survive.
People who promote the concept of “No Government” are either very ignorant or are criminals. As you know criminals don’t follow the rules of survival for themselves and the group they pretend to be a part of. They try to find ways to live outside of the survival rules of the group and thus bring about non-survival conditions for themselves and the group they pretend to be a part of. The reason I say, “pretend to be a part of,” is they in reality are not part of the group they say they are, because they are not following the rules of this group. So, they are not “in the group!”
This is not to say rules can‚t be changed. Rules will be changed based on changing environmental conditions and changes brought by technological advances.
What would happen if we got rid of the Governing bodies of professional sports industries? I think you could guess without much looking and studying. The sports industries would go into chaos and cease to exist. This happens to other industries and to countries as well.
The field of Music is governed by very strict exact rules. What would happen to the field of Music if we abandoned all the rules? We would end up with noise and very irritating noise. This field would cease to exist. It would become a dead field.
So, it is very self-evident that there is no such thing as, “No Government.” There is only good pro-survival Government or bad criminal government. We get bad criminal government when people attempt to rid themselves of government or take a government office and do not enforce the rules or the laws.
People who believe we can get rid of government should not ever be placed into any governmental office. Their purpose is to destroy themselves and their society.
Technology of Democracy
Raymond P Obrigewitsch
October 13, 2008
Axioms of Economics
Constant Money Supply
Money Velocity and Prosperity
- 1.0 Money Velocity and Prosperity
- 1.1 The Money Velocity Cycle
- 1.2 Capital Producing Economics
- 1.3 Vampire Economics
- 1.4 The Goal of a Society
- 1.5 Production Efficiency
- 1.6 Why Money Velocity Slows Down?
- 1.7 Capital Destroying Economics
- 1.8 Producer, Non-producer or Counter-producer?
- 1.9 Razor Thin Path