Preserving the Past, Informing the Future
|Skip Navigation Links|
United States Government
Connecticut's Congressional Delegation
Connecticut State Government
Brief Profiles of Connecticut State Agencies
Archives Finding Aids Connecticut Municipal Government Counties in Connecticut – History Issues in State Government
The State Library provides a rich tapestry of resources with which to study the history and the present state of Connecticut and United States government. In addition to its extensive archival materials and collections of local and state histories, the Library is a depository for both Connecticut and U.S. government publications. These depository collections provide access to over two million documents produced by the Connecticut and federal governments, opening a window on over 200 years of history. A copy of the Journal of the Senate, recording the proceedings in the Senate on the very first session of the first Congress "begun at the City of New York, March 4, 1789," can be found in the Library as well as in U.S. House and Senate Journals, 1789-1817, a specialized database.
Not only does the Library hold the recorded history of our government back to 1789, but provides access to the most recent government information through digital federal and state documents.
New Web documents show pictures that may be as old as the universe itself:
"Imagine looking through a keyhole and seeing all the way to the edge of the visible universe. This image provides such a view. For 10 days, the Hubble Space Telescope gathered light from a speck-sized spot in the sky to reveal this astonishing array of galaxies." The Space Telescope Science Institute Leading Astronomical Discovery. [Baltimore, Md. : Space Telescope Science Institute, 2004?]
Many databases about municipal, state and federal government, including the texts and often the images of many current and historical documents are also available to users of the Library:
Researching from home or office?
These databases can be accessed at the State Library:
County government was abolished effective October 1, 1960; counties continue only as geographical subdivisions. There are no county seats in Connecticut. For a detailed treatment of this subject, see County Government in Connecticut; Its History and Demise. Rosaline Levenson. (Storrs, CT: University of Connecticut. Reprinted 1981.) [CSL Call Number GIS Ref ConnDoc Ag83m cg]