Drive over the Buckman Bridge with a compass and it will tell you that you’re traveling either east or west.
But if you look at the road signs along that stretch of Interstate 295, they will tell you that you’re going either north or south.
That confusion will end, or at least switch directions, sometime in 2010, when I-295 swallows 25 miles of Florida 9A and becomes a 60-mile loop with an east-west designation — even though the majority of it will run north and south.
The Times-Union asked Florida Department of Transportation spokesman Mike Goldman to explain that and other particulars of the change.
When the two roads merge, what will it be called?
It will be called the Interstate 295 Beltway, with Florida 9A ceasing to exist. Interstate 295 is already part of the federal interstate highway system, and 9A will also become part of the federal highway system.
Why are the roads being merged?
The long-term plan was always to combine the two roads. Florida 9A was built under the assumption that it would become part of Interstate 295.
Why was the road called Florida 9A? Why wasn’t it part of Interstate 295 when it was being built?
Florida 9A had two traffic lights at the intersection of Butler Boulevard until recently. Federal law states a road cannot be part of the interstate highway system if it has traffic lights. That situation was recently rectified when a new interchange was built at the intersection of Butler and 9A that allowed the traffic lights to be removed.
Why does the state want the road to become part of the federal highway system?
Once a road becomes part of the federal highway system, it qualifies for federal highway funds.
Does any construction need to be completed before the roads are merged?
The last construction was the overpass at the intersection of Butler Boulevard and Florida 9A. That project is essentially complete, though there is still some minor work being done such as the installation of lights and the resurfacing of pavement. The entire project is expected to be complete by the end of February.
What has to happen before a road becomes part of the federal highway system?
The road must be reviewed by the Federal Highway Administration and the American Association of State Highway and Transportation to determine if it meets interstate design standards. FDOT officials say it was built to meet interstate standards, so the review should be routine. However, it is possible the federal government will want changes made when it comes to exit numbers or road markings. When that review is over, FDOT must install new signs on the road, and on other roads, that identifies the entire roadway as Interstate 295. The cost is expected to be $3.4 million, and FDOT plans to accept bids for the project in November.
Where does the road change from east to west, and vice versa?
The change occurs where the road intersects with Interstate 95, between exits 60 and 61 and exits 35 and 36. Essentially, the existing Interstate 295 will be Interstate 295 west and Florida 9A will be Interstate 295 east.
Why change it to an east-west road when people are used to it as a north-south road?
FDOT believes it will be easier to navigate the road this way. Interstate 95 is a north-south road, so it makes more sense to have Interstate 295 be east-west.
This report also contains material from Nancy Singer, Federal Highway Administration spokeswoman.