REVERB TIME - is the total time that elapses between when a signal enters the processor and when the sound of the first sample decays to zero. Sustained sounds never exhibit a clean decay cutoff to zero. By making this parameter numerically large , a more spacious or larger environment is generated.
INITIAL DELAY - is the amount of time between the initial signal input to the processor to when the first early reflections are generated .
DIFFUSION - governs the perception of stereo field width. High diffusion values will sound more like the sound source is centered in a large enclosure, whereas low values narrow the sound as at the end of a long hall or the back of a large venue. High values are more focused and are usefull for smaller soundstage environments. Low values work better with larger room simulations.
DENSITY - indicates reflection content, the greater a reverbs density, the more closely associated and higher in number the reflections are in time .Higher numbers generate a richer sounding reverberant field. Density can be an indicator of the complexity of interior surfaces creating the environment with large square shaped room creating much sparser and simpler reflective fields than a geodesic dome for example with its multitude of surfaces.
HIGH AND LOW PASS FILTERS - Sometimes called "Cutoff", are EQ control for the generated reverberant field. Most importantly this simulates the absorbtion of high frequencys by the surfaces in our environment. A upholstered theatre will have far less high frequencys than a mirror lined ballroom. A small room will have less lows that a large one because the low frequency wavelengths need sufficient physical size to be reflected as well as the high frequencys.
EARLY REFLECTION DELAY - specifies the elapse of time from the moment the signal enters the processor to the production of the first reflection. This attribute is a strong indicator to the listener, of the apparent room size since larger room have longer early reflection delay time. Although early reflections arrive in clusters, this delay is the time to the earliest in the first cluster.
EARLY REFLECTION BALANCE - the first set or cluster of early reflections are the strongest and clearest of the reflections, the closest to the direct sound in tonality. They can be critical in determining realism of our generated environment. If they are too strong they can lead to a thickening effect in a powerfull mix. A reduction of the early reflections can lead to an airy quality that can be desirable.
EARLY REFLECTION NUMBER - specifies the total number of reflections that can occur during the reverb time.
HIGH AND LOW FREQUENCY DECAY RATIO - is the rate at which high and low frequency content will be removed from the reverb signal over the course of the reverb time. This will cause a darkening or brightening of the reverb signal. In environments that don’t absorb enough of the lows or highs, the absorbtion or removal process can be enhanced.