Rovio games among the most addictive for children, study finds
How do you manage your kids' video game playing time and appropriate content?
Think your kids spend too much time playing video games? You could be right.
A national survey by the Kaiser Family Foundation found that children between the ages of 8 and 18 spend almost eight hours a days in front of some form of electronic media.
More from MSN Living: 51 perfect daytrips for families
When it comes to time spent actually playing games, kids gravitate to games that are more “fun” than instructive, reports TechCrunch. A study of kids’ mobile gaming market by the startup Kytephone shows that titles from the entertainment media company Rovio, including Angry Birds Star Wars, Bad Piggies and the original Angry Birds, top the charts in terms of time spent gaming. Combining minor skill, minimal knowledge and lots of flexibility in play, Angry Birds, a casual puzzle game, is frequently described as an addictive game.
Kytephone pulled data from a sample size of 13,000 children, aged 8 to 14 years old, located in over 70 countries and didn’t find any major differences in app usage between regions.
“Everyone seems to love Rovio games, regardless of where they live,” Kytephone co-founder Anooj Shah was quoted. Rovio’s Angry Birds Star Wars is the No. 1 paid app of all time and most played game and since its release, reports TechCrunch.
How much time spent playing video games is too much?
A 2011 study published in journal Pediatrics found that roughly 1 in 10 children who play video games are at risk of becoming pathologically addicted to them. That means for every classroom of 30 kids, three of them could develop a hardcore digital addiction that boosts the risk of depression, social phobia and poor school performance, the study found.
More from MSN Living: The most popular baby names of all time
"What we've known from other studies is that video gaming addiction looks similar to other addictions. But what wasn't clear was what comes before what. Gaming might be a secondary problem. It might be that kids who are socially awkward, who aren't doing well in school, get depressed and then lose themselves into games," Douglas A. Gentile, an associate professor of psychology at Iowa State University in Ames was quoted in U.S. News.
As the controversial chicken-or-egg relationship between video games, addiction, aggression and violence continues to be examined, Vice President Joe Biden met with representatives of the video game industry earlier this month as part of his effort to find legislative remedies to the problems associated with gun violence.
“Video games are the most effective advertisements there are for firearms,” Robert Farago, a gun-rights supporter and the founder and publisher of The Truth About Guns, was quoted on Huffington Post.
How much video game playing time do you allow your kids? How do you monitor the appropriateness of the games’ content?
More from the Family Room:
Photo: Cultura/Igore/Getty Images
family: tips, trends & advice for all things family
Kids and water parks go together like macaroni and cheese. Check out our top picks for your next wet and wild vacation.
We got new dads to dish on what they wish their partners knew. So, listen up, mamas!
Are you really ready to be a parent, or should you stick with a houseplant? Find out before you TTC.
With all the glitz and glamour that comes out of Tinseltown (not to mention the endless tabloid fodder), it's not always obvious that many celebrities are animal lovers, too.
From designer crosses to giant breeds, we scoured Vetstreet's data of millions of dog breeds to determine the trendiest breeds of the past decade.
One of the most unsettling consequences of bringing a child into your previously simple, happily oblivious manly life is that you’re now unquestionably, inescapably…The Man.
Whether it was baby’s first kick or the first time your boobs leaked in public, there’s a point in every mom’s life when the world as you know it ends and you realize -- Whoa, I'm someone's mom now. Some of our favorite mommy bloggers revealed what their aha moments were. They range from heartwarming to completely hilarious.
From DIY jewelry to homemade “flowers” to sweet vases, you can help your kid make mom’s day with these crafty gifts.
The first parenting shock: They let you take the baby home. Like, without supervision. Only then do the real surprises unfold. Here's what readers told us was most unexpected for them as they embraced this whole mama thing.
Be prepared to say, 'awww,' multiple times while flipping through this collection super-sweet stuff for babies and kids on Etsy.com. Take a peek at some of our favorite finds for moms (and click 'More' to find out how to get this amazing gnome hat!)...By MSN Living editors
Your Mother’s Day plans are all set, right? Brunch is booked and a fabulous gift is wrapped and ready to go. So take a breather and celebrate these stylish celebrity moms who work hard, care for their kids, and manage to look amazing in the process.
Find out this year’s top baby names on Parenting.com, and see what we predict will be big in 2013