Computer science is the study and the science of the theoretical foundations of information and computation and their implementation and application in computer systems.
SysNucleus concentrates in developing device driver & system
products and development tools which will make the life of
developers and users easy. SysNucleus's USBTrace is a very
Offers consulting and custom software programming services to
meet your information needs using Visual Basic 5, Visual Basic
6, Visual Basic .NET, Microsoft SQL Server 2000 and Seagate
This page is designed to help novice programmers learn the Perl programming language and will get you started with cgi scripting.Specifically, it's designed to help them learn enough to customize cgi...
A sufficient resource site teaching the pascal programming language from scratch. It is really best suited for those who really want to quickly get familiar with the language.
Computer Science and Aritifical Intelligence Programming
Resources Computer science, artificial intelligence, and
machine learning tutorials, source code, and book reviews.
Contains thousands of programming tutorials categorized by language.
c10n.info is a news blog which aims at providing its readers a comprehensive coverage of any new happening related to data compression. Readers can also submit any news, their own commercial/research...
AjaxPatterns.org is an in-progress collection of AJAX patterns being collected and discovered by Michael Mahemoff, building on an initial draft published on my blog about a month ago.
Discussion forum about mobile telephony, including mobile phone reviews, programming on mobile devices and related technologies.
Comprehensive listing of file extentions for Windows, Apple Mac and Linux. If you need help, feel free to ask a question on the forums.
Microsoft had a good idea when they created browscap.dll and browscap.ini to use with their web server. In theory someone at Microsoft would constantly keep the browscap.ini file up to date and make...
Science Lobby is a very useful collection of Electronic Circuits, Schematics, Electronic Tutorials, Projects, Computer Interface, Diagrams, Science Projects Fair to find quick solution for electronic...
Real time operating system and embedded operating system software by Express Logic.
Catalog of data compression resources. Allows users to add new links. Has a number of links to papers, sources, tutorials, commercial and non-commercial software.
This site will show all you need to know in order to create your own video games coded in C++. It provides a few basic C++ lessons which will teach you all you need to move on to the graphics lessons...
Orinda Software is a privately held startup located in Dublin,
Ireland. Orinda's mission is to create easily usable products
that improve productivity for people who use Oracle, Java and