This bundled unit contains at least 2 weeks of teaching materials or 3 weeks if you complete all of the enclosed labs. The title of this unit is Viruses and Bacteria. This unit has everything that a teacher needs to teach a unit on this topic to Biology or life science students. It includes: History of viral studies, structure of viruses, reproduction of viruses, viral diseases, structure of bacteria / prokaryotic cells, 2 domains of bacteria, and much more. You will receive 14 separate products: A 58 slide powerpoint presentation, teacher notes, student notes, 4 labs, 2 jeopardy review games, 2 daily quizzes, 2 homework assignments, 2 crossword puzzles, and a unit test.
When appropriate, I have included each product as an editable Word document, and I have also included each product in pdf form. Each of these products is sold separately in my TpT store, but buying the entire unit in one download will save you money. If each of these products were purchased separately, the total cost would be $32.00.
All answers are included.
Topics covered are:
1) What is a virus? Includes definitions and the work of two scientists: Beijerinck and Stanley.
2) Characteristics of Viruses
3) Students will label a diagram of a virus.
4) Viruses: Living or Nonliving?
5) Viral reproduction: How do they do it? Includes lytic and lysogenic cycles. Students will label diagrams of both type of reproduction.
7) Comparison of Viruses and Cells
8) Viral Diseases
9) Viroids and Prions
10) Introduction to Bacteria
11) Classification of prokaryotes
12) Characteristics of Bacteria
13) Structure of a bacterial cell: Students will label a diagram of a bacterial cell. All cell structures are fully explained and defined.
14) How do bacteria obtain energy? Discussion of heterotrophs, autotrophs, parasites, saprophytes, photosynthesis and chemosynthesis.
15) Growth and reproduction of bacteria: requirements for growth, binary fission, conjugation, endospore formation
16) The importance of bacteria: Role of decomposers, nitrogen fixation, human uses of bacteria.
17) Bacterial diseases in humans: Ways bacteria cause disease, pathogens, vaccines, antibiotics.
18) Symbiotic relationships: mutualism, commensalism, and parasitism is discussed.
All of the materials that I am including in this bundled unit download are sold separately on TpT. Below is a complete list of what you will receive. You can click on each link to read a detailed description of each product.
Viruses and Bacteria Powerpoint with Notes for Teacher and Student
Lab: Controlling Bacterial Growth
Test: Bacteria and Viruses
Lab: Microorganisms in School (Growing Bacteria)
Lab: Soil Communities (Testing for Bacteria in the Soil)
Viruses: Homework and Study Guide
Bacteria Quiz or Homework
Bacteria Homework / Study Guide
Viruses Crossword Puzzle
Bacteria and Prokaryotes Crossword Puzzle
Viruses Powerpoint Jeopardy Review Game
Biology Lab: The Effect of Antiseptics and Disinfectants on Bacterial Growth
Bacteria Powerpoint Jeopardy Review Game
I hope that you will follow me at:
My TpT Store
Science Stuff Blog
My Facebook Page
Amy Brown (Science Stuff)