The law of oneness states that we are all one and everything in our existence is connected. This oneness applies to everyone and everything regardless of whether or not religions are involved.
For those who do believe in religions, many have said throughout time that there is only one God, creator, or source, and that he is everything. They also say he has many names for different cultures around the world. Logically this oneness also means that everything is also connected through this creator, including us.
Science supports this in the following ways:
Einstein used his famous formula E=mc2 to show that energy and matter are interchangeable. Simply put, matter, at its most basic level, is made up of vibrating energy. This supports the law of oneness by showing everything is energy.
In quantum physics, non-locality (or entanglement) shows that when two particles have previously interacted they will react to each other instantly even when separated by great distances or time. Einstein called this “spooky action at a distance” because he figured this couldn’t be happening unless the particles were somehow connected. This supports the law of oneness by showing that everything is connected energy.
String Theory claims that everything in life is made up of energy and at the most basic level of creation there are vibration strings. These strings vibrate at different frequencies to determine how energy manifests into matter. Again, this is another source that supports the law of oneness.
So how does this apply to you and to everyday life?
It means that we should begin to see life from a different perspective. If everything is made up of connected energy then we are also part of everything. If God is this energy then we are part of God.
We just happen to live in a reality where we also have duality, which means we get to experience many separate things that appear to be apart from the oneness even though they are not.
So the next time you see a rock or plant, think of it as part of you, and give it love. The next time you experience someone who is angry at you send them love and understanding knowing that they are part of you as well, just in a different form with a different consciousness.
All the people of the planet make up a collective consciousness that is one. Each person is like a cell in your body. Each cell has its own life and purpose but collectively all the cells of your body work to create a much larger organism – You.
The law of oneness is important because each thing is part of every other thing, and they are all connected. This means that every thought, word, or action you do affects the whole in ways that you cannot imagine.
So when you do a good deed for someone or you brighten someone’s day that act will reverberate like the “butterfly effect” to continue creating good. Unfortunately, the same goes for a mean or angry deed.
You see we are the ones who are building our future world one thought, one word, and once action at a time.
So I challenge you to see the world from a new perspective. I challenge you to see it as part of yourself. Treat it and the people in it the way you want to be treated and you will ultimately get that treatment back in return from all aspects of life. That is how the law works.
Do you have a comment? I would love to hear your input on this post.
Also if you enjoy this blog please share it with others and ask them to follow it as well. The more people who awaken to this knowledge the better our world will be.
Do you have a question or blog request? Post it in the comment section and I will consider it for a future article.
Author of Awaken Your Power, an Amazon.com best seller.
Sign up here for updates whenever I post new material.