What's New- iOS 5 minimum requirement update
- Version 1.2 includes localizations
App Description👍 "This app is AWESOME!" - Smart Apps for Kids
👍 "If you have a preschooler, you’re no doubt familiar with Wee Sing, a beloved children’s brand that has taught through music for more than three decades." - MacLife
👍 "one of the most fun and interactive alphabet apps that I have ever came across." - Wee Share
👍 "entertaining education app" - AppAdvice
👍 "Fantastic App" - iHelp SN Kids
👍 "Great Learning Tool" - Bargain Briana
👍 "packed with educational games and books." - Famigo
Sing your way through the alphabet! The new Wee Sing & Learn ABC app combines original music, animated animals, musical instruments from A to Z, and read-along text to provide parents fun and creative ways to help their children learn the ABCs. From beloved children’s brand Wee Sing and award winning developer zuuka, this educational tool will provide endless entertainment.
Kids will love interacting with the animated characters while learning letters and beginning to read. Every letter of the alphabet has its own special song. Humorous animals join in as they play instruments from around the world. The real sound of each animal and every instrument is heard. The simple songs are easy for kids to sing along as the read-along text is highlighted and repeated.
The Wee Sing & Learn ABC app effectively teaches letters and language through the use of music along with charming animation and genuine sounds to explore. The interactive graphics, narration, and music will enhance language development, listening skills, and retention.
♫ Read Along – Narrator reads and sings a song for each letter, the animal and instrument sounds are heard. Press additional buttons for more words that start with that letter.
♫ ABC Song – Follow the letters of the ABC song set to narration and music
♫ Explore ABC – Explore the alphabet by pressing on the letters to hear them spoken aloud
♫ Play Along – Try to keep up with the ABC song by pressing the letters in rhythm with the instrumental accompaniment
♫ Explore Animals – See an animal and instrument associated with each letter of the alphabet and hear their sounds
♫ Learn the alphabet through music and repetition
♫ Hear real animal and instrument sounds
♫ Build vocabulary by learning the names of various instruments and animals
♫ Encourage reading skills by following read-along text
♫ Enhance language development and listening skills
ABOUT WEE SING:
Over thirty years ago, two music educators published a children’s songbook and called it Wee Sing. More than 60 million books, albums and live-action videos later, WeeSing is recognized as one of the world’s most beloved children’s brands – and a leader in preschool learning through music.
May 10, 2013 Price Decrease: $2.99 -> FREE!
November 09, 2012 Price Decrease: $2.99 -> FREE!
September 14, 2012 New version 1.2
November 30, -0001 Initial Release