Toronto students from St. Clement’s school form bond with Cree community in Moose Factory
Explore This Story
Sitting in a classroom studying the challenges of aboriginal life is one thing, but heading north over the Christmas break to witness the struggles first-hand is a much different form of education.
That’s what eight students from St. Clement’s School in Toronto discovered when they boarded a train on New Year’s Day and travelled to Moose Factory, where they did volunteer work for 10 days with the Moose Cree First Nation.
“For those 10 days, the girls learned to make moccasins and mittens, they took us out on the land and taught us how to snare rabbits, prepare traditional game, and live on the land in a cabin without running water or a bathroom,” says Nora Scott, who teaches native studies to Grade 11 and 12 students at St. Clement’s.
“We learned about the struggles these people face and we were overwhelmed by their resilience and innovative ways of dealing with life and working hard to ensure a positive future.”
St. Clement’s students have developed a strong bond with the Moose Cree community, following summer excursions in 2010 and 2011, last month’s trip, and two return visits to Toronto by a Cree drumming group.
Although the trips have helped students understand the challenges of native communities, many feel their volunteer work back home is equally valuable.
“We think the post-trip, action-work we’ve done in our own SCS community is almost the most important part of the trip,” says Grade 11 student Margaret Irwin. “Even though we go there to do service in the health centre and high school, the learning we gained from there and the service we can do back home is really important.”
The school has held fundraisers, book drives and sports equipment drives to provide resources to the community.
“The fundraisers are for the youth centre there, because it’s the only place youth have to go hang out,” says Irwin. “They always struggle to find money to fund the youth centre. It’s important they have this place to go.”
Scott says the girls return from the trips inspired to create change. “A lot of students come back ready to create awareness workshops, and spread the word to think about what’s going on in Northern Ontario.”
The partnership with the school began when Scott organized a canoe trip along the Moose River in 2010, after her students expressed an interest in learning more about aboriginal issues and history.
The group of students and teachers rode the train for a day and a half to Cochrane, and then took another train to Moose River Crossing. From there, they paddled for five days.
“That led us to Moose Factory, where the Moose River ends and spills out to James Bay,” says Scott. “The fact we paddled the river and wanted to learn about the native community’s relationship with the land — there is an element of respect there. An elder told me he shared his stories with us because, ‘you have paddled the same river my people have travelled’.”
The teens were shocked by the conditions they found —gravel roads, modest homes filled with large multi-generational families and poor attendance at the local high school — but they were also overwhelmed by the generosity of spirit expressed to them.
While there, the students helped out at the local hospital and volunteered at the health centre and community garden. “We got to know and meet the community members and leaders and elders,” says Scott. “Right away there was a huge connection.”
For Grade 12 student Charlotte Butler, the highlight of the 2010 trip was meeting a group of drummers called the High Ridge Singers. Comprised of boys and men ages 14 to 24, the group was formed three years ago to preserve the Moose Cree culture and promote a healthy lifestyle free from drugs and alcohol.
“Moose Factory and Moosonee have struggled with a youth suicide epidemic and they have really had to pull together,” says Scott. “That’s why the drumming group has come together to be an example of living a good life and revitalizing the community’s culture and traditions.”
“That’s a really moving part of the trip, when we sit down with these boys and hear them talk about what their peers are going through and what their hope for the future is,” she adds.
“It’s one thing to talk about it in the classroom but so much more meaningful to go up there and talk to people and create a long-lasting partnership. It has created a friendship between the two schools.”
From The Homepage
- Elijah Harper’s body to lie in state at Manitoba legislature
- Markham to Mogadishu: Why westerners are joining the jihad
- Blue Jays fall flat against Yankees in New York
- DiManno: The mayor should speak up
- Doug Ford tells radio show he’s never seen Rob Ford involved with coke
- Tim Bosma: The painful search for a missing man
- What’s open and closed on Victoria Day
- Toronto's pro ultimate frisbee team might be a nice score for father and son