Third Sun Productions
Each classroom is tailored to meet children's needs. Large windows are featured in each classroom to accommodate outside views for children and adults. Classrooms are also equipped with child-sized toilets and sinks.
Windows surround the interior walls so parents can view the classroom from the hall without disturbing children.
The toddler classroom is equipped with a soft floor, child-sized sink, and a variety of Montessori materials displayed at the toddlers’ eye level. Learning materials consist of high quality Montessori materials, each with a distinct purpose for the child. Rugs delineate a child’s place in the classroom to execute these activities. Music, dancing and singing is also a regular part of this classroom. There is a separate age-appropriate playground for children under three, and children remain separated by age throughout the school day. Watering plants with spray bottles is one of the favorite activities during the day for toddlers. They also enjoy visiting the gym where they sing and dance and play with balls, bubbles, and parachutes.
The twos classroom is equipped with Montessori materials that are simplified to accommodate this age group. Potty training is an important part of the curriculum in this class. “Potty time” eases children into sitting on the child-sized toilet without overwhelming them. Singing and dancing is also integral to the day-to-day routine. Teachers move the children around in 10 to 15 minute increments to capture and maintain their interest. Phonemic Awareness is a primary focus for teachers. Children learn how to break apart a word by sounds before they even begin to recognize the written symbols. Once a child recognizes that sounds make up words, the child learns to associate the letters with sounds. For math, children begin to recognize numerical symbols, and they begin to associate quantities with the symbols. Practical life activities include washing hands, wiping tables, pouring water, grasping with tongs and many others.
Three- to Five-Year-Old Classroom
The three to five-year-old classroom is structured with several workstations to facilitate a myriad of curricular objectives. The sink area promotes practical life activities such as washing dishes and art projects such as water color painting. Reading is promoted first through Phonemic Awareness. Letter boxes contain objects for children to isolate sounds and match them with appropriate symbols. The DMMS leveled reading program allows parents to become involved in their child’s progress by continuing the learning process at home. Math is introduced in many different concrete ways. Math materials introduce multiplication and division if a child is interested and ready for these math processes. Each week, full-time students participate in dance, yoga, karate and choir. These special classes are important for the Dancing Moose emphasis on educating the whole child.
Dr. Joyce Sibbett has taught in the public schools and higher education, preparing students for teacher positions in early childhood, elementary, and secondary programs. In her capacity as Associate Professor and teacher educator, Joyce has researched, presented and published professional papers, and she has observed and analyzed classroom practices. She has also chaired and participated in the hiring process of faculty and staff positions. She is continuously putting best practices into action in her Montessori school. Her academic experience is complemented with her certificate in Montessori education by the North American Montessori Center.
Today, more than at any time in history, people across America are talking about the importance of early childhood education. Joyce applies her experience and knowledge to offer truly outstanding programs. She has selected Montessori practices because they fit perfectly with constructivist philosophies that are child-centered, progressive, and conducive to creativity as well as critical thinking. The Montessori curriculum is active, which means that students learn how to exercise self motivation as well as self direction.
Joyce plans, organizes, and oversees curriculum. She gives final approval for hiring teachers, conducts training sessions, maintains positive relationship with parents, and facilitates a collaborative culture within DMMS and in the surrounding community. She monitors quality control in day-to-day curriculum operations
Jennifer has experience in preschool education that assists her in overseeing day-to-day classroom operations for DMMS. She has been a teacher at an upscale traditional preschool and has acted as an interim director at Springstone Montessori School in Las Vegas, Nevada. Her academic background in chemistry (Bachelor of Science) and business (Master of Business Administration) supports her role as director of faculty, staff, and operations. Jennifer has studied and prepared papers on preschool education, collaborating with numerous individuals to develop best practices for DMMS.
Jennifer assists in hiring personnel and evaluating teacher performance to ensure quality and to identify areas for further training. She organizes and administers in-service training and prepares periodic reports on performance goals and objectives. Maintaining positive relations with parents and community members is an important aspect of Jennifer's responsibilities. She also assures that DMMS operations are consistently on target with Utah’s Childcare Licensing regulations as well as the Health Department regulations.
The name “Dancing Moose” focuses on a creative philosophy that combines the arts with academic excellence. Low teacher-to-student ratios ensure that Dancing Moose students are learning at their own accelerated pace.
Providing quality curriculum from preschool through second grade, Dancing Moose attracts highly educated teachers who choose to build their career in the rewarding field of early childhood education.
The beautiful, state-of-the-art building that includes a spacious gymnasium, on-site chef (who prepares food from scratch), and free-movement coach sets Dancing Moose apart from schools nation-wide.
With optional extended hours from 7:00 am to 6:00 pm, parents are assured that their child is in a safe, productive educational program before and after school.