World War II: Invasion Of Poland - part 5/5
September 1939 - May 1940 The German and Soviet invasions of Poland, the Winter War, the sinking of the Graf Spee and Britain's apathy during the "phony war" until Britain's defeat in its first military engagement with German land forces in Norway, which led to the rise of Winston Churchill. Interviewees include Lord Boothby, Lord Butler, Admiral Charles Woodhouse, Sir Martin Lindsay and Sir John "Jock" Colville.
Invasion of Poland 1 of 3
1943 War Department Film Bulletin No 48 produced by the Signal Corps Photographic Center. Invasion of Poland in Sept of 1939 which was the beginning of WWII. Contains footage shot by German troops and confiscated by the Allied Forces of artillery and infantry attacks which resulted in the capture of Warsaw.
Autism Symptoms & Treatments : Diagnosing Autism
Video is presented by Dr. David Hill. There are some tests that a doctor can do, a nine month old who doesn’t know his name or doesn’t understand the word “no.” The most diagnosis of autism happens in the second year of life, often at 15 – 24 months, the test is known as the MCHAT. The pediatrician should be doing some testing at the wellness exams. If initial exams raise some concern, then the child will need to see a psychologi
Goldilocks and The Three Bears- In ASL
Student-Created Video- The children's tale of, Goldilocks and the Three Bears, in American Sign Language. No voice, text or illustrations are used in the story.
Clifford Visits the Hospital by Norman Bridwell in ASL (Part 2)
Clifford the Big Red Dog sneaks into Mary Elizabeth's basket as she goes to visit her grandma in the hospital. Learn about his continued adventure in the hospital in this interpreted version of the classic book.
Paper Heart Garland: Punch Holes-Step 5
Step 5 for making paper heart garland. This part explains how to glue and punch holes along the top of the hearts.
Learn French - Professions, Part 1
The instructor recites various careers in French. This video has words spoken by a native speaker accompanied by appropriate images. It is well-produced with clear sound.
Cooking With Miranda - Baked Spaghetti
Ten-Year Old budding chef guides us through her grandma's extra special recipe for spaghetti!
What Was the First Pokemon Card?
This clip gives information about the first Pokemon cards. he shows an example of a basic set with the most popular card called Charizard.
Future of Chemical Research
Interviews with leaders from academia and industry explore the frontiers of chemical research. Chemistry is changing our lives through medical advances, new resources, and new molecules. Chemists come from a variety of backgrounds and share a curiosity about the world. Chemistry will be essential to the solution to the problems that face our world today, and new technolo
A Nation Divided Unit 9
Although the Civil War is viewed today through the lens of the Union’s
ultimate victory, for much of the war, that victory was far from
certain. By examining the lives of the common soldier, as well as
civilians, this unit examines the uncertainty and horrible destruction
in the war between the states. (This unit includes a facilitator guide,
video, and online text chapter.)
Workshop 7: Sun and Seasons
The tilt of the Earth's axis causes the cycle of the seasons. In this workshop, we'll discuss how different parts of the Earth receive different amounts of light energy that result in the Earth's seasons. In particular, we will look at the tilt of the Earth's axis and how the hours of daylight change throughout the year.
All Sorts of Leaves
A first-grade class in Boynton Beach, Florida studies biodiversity by taking a close look at leaves.
All Sorts of Leaves: A Conversation About Teaching
Practicing teachers and science education professionals reflect on the issues raised in All Sorts of Leaves.
Sixteen inservice teachers engage in professional development using Completing the Circuit.
Learn French--Learn 10 Sentences, Part 1
Learn 10 simple French sentences. Each sentence is said by a native French speaker 3 times. When the head on the right side 'blinks', that is the time for the viewer to say the sentence aloud. Each sentence is accompanied by an appropriate image. The video would be better served if there was a English translation.
(Some of the simple sentence in English are: He sings. He cuts the meat. He runs. He doubted.)
Writing Techniques for Novels
Discover your own personal writing process that gets the job done with tips from a published author and English professor in this video on writing. The professor gives you ideas that help you find what works best for you.
The Harvest Moon
Although most think of the "harvest moon" as a bright full moon any time in the late summer or early fall, defined properly it is the full moon closest to the fall equinox in September in the Northern Hemisphere. THe slide show explains the history behind the "harvest" name for the moon, as well as why it appears larger in the horizon with its pale yellow, orange or red tinge. This slide show does not include audio.
How to Interview for Essays
How to Interview for Essays. Part of the series: How to Write an Essay. Learn how to gather interviews for essays in this free educational video on writing essays.
Open-Ended Research Questions: Success Secret for Research Projects
How to frame an open-ended research question for your research project: who, what, when, where, why, how--and all the variations of them.