Circles of learning offer a range of holistic programs to help your children develop into wise and well balanced people. Each program is tailored to suit the interests and abilities of different children. Take a look at the programs we offer.
Garden Circle for Parents & Children
Join the Circles of Learning Garden Circle and experience the edible garden program for Children, Parents & Seniors
FREE to participants, the Garden Circle Program It offers practical experiences in the garden, discussions around the nutritional value of the fruits and vegetables and ways to encourage children who may be ‘picky’ eaters to eat more healthy foods. Plus tips and hints for their whole being.
When you attend you will..
Learn how to grow healing herbs and organic fruit and vegetables
Have fun growing your own food
Gain hints on ways to prepare & cook healthy meals
Discover ways to assist your family’s wellbeing.
The Circles of Learning, the Garden Circle program is presented in a simple format for children to understand and parents to find informative. To keep little ones stimulated and interested, it includes games and lots of tactile digging and planting activities.
Learn skills and gain tips on nutrition, water, oxygen, feelings, thoughts, resilience and building self esteem for yourself and your children. Fun and creative activities bring you and your children to connect with nature and enjoy being in the fruit and vegetable garden.
When young children model and observe their parents working in the garden, it sets them up with healthy attitudes and habits for life.
What you will find...
Children are calmer and better behaved
Have a greater respect for nature and the environment
Have a greater appreciation of the importance of healthy living foods
Discover a happier, healthier you
Better brain function through better brain balance
Helps to offset early learning difficulties
Gives a strong foundation for life and learning
Every week there is different information and experiences.
To find out the closest Garden to you, please contact us.
The Clever Kid Health and Play program was created by Circles of Learning to bring the brain into a cohesive state for learning. It assists in managing behavioural problems and learning difficulties in children, laying a solid fou..... read more.
..... read more.
A ten week program integrating numeracy and literacy through creativity-based programs, enabling children to discover their true self. It is a creative way to stimulate your child’s love of learning, and to make engaging with..... read more.
Is your child struggling at school? Do they find it difficult to participate / join in group activities? Are they happy and relaxed? For children with emotional, behavioural and learning difficulties, fulfilling their potent..... read more.
..... read more.
..... read more.
Discovery is a scientifically based program to educate young people in the benefits of whole brain learning. Traditional teaching focuses on only one of the senses - that of listening. Whole brain learning combines all of th..... read more.
The following programs have been developed for children aged 5-7yrs, 8-12yrs, 13-16yrs and for adults. Circles of Learning is committed to giving children a strong foundation for health and learning, recognising that when you g..... read more.