Posted in Graffiti on May 13th, 2010 by admin
The question “How to do graffiti” can be well answered by following the first basic step of any art form that is the observation. The observation of the surroundings can help you get a notion or an idea of the situation. Looking at the available piece of graffiti can also give you an idea of how to do graffiti. Once you have got the idea of how to do graffiti, you should now get to know how to draw graffiti. By trying to copy the existing graffiti you can have an idea of how to draw graffiti. When you copy graffiti you come to know about some of the basic ratios and proportions of the object. You also come to know how the perspective of object works.
Make your own impression with creativity
Once you have tried to copy a graffiti you should try to make your own variation in the graffiti this will let you understand in a better way to draw graffiti. Once you have acquired the basic skills of how to make graffiti you need to apply the skill. Try to make a graffiti that can set as your logo. Your creativity now comes into picture. You have to decide what you have to draw; the concept should be generated within your mind. You can also take graffiti tips from graffiti masters and schools.
There are few graffiti tips that can be followed during your course of drawing graffiti. First among the graffiti tips is the use of paint cans. The graffiti is best made with the help of color spray cans that help you make graffiti on any texture and surface with minimum amount of effort and also within very short time. So get your self familiar with how to use the color spray can.
Another one graffiti tips is the order in which the graffiti making should go. First make a background for your graffiti to stand out. Make the background such that it gives a smooth finish to the graffiti. Make use of light colors such as white or Grey to make the background. Once the background is ready make use of small cap spray can to make the outline of the graffiti. The outline should be of light color and should merge well with the background. The outline is just for your convenience and not to stand out. Once the outline is over, go ahead with real painting and make the graffiti as per your thoughts.
Next is to make use of 3D effects; with the use of thin stroke of dull color you can make a three dimensional effect. To make the thin line, hold the can near the wall and make a fast stroke. This will limit the spreading of the paint and give you a sharp thin line. The colors of the graffiti are also very important and hence basic color wheel should be kept in mind while deciding the color combination.
To make your graffiti look tidy and neat, fill in all the space that is available. Do not leave gaps within your graffiti. Fill all the gaps with proper strokes of the color can. Also make sure that light shade does not overlap dark shade, it should always be the other way round.
The use of graffiti has reached to the art level and now is considered as a form of art, creativity and also offers you a method of expression. Graffiti offers a wide circulation of thoughts and leaves a better impact on the viewer than other means of expression.