Milli-PEET: Complete Genus Listing
- Millipedes Made Easy
- Tools & Resources
Complete Genus Listing
Our planet sustains a magnificent diversity of life forms. Despite over two centuries of biological research, humans are far from even listing all the species living on Earth, much less comprehending integrative topics like their ecological interactions. Not only are many species in danger of extinction, human expertise is on the brink of extinction. One group that is threatened by both these dangers is the arthropod class Diplopoda. Efficient management and ease of retrieval of existing data will greatly enhance the speed with which we will be able to complete a global inventory of the Earth’s biodiversity.
Comprehensive taxonomic catalogues of organisms are essential management tools for the discovery and analysis of biodiversity. The Nomenclator Generum Diplopodorum, edited by Petra Sierwald and co-authored by C. A. W. Jeekel, R. L. Hoffman, R. M. Shelley, P. Sierwald, S. B. Kiser & S. I. Golovatch, is a complete listing of all genus-group names in the Diplopoda, described between 1758 and 1999, with full bibliographic data.
Citation of the online publication: Sierwald, Petra (ed.). 2006. Nomenclator Generum Diplopodorum, Version 2. A complete listing of all genus-group names in the class Diplopoda from 1758 through 1999.
This Excel file is available to download (1.04 MB): MILLGEN
Nomenclator Generum Diplopodorum, Version 2.0 is based on the literature listed below.
Enghoff, H. 1981. A cladistic analysis and classification of the millipede order Julida. Zeitschrift für Zoologische Systematik und Evolutionsforschung, 19, 285-319.
Enghoff, H. 1984. A revision of the Nopoiulinae, with notes on the classification of blaniuliud millipedes. Senckenbergiana Biologica, 64, 393-427.
Enghoff, H. 1990. A revised cladistic analysis and classification of the millipede order Julida. Zeitschrift für Zoologische Systematik und Evolutionsforschung, 29, 241-263.
Enghoff, H. 1995. A revision of the Paectophyllini and Calyptophyllini: millipedes of the Middle East (Diplopoda: Julida, Julidae). Journal of Natural History, 29, 685-786.
Hoffman, R. L. 1980. Classification of the Diplopoda. Museum d’Histoire Naturelle, Genève, 237pp.
Hoffman, R.L. 1990. Myriapoda 4, Polydesmida: Oxydesmidae. Das Tierreich, 107, 512pp.
Hoffman, R.L. 2005. Monograph of the Gomphodesmidae, a family of African polydesmoid millipeds. Naturhistorisches Museum Wien, 537pp.
New genera described in this work are not yet included in the Genus Catalog.
Jeekel, C. A. W. 1971. Nomenclator generum et familiarum Diplopodorum: A list of the genus and family-group names in the Class Diplopoda from the 10th edition of Linnaeus, 1758, to the end of 1957. Monografieën van de Nederlandse Entomologische Vereniging, No 5, 412pp.
Krabbe, E. 1982. Systematik der Spirostreptidae (Diplopoda, Spirostreptomorpha). Abhandlungen des Naturwissenschaftlichen Vereins in Hamburg, (NF) 24, 476pp.
Mauriès, J.-P. 1983. Myriapodes du Népal (Mission I. Löbl et A. Smetana 1981) I. Diplopodes Iuliformes (Julida, Cambalida et Spirostreptida): Nepalmatoiulus nov. subgen. Revue Suisse de Zoologie, 90(1), 127-138.
Mauriès, J.-P. 1970. Un nouveau blaniulide cavernicole du pays basque français. Éléments d’une nouvelle classification des diplopodes iulides (Myriapoda). Annales Speleologique, 25, 711-719.
Mauriès J.-P.& M.C. Vicente. 1976. Miriápodos de Baleares. Descripción de un nuevo diplopódo cavernícola y catálogo de miriápodos señalados en Baleares. Bolletino Societe Hist. Nat. Baleares, 21, 33-46.
Read, H.J. 1990. The generic composition and relationships of the Cylindroiulini – a cladistic analysis (Diplopoda, Julida: Julidae). Entomological Scandinavica, 21, 97-112.
Shear, W.A. 2000a. On the millipede family Heterochordeumatidae, with comments on the higher classification of the order Chordeumatida (Diplopoda). Invertebrate Taxonomy, 14, 363-376.
Shelley, R.M. 2003. A revised, annotated, family-level classification of the Diplopoda. Arthropoda Selecta, 11(3), 187-207.
Shelley, R.M., P. Sierwald, S. B. Kiser & S. I. Golovatch. 2000. Nomenclator generum et familiarum Diplopodorum II. A list of the genus and family-group names in the Class Diplopoda from 1958-1999. Pensoft Publishers, 167pp. Pensoft Series Faunistica No 20. ISBN 954-642-107-3.
The Excel spreadsheet contains all millipede genus-group names, with the type-species and complete bibliographic reference. For each genus, the complete higher classification is given. All journal names are fully spelled out. Some journals have changed names over time; the journal name given here is the one that was used at the time when a particular taxon was described. Genus names printed in bold are available names. Genus names with parentheses in the preceding field are currently considered subgenera. The subgenus status is noted only for genera described after 1958. Future updates will reflect the subgenus for all nominal genera, if applicable. The systematic placement of genera is taken from the literature cited above. The numbers of species given for many of the genera are primarily based on Hoffman, 1980.
Explanations of Fields, Version 2.0 (2006)
Asterisk: indicates that a family-group name is based on the genus
Subgenus: the genus name is currently considered a subgenus
Genus: Genus Name
GenusAuthor: Author of the genus
GenusYear: Year of first description of the genus
GenusJournal: Journal name in which the genus was described
GenusVol: Volume number of journal
GenusPage: page number, where the first description of the genus appears
G: Grammatical gender of the genus name: M = masculine, F = feminine, N = neuter
TypeSpecies: Name of the type species (if the genus name is abbreviated with only one letter in this field, the type species was described in the genus it is still placed in)
TspAuthor: Author of the type species
TspYear: Year of the first description of the type species
TspJournal: Journal name in which the type species was described
TspVol: Volume number of journal
TspPage: page number, where the first description of the type species appears
Country: Country from which the type species was described
Designation: mode of typification of the genus, e.g., by original designation, monotypy or subsequent designation
#Species: estimated number of species presently included in the genus
Tribe: tribal placement of genus if applicable
Subfamily: subfamilial placement of tribe
Family: family placement of subfamily
Superfamily: suprafamilial placement of family
Suborder: subordinal placement
Order: ordinal placement
Version 1.0, released 1 September 2001, was based on Hoffman (1980), Jeekel (1971) and Shelley et al. (2000) alone. Version 1.0 did not contain tribal and subfamilial placement.
I wish to express my sincere gratitude to Dr. Jeekel for his permission to use the genus names listed in his 1971 catalogue electronically in order to make them available on the Internet. The Nederlandse Entomologische Vereniging also graciously gave its permission. Special thanks are also due to Dr. Hoffman, who gave permission to incorporate major components of his monumental work, Classification of the Diplopoda, into the online spreadsheet. The Museum d’Histoire Naturelle in Geneva supported this effort and had no objections to the transfer of the data into electronic form.
Whereas the Nomenclator II (Shelley et al, 2000) was generated as an electronic file, Jeekel’s nomenclator was painstakingly typed in by several of my volunteers and proofread by summer intern Anton Antov. Julie Coan, Veronica Felix and Anton Antov accomplished most of the data-entry tasks. Volunteer Meyer Cornis assisted me greatly in the Field Museum’s splendid library by locating the required volumes. The Field Museum’s library staff helped cheerfully and patiently. Volunteer Victor Zubb did an outstanding job expanding many of the originally abbreviated journal names. M. Mauriès (Musée National d’Histoire Naturelle, Paris), Dr. Enghoff (Zoologisk Museum, Copenhagen) and Dr. Jörg Spelda (Staatliches Museum für Naturkunde Karlsruhe) helped us tremendously through their reviews. As always, Dr. H. D. Cameron (University of Michigan), gave us much appreciated advice in linguistic matters.
Your Feedback is Encouraged
Please send your corrections and questions to Petra Sierwald.