San Miguel Mission: also known as San Miguel Chapel, is a Spanish colonial mission church located in downtown Santa Fe, New Mexico - a block from the historic Pueblo Bonito Inn. Claimed to be the oldest church in the United States, San Miguel Mission was built around 1626. Damage sustained during the Pueblo Revolt of 1680 was rebuilt in 1710 following the Spanish reconquest for which the chapel served Spanish soldiers. Hand carved pieces located inside the chapel include a wooden statue of Saint Michael dating back to at least 1709. Though the church has been repaired and rebuilt numerous times over the years, its original adobe walls are still largely intact despite having been hidden by later additions. The mission is a U.S. National Historic Landmark.
Loretto Chapel- originally a Roman Catholic church, now privately owned and used as a museum with wedding chapel. A long time subject of legend, the “Miraculous Staircase” and circumstances surrounding it are considered miraculous by the Sisters of Loretto as well as many visitors. In 1872, a convent chapel was commissioned to be built and named Our Lady of Light Chapel for the Sisters of Loretto. Designed by French architect Antoine Mouly in Gothic Revival style, ornately decorated with spires, buttresses, and stained glass windows imported from France, the Loretto Chapel built on a smaller scale, bears close resemblance to Paris’s Sainte-Chapelle. After the architect’s sudden death, and much of the construction finished, it was realized no type of stairway to the choir loft was provided. Needing a way to get up to the choir loft the nuns prayed for St. Joseph’s intercession for nine straight days after which a stranger appeared at their door. Offering to build the nuns a staircase, but requiring total privacy he locked himself in the chapel for three months. Using a only primitive tools including a square, saw and warm water he constructed a spiral staircase entirely of non-native wood. The carpenter’s identity was never known for as soon as the staircase was finished he was gone. Witnesses, upon seeing the staircase, felt it was constructed as a miraculous occurrence by St Joseph himself. The mystery has never been solved as to who the carpenter was or where he got his lumber, for no reports were made of anyone seeing lumber delivered nor of the man come and go while construction was done. Less than a five minute walk from Pueblo Bonito b&b inn- the Loretto Chapel is a must see when Mission touring Santa Fe.
Cristo Rey church (Spanish for Christ King), is a beautiful adobe example of historic New Mexico Mission architecture with notable Spanish colonial retablos and santos adorning its sanctuary. Used for worship, weddings and community events, this active Roman Catholic church quietly sits at the east end of Canyon Rd on the corner of Cristo Rey street. An easy five minute drive from Pueblo Bonito b&b as you peruse the famous art and sculpture work on Canyon Road.
Galisteo Mission the Pueblo of the Tanos (Galisteo Pueblo) was founded around 1250 AD. A thriving community of 1,000+ surface dwellings was situated on the west side of Galisteo Creek. This pueblo presented an impressive appearance to outside visitors for the time period. Once named “San Lucas” by Spanish settlers in 1590, Juan de Oñate renamed the pueblo “Santa Ana” in 1600. In early seventeenth century again renaming occurred and the village became known as “Santa Cruz de Galisteo“. Franciscan brothers founded this first permanent mission among the Tanoan speaking people in 1612. It was the earliest mission in the Galisteo Basin as well as one of the earliest missions in New Mexico. This 17th century church was unique as it was built sufficiently wide – having three aisles with two rows of support columns leading from the sanctuary. Though it is not certain whom is responsible for the notable church design, Fray Pedro de Ortega, is thought to have contributed. Galisteo Mission is located a short, but beautiful 20 minute drive south of Santa Fe’s Pueblo Bonito bed and breakfast inn off Hwy 41 in Galisteo New Mexico.
The Santuario de Guadalupe originally built in 1781, located on Guadalupe St- just a five minute walk north-west of Pueblo Bonito b&b inn, it is known as the “Soul of Santa Fe“. This historic mission church played a very significant role in religious, cultural, and traditional life of the people of Santa Fe. It is the oldest, still-standing church dedicated to Our Lady of Guadalupe in the US and Canada. Located at the end of the Camino Real (the main route from Mexico City via Chihuahua to the Southwest) which brought Spanish ancestors and the Franciscan friars who ministered and sowed seeds of Christian faith with a devotion to Our Lady of Guadalupe. This historic New Mexico mission is considered to be very holy. El Santuario de Guadalupe church is currently an art and history museum and contains the Archdiocese of Santa Fe’s collection of New Mexican santos (carved images of the saints), Italian Renaissance paintings, and Mexican baroque paintings. Among the treasured works is Our Lady of Guadalupe, one of the largest and finest oil paints of the Spanish Southwest, dated 1783 and signed by Jose de Alzibar, one of Mexico’s most renowned painters.Sanctuario de Chimayo – Located north of Santa Fe, New Mexico on Hwy 285/520 – a short 20 minute drive from Inn at Pueblo Bonito in the historic village of Chimayó, New Mexico – one can view this rustic and serene active Roman Catholic Church. This is one of the most famous churches in New Mexico and North America. Known as a shrine and National Historic Landmark, El Sanctuario de Chimayo receives over 300,000 visitors a year and is called the most important and largest Catholic pilgrimage center in the United States. The walled courtyard entrance is one of the most photographed sites in Northern New Mexico and houses a small cemetery. This picturesque church, built of three foot thick adobe walls has a bell tower on each side with pointed caps and a metal pitched roof that were probably added in the 1920s. Thick, yet elegant wood doors were carved by 19th-century carpenter Pedro Domínguez while notable folk-art carvings and decorations can be found inside the sanctuary and narthex. Of special note, a small room called el pocito (the little well), located just left of the front alter, contains a round pit. This “round pit” is the source of “holy dirt” (tierra bendita) that is believed to have healing powers. The adjacent Prayer Room displays photographs, discarded crutches, and unique testimonials of those who have received healing. Recently added is the outside sanctuary needed to receive mass numbers of pilgrims on Good Friday and Easter walks.
Pecos Mission (aka: Mission Nuestra Señora de los Ángeles de Porciúncula or Mission of Our Lady of the Angels of Porciúncula) was a mission that served the people of Pecos Pueblo near Pecos, New Mexico. The first church at Pecos Pueblo is thought to have been built by Franciscan Fray Pedro Zambrano Ortiz around 1619. This isolated church was built along a narrow ridge, 400 m northeast of the pueblo’s main quadrangle, as the pueblo people would not allow construction closer to their dwelling sites. A permanent church was constructed outside the walls of the pueblo of Pecos, New Mexico in 1625. This church was destroyed in the Pueblo Revolt of 1680, wherein the Spanish were ejected from New Mexico. After the Spanish reconquest in 1693, a smaller church was built in 1717 for which the walls of this later church still stand on top of the prior church’s stone foundation. Ruins are located 25 miles south east of Santa Fe’s Pueblo Bonito Inn off I-25 in Pecos National Historic Park.
While visiting Santa Fe, NM and staying at Pueblo Bonito b&b inn, we invite guests to experience the vibrant and diverse offerings of Santa Fe events, activities and festivals. Whether your New Mexico vacation consists of a weekend getaway, an extended vacation, group gathering, or family reunion don’t miss out on Santa Fe events happening year round! Beginning in January with Ski Santa Fe to enjoy outside activities like skiing, snowboarding or snow shoeing in the Sangre de Cristo mountains to markets on the historic Santa Fe Plaza in August, to Holiday festivities in December – enjoy New Mexico’s rich culture and history and art! Santa Fe’s Art Galleries are open year round offering a plethora of creativity and awe inspired works from around the world. For more information, please visit the Santa Fe Visitors Bureau.
Ski Santa Fe - Thanksgiving thru Easter
Nestled high in the beautiful Sangre de Cristo Mountains, an easy 18 miles from Pueblo Bonito bed and breakfast inn and the heart of historic downtown Santa Fe, New Mexico. Ski Santa Fe is among the highest ski areas in the continental United States with base area elevation of 10,350 feet. The Millennium Triple Chairlift takes snow sport enthusiasts to a new height of 12,075 feet and some of the southwest’s finest skiing. Vistas atop Ski Santa Fe are unsurpassed and are a gateway for thrills including steep bump runs, powder filled chutes, gladded tree-skiing, and plenty of groomers. Skiers’ and Snowboarders alike enjoy this annual Santa Fe event beginning Thanksgiving through Easter dependent upon snow falls. Whether a first timer or seasoned veteran, Ski Santa Fe offers complete services for all levels of participants. Families of all ages, challenge seekers and sun lovers always enjoy this annual Santa Fe activity.
Santa Fe Souper Bowl – Santa Fe Convention Center
With 30 or so restaurants in attendance, this Santa Fe event occurs each January! The Santa Fe Souper Bowl is a great way to sample numerous Santa Fe restaurants like La Boca, Epazote or taste some of New Mexico’s best wines as well as raise money for hunger-relief in Santa Fe.
ARTfeast – Santa Fe galleries – February 22-24, 2013 ARTfeast features fine art coupled with delicious food prepared by local chefs. Held at a few Santa Fe galleries in late February, ARTfeast provides support to art programs in Santa Fe’s public schools. ARTfeast is a weekend of artful events with culinary delights and drinks.
Santa Fe Farmers Market -Railyard -Every Saturday and Tuesday, 8:00 am to 1:00 pm. This Santa Fe activity is year round. Fresh and yummy locally grown fruits, veggies, honey, eggs, cheeses, grass-fed meats, baked goods, body care, herbal products, and so much more!
Railyard Artisan Market- Railyard Farmers Market – Every Sunday, 10am to 4pm. Railyard Artisan Market features local artists and craftspeople from New Mexico, as well as food and entertainment! Great Santa Fe Event to enjoy year round!
Santa Fe Restaurant Week – Santa Fe Restaurants -Feb 25- March 3, 2013 Santa Fe Restaurant Week gets bigger and better each year! 60 or so restaurants participate and offer daily lunch or dinner discounts, fee samplings and unique dining experiences in and around downtown Santa Fe. This event easily compliments any Santa Fe visitors March vacation experience as exploring the vibrant tastes of Santa Fe cuisine is always a pleasure!
Civil War Weekend The Battle of Glorieta Pass was one of the most important battles of the Civil War in the Southwest which took place in March of 1862. Re-enactment dates of this annual Santa Fe event are in May but can vary. New Mexico’s role in the United States Civil War is re-enactment at the battles of Glorieta Pass and Apache Canyon at Rancho de Las Golondrias near downtown Santa Fe and Pueblo Bonito Inn. This historic Santa Fe event features military drills, cannon firings, and more all within 15 minute drive of Pueblo Bonito Inn- Santa Fe.
Eldorado Studio Tour - May 17-19, 2012 90+ artist studios can be explored on this unique and local art tour which is so close to Pueblo Bonito b&b inn! An impressive array of art work features stained glass, digital art, fiber arts, paintings, sculptures & photography. Santa Fe visitors can examine and buy art pieces from artists directly on this tour!
Native Treasures Indian Art Festival – Santa Fe Community Convention Center – May 25-26, 2013
Shopping more than 180 established and emerging artists from Native American pueblos and tribes features beautiful jewelry and art pieces. A late May weekend is traditional for this Santa Fe festival which benefits the Museum of Indian Arts and Culture. Included is a preview and benefit cocktail party on Friday eve.
Santa Fe Century - May 19, 2013
Cycling through natural beauty of northern New Mexico landscapes and clear, blue skies! This annual Santa Fe event draws more than 2,500 bicyclists for a memorable 100-mile ride down historic Turquoise Trail, across the Ortiz and San Pedro Mountains, into quaint Galisteo, then back to Santa Fe! Optional rides of 25, 50 and 75 miles are available for bicyclist too. The third Sunday in May is traditional for this Santa event to take place.
Rodeo de Santa Fe – Santa Fe Rodeo Grounds
Pueblo Bonito b&b is a loyal sponsor of the annual Santa Fe rodeo held in late June. Since 1949, this special Santa Fe event features traditional rodeo competitions from barrel racing to bull riding. A sanctioned PRCA event, the Rodeo de Santa Fe kicks off New Mexico’s rodeo circuit and is always family friendly. Mutton Bustin’ for kids, the carnival midway, a parade held in downtown Santa Fe, with food, souvenirs and of course beautiful Rodeo Royalty to enjoy! Performances on Thursday thru Saturday eves around 6:00 pm traditionally.
The Santa Fe Opera – The Santa Fe Opera House -June 28 – August 24, 2013
2013 Santa Fe Opera season is certain to be exciting! Featuring 5 new productions, one of which is a world premier performance held at The Santa Fe Opera House. Opening the season, opera enthusiasts will be thrilled by the ebullient mezzo-soprano Susan Graham in the title role of Jacques Offenbach’s hilarious The Grand Duchess of Gerolstein. Next, The Marriage of Figaro provides an endless appeal to audiences and scholars alike with its beautiful music and story of redemptive love. La Donna del Lago -Rossini’s most romantic masterpiece will be performed by the fabulous mezzo-soprano Joyce DiDonato in the title role for which has earned her acclaim in world opera capitals including Milan and Paris. La Traviata – Verdi’s tenderest and most intimately observed depiction of love reveals the hypocritical realities behind a gorgeous facade of the Parisian demi-mondaine and brilliantly illuminated by stage director and designer Laurent Pelly. As anticipation builds, The Santa Fe Opera’s world premiere of Oscar by composer Theodore Morrison’s opera based on the life of Oscar Wilde is certain to round out a memorable Santa Fe Opera season.
Art Santa Fe – Santa Fe Convention Center 50 or more Art Galleries bring together this festive Santa Fe art fair which features works from around the world. Art collectors, artists, and representatives showcase work by acclaimed masters as well as emerging artists.
Santa Fe International Folk Art Market – Milner Plaza on Museum Hill – July 12-14, 2013
Emerging as one of the top Santa Fe Markets, New Mexico visitors will enjoy, artists from around the world who travel to Santa Fe to sell their crafts. Weavings, woodcarvings, pottery, paintings, beadwork, and jewelry are all available to Santa Fe visitors at the largest international folk art market in the United States. Santa Fe Folk Art Market is truly an inspiration boasting a wide variety of creativity from around the world. Santa Fe is the perfect host location as it is the only place in the U.S. designated by U.N.E.S.C.O. as a Creative City of Design & Folk Art.
Pancakes on the Plaza – Santa Fe Plaza – July 4, 2013 Get up early on July 4th and walk down to Santa Fe Plaza from Pueblo Bonito bed and breakfast inn. Enjoy freshly made hot pancakes with butter and syrup along with live music, dancing, kids entertainment, art booths, antique car show and lots of local people in this annual Fourth of July Santa Fe event. In the evening gaze into the clear skies over Santa Fe for a community firework display at Santa Fe High School.
Santa Fe Wine Festival – El Rancho de las Golondrinas
New Mexico is the country’s oldest wine-producing region, inviting you to savor a glass of Chardonnay, Syrah, Viognier or other varietals than our annual wine festival in early July. You can purchase bottles to take home from more than a dozen New Mexico vintners. There’s also live music, food, and handmade arts and crafts for sale as well.
Eight Northern Indian Pueblos Arts & Crafts Show – San Juan, New Mexico
Fans of Native American art and culture adore this annual Santa Fe event, held in mid-July at Ohkay Owingeh (formerly San Juan Pueblo). Hundreds of artists from pueblos and tribes around the country gather to celebrate their heritage, selling an amazing array of arts and crafts and participating in ceremonial dances. Founded in 1972, this popular Santa Fe festival draws crowds who appreciate that it’s organized by Native Americans and held on Pueblo land.
Traditional Spanish Market – Santa Fe Plaza – July 22-28, 2013
A popular Santa Fe event, the Traditional Spanish Market features an impressive collection of santos, tinwork, textiles, & furniture, all hand-crafted by New Mexican artists using traditional tools and techniques. This annual Santa Fe event takes place in late July on the Santa Fe Plaza, while the winter market occurs in December in downtown Santa Fe.
Contemporary Hispanic Market – Lincoln Avenue
The Contemporary Hispanic Market is the largest Hispanic art event in the country, featuring innovative work by more than 100 artists drawing. Showcasing Hispanic heritage and New Mexico traditions, this summer market is held on Lincoln Avenue near the Santa Fe Plaza at the same time the Traditional Spanish Market in July.
Lavender and Herb Fair – El Rancho de las Golondrinas
When the lavender flowers bloom around the historic museum El Rancho de las Golondrinas, it’s time for the annual Lavender and Herb Fair in July. If you’re a lavender lover, this is the Santa Fe event for you. You’ll learn all about the herb, from culinary to medicinal use.
SOFA WEST: Santa Fe 2012 – Santa Fe Community Convention Center
Recognized as the nation’s premier fairs for outstanding contemporary arts and design in New York and Chicago, the 2012 SOFA’s Western edition returns to the Santa Fe Convention Center in August.
Mountain Man Trade Fair and Rendezvous – Palace of the Governors Courtyard
Experience mountain life during this annual celebration of 19th-century life in New Mexico. Held in early August, buy authentic and reproduced items from people dressed up in 19th-century clothing. Enjoy live music from the era, while your family participates in games and activities.
Wheelwright Museum Benefit Auction – Wheelwright Museum of the American Indian
Held in late August, this annual auction benefits the Wheelwright Museum of the American Indian. The Santa Fe event features historic and contemporary Native American art, while guests enjoy silent and live auctions.
Whitehawk Antique Shows – Santa Fe Community Convention Center
This annual set of antique shows is held mid-August, becoming a popular Santa Fe event for serious collectors and browsers alike. Beginning with 3 days of the Annual Antique Ethnographic Art Show, the show features ethnographic and tribal art from around the world, and is followed by 3 days of the Annual Invitational Antique Indian Art Show.
Santa Fe Indian Market – Santa Fe Plaza
Don’t miss this internationally-famous market, held at the end of August. If you’re a fan of Native American art and culture, this is the Santa Fe event for you! With 1,000+ artists selling their pottery, weaving, jewelry, and basketry, enjoy a variety of art on the Santa Fe Plaza. Enjoy fry bread, roasted corn, and Navajo tacos as you enjoy Pueblo dances, live music, and shopping. Get there early – this Santa Fe market typically draws 100,000 visitors from around the world!!
Bluegrass and Old Tyme Music Festival – Santa Fe Rodeo Grounds
A Santa Fe festival in late August, dance the weekend away during the Bluegrass and Old Tyme Music Festival in Santa Fe. Featuring all kinds of musicians who have mastered the bluegrass banjo, mandolin, clawhammer, and fiddle, you can’t miss this lively Santa Fe event, sponsored by the Southwest Pickers.
Santa Fe Renaissance Fair – El Rancho de las Golondrinas
Bursting with entertainment, join the cheerful crowds as you watch jousting, sword fighting, and Celtic games. Buy shields, blades, and cloaks from vendors while feasting on turkey legs during this mid-September Santa Fe fair!
Burning of Zozobra and Santa Fe Fiesta – Santa Fe Plaza and various venues
Occurring in mid-September, the streets are filled with joyous shouts during “Viva la Fiesta”, the oldest community event in the United States. The week-long festivities honor the reoccupation of Santa Fe led by Don Diego de Vargas in 1692, a dozen years after the Pueblo Indian Revolt. Beginning with the Burning of Zozobra, the fiesta rids everyone’s troubles from the past year. In addition, guests embrace music, dance, food, a Children’s Pet Parade, religious ceremonies, and more. Blending cherished traditions and joy, Fiesta is a favorite time for visitors and locals alike!
Pilar Studio Tour – Pilar, NM – Early September
Pilar is a charming village along the Rio Grande just 75 minutes north of Pueblo Bonito b&b inn in downtown Santa Fe. The Pilar Studio Tour features a handfull of talented local artists who make pottery, wearable art, paintings, and more unique creations.
Pojoaque River Art Tour – Pojoaque River Valley – Mid-September
The annual Pojoaque River Art Tour takes place in the scenic Pojoaque River Valley- an old farming community just 16 miles north of Pueblo Bonito b&b in Santa Fe, NM. Nearly 20 artists open their studios which include Pojoaque and San Ildefonso pueblo residents and artists.
High Road to Taos Art Tour - Last Two Weekends in September
The High Road Art Tour is a destination and an event. Each fall artists of Northern New Mexico open their studios and galleries for two consecutive weekends for the High Road Art Tour. Trees of gold and an autumn cobalt sky offers one of the loveliest drives in the loveliest of seasons for this annual tour. An historic daytrip from Pueblo Bonito b&b that winds through tiny, old Land Grant villages and rural countryside offering nearly 60 stops to see woodcarvers, painters, jewelry makers, wind chimes creators and more!
Santa Fe Wine & Chile Fiesta- Downtown Santa Fe Venues – Sept 25-29, 2013
This popular annual fiesta has become a favorite for food and wine enthusiasts throughout the United States. Late September brings this featured Santa Fe event with more than 110 wineries, nearly 50 Santa Fe restaurant chefs who participate in seminars, cooking demonstrations, as well as luncheons, winemaker dinners, and the famous Grand Food & Wine Tasting. Can’t forget the Gruet Golf Classic!
Albuquerque International Balloon Fiesta - Albuquerque Balloon Fiesta Park – Early October- 9 days
Just a short 66 miles south of Pueblo Bonito b&b the worlds largest gathering of hot air balloons fill the sky with mass ascesions in early morning, balloon glows in the late evening and competitive events for balloon enthusiasts. This spectacular annual fiesta has been known to bring in 800,000 visitors over the 9 day New Mexico fiesta!
Harvest Festival – El Rancho de las Golondrinas – Early October
A living history museum dedicated to the heritage and culture of Spanish Colonial New Mexico, celebrate the harvest during this annual Santa Fe festival in early October. Held at the El Rancho de las Golondrinas, learn to string chile ristras, crush wine grapes by foot, and grind sorghum with the help of burros. Enjoy freshly cooked tortillas while shopping arts and crafts from local artisans. This annua Santa Fe Festival is one the whole family will enjoy. Experience New Mexico’s vibrant culture.
Abiquiú Studio Tour – Abiquiú, NM
Santa Fe vacationer enjoy over 70 Abiquiu artists on this annual art studio tour. Breathtaking mountain views of the Chama River Valley painted with golden cottonwoods creates a memorable day trip from Pueblo Bonito b&b inn in Santa Fe. A 40 minute drive to the historical spot where Georgia O’Keeffe once lived and worked. Featuring paintings, weavings, furniture, traditional Spanish Colonial art, and much more.
Galisteo Studio Tour – Galisteo, NM
Third Saturday and Sunday annually in October
Delightful and quaint the sleepy village of Galisteo lures visitors to enjoy 30+ artists living in beautiful old adobe homes in the Galisteo basin. Gold and amber leafed trees boast fall colors creating a picturesque autumn environment for strolling dirt roads to enjoy a wide range of items. Open studios include antiques, painting, pottery, sculpture, weaving as well as bake sale items and self tours of the historic Galisteo Church. This traditional New Mexico village comes alive during this annual Santa Fe art tour. Just a short 20 minute drive south of Pueblo Bonito bed and breakfast inn. http://galisteostudiotour.com/
Dixon Studio Tour – Dixon, NM – First Weekend in November
An abundance of artists (50 or more) open studios in November for this annual art walk event and tour. A stunning 45 minute drive north of Pueblo Bonito b&b takes you through Embudo Valley to Dixon, NM. Creative works not limited to ceramic, wearable art, local wines, roving musicians photography, and jewelry are featured in this picturesque village.
La Cienega Studio Tour – La Cienega, NM (about 10 miles southwest of Santa Fe off I-25) – November 24-25, 2012; Nov 23-24, 2013
30+ New Mexico artists open their studios for this annual art tour southwest of Santa Fe. Paintings, photography, fiber arts, sculpture, glass, and jewelry can all be viewed and purchased on this Santa Fe Art event tour.
Santa Fe Indian Market Winter Showcase – Santa Fe Community Convention Center – Nov 23-24, 2012; Nov 22-23, 2013
Santa Fe holiday shopping begins Thanksgiving Weekend! Treasures of all kinds created by Native American artists from around the United States show at this annual Santa Fe Market. Hosted by Southwestern Association of Indian Arts (SWAIA) – both Winter and Summer Indian Santa Fe Market events feature popular artists showing off rare talents and one-of-a-kind pieces by acclaimed Native artists.
Santa Fe Film Festival - December 6-9, 2012
This relatively new Santa Fe festival celebrates the creative spirit by showcasing films made in the southwest, independent American-made narrative films, films made outside the U.S., documentaries, and art films. A four day schedule offering workshops, panels, parties, and awards have made the Santa Fe Film Festival a popular annual Santa Fe event attracting film professionals and fans alike.
Contemporary Hispanic Winter Market – Santa Fe Community Convention Center – Dec 5-6, 2012; Dec 7-8, 2013
This Annual Santa Fe event provides a rare opportunity to meet some of the best Hispanic Artists in New Mexico. Personal interaction with these creative artists is a highlight of the Annual Santa Fe Market showcasing original paintings, prints, sculptures, photography, furniture, jewelry, ceramics, weaving, and much more. Each year prior to Winter Spanish Market the Spanish Colonial Arts Society holds ¡Celebración! – an exciting Art and Travel Auction and Dinner on Friday night.
Las Posadas – Palace of the Governors – Early December
This candle-lit annual Santa Fe event occurs at the beginning of each December ushering in the Christmas season. This tradition includes a version of the re-enactment of Mary and Joseph searching for lodging in Bethlehem to give birth to Baby Jesus. The procession proceeds around the Santa Fe Plaza and ends at the Place of the Governors courtyard where community join together to sing of carols and feast on cookies! Free to public.
Canyon Road Farolito Walk – Canyon Road – Dec 24- Annual Santa Fe Event
Celebrating the holiday season on Canyon Road Farolito Walk, lighting up the hearts and souls of the crowds who walk this famous path every Christmas Eve. Small, sand-filled bags contain votive candles that softly glow on this enchanting night as they line neighborhood streets and adobe walls. Carolers sing for joy as they warm themselves around small bonfires during the night.
Pueblo Bonito b&b offers exceptional value for the Santa Fe traveler who wants to create a memorable New Mexico vacation experience. Voted “2012 Guest Favorite”; 2011 ”Most Likely to Return” and “Excellent” by Tripadvisor- let us help you plan your next trip to Santa Fe, NM! 1-800-461-4599
Popular day trip suggestion for our Santa Fe vacation visitors who enjoy staying at Pueblo Bonito bed & breakfast inn is to enjoy a visit to one of the nearby natural hot springs. A short scenic drive to access one of the following natural hot springs is worth the time alone, but when coupled with the therapeutic, relaxing energies these waters provide, a special and memorable experience occurs that can only be experienced when taking an enchanting New Mexico vacation.
Please note many of these springs are located in remote destinations and may require a certain amount of hiking, climbing or other physical activity to reach. You should always check with the Forest Service or local ranger station before attempting to access these pools.
Ojo Caliente, located in the foothills of the Carson National Forest, in the town of Ojo Caliente, between Santa Fe and Taos. Five different springs with different temperatures and mineral content; indoor and outdoor pools with temperatures ranging from 85-106F. Bathing suits required.
Montezuma Hot Springs, located northwest of the town of Las Vegas on the grounds of the United World College. Three clusters of concrete soaking pools of various sizes and temperatures. Bathing suits required.
San Antonio Hot Springs, located west of Santa Fe, north of the town of Jemez Springs. It is about a 10 minute walk from where you can park. Ask locals for directions. A series of rock pools built along the hillside of San Diego Canyon. The hottest pool is about 105 F with the lower ones progressively cooler. Clothing optional.
McCauley Warm Springs, located west of Santa Fe, north of the town of Jemez Springs. Accessible from either Battleship Rock (5 miles north of Jemez Springs on highway 4) or Jemez Falls Campground (14 miles north of Jemez Springs). Park at either location for the roughly 2.5 mile hike in to the springs. Large, shallow, warm pool that flows into several smaller, deeper pools with temperatures 85-90 F. Clothing optional.
Soda Dam Hot Springs, located west of Santa Fe, north of the town of Jemez Springs. A cluster of small hot spring pools with spectacular scenery not great soaking.
Spence Hot Spring, located west of Santa Fe, north of the town of Jemez Springs. An easy short hike. Ask locals for directions. Several sand-bottom pools on a steep hillside on the east side of the Jemez River. Water temperature between 100 –– 110 F. Clothing optional.
Giggling Springs Hot Springs Jemez Springs, Bathing suits required. Reservations strongly recommended. Pool temperature is 102-104.
Jemez Springs BathHouse, located in the park on the main street of Jemez Springs.