Reporter: Krista Eleftheriou
First Published: 16/07/2006
SALLY SARA: Well, it might seem remarkable given the current conditions, but 50 years ago, much of eastern Australia was experiencing heavy rainfall. The result was a wall of water which swept down the Murray-Darling system. Thousands of people from Wentworth to the Murray mouth were involved in desperate struggles to save their towns. The flood crossed State borders and was described as the biggest natural disaster in South Australia's history. Now, 50 years later, we look back at the floods of 1956.
NEIL BORMANN: It was just month after month of very heavy rain.
BOB POLLOCK: It was the mother of all floods.
MICHAEL KEENAN: It was the biggest one in white man's history.
IAN TOLLEY: It was just a phenomenal occurrence that grew on us.
SID VILLIS: The power of it and the huge dimension of it - it was very hard to describe it in words.
KRISTA ELEFTHERIOU: Max Fatchen was a 36-year-old journalist working for the 'Adelaide Advertiser' when he was sent to cover the biggest rural story of 1956 - the rising floodwaters of the Darling, Murray and Murrumbidgee rivers.
MAX FATCHEN: My brief was to go up and write the human stories that were everywhere. When I arrived, there was a great stretch of water in the whole valley. Everywhere there were the flood banks, there were trucks carrying sandbags, there were people filling sandbags, there were people watching the river itself and I realised that I was in the middle of a great crisis.
KRISTA ELEFTHERIOU: This is the River Murray, and it's here near Wentworth that the Darling joins it. In 1956, both of these rivers were overflowing and, when they met, they created the largest flood since European settlement. It was a flood that threatened dozens of communities.
MICHAEL KEENAN: Wentworth is on the floodplain of the Darling River, as it enters the Murray, and Wentworth also has the awkward position of having three parts of the town so that were three ring roads of levee banks required. Nobody really knew how high the river was coming, but it kept coming and coming and coming, so it was really quite desperate.
KRISTA ELEFTHERIOU: At the time, Michael Keenan was just a teenager, but that didn't stop him joining hundreds of other river locals in building levees around the town of Wentworth.
MECHANIC: We might have to get a jack under it.
KRISTA ELEFTHERIOU: Their aim - to stop the waters from swamping their town. Fruit grower Bob Pollock also pitched in.
MICHAEL KEENAN: Bob was part of a war service land settlement out here at Coomealla, and part of their issue was a grey Fergie tractor to open up their farms. So there was a ready supply of almost-new tractors which came to the rescue, because of their agility and some of their attachments that could help build levee banks.
BOB POLLOCK: It was right at the peak when it looked as if Wentworth and Curlwaa could be washed away.
KRISTA ELEFTHERIOU: The Ferguson tractor has a fondly held place in Wentworth's history. For miles around, growers and farmers sat atop their Fergies for hours on end, holding back the water.
MICHAEL KEENAN: They were going through the night, particularly when it was critical, and so it was really lights and a couple of tractors went over the bank and into the river and they had to be rescued, and there was a bit of drama around it as well.
KRISTA ELEFTHERIOU: The little tractors' place in history is remembered every five years during Wentworth's Festival of the Flood. This year, the 50th anniversary will be even more special. Hundreds of tractors will take to the main street to remember the flood that came so close to washing them away. The town of Renmark is a few hundred kilometres downstream of Wentworth. By the time the flood reached this South Australian fruit-growing region, the force of water was a massive 340,000 megalitres a day - 100-fold on today's flow. And as the water streamed in, so did the volunteers from all across the country. Max Fatchen remembers it well.
MAX FATCHEN: The women were the sandbag fillers as well as the feeders and they were just marvellous, and they kept up the men's morale. There were various plans to evacuate people, but it was a constant state of tension and alert.
IAN TOLLEY: As a citrus grower in part of the community, life just stopped in that interim period of three months. We had little time to pick fruit and little place to get it packed.
KRISTA ELEFTHERIOU: With a lifetime spent on the Murray - first as a grower, later as a horticultural consultant - Ian Tolley remembers the '56 flood as a time when growers and volunteers worked feverishly to build levee banks around Renmark.
IAN TOLLEY: In the fruit block area, the growers supplied the resourcing with all their tractors and scoops and trailers. They just came out of every block. In the end, we worked on 20ks of floodbank surrounding Renmark and the settlement to protect it. Without the banks, Renmark would have washed downstream.
KRISTA ELEFTHERIOU: But despite the effort, the levees did not always hold and the crops and homes they were meant to protect were flooded.
IAN TOLLEY: On one occasion, a clean break - it just slid away and here we have now a mess of pottage. And men risking their lives with sheets of iron being put in vertically from both sides of a break, trying to hold it and then suddenly being swept away and having to fight your way through the mud and there’s sheets of iron flying away in the water, with all sorts of debris, so it was quite a dangerous situation.
MAX FATCHEN: It was the night that everybody dreaded to a degree because the river would start to infiltrate.
IAN TOLLEY: No floodlights, no night lights. It was winter - it was pitch black.
KRISTA ELEFTHERIOU: By August 1956, it seemed as if the remaining residents of Renmark would have to evacuate.
IAN TOLLEY: It kept rising, and so when it got to 30 feet, there was a good deal of suggestion we'd reached the point of no return all-out and that's when the steamer was ready to take the last of the people away to get them to the railway linkage and then at that point, the river level stabilised. Within a week, it dropped half an inch and we were saved.
KRISTA ELEFTHERIOU: While the town of Renmark was saved, further downstream again, it was a different story. Mannum was inundated. Here, the wide-sprawling plains had given way to steep cliffs and hills, walls that hemmed in the rising floodwaters. Baker Neil Bormann had just bought into his business in Mannum's main street. Much of his time had been spent building walls of sandbags to keep the rising floodwaters out.
NEIL BORMANN: August 24th is the night - it was a Friday morning. Our local fire chief came in and said, "There has been a break in the levee." So I slipped on my knee boots which were always by the back door, took two steps down and I was well up past my knees in floodwaters rushing in. We had yeast and dough all on trays, buns being made, so we had to empty everything else and let it float in the water.
KRISTA ELEFTHERIOU: Cars gave way to paddle power as streets began to resemble the canals of Venice. The ground floors of the town's two pubs were flooded, not that it stopped the locals from having a drink.
NEIL BORMANN: The pub was operational. You would row your boat up to the top balcony. They had a hole cut in the railing. You would tie your boat up and you'd just go and drink from both hotels which had top bars operating.
KRISTA ELEFTHERIOU: When the waters receded, Neil Bormann was able to return to his bakery and rebuild his business. But not all victims of the flood were so lucky.
SID VILLIS: We went in for a poultry farm here and from about '52 or '53 up to the '56 flood time. We were just starting to build up something nice and big. We had washing machines, incubators and God knows what. We were starting to do well.
KRISTA ELEFTHERIOU: These days, Sid Villis has just a couple of chooks in his backyard. In 1956 he was a budding poultry farmer in the riverside hamlet of Moorook.
SID VILLIS: We took our birds out to an old farmhouse. It was pretty rough. We had to fold up papers and push in the cracks of the walls to keep the wind out, but it was all right, and the birds were just let run wild.
KRISTA ELEFTHERIOU: Sid Villis has never learned to swim, but as his birds free-ranged and the water level kept rising, he got about in an old wash tub.
SID VILLIS: We had an old three-compartment wash trough and we went around in that. We would stand in there. I had my two heels in two and my brother was up the front with one heel in a hole with a lump of wood for an oar. When you think about it later on, you think, we were damn fools. We could have drowned quite easily.
KRISTA ELEFTHERIOU: Obviously he lived to tell the tale, but an attempt to rebuild his farm on higher ground failed. Two years later Sid Villis walked away from his dream of owning his own poultry business.
SID VILLIS: Worked like dogs to try to make a dollar. All of a sudden - as you can see, there is nothing there now.
KRISTA ELEFTHERIOU: The water flooded more than 600 buildings and 20,000 acres of irrigated property in the Riverland alone.
TREVOR JACOBS: The areas affected, like the vineyards and the orchards, took about three to five years to be repaired. Orchards take about three years to be replanted and then be productive. The stone fruits take about five years. In terms of rebuilding houses and other infrastructure, houses could take up to 10, 15 years, depending on the processes.
KRISTA ELEFTHERIOU: Trevor Jacobs, manager production with the Murray-Darling Basin Commission, is considered something of an expert on the great flood of '56. He says two consecutive years of rain within the Murray and Darling catchments led to the record flow.
TREVOR JACOBS: The flood plain is about a million hectares and this would have flooded about 900,000 hectares of the flood plain. On the Darling, even larger numbers because the river spreads everywhere there. It's flatter.
KRISTA ELEFTHERIOU: In today's terms, the flood caused more than $300 million worth of damage where it hit hardest in South Australia. Some of those who went through it believe it will never happen again.
MAX FATCHEN: This was an exceptional thing. It was something far beyond the norm and I don't think that it will ever come again.
TREVOR JACOBS: It can happen again at any time.
KRISTA ELEFTHERIOU: Although irrigators draw more than 11,000 gigalitres of water from the basin each year and dams have been built since the '56 flood, Mr Jacobs warns nothing can completely prevent a repeat of history.
TREVOR JACOBS: The consequences of a '56 flood now would be higher than then because of the increased development both in agricultural pursuits and other developments.
KRISTA ELEFTHERIOU: Most councils now restrict construction of new buildings to above the 1956 flood peak and levees surround many of the growing regions and towns, but ironically, the banks designed to protect could worsen the situation.
TREVOR JACOBS: The water still has to go somewhere, so if you block it off from one area, it goes somewhere else. So there is always controversy associated with levee banks, but they are effective when managed properly.
KRISTA ELEFTHERIOU: Former Mannum baker Neil Bormann had his business flooded a second time in 1974, but it hasn't stopped him joining the hundreds of retirees and holiday-makers who have built new homes on the banks.
NEIL BORMANN: So if I was sitting here during the '56 flood level, I would be more than a metre under water.
KRISTA ELEFTHERIOU: Do you think we are prepared for the next big one?
MICHAEL KEENAN: Yes, I do. It depends on what extreme, because substantial levee banks have been built around Wentworth and the surrounding urban areas and hospital area, and they've just recently been restored and rebuilt.
BOB POLLOCK: Yes.
MICHAEL KEENAN: Higher and stronger, so I think they are well prepared for anything like this. What the question might be is, "How high does the river come?" That's it. That's it. That's it.
MAX FATCHEN: When it happens, will it happen? Nobody knows, but we're prepared.
TREVOR JACOBS, Manager Production, River Murray Water
02 6279 0139