What is Envirothon?
Envirothon is a natural resources competition for high school students. Students who participate learn stewardship and management concepts and work to solve real and hypothetical environmental problems. The program is field-oriented, community based, and gives students an opportunity to work with natural resource professionals.
Who makes up a team and what do they do?
Envirothon is a tiered series of competitions. Students work in teams of five students. Throughout the school year students prepare to compete at the local (county) level. Winners of the local competition advance to compete at the Area level. The top three teams from the six Areas in the state compete to be the State Winner. The team wining the state competition then advances to the national Canon Envirothon.
These teams of high school students are tested on their knowledge of natural resources – soils, forestry, wildlife, aquatics, and a current environmental issue. Students visit five “in-the-field” test stations where written and hands-on problem solving is required along with an oral presentation formulating a strategy for addressing an environmental issues problem.
How does this work?
The local, countywide Henrico competition and program is sponsored and administered by Henricopolis Soil and Water Conservation District. Henricopolis will provide a schedule of training opportunities to prepare Henrico teams for their local competition. (link to schedule). Henricopolis staff will also assist with registration and administrative duties associated with having the winning Henrico team participate in the Area competition (link to Area competition). Staff will provide coaches with pertinent and relevant information related to the program.
How do I start a team?
Each team must have a team coach. Interested students must identify a coach,
whether it be a teacher, club leader, parent, or other adult. It is
recommended that the coach attend the
Henrico Coach’s Information Meeting (new, for 2012).
If you are unable to attend the
Henrico Coach’s Information Meeting,
please contact Henricopolis SWCD.