Find ancestors who served their country in these databases and archives.
Alabama Department of Archives and History
Military riches here include Thomas McAdory Owen's Revolutionary War Soldiers in Alabama, Confederate service cards and WWI deaths.
Archives of Maryland Online
Also home to land and probate records, this site will attract military researchers for its muster rolls and other service records from the Revolution, and Civil War records from both sides.
Civil War Soldiers and Sailors System
An essential starting point for finding Civil War military kin, the system searches 6.3 million names, Union and Confederate alike, from 44 states and territories. Each name is linked to a regimental history and, in turn, capsule histories of battles.
Among the hundreds of thousands of pages of information here, you'll find the published Official Record of the war (the "OR"), battle maps and the largest online collection of Civil War photos.
Library of Virginia
Though encompassing all of Virginia history, these digital holdings are particularly rich in military history, including the 34,402-name Virginia Military Dead Database and 250,000 Virginia World War II Separation Notices. The index to names in Confederate Veteran magazine goes beyond Virginians.
Louisiana State Archives
Search a 49,000-name online index to 152 rolls of microfilmed Confederate pension applications.
National Park Service Civil War Homepage
Get a head start on the Civil War sesquicentennial beginning in 2011 with this official site.
New York State Civil War Soldier Database
The archives is loaded with helpful info for researching military records, but the star of this site is its searchable database of more than 360,000 New York soldiers.
Pennsylvania State Archives
Files of Pennsylvania veterans from the American Revolution to the Spanish-American War are online here, along with WWI medal applications.
Texas State Library and Archives Commission
Though not limited to military history, this Lone Star State site is packed with data on Texas fighting men. Search more than 54,000 Confederate pension applications, the Confederate Indigent Families Lists, and the Index to Texas Adjutant General Service Records, 1836 to 1935.