Beside him, his younger brother Jacob slept soundlessly huddled into his neon overcoat, the chords to his tiny iPod hanging loosely around his neck and off his shoulders. Alex felt the need to detangle his brother from the mess he had slept into but decided otherwise. Waking up Jacob is never really a good idea. The general sensory overload he had hoarded would not be aided by an added Jacob.
"The ammo was said to be found during the airport's routine screening."
Alex, seated directly behind his mother, could sense her silent agitation. She strapped and de-strapped herself, frustrated at the small bleeps of information the radio leaked, and she hit buttons senselessly. Despite his father's repeated consolations, she mindlessly raved on.
Maybe waking Jacob up wasn't that bad an idea.
Too bad pushing him across the car would be caught in the rearview mirror. Alex could only will him to wake up which was, of course, much to no avail.
"In other news, William Tomlinson is donating."
He leaned his head against the cold grubby window and watched the raindrops form glassy globes as they trickled down the car door. A red bicycle passed by, a wet dog in a bush, three puddles and four bigger ones, an alarming shriek and a cry, and the droplets skidded backward.
The shriek was his own, the cry was his mother's. With one hand instinctively on Jacob, his body rose despite itself and slammed against the passenger seat, as their Toyota helix skidded across the asphalt. Before he knew it they were engulfed by the black Maybach, first by its blinding lights and then the rest of its impact. The two metallic bodies collided, and two asteroids suddenly tangent, and pushed off-road.
Stones in a glass jar. Beads in a closed fist. The Owen family in their blue family car.
Alex could hear Jacob but he couldn't, he could hear his parents but he couldn't, maybe he could hear the radio sing through the crashes. Maybe he couldn't. The car hit a bump, flying a few feet up in the air, hitting his head painfully on the ceiling, before it flipped over and settled down, crushing everyone beneath it.
