The lepromin skin test is used to determine what type of leprosy a person has.
A sample of inactivated (unable to cause infection) leprosy-causing bacteria is injected just under the skin, usually on the forearm, so that a small lump pushes the skin up. The lump indicates that the antigen has been injected at the correct depth.
The injection site is labeled and examined 3 days, and again 28 days, later to see if there is a reaction.
People with dermatitis or other skin irritations should have the test performed on an unaffected part of the body.
If your child is to have this test performed, it may be helpful to explain how the test will feel, and even demonstrate on a doll. Explain the reason for the test. Knowing the "how and why" may reduce the anxiety your child feels.
When the antigen is injected, there may be a slight stinging or burning sensation. There may also be mild itching at the site of injection afterwards.
This test is a research tool that helps classify the different types of leprosy. It is not recommended as the main way to diagnosis leprosy.
People who don't have leprosy will have little or no skin reaction to the antigen. Patients with a particular type of leprosy called lepromatous leprosy will also have no skin reaction to the antigen.
A positive skin reaction may be seen in patients with tuberculoid and borderline tuberculoid leprosy. Patients with lepromatous leprosy will not have a positive skin reaction.
There is an extremely small risk of an allergic reaction, which may include itching and, rarely, hives.
This test is used primarily as a research tool and only helps in the classification of leprosy. It should not be used to establish a diagnosis of leprosy.
Leprosy skin test; Hanson disease - skin test
Renault CA, Ernst JD. Mycobacterium leprae. In: Mandell GL, Bennett JE, Dolin R, eds. Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases. 7th ed. Philadelphia, Pa: Elsevier Churchill Livingstone; 2009:chap 251.
Kumar B, Dogra S. The infectious diseases. In: Bope ET, Kellerman RD, eds. Conn’s Current Therapy 2012. 1st ed. Philadelphia, Pa: Saunders Elsevier; 2011:chap 3.
Updated by: Linda J. Vorvick, MD, Medical Director and Director of Didactic Curriculum, MEDEX Northwest Division of Physician Assistant Studies, Department of Family Medicine, UW Medicine, School of Medicine, University of Washington. Jatin M. Vyas, MD, PhD, Assistant Professor in Medicine, Harvard Medical School; Assistant in Medicine, Division of Infectious Disease, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Medical Director, A.D.A.M. Health Solutions, Ebix, Inc.
The information provided herein should not be used during any medical emergency or for the diagnosis or treatment of any medical condition. A licensed physician should be consulted for diagnosis and treatment of any and all medical conditions. Call 911 for all medical emergencies. Links to other sites are provided for information only -- they do not constitute endorsements of those other sites. Copyright 1997-2013, A.D.A.M., Inc. Duplication for commercial use must be authorized in writing by ADAM Health Solutions.