A Martian writing the history of terrestrial medicine 500 years from now could be forgiven for recording that “it was not unknown for a female earthling undergoing hysterectomy in the late 20th century to make a gift of her womb to a male friend”. After all, it is a documented fact that when film producer Raffaella De Laurentiis underwent hysterectomy she had her uterus bottled and sent to director David Lynch who keeps it to this day. If the Martian researcher were so minded, she could proceed from the observation of her single instance to the erection of a comprehensive theory which will reveal her own presuppositions far more effectively than it will illuminate the past.
In 1990 when Katharine Park began the researches that culminated with the publication of Secrets of Women: Gender, Generation, and the Origins of Human Dissection, she “planned to study the roots of human dissection in medieval Christian devotional and funerary practice”, the supposition having apparently been made and accepted that human dissection did indeed have roots in Christian devotional and funerary practice. In Secrets of Women she seeks to parlay clusters of odd instances of female dissection into a general tendency or “ubiquity”, although every reader of Gray's Anatomy knows that the paradigmatic human anatomy is male and the female anatomy consists of reproductive organs and nothing else. Though we might these days study the structures in the female human brain, it has not yet become the standard human brain.
The earliest case to be discussed in Secrets of Women is that of a Franciscan abbess, Chiara da Montefalco, whose body was searched in 1308 by her nuns post mortem for prodigious signs that would promote an already burgeoning cultus and bring her convent fame and fortune; two similar cases are cited, and the point made that no similar case can be found in the period in which the body to be searched is male. This in turn is interpreted as evidence that practice, already extremely rare, was “restricted to female bodies”. There was no authority presiding over these events; in all three cases the procedures were informal, carried out by nuns of the community. What the nuns found inside the saintly Mother Chiara were three small gallstones and an impression of the crucified Christ imprinted on her heart. The consulting physician assured them that these could not have been naturally occurring structures. The church authorities, to their credit, retained a healthy scepticism for more than three centuries. Chiara was not canonised until 1881.
Park goes on to argue “that knowledge of the body's interior based on anatomy and dissection was represented in late 13th- and early 14th-century Italian learned discourse as male and public, in opposition to characteristically female and secret forms of knowing, and, second, that the female body emerged during the course of this period as the ideal type of body, with a secret and hidden interior, the paradigmatic object of dissection”. Even the female body is not constructed around a void; it is precisely the vulgar notion of the female body as a passive container that limits investigation of the female anatomy to the organs of generation. Not for nothing were the parts of the matrix given the same names as the parts of the brain; the uterus was, as it were, the female brain. When the systematic study of human anatomy gathers pace in the 16th century, men's bodies begin to be examined as dynamic structures. Nobody studied musculature in a female model; there are no écorchées. The female body was not skinned but opened, like a box; indeed female models in which the abdomen could be opened, the uterus exposed and opened in its turn and a model of the fetus taken out were highly prized objets de vertu.
Park moves rather swiftly to late 15th-century Florence and the autopsy carried out on the body of Fiametta Strozzi at the request of her husband. Fiametta seems to have died 3 weeks after her seventh confinement as a consequence of a retained placenta. Such privately ordered autopsies were becoming commoner at the turn of the 16th century but they were never common. At this point, Park's argument becomes difficult to follow:
“The relative lack of occupational organisation and autonomy on the part of Italian midwives may reflect the early involvement of Italian physicians in treating women in matters relating to generation and birth. This did not represent a ‘usurpation’ of the functions of midwives by physicians…”
Obviously. A physician trained at Padua or Bologna was not expected to touch the body of the patient. What was expected of him was a learned opinion, a diagnosis possibly, and a prescription certainly. Wounds of all kinds, burns, fractures, gashes, were daily occurrences and none of them was dealt with by a physician. Bone-setting and suturing were learned by surgeons and women as manual skills, by watching and copying. The women and barber-surgeons who carried out everyday procedures understood and recognised the structures they were dealing with, but they could not name the parts. The great change happens when the son of a surgeon, Berengario di Carpi, acquires a humanist education and sets out the practical knowledge he acquired as his father's assistant in an illustrated Latin text.
The father who summoned a physician to his wife's confinement was displaying both a fitting concern for his progeny, if not for his wife, and his spending power. It was the midwife's duty to attend the woman from the onset of labour to the outcome; the physician came and went, much as the consultant obstetrician does now. Park muddles the situation:
“Rather it seems that male physicians began to provide more medical services to women in matters in which these women had received little or no specialized care of any sort and had relied instead on the advice of female family, friends, and the occasional empirical practitioner.”
The only medical service a physician provided in 16th-century Italy was words, very expensive words, that became even more expensive when they were translated into the apothecary's receipts, in which the costliness of the ingredients had far more to do with the patient's ability to pay than with any therapeutic function. The organisation and licensing of midwives was sometimes undertaken by the ecclesiastical authorities, but it was more often a matter of local knowledge. We know from surviving letters that families sought out the most respected midwives and booked their services in advance. The popular impression was that the woman whose labour was complicated by the presence of a physician would be lucky to survive.
Most of what passed for medicine before the 17th century was self-important, self-protective humbug. Park's second last case, of Elena Duglioli, involves a self-professed virgin who lactated. As she lay dead in the Church of San Giovanni in Monte in Bologna in 1520, milk was expressed from her breasts.
“…her most devoted supporters suckled from Elena's corpse, which was then eviscerated and embalmed by two local surgeons.”
The faithful, scenting a miracle, were already congregating. Unfortunately the local surgeons threw away the uterus with the other gizzards, so the most likely cause of Elena's lactation was never eliminated. No reliable hypothesis can be erected on evidence so singular. It is a positive relief to emerge from such hocus-pocus into the luminosity and proportion of Vesalius and Berengario, but sobering to reflect that the poor understanding of the functions of the normal female reproductive system, in particular menstruation, that Park castigates in them, persists in our own time. The well woman is almost as mysterious a creature today as she was in 1500.