High blood pressure and low blood pressure are dangerous to mothers and the unborn babies, but high blood pressure is the more common and the more dangerous of the two conditions. In the U.S., six to eight percent of pregnant women have high blood pressure and this can lead to complications such as stillbirths, premature births, and low-weight births.
Some women are at a greater risk of getting high blood pressure while pregnant than others. Some women are at a greater risk than others and you should be concerned if you are pregnant with more than one baby, if you were obese before you were pregnant, if you have high blood pressure before the pregnancy, and if you are suffering from diseases that cause high blood pressure.
Although fatalities because of a blood pressure pregnancy are very uncommon, you should take preventative action so as not to risk your health or the health of your unborn baby. You should not allow yourself to become pregnant before you have controlled the high blood pressure. When you decide to have a baby and you have high blood pressure, take measures to control the condition.
One way of controlling high blood pressure is medication. Although there are several treatments available, note that some are not safe after you, are pregnant and you should therefore tell your doctor about your intentions to get pregnant. If you have a sedentary lifestyle, you can control your high blood pressure by exercising more.
Note that the methods that are used to control high blood pressure before the pregnancy are the same methods that are used to control high blood pressure while pregnant and to prevent the condition. Dieting is an effective method of treating and preventing high blood pressure. Reduce your salt intake to reduce the amount of sodium in your body. Go for whole grains such as oats and avoid processed foods. Avoid alcohol, tobacco, saturated fats, and take plenty of vegetables and fruits.
Some women get preeclampsia in the 20th week of the pregnancy or thereabout and this will usually lead to gestational hypertension in women who were healthy before the pregnancy. It is treated just like normal high blood pressure. You should invest in a blood pressure monitor to keep track of your blood pressure. Consult your doctor for treatment. Although high blood pressure is the most common and the most dangerous blood pressure problem, it is important that you control low blood pressure too. Knowing your condition will help you make decisions that are more educated.