(NaturalNews) When you are on a diet, there are times when hunger strikes and you need a low calorie, healthy snack. Low-fat foods and foods with fiber help fill the stomach and stop cravings. Wait 20 minutes after eating, as that is how long it takes your stomach to tell your brain that you are full. Be certain that you are experiencing hunger, and not eating for emotional reasons.
Raw vegetables are full of fiber and antioxidants. Keep sliced veggies chopped and ready to snack in the refrigerator for a quick and easy snack.
A banana cut into bite-size pieces is quite a filling snack, and is a mouthful of flavor in just a few calories. Coat the banana pieces in melted chocolate and cool on a cookie sheet before freezing for a real treat!
Chocolate is a healthy food with good fats and loaded with antioxidants. A small piece of healthy chocolate- organic, cold pressed or raw- can satisfy the craving for candy, while still providing a sweet treat.
An apple contains one of the best forms of fiber. They are easy to digest and make a refreshing treat. Applesauce is another good alternative. An apple is easy to transport and doesn't need refrigeration.
Another high-fiber food is popcorn. You can purchase low-fat varieties, or pop it yourself.
Make your own jell-o with gelatin and fruit juice. Apple juice and grape fruit are both delicious. You will fill your stomach with a low calorie food and you may grow better hair and nails from the protein in the gelatin as well.
Make your own fruit juice popsicles. This will keep you hydrated in hot summer months and provide a refreshing way to cool down and fill up.
Before a meal, drink water to fill your stomach. Hydration is important to health
and to fat burning metabolism.
Fresh fruit with lemon juice will keep in the refrigerator for up to 24 hours and provide a nutritious and filling snack.
Plan your snacks in advance. Cut vegetables and have them ready in the refrigerator. Pre-package popcorn or nuts in small bags, so that you will eat measured quantities and not get carried away.
Allow yourself to snack by snacking on healthy
food choices and you will lose weight without feeling deprived. Good nutrition and healthy food choices are always the best way to ensure you will stay slim and fit.http://www.naturalnews.com/025889.htmlhttp://www.healthnews.com/blogs/melanie-grimes/natural-health/mindbod...http://www.mayoclinic.com/health/healthy-diet/NU00190
About the author
Melanie Grimes is a writer, award-winning screenwriter, medical journal editor, and adjunct faculty member at Bastyr University. She also teaches homeopathy at the Seattle School of Homeopathy and the American Homeopathic Medical College.
A trained homeopath, she is the editor of the homeopathic journal, Simillimum, and has edited alternative and integrative medical journals for 15 years. She has taught creative writing, founded the first Birkenstock store in the USA and authored medical textbooks.
Her ebook on Natural Remedies for the Flu is available at: http://melanie-grimes.blogspot.com/2009/04/buy-natural-flu-remedy-ebo...
Follow her blog athttp://melanie-grimes.blogspot.com/www.melaniegrimes.com
Have comments on this article? Post them here:
people have commented on this article.