Making The Case For Stakeholders
Scientific evidence can help collaborations or coalitions make the case about the need for and efficacy of strategies to reduce the prevalence of chronic disease in their communities, especially for those strategies whose health outcomes are not often immediate.
Our Healthier Communities Initiatives are built on the concept that local communities can work together to give all community members healthy choices and support the pursuit of healthy lifestyles. More than 160 Ys are working in collaboration with community leaders to make changes in policies and the physical surroundings in those communities so that healthy living is within reach for individuals of all ages and backgrounds.
Neighborhoods perceived to be unsafe can be barriers to physical activity. Research shows that people are more likely to engage in physical activity outdoors if they have a safe place to do so.
Research shows that people are more likely to engage in physical activity outdoors if they have a safe place to do so. This is especially true for women and children. Living in a neighborhood perceived to be unsafe has been found to be a barrier to physical activity. Implementing specific measures can improve the safety of the area. Some interventions that have effectively provided safe environments for physical activity include opening school playgrounds after school hours and on weekends, closing streets to traffic, and improving street lighting on pedestrian walkways. A study found that inner-city elementary school children reduced screen time over a two-year period after being provided with a supervised schoolyard for use after school hours. Another study found that adults increased their use of a pedestrian walkway and reported feeling safer following lighting improvements.
|Become our fan on Facebook|
Copyright © 2013 YMCA of the USA. All rights reserved.
The YMCA is a nonprofit organization whose mission is to put Christian principles into practice through programs that build healthy spirit, mind and body for all.