Brain Iron Serves as Marker for MS
A new study finds iron accumulation in patients with advanced multiple sclerosis.
Reviewed by Robert Jasmer, MD
2, 2011 (MedPage Today) —
accumulation in the basal ganglia was found in patients with advanced
(MS), but not in patients with a clinically isolated syndrome (CIS) that can
precede MS, Austrian researchers reported.
In this study, 113 MS and
CIS patients, as well as 35 healthy volunteers, underwent MRI imaging, which
showed increased levels of brain iron in the MS patients as opposed to the
other participants, wrote Franz Fazekas, MD, of the Medical University of Graz,
and colleagues in Neurology.
Using MRIs to track levels
of iron in the brain has been proposed as a marker of neurodegeneration in
various neurologic disorders, including MS, explained Alex Rovira, MD, from the
Hospital Vall d'Hebron in Barcelona.
Abnormal iron accumulation
has been identified in MS, but few studies have investigated brain iron levels
in patients with CIS, the investigators stated.
Of the 113 patients, 78 had
MS and 35 had CIS. Along with the MR studies, the participants underwent
clinical and neuropsychological examination.
The difference between
basal ganglia relaxation rates in MS and CIS was statistically significant, as
was the difference between MS and healthy
participants. Also, the difference between CIS and controls was significant.
Basal ganglia iron
accumulation in MS occurs with advancing disease and is related to the extent
of brain damage. These study results argue for iron deposition as a phenomenon,
and the absence of increased iron levels in patients with CIS indicates that
iron accumulation does not precede the development
Once iron accumulates
within the brain, subsequent tissue damage may enhance the extent of axonal
damage and of neurodegeneration, Fazekas said. However, given the limitations
of this study, present findings do not support a strong role of such a mechanism.
It would be important to examine more advanced stages of MS and to obtain further
data, he concluded.
Rovira, along with
co-editorialist Xavier Montalban, MD, PhD, said this study should be looked at
as a "first step ... the second step will require reproducing these
preliminary results in an MS cohort with a wide range of physical
disability." The study only included patients with mild physical
disability, which is not representative of the full spectrum of the disease.