United States Department of Energy
The U.S. Department of Energy funds R&D to help commercial builders, businesses,
and homeowners reduce energy use through energy efficiency and renewable energy
technologies. Access their website to learn about DOE programs for buildings, how
to use efficient and renewable energy in buildings, and access information resources
and financial incentives. The United States Department of Energy (USDOE) has a broad
national mission that includes oversight of energy production and distribution.
It also has a major role in the production of nuclear weapons, the safe storage
of nuclear wastes, and the remediation of sites that have been contaminated as a
result of the nation's atom bomb production program. DOE has a strong scientific
component located in the DOE National Laboratories, which support research ranging
from basic biologic processes to risk assessment.
While not a frontline public health agency, the DOE engages in many activities that
impact human health and the environment. These include its role in the national
choice of energy sources, such as the different fossil fuels that emit varying levels
of sulfur oxides, particulates, and nitrogen oxide air pollutants; nuclear energy
with its attendant risks; and hydroelectric power sources, which also have ecological
consequences. DOE is also heavily involved in research to develop more efficient
and less-polluting automobiles. Within the DOE, the Division of Environmental Management
and the Division of Environment, Health, and Safety have combined annual budgets
of over $6 billion, which is used to clean up the legacy of atom bomb production
and to protect worker and community health.
The Department of Energy, through the Office of ‘Energy Efficiency and Renewable
Energy's (EERE) works closely with the building industry and manufacturers to conduct
research and development on technologies and practices for energy efficiency. The
Department also promotes energy and money-saving opportunities to builders and consumers
and works with state and local regulatory groups to improve building codes and appliance
In addition, the Office of Hearings and Appeals plays a regulatory role in the area
of Energy Efficiency as it relates to the Energy Policy and Conservation Act.
The Federal Energy Management Program (FEMP) in the Office of Energy Efficiency
and Renewable Energy promotes energy efficiency and the use of renewable energy
resources at federal facilities all over the world including military installations
and our very own DOE sites. FEMP does this to ensure that the federal government,
the largest energy consumer, works toward meeting the goals set forth in legislative
mandates and Executives Orders for saving energy. Federal agencies are continually
striving to meet these legislative and Presidential mandates, demonstrate leadership,
and save taxpayer dollars with responsible and cleaner energy choices.
In addition to promoting any technologies that can reduce our reliance on fossil
fuels to produce energy, the DOE also supports many so called passive technologies
that increase energy efficiency, and reduce power consumption. These technologies
include many types of insulation and more efficient Windows and Doors, which reduce
energy consumption. Skylights are another technology that have the ability to both
provide free interior illumination, as well as reduce energy needs.