"Why Belly Fat Develops Hand-in-Hand with Middle Age"
Perhaps you’ve heard the expression “middle-age spread.” As you reach middle age and beyond, your body begins to store and release fat differently. And this all happens out of sight at your body’s cellular level. Your fat cells control their size and number by secreting three different ‘command signals’:
- Glycerol-3-phosphate dehydrogenase
These command signals tell your brain whether to stop or to continue to eat. And you’ll soon discover that it’s because of these three substances that many young, physically-active people can consume what seems like endless calories without packing on pounds.
The Commander of Your Fat Cells
No more starvation diets.
Have you ever noticed that when you're trying your hardest to control your weight, all you can think about is food?
What if you could go about your day (and evening) focused on things besides dieting and eating?*
Wouldn't that constitute a major personal breakthrough? And, best of all, healthy signals to your brain regarding eating would just happen, without undue thought or action.*
You'd help reduce some of the distraction.*
Ideally, you would simply sit down at the table and eat only enough to satisfy yourself.*
When you allow your brain -- and your body to go about its normal task of controlling your eating, it becomes easier to achieve and maintain your normal body weight.
And this can happen without excessive will power or starvation diets.*
Meet Leptin, What I Consider to Be Your Best Friend When it Comes to Eating
The hormone leptin is key for helping your body maintain its lean composition. The fat cells in your body secrete a hormone called leptin. Leptin works as a chemical signal in your blood that tells your brain you have eaten enough.
When things are working optimally, you “hear” that message and you stop eating. Your body really doesn’t want to pack away more pounds than it needs. Your body naturally seeks to stay within your ideal weight zone.
Not only does leptin help shut down your hunger, it also helps you burn more calories. Leptin stimulates the breakdown of stored triglycerides from your fat cells. But, as you’ll soon see, all doesn’t always work perfectly.
The Vicious Cycle of Leptin Overload
Here’s the problem:
Most overweight individuals already have high levels of leptin circulating in their bloodstream. And because of this overload, their fat cells become less sensitive to leptin that is, cells do not receive and respond to leptin signals optimally.
Researchers now understand how leptin resistance can lead to weight gain and stubborn weight loss.
When you’re overweight, your fat cells also increase in size. They pump more and more leptin into your bloodstream in an attempt to better get their message through to your brain. But, unfortunately, your brain does not “hear” the message in an optimal way.
In response, two things happen.
- First, your body burns less fat.
- Second, your fat cells soak up fewer free fatty acids from your bloodstream. The overabundance of fatty acids in your blood causes your muscles to become less responsive to insulin than they ideally should, ultimately leading to a rise in blood sugar. This in turn only leads to more free fatty acids, more fat stores and a vicious cycle.
But That's Not All. There are Still Two More to Go
We’ve talked about leptin and how it’s an important chemical signal that commands your brain to cease eating.
The second signal produced and released by your fat cells is adiponectin a hormone that helps to maintain your body’s normal insulin sensitivity. As the amount of fat tissue increases, the level of adiponectin decreases. Larger fat cells naturally produce less adiponectin. Levels of adiponectin also appear to be directly related to belly fat.
Overall, levels are lower in overweight people and higher in lean people. When you lose weight, more adiponectin is available to promote health.
Last but not least, glycerol-3-phosphate dehydrogenase is the third command signal that your fat cells produce. This is an enzyme that helps convert starch and sugar calories to stored body fat.
I probably don’t need to state the obvious, but I’m sure you’re beginning to see why maintaining healthy, normal levels of these three substances may be helpful for not just a lean and trim body, but for total health.*
Just to summarize how these three substances can help contribute to maintenance of your ideal weight in my opinion, the perfect weight loss tool would help:
- Increase adiponectin
- Decrease glycerol-3-phosphate dehydrogenase
- Allow leptin’s natural signals to be “heard” optimally
Promoting Your Cells' Normal Response*
There are several things you can do to help promote your cells’ ideal sensitivity to leptin and support the second two important command signals:
- Avoid processed foods
- Avoid high fructose corn syrup, sugars, grains, fruit juices, and sweetened and diet drinks
- Supplement with high quality omega-3 fatty acids (Krill oil is a good, highly absorbable form to use)
Another Important Way to Promote Your “Had Enough!” Messages
Of course, no discussion about promoting your cells' optimal ability to respond to leptin's signals would be complete without mention of exercise.
If you're not accustomed to exercising, I advise you to start slowly. Even something as simple as rebounding on a mini trampoline or a brisk walk or bike ride around your neighborhood will help you get started.
Find something you like to do - and commit to doing it regularly.
Can't get motivated? Enroll an accountability partner and help each other be consistent. I cannot stress enough the importance of eating nutritiously and a regular exercise plan to help better manage your weight.
If you're looking for a type of exercise that will give you maximum reward for your time spent, then I believe you should check out my Peak Fitness Routine.
Just like implementing the right nutrition plan is vital to keeping off the pounds, such is the case with exercising as well. But if you've not exercised in some time, I recommend you begin slowly and build up to more intense levels over time. It would also be wise to double-check with your healthcare professional prior to starting any exercise program.
What You MUST Avoid If You Want to Lose Weight
Many people turn to diet drinks and foods when they want to shed extra pounds and inches. Artificially-sweetened beverages and foods are NOT the answer to losing weight.
They contain synthetic and what I believe to be harmful ingredients. Not only that, the latest research very clearly shows that artificial sweeteners actually cause weight GAIN rather than weight loss.
I've detailed their hazards in my book Sweet Deception, as well as in numerous articles on the Mercola.com website. Your best alternative, in my opinion, is to replace any type of soda with pure filtered water.
Aspartame in particular is of extreme concern to me. Also known as Equal or NutraSweet, its use has been linked to cancer, premature birth, and developmental and cognitive problems in kids.
Added to over 6,000 foods and beverages, you must read labels carefully to detect its presence.
What About OTHER Weight Loss Options?
You may already know my opinion about many of the other options out there. Please don't go there. Often, the risk of side effects is simply much too great.
Physical risks are only part of the risks involved with many common approaches. There is also a huge potential for emotional fall-out as well.
Why? It might shock you to know that the majority of weight loss programs fail a whopping 95 percent of the time.
And when you fail, it's not uncommon to blame yourself and then find your self-esteem plummeting and your weight rising.
Not exactly the goal you were in search of...
Introducing BioTHIN with Irvingia
BioTHIN with Irvingia is a supplement that I formulated to help better support your weight loss when combined with diet and exercise.* And this product is intended to help harmonize with the way you were designed to lose weight - and with overall healthy living.*
And as I mentioned previously, a healthy eating plan and a regular exercise plan are critical keys for success in helping to manage your weight and overall wellness. BioTHIN with Irvingia was formulated as a complement to all this to help you even more.*
BioTHIN with Irvingia is formulated to give you the edge you seek, to make a long-term difference in your weight loss and consequently, overall health.*
And with BioTHIN, you get much more than just Irvingia.
Fucoxanthin - The Gift From the Sea
In my opinion, Fucoxanthin is one of the most exciting substances to hit the weight loss market in quite some time.*
A natural carotenoid (natural pigments found primarily in plants and algae), Fucoxanthin exists naturally in brown seaweed, a type of kelp. Preliminary animal research performed in Russia and Japan suggests that fucoxanthin may help burn fat.*
Also, here's a huge plus for you and others searching for an effective yet natural option that doesn't disrupt your activities and sleep. Fucoxanthin revs up your metabolism without stimulating your central nervous system.* Although it's not fully understood how fucoxanthin works, it appears to target a protein called UCP1 that increases the rate at which belly fat is burned.*
Evidence is emerging showing that the fucoxanthin component is a powerful antioxidant that can protect your cells from free radical damage.* It also may support your:
- Cardiovascular health*
- Maintenance of healthy cholesterol and triglyceride levels that are already within the normal range*
- Maintenance of healthy blood pressure levels that are already within the normal range*
- Healthy liver function*
So, for natural weight loss, along with eating a healthy diet according to your Nutritional Type plus exercising, consider BioTHIN with Irvingia that includes fucoxanthin to help jumpstart your weight loss efforts.*
But wait! That's just part of the story...
An Ancient Source with Modern Applications - Pomegranate
The pomegranate has been a staple of Asian diets since ancient times. The rich ruby fruit was mentioned in Egyptian papyrus scrolls dating back to 1550 BC. And in ancient Greek myths, the pomegranate represented life and regeneration.
Its traditional use dates back more than 3,000 years. Modern science is actively rediscovering its potential for a more healthful life.*
Pomegranates contain powerful antioxidants that help quench free radicals in your body.* One study suggests that pomegranate shows triple the amount of antioxidant activity of either green tea or red wine.*
BioTHIN with Irvingia is enhanced with pomegranate extract standardized to 40 percent punicosides, which are the most powerful antioxidants in pomegranate.
You Don't Need to Struggle Alone with Weight Management Any Longer
And you don't need to expose your body to alternative, potentially dangerous weight loss options.*
Along with sensible eating and getting your body moving every day, BioTHIN with Irvingia is your all-natural partner in achieving the new body you desire.* Whatever your reason for wanting to shed those unwanted pounds, BioTHIN with Irvingia is ready to help.*
Plus, BioTHIN with Irvingia gives you so much more than 'just' support for weight loss.* It can also give you nutritional benefits - antioxidants, vitamins and minerals that all contribute to your optimal health.*
So, you'll be working toward not only looking great - but also feeling your best, too.*
Are You Ready to Let BioTHIN with Irvingia Help You Change YOUR Life?
Take control over your weight now. Why settle for failure when you can have help in the war with your weight? All-natural BioTHIN with Irvingia gives you that extra fighting power to help you finally get in control of your eating and your life.*
BioTHIN with Irvingia is a phenomenal complement to a healthy eating plan and a regular exercise regimen to help put you in control of your weight and overall health.*
You might think that such a high-quality supplement with seven of the finest weight loss botanicals would cost a fortune. But I didn't want anything to deter you from maximizing your health and optimizing your weight,* so we've made it very affordable.
And, as an extra bonus, with BioTHIN with Irvingia, you won't have to purchase meal plans, attend meetings, or buy anything unnatural. So if you want a botanical weight loss supplement* at an affordable price, give BioTHIN with Irvingia a try today. Your investment in your future health is only $39.97 per bottle.*
This could prove to be one of the greatest years of your life. And now with the very-affordable BioTHIN with Irvingia, achieving your ideal weight is a more manageable goal than ever before.*
Start working toward fulfilling your weight control dreams starting today.* Order BioTHIN with Irvingia now.
Label Snapshot for Biothin with Irvingia & Fucoxanthin
Serving Size: 2 Vegetarian Capliques® Capsules
Servings Per Container: 60
% Daily Value
Amt. Per Serving
CLA (Conjugated Linoleic Acid)
*Daily Value not established
|Other Ingredients: Silica and cellulose.
|Suggested Use: As a dietary supplement, adults take 2 vegetarian Capliques® capsules daily or as directed by your healthcare professional.
View Complete Product Label
Serving Size: 2 Vegetarian Capsules
Servings Per Container: 30
% Daily Value
Amt. Per Serving
|(Undaria pinnatifida, yielding 30 mg of fucoxanthin)
|Irvingia gabonensis proprietary extract (seed)
|Garcinia cambogia (fruit, standardized to 50% hydroxycitric acid [HCA]), Ginger root, Pomegranate extract (fruit, standardized to 40% punicosides), Cayenne (fruit), Apple cider vinegar, Hoodia Gordonii (stem)
* Daily Value not established.
|Other Ingredients: Cellulose, silica, and L-leucine.
|Contains Tree Nuts
|Suggested Use: As a dietary supplement, adults take 2 vegetarian capsules daily or as directed by your healthcare professional.
View Complete Product Label
BioTHIN (w/ Irvingia™ & Fucoxanthin)
60 Capsules Per Bottle
|MSRP: ||$119.91 |
|Your Price: ||$99.97 |
|Savings: ||$19.94 (17%) |
BioTHIN 2-Pack (60 Capsules Per Bottle)
CLA 2-Pack (120 Capliques® Per Bottle)
|MSRP: ||$119.88 |
|Your Price: ||$99.97 |
|Savings: ||$19.91 (17%) |
* Free Shipping to US & Canada Only
I am so confident that you will be more than satisfied with your purchase of BioTHIN Supplements, I am providing a Lifetime Satisfaction Guarantee!
The Lifetime Satisfaction Guarantee Badge allows you to receive a full refund* (less shipping charges) when you return an item within 60 days as long as the product is in its original packaging and has at least half of the product remaining. Products returned after 60 days that have at least half of the product remaining will receive store credit (less shipping charges).
Click Here for Full Return Policy Details
Toll Free: 877-985-2695 | Int'l Customers : 847-252-4355
MON - FRI (7am - 8pm CST) | SAT - SUN (8am - 5pm CST)
View Product Labels
Click to view