It was half past six on an unusual frosty morning when a door flung open. At the doorway, stood a roughly dressed man, who stumbled forward like a drunkard. With each step, the man groaned and grumbled words incoherently. As the man walked slowly away from the house, a woman was watching him through the window and shut the door after he left. She smiled peculiarly as she heard the man fumble his keys while his footsteps grew farther away.

As the woman began to walk around the house, she could not help but replay the events that unfolded the day before. She meticulously calculated and planned every minor detail. The complex plan involved items such as knives, boxes, and liquids. She executed the plan perfectly and timely, as she had done numerous times before. Last night was no different and just like every other night, she finished her plan successfully while the man was deep asleep. However, if one were to see the current state of affairs now, the true intent of the woman's plan would be obvious judging from the aftermath. However, for some unknown reason, the woman felt as if something was missing. A vague and intangible itchiness was knawing at her heels.

The woman frantically looked around. She did not know what she was looking for but wanted to just check everything. Her eyes finally locked on the side table next to the door she had just closed. On the table was a bag the size of a baby made of soft materials. The woman's eyes widened in astonishment and she almost tripped as she darted towards the bag with both hands outstretched in front of her. The woman grabbed the bag and busted the door wide open, with a disregard for anything that may have been in the way. The man, who had walked some distance away now but was still within clear sight of the door, snapped his body. He was startled by the sudden outburst and his face grew pale. The man squinted to see the bag that the woman was holding and smiled widely. She was holding his bento box! The man hurried over, took his bag, and pecked the woman on the cheek before turning to walk towards his car again.
