Revista mexicana de biodiversidad
versão impressa ISSN 1870-3453
MONTERRUBIO-RICO, Tiberio C. et al. Present and potential distribution of the military macaw in Michoacán, Mexico. Rev. Mex. Biodiv. [online]. 2011, vol.82, n.4, pp. 1311-1319. ISSN 1870-3453.
The military macaw (Ara militaris) is an endangered species in Mexico, it has disappeared from states on the south Pacific. However, actual studies providing distribution information on the different states are inexistent. The main objective of this study was to provide information concerning its actual distribution on Michoacán. We evaluated 215 localities from 3 physiographic regions that present suitable ecological conditions during the 2002-2008 period. Its actual distribution was analyzed using geographic information systems, and its potential distribution was obtained with the genetic algorithm for rule set prediction (GARP). We evaluated the coincidence between field records and the distribution of suitable ecological conditions (elevation, vegetation) for the species, generated by ecological niche modeling. We confirmed its presence on the Municipalities of La Huacana, Churumuco, and Arteaga, confirming its distribution on 2 359 km2 from the region known as the lower Balsas basin. In addition, we obtained records on the Sierra Madre del Sur, however there are large areas from this region that require field confirmation, and the distribution for this region can still be considered as potential. The military macaw inhabited the Michoacán coast in 1980, today the species its been extirpated from an estimated area of 1 303 km2. Considering the extent of the confirmed distribution, and the extent of the area with suitable ecological conditions that require field confirmation, we assume that the species may have 8 285 km2 of distribution on the state. Additionally we localized 7 roosting and nesting areas of the species. The area known as Chorros del Varal, in the municipality of Los Reyes is important because is on the border limits with Jalisco state and could be a contact area between macaw populations of the 2 states. This is the first state level study in the country that combines actual field records and ecological niche modeling to estimate the species actual and potential distribution.
Palavras-chave : Ara militaris; actual and potential distribution; nesting localities; extirpation area.