HOW to GET RID of MICE
There are three common mice in the United States, which are the House Mice and the Deer Mice and the White Footed mice.
House mice are small and slender. They are about 2-3.5′ long in length from the nose to the end of its tail. The snout is pointy and the ears are big with a little hair, the eyes are small and the tail is dark. House mice fur is usually light brown, light gray, and smooth. Their feces are small rod shaped droppings. They eat cereal grains, seeds, meats, peanut butter, and sweet material. House mice will nibble at food and will eat only small quantities; however they will eat 20-30 times a night. They can also survive for a period of time without water. House mice are nocturnal creatures but they can still be active during the day and quiet times.
Deer mice are about 2 3/4′-4′, the tail is 2-5′ and the tail is longer than half of length of the head and the body combined with short hair. Their fur is pale grayish to deep reddish brown on the top and white on the bottom. The deer mice runways are poorly defined because they will use the runways of different small animals. They are EXCELLENT climbers and use the upper areas of buildings. Deer mice consume insects, seeds, nuts, berries, small fruits, and subterranean fungus, and other small animals (i.e. centipedes). They will store food for the winter in hollow logs and other protected places.
White Footed mice are about 3 9/16′ – 4 1/8′, the tail is 2 7/16′ – 4′ and their ears are small. Their fur is grayish to rich reddish brown on the top with white belly and feet. The white footed mice are active at night. They consume seeds, nuts, fruits, beetles, caterpillars, and other insects. The two major foods they will consume are the centers of black cherry pits and jewel weed seeds. They are active year round, but will libernate during the winter. When the white footed mice get scared or alarmed, they will start drumming its front feet quickly.
All mice are a medical concern because they can spread diseases. The Deer and White Footed mice carry Hanta Virus and Lyme disease. The virus can be spread through their urine and feces. All mice carry Salmonellosis. Salmonellosis is usually transmitted by eating foods that have been contaminated with the mice feces.
Mice can be found in nests in the insulations, in walls, storage boxes, ceiling voids, drawers, under major appliances, within upholstery of furniture, garages, sheds, stored RVs, other frequently unused vehicles. They can also be found in debris, in borrows in the ground, underground around roots of trees and shrubs, underneath a log or a board, in a tunnel that another animal has made, hollow trees, unused equipments, cabinet voids, unused furniture, wood piles, fence posts, and empty bird/squirrel nests. Mice have a unique, certain musky smell to them that identifies their presence. Mice infestation can be checked by feces. If there are many droppings, then there is more than one mouse. Mice droppings are 1/8′ – 1/4′ and they are usually 1 or both ends are pointed. Their new feces will be shiny and putty in texture. There will be visible gnaw marks and they will be 1-2 mm in width and the holes are small and clear cut. Mice are very curious creatures, so they are not shy with new objects.
There are few steps that you can take to reduce mice coming into your house.
- Close off all the openings that mice might get into. They can come into an opening that is 1/4′, so make sure to close any openings larger than a 1/4 of an inch. Seal off all the cracks and openings inside the building foundations and utility pipes and vents.
- If you seal the openings with a patching compound, make sure that the surface is smooth and not rough, because the mice can gnaw through them.
- Grass and vegetation should be cut short because tall grass can protect the mice from predators.
- Eliminate vacant bird nests.
- Doors, windows, and screens should be tightly fitted so there are no openings for mice.
- All food that is stored, processed that are used should be kept in a glass jar, metal canister, or any other reseal able air tight containers so that the mice cannot get to them.
You can set the traps along the wall or anywhere else where there is a lot of mice droppings. The glue boards on the traps will not release the mice, so it will be stuck there and die. While using the traps, drop one or two drops of the attractant onto the trap to attract the mice to it.
Baits & Pallet Hazardous contains Rat Poison - (CONTRAC CAKE, FINAL BLOX , CONTRAC BLOX ), Pallet (CONTRAC PACKS, FASTRAC PACKS ).
The baits should be placed in a bait station (PROTECT A MOUSE BAIT STATION,BELL RTU MICE SIZE) and placed where mice activity is frequent. The baits are rat poison, so please be cautious so placed out of reach of other animals and children or pets. Place the baits along the runways of mice and the entry points. The liquid bait (LIQUA TOX II LIQUID MOUSE / RAT BAIT) should be used in a liquid dispenser (Helland Liquid Rodenticide Dispenser Stations) at places where the food competition is high. The liquid bait will need to be mixed with water following the directions on the label and placed along the wall or to the side where mice have a lot of activity. Pallets can be used anywhere that has mice activity. Do not open the package but place them along the wall or corners of the infested area.
Repellent (DR.T’S RAT-A-WAY REPELLENT)
For the use of a repellent (DR.T’S RAT-A-WAY REPELLENT), you will need to wear gloves and sprinkle lightly around the area where garbage bags are placed. Beginning no more than 1 foot out from the outermost bags, lightly broadcast the repellent (DR.T’S RAT-A-WAY REPELLENT) until a band of 24 wide circles the bags. When the odor becomes faint, the effectiveness may be diminished. Retreatment may also be necessary after heavy, washing-type rain. Do not leave the repellent inside the home for too long because the smell will be bad. After the mice are out of the area, cover the holes where mice have entered using STUF-FIT – RODENT PROOFING – COPPER MESH and repair the hole. When using this repellent inside the home as in the attic, does not air circulate because the smell will circulate throughout the rest of the home. Also sprinkle the repellent using gloves around the structure of your home. This will create a barrier around your home to prevent future mice infestation.
|Catchmaster||Trapper Mice||Victor Holdfast||Provoke Attractant|
|Contrac All-Weather Cake||Final Blox||Contrac Blox||Fastrac Blox|
These products can be used with these items:
|Protect A Mouse Bait Station||Bell RTU Mice|
|Contrac Rodent Place Packs||Fastrac Place Packs|
|Liqua Tox II|
This product can be used with this item:
|Helland Liquid Dispenser|
|Dr. T Rat-A-Way Repellent|
This product can be used with this item when covering the hole after the rats left:
|Stuf-Fit Rodent Proofing|