1 2 3 4  6
Comment 18 of 58, added on November 3rd, 2008 at 2:48 AM.
Mary, a firm wife, is waiting for her husband Warren. In this poem, we find
a dramatic description of Mary’s attitude towards Silas. She appears to be
very kind human being. She has pure sympathy for their servant Silas.
Warren return and Mary presents news that Silas has just returned home. But
warren becomes because of this information. Warren is frustrated because of
his past experience. Because, during haying season, Silas quit his job and
left Mary and warren. For that reason, warren does not want to take him
back. But Mary requests to her husband to show kindness to their servant
Silas. But warren is rather harsh and unforgiving towards Silas and does
not to take him back in service. But we see the optimistic attitude of
Mary. She tries to convince warren. She says that Silas is now powerless to
move because of his age. He has fallen asleep beside the stove. But
warren’s tone is almost sarcastic. But Mary is still trying to convince
warren. Now she presents Silas’s good qualities. Mary makes a difference
between Silas and Harold Wilson. We the reader find a conflict between
Harold Wilson and Silas. Silas did not support the study. Silas loves the
works more than study. When warren thought about the difference, then he
becomes softer. But he again becomes strong and decides not to take Silas
back. Mary tells warren that Silas has come home to die. At that time her
husband smiles at the word ‘home’. Warren says,
‘Home is the place where, when you have to go there
They have to take you in.’
Warren wants to say that he is nobody to us. So, we must not take him. He
is a hired man, nothing more. Now Mary presents the relation between Silas
and his banker brother. Mary says that Silas prefers Mary’s home more than
his banker brother’s home.
At last, warren becomes softer towards Silas. But Silas was far from all
Comment 17 of 58, added on October 27th, 2008 at 12:59 AM.
I think, 'THE DEATH OF THE HIRED MAN' shows the philosophy of life. Death
is the supreme truth of the life. Silas knows that in this world there is
only one woman who can take care of him. For that reason he did not go to
his banker brother's home. But Warren says, 'Home is the place where, when
you have to go there, they have to take you in.' Warren thinks that, this
is not Silas's home, because he is not welcome in this home.
Comment 16 of 58, added on May 11th, 2008 at 9:53 PM.
this poem is wonderful. it shows that death is part of life and could
happen at any time. warren must have felt a little hurt after finding silas
dead, knowing that he was about to deny him the basic things og life...
mary showin the general; emotions of a women acts as though silas is her
lost son that came back home. the poem could be secrectively showing the
need for forgiveness because life is full of surprizes. it is indeed 1 of
frost best work.....
Candacy from Trinidad and Tobago, Republic
Comment 15 of 58, added on April 8th, 2008 at 9:59 AM.
well this poem is interesting but FRESHMEN IN HIGH SCHOOL cannot be
expected to understand the full meaning of it can they? we are expected to
get a full college analysis on this... it sucks
from United States
Comment 14 of 58, added on January 9th, 2008 at 1:59 AM.
I am a senior in a well to-do high school in Iowa. I am actually taking a
college english class where we are on a unit of poetry. Now I have read
many Robert Frost poems but this seems to be the first ive read where it
doesnt really have a underlying meaning. It's pretty straight forward
almost novel written. And I believe Silas came back, because im sure he
felt guilty for taking advantage of Mary and Warren and thier kindess. And
that he called their little farm home for the kindness they showed to him.
Ali Thomas from United States
Comment 13 of 58, added on August 28th, 2007 at 12:56 AM.
I have always loved this poem. Having been born, in 1931, on a farm in New
England,son of a simple man, who despite having left school after
completing sixth grade, had a great love for poetry and who used to
entertain my brother and me by reciting poetry. He had committed to memory
literally scores of poems, and could recite them without flaw and with
great passion.By the time I was 8 I had learned Longfellow's Song of
Hiawatha and Evangeline in their entirety, as well as Charge of the Light
Brigade, Laska, The Raven, Annabell Lee and Bingen on the Rhine.
He loved Kipling, Sir Walter Scott, and most of all Robert Burns.
Reading Death of the Hired Man takes me back to those magical evenings when
Dad would recite poetry. This was my TV.
Truly a trip to the past. Thank you dad!
from United States
Comment 12 of 58, added on June 1st, 2007 at 3:24 AM.
This work, by one of the finest, most sensitive poets ever to be published
in America, shows such a depth of understanding and compassion for human
experience, that an intelligent reader should invariably feel an undeniable
sense of growth after having studied it. The subtleness of the meter and
form gives the feeling of prose, yet at closer examination, it is clearly a
work of iambic pentameter throughout. The several characters in this
brilliant piece are fully developed, and one can feel that they know all
the individuals well; not only Mary and Warren, ut of course Silas, Harold
Wilson and Silas' brother. I was literally moved to tears when I first
read it, and it remains one of the most poignant and inspirationa works I
have ever read. I hope the literary public is populated by readers and
writers who can gain from such brilliance as that of Robert Frost, and that
the trogloditic opinions expressed by TJ Cusack in his comments reflect a
very negligible minority. I also would like to say that it is unfortunate
that this website allows obscene language such as that used by TJ Cusack.
Such comments should be removed.
RC from United States
Comment 11 of 58, added on December 10th, 2006 at 7:04 PM.
This poem represents a theme that we have lived in our own experience our
whole lives. The fact of this reality is bull shit, and Robert Frost is
trying to corrupt the mind of the reader and make the reader feel guilty in
his past experience. I say screw your own history and move forward with a
high fucking head!
TJ Cusack from United States
Comment 10 of 58, added on April 7th, 2006 at 7:52 AM.
I see some of the themes such as coming home, and reminising about the past
but are there any more hidden themes than that???
BRINKLES from United States
Comment 9 of 58, added on April 7th, 2006 at 7:46 AM.
I see now,he came back because this was the closest thing he had to a
BRINKLES from United States
This poem has been commented on more than 10 times. Click below to see the other comments.
1 2 3 4  6