(NaturalNews) If you went up to the average person on the street today and tried to explain that most Americans drink, bathe in, and wash their dishes and clothes in an industrial waste product that is linked to causing endocrine disruption and cancer, you might be labeled a loon. But this is exactly what millions of city-dwellers do every day without realizing it, thanks to an outdated and completely unscientific public health intervention known as artificial water fluoridation.
Contrary to popular opinion, fluoridated water is not the dental health miracle that some government bureaucrats and conventional dentists still claim it is, and regular exposure to this noxious snake oil could slowly be poisoning you and your family. Here are eight solid and scientifically-backed reasons why water fluoridation is nothing to celebrate:
1) Water fluoridation has failed to reduce dental expenditures. Fluoride apologists have long claimed that forced water fluoridation would greatly reduce dental costs for everyone. But according to the data, dental expenditures have actually increased dramatically since the advent of water fluoridation back in the 1940s, as have the number of dental professionals, dental schools, and overall industry profits.
2) Water fluoridation has actually increased rates of tooth decay. Likewise, there has also been a steady increase in tooth decay rates across the country, despite the fact that nearly three-quarters of the U.S. population is now receiving fluoridated water. Most of Europe and many other countries around the world do not fluoridate their water at all, and tooth decay rates in these areas are similar or even lower than they are in North America.
3) Water fluoridation has created an epidemic of dental fluorosis. Even the most devoted fluoride apologist will admit that chronic exposure to fluoride can lead to a form of tooth decay known as dental fluorosis, which is marked by brown or white staining and corresponding mottling on teeth. It would be scientifically foolish to insist otherwise when acknowledging the fact that as many as 60 percent of all adolescents, and particularly those who live in fluoridated areas, now suffer from the permanent condition.
4) Water fluoridation is responsible for damaging bones, triggering arthritis. Back in 2006, the National Research Council (NRC) published a report showing that the federal government's maximum contaminant level for fluoride in water is a complete fraud. As it turns out, so-called "optimal" fluoride levels in water do not protect the health of children or adults, and regular exposure to fluoride in water can lead to brittle bones, pre-clinical skeletal fluorosis, and arthritis.
5) Children who drink fluoridated water develop lower IQs. According to information compiled by the fluoride awareness group Fluoride Action Network (FAN), at least 34 published studies have identified a link between fluoride exposure and reduced IQ levels. A recent review put together by researchers from Harvard University found that children living in fluoridated areas have 350 percent lower IQ levels on average compared to children living in non-fluoridated areas.
6) Fluoride calcifies the thyroid and pineal glands, two important hormone producers in the body. Another inconvenient fact about fluoride is that it binds to receptors throughout the endocrine system that are specifically reserved for actual nutrients. Fluoride has been shown to accumulate in both the thyroid and pineal glands, where it inhibits the normal production of hormones that regulate living systems throughout the body.
7) Fluoridated water is toxic to formula-fed babies. Did you know the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) recognizes fluoride as an "unapproved drug," which means those who receive it are being forcibly medicated against their will and without informed consent? Fluoridated water is particularly harmful for the development of formula-fed babies, who admittedly receive toxic doses of fluoride whenever their parents mix baby formula with fluoridated tap water.
8) The fluoride added to most water supplies is an industrial waste product that causes cancer. Unbeknownst to many is the fact that the fluoride chemicals added to most municipal water supplies are not naturally occurring elements in the earth, but rather waste byproducts of industrial production systems. Such chemicals have never been properly safety tested, and they most definitely do not benefit oral health in any way.
"The chemical used in over 90 percent of cities in North America are fluorosilicates," explains Dr. Hardy Limeback, a dentist and former head of preventive dentistry at the University of Toronto. Dr. Limeback used to support water fluoridation, that is until he learned the truth about where it comes from and what it does to the human body. "[Fluorosilicates] are contaminated with cancer-causing arsenic and radioactive particles and have never been tested for safety in humans."
To learn more about the dangers of fluoride, and to join the fight to get it removed from your own local water supply, visit: http://www.fluoridealert.org/
FREE online report shows how we can save America through a nutrition health care
revolution. "Eating healthy is patriotic!" Click here to read it now...
Healing Power of Sunlight and Vitamin D
In this exclusive interview, Dr. Michael Holick reveals fascinating facts on
how vitamin D is created and used in the human body to ward off chronic diseases
like cancer, osteoporosis, mental disorders and more. Click here to read it now...
Get the Full Story
The International Medical Council on Vaccination has released, exclusively through
NaturalNews.com, a groundbreaking document containing the signatures of physicians,
brain surgeons and professors, all of which have signed on to a document stating
that vaccines pose a significant risk of harm to the health of children.
Click here to read it now...
Ranger Storable Organics
GMO-free, chemical-free foods and superfoods for long-term storage and preparedness.
See selection at www.StorableOrganics.com