The Atlas of Breeding Birds of Alberta. Edmonton: Federation of Alberta Naturalists, 1992. Comprehensive study of all birds that breed in Alberta, with easy-to-read distribution maps, details on nesting and other behavioral patterns, and color plates.
Aulenback, Kevin. Identification Guide to the Fossil Plants of the Horseshoe Canyon Formation of Drumheller, Alberta. Edmonton: University of Alberta Press, 2009. While there are many books about the dinosaurs of Alberta, this is the only one in print devoted to the plants that existed during the dinosaur era.
Baldwin, John. Mountain Madness: Exploring British Columbia’s Ultimate Wilderness. Vancouver: Harbour Publishing, 1999. Filled with stunning photography, this coffee table book is a worthwhile purchase for climbers or anyone interested in the natural landscapes of the Coast Mountains.
Cannings, Richard. British Columbia: Natural History. Vancouver: Douglas & McIntyre, 2004. The natural history of the province divided into 10 chapters, from the earliest origins of the land to problems faced in the new millennium. It includes lots of color photos, diagrams, and maps.
Folkens, Peter. Marine Mammals of British Columbia and the Pacific Northwest. Vancouver: Harbour Publishing, 2001. In a waterproof, fold-away format, this booklet provides vital identification tips and habitat maps for 50 marine mammals, including all species of whales present in local waters.
Foster, John E., Dick Harrison, and I. S. MacLaren, eds. Buffalo. Edmonton: University of Alberta Press, 1992. A series of essays by noted historians and experts in the field of the American bison, addressing their disappearance from the prairies and the development of buffalo jumps. One essay deals with Wood Buffalo National Park.
Gadd, Ben. Handbook of the Canadian Rockies. Jasper: Corax Press, 2009. The latest edition of this classic guide is in color, and although bulky for backpackers it’s a must-read for anyone interested in the natural history of the Canadian Rockies.
Gill, Ian. Haida Gwaii: Journeys through the Queen Charlotte Islands. Vancouver: Raincoast Publishing, 1997. A personal and touching view of the Queen Charlottes complemented by the stunning color photography of David Nunuk.
Haig Brown, Roderick. Return to the River. Vancouver: Douglas & McIntyre, 1997. Although fictional, this story of the life of one salmon and its struggle through life is based on fact, and is a classic read for both anglers and naturalists. It was originally published in 1946 but has recently been reprinted and is available at most bookstores.
Herrero, Stephen. Bear Attacks: Their Causes and Avoidances. Toronto: McClelland & Stewart, 2003. Through a series of gruesome stories, this book catalogs the stormy relationship between people and bruins, provides hints on avoiding attacks, and tells what to do in case you’re attacked.
Jones, Karen. Wolf Mountains. Calgary: University of Calgary Press, 2002. Explores the history of wolves in the Canadian Rockies, with emphasis on the often controversial relationship between man and wolf.
Marty, Sid. The Black Grizzly of Whiskey Creek. Toronto: McClelland & Stewart, 2008. True story of a grizzly bear that went on a terrifying rampage near the town of Banff.
Musiani, Marco. A New Era for Wolves and People. Calgary: University of Calgary Press, 2009. A detailed analysis of the relationship between wolves and people in both North America and Europe. All contributors are wolf experts; includes stunning images.
Patterson, W. S. The Physics of Glaciers. Toronto: Pergamon Press, 1969. A highly technical look at all aspects of glaciation: why glaciers form, how they flow, and their effect on the environment.
Rezendes, Paul. Tracking and the Art of Seeing. Charlotte, Virginia: Camden House Publishing, 1992. This is one of the best of many books dedicated to tracking the North American mammals. It begins with a short essay on the relationship of humans with nature.
Sharp, Robert P. Living Ice: Understanding Glaciers and Glaciation. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press, 1988. A detailed but highly readable book on the formation, types, and results of glaciers.
Whitaker, John. National Audubon Society Field Guide to North American Mammals. New York: Random House, 1997. One of a series of field guides produced by the National Audubon Society, this one details mammals through color plates and detailed descriptions of characteristics, habitat, and range.
© Andrew Hempstead, from Moon Western Canada, 3rd Edition