This glossary has been compiled from various different sources. Some of the terms have been reproduced with kind permission from the Stanley Gibbons Philatelic Terms Illustrated by James Mackay. If you think a term is missing please e-mail us.
Red Cross Stamps
Stamps either commemorating the Red Cross or bearing a premium in aid of the Red Cross.
Printing plates used for making Penny red stamps of Great Britain in 1841 (q.v Black Plates).
A new printing of a stamp whose design differs in some detail from the original while retaining its principal features.
Stamps printed by presses using continuous reels of paper.
Picture postcards issued by the various regional postal boards in the UK.
Postal stamps issued by the British Post Office for use in Scotland, Wales, Northern Ireland, Guernsey, Jersey and the Isle of Man. Following the postal independence of Guernsey, Jersey and the Isle of Man, stamps issued for use in Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland are now described as "Country Issues" q.v.
Any marking in the sheet margin in the form of lines, dots and arrows, placed as a guide to colour registration.
Special Envelopes pioneered in GB in 1878 for registered packets and distinguished by crossed blue lines.
Special marks applied to registered packets to indicate greater security in transit.
Labels affixed to mail to show that it has been registered. Service now replaced in the United Kingdom by "Royal Mail Special Delivery" with delivery guaranteed by either 9.00am or 12 noon, the following day.
Special adhesive stamps or postal stationery denoting that the registration fee has been paid.
A stamp whose original gum has been lost and which has been issued with a fresh layer applied. Maybe also re-gummed to simulate original gum that was earlier removed in use to increase its possible market value.
(German) Imperial Post.
A stamp or series of stamps brought back into general use after being withdrawn.
Printing from raised type often referred to as letterpress.
Unsold stamps on hand after an issue has been taken off sale.
Correction of a damaged or faulty printing plate, cylinder, die or perforation pins.
A stamp which has had a fault or defect hidden in order to increase its possible market value.
A stamp which has had perforation applied unofficially to an imperforate or damaged margin.
Copy or imitation of the design and colour of a stamp.