Urban gardens could sustain cities
Vacant lots equal lots of acreage to plant
- Medical examiner: 24 dead in Oklahoma twister
- Heart transplant giving climatologist Lonnie Thompson a second chance
- Pesticide makers seek cause of bee deaths
- Ratepayers save under Ohio’s green-energy law, group says
- Chesapeake Energy names new CEO as it trims assets
- Alaska unveils plan to assess gas, oil in ANWR
- Pesticide makers seek answers as bee losses sting agriculture
- Researchers train bees to sniff out land mines
Michael Storck and his daughters, Isabel, 10, and Zita, 4, pick produce from their plot at the Bexley Community Garden. Researchers say such urban gardens can help sustain cities.
Say you found an empty part of town about the size of Worthington, razed the vacant houses, offices and businesses, and farmed the land.
Could you grow enough fruits and vegetables to be self-sufficient — and feed everyone in Columbus?
That’s what two Ohio State University professors wondered, so they went to Cleveland, where the vacant land throughout the city amounts to an area roughly the size of Worthington.
The researchers found that the land could generate as much as $115 million in produce each year, enough to satisfy at least 22 percent of Cleveland’s demand for fresh produce. In some scenarios, perhaps 100 percent.
“We were definitely shocked it was really possible to be self-reliant,” said Parwinder S. Grewal, who is co-author of the study and director of Ohio State’s Center for Urban Environment and Economic Development, in Wooster.
Many older industrial cities have become magnets for urban farming. Many Columbus neighborhoods have added community gardens.
Grewal said he worked with Cleveland’s planning commission to compile all the land that would be available for growing.
The researchers created three scenarios based on using 80 percent of the vacant lots as well as varying percentages of rooftops and occupied residential lots. Then they looked at how much produce could be grown per acre, based on the crop, and at consumption levels in the city.
Cleveland has 20,000 vacant lots that add up to at least 3,400 acres, or about 5.3 square miles, an area slightly smaller than Worthington. According to OSU Extension, the 50 acres currently devoted to community gardens in Cleveland generate $1.2 million to $1.8 million of fresh produce each year.
Cleveland has liberalized its land-bank regulations to make urban gardening more accessible. The city generally leases lots for one year but has been approving five-year leases in some cases.
“It allows people to be more comfortable in investing significant time and money,” said Robert Brown, Cleveland’s planning director.
Grewal said he thinks Columbus has the potential to do more than it is and should plan for areas to grow food as the city expands.
Columbus has about 250 community gardens, said Noreen Warnock, director of public policy and community outreach for Local Matters, a local nonprofit group working to increase access to fresh food and to increase local-food production. In Weinland Park alone, she said, 57 gardens have been planted this year.
“Self-sufficiency is a huge goal,” said Woody Drake, a neighborhood resident.
Drake helps tend a garden featuring tomatoes and squash on N. 4th Street in the neighborhood.
With hard work and good leadership, he said, Weinland Park could produce 60 to 80 percent of the vegetables that the neighborhood needs.
Joe Kovach, an associate professor of entomology at the university’s Ohio Agricultural Research and Development Center in Wooster, is growing peach trees in trenches dug in a parking lot at the Wooster campus.
“I think it’s very possible to grow food in cities to feed cities,” he said. “Unfortunately, we’l l need some sort of crisis to adopt the new technology.”
Kovach’s crisis scenario revolves around skyrocketing gas prices. That would affect the cost of shipping food.
“If gas gets to $15 a gallon, then local (food) really wins,” he said.
Jerry Tinianow, director of the Mid-Ohio Regional Planning Commission’s Center for Energy and Environment, said the crucial factor is not just how much you can grow but how much you can preserve.
“The biggest missing link in the food system is food processing,” he said.
He also said that at some point, when market conditions change, it will make more sense for cities to use the land for something other than food production.
But Grewal said the momentum toward urban farming will not abate.
“Cities have waited long enough for industry to come back,” he said. “It’s not coming back.”