One of the easiest ways to monitor your health is having your blood pressure checked on a regular basis is one of the most basic and easiest ways to monitor your health. Your blood pressure may be an inclination to health problems you may have before you even show symptoms. It is important to not only regularly check your blood pressure, but understand what those readings mean.
Your blood pressure reading consists of two numbers: systolic and diastolic. When given your blood pressure reading, it is presented to you in a ratio format with the systolic number on top or to the left and the diastolic number on the bottom or to the right. The systolic number indicates the pressure in the arteries when the heart beats while the diastolic number measures the pressure in your arteries between heartbeats, or when the heart is at rest. When in written format, blood pressure is measured in millimeters of mercury (mm Hg).
As an adult, you should have your blood pressure checked regularly as a preventive measure. High blood pressure can lead to hypertension, heart disease, heart failure, stroke, and kidney failure. Depending on your blood pressure range will determine what, if any, actions you need to take to avoid high blood pressure.
• A normal and healthy blood pressure range is less than 120 mm Hg/80 mm Hg.
• Prehypertension range is 120 to 139 mm Hg/80 to 89 mm Hg. Prehypertension is slightly elevated blood pressure that if no lifestyle changes are made such as healthier eating and exercise, then hypertension is likely to occur.
• High blood pressure is when levels are consistently 140 mm Hg/90 mm Hg or higher.
The higher your blood pressure is, the more serious of a condition it becomes. One in three adults suffers from high blood pressure, and many do not realize it. Often times high blood pressure is referred to as the “silent killer” because there can be no symptoms or warnings signs for this condition.
If you consult a physician for high blood pressure, he or she may want to record several blood pressure readings over time. There are various ways in which you can do this without having to go to the doctor’s office for each reading.
Within our community, you have the following places available to you to help you track your blood pressure: Walk-in clinics, pharmacies, the VNA free blood pressure clinics held throughout the community, and the health department. Be sure to check the schedule or appointment guidelines before going to any facility. Checking your blood pressure regularly could save you in the long run.
For more information on no-cost blood pressure clinics, call 772 567-5551 or visit www.vnatc.com.
Joyce Baldrica is president and CEO of the VNA of the Treasure Coast and Nightingale Private Duty Nursing, Vero Beach-based non-profit organizations providing home healthcare, hospice care, homemaker services, companions, and transportation. To contact Joyce with your questions, feedback, or suggestions about healthcare topics you'd like to learn more about, call 772 567-5551.