|Databases of the United Nations|
|Press Releases of the United Nations|
|United Nations History|
|Humanitarian Affairs, Refugees|
|Millennium Development Goals|
|Peace and Security|
|Question of Palestine|
|Statistics and Country Information|
United Nations Treaty Collection
The Office of Legal Affairs Treaty Section has launched a new online version of the United Nations Treaty Collection in September 2008. The new website is free and provides access to UN publications about treaties, including:
The site is also available in French. The text of each treaty is available in all languages in which the treaty is authentic.
Audiovisual Library of International Law
The Office of Legal Affairs has launched the Audiovisual Library of International Law. This website has three main parts:
The Audiovisual Library aims to provide free, scholarly resources to students and practitioners around the world, particularly in regions where there are few resources for the study of international law.
The United Nations Rule of Law Website and Document Repository
The United Nations Rule of Law Website is a promotional and educational tool for practitioners and the general public. It seeks to inform users about the UN’s work in the field of rule of law, and its efforts to coordinate and strengthen system-wide approaches in this field. It is the central UN rule of law web-based resource, serving as a gateway to the rest of the UN’s related sites, and making information more widely accessible about UN rule of law issues and activities, and the various tools, documents and materials on the subject. The website is also an avenue for users to access other web resources on or related to rule of law, developed by the UN or external organizations.
Electronic Legal Resources on International Terrorism
(United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, Terrorism Prevention Branch)
This site aims to provide comprehensive and accurate legal information on the steps taken by the international community and individual countries in the fight against international terrorism. Stored data are accessible in full-text, and provide up-to-date information on counter-terrorism conventions, resolutions, and national criminal laws worldwide. Model laws, legislative guides, and other legal tools can also be accessed to assist national authorities in setting up the structures and adopting the legislation necessarry to implement the global legal framework against terrorism.
TRACK - “Tools and Resources for Anti-Corruption Knowledge”
(United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime)
From here, you can access the Legal Library related to the United Nations Convention against Corruption using the links from the main menu or the world map. The Legal library contains laws, jurisprudence and information on anti-corruption authorities from over 175 States worldwide, indexed and searchable according to each provision of the Convention.
The Brussels based United Nations Regional Information Centre for Western Europe - UNRIC provides information on UN activities to the countries of the region. It also provides liaison with institutions of the European Union in the field of information. Its outreach activities extend to all segments of society and joint campaigns, projects and events are organized with partners including the EU, governments, the media, NGOs, schools and local authorities.
United Nations Regional Information Centre for Western Europe (UNRIC Brussels)
Residence Palace, Rue de la Loi/Wetstraat 155, Block C2,7th and 8th floor, Brussels 1040, Belgium
Tel.: +32 2 788 8484 / Fax: 32 2 788 8485