People are more interested in viewing the skies visually and not through just audio. However, in radio astronomy this is used, but this is actually a form of astronomy that is used for being able to find stars in the skies and to use frequencies to assist with the visual documentation of stars. Radio astronomy is indeed one of the more interesting methods of astronomy.
The light that comes from stars that can be seen visually will generally be thousands of years old because it can take a very long time for the light emitted by a star to fully reach the planet for viewing. The light is a unique part of a star but what is more interesting is that light is a type of energy that only exists in a certain frequency. This is where radio astronomy comes into effect. Being able to channel the frequencies that light comes in from is useful in that it can help to pinpoint the location of a star and where other sources of light are coming from.
The range of frequency that is used for light is relatively small when compared to other parts that use certain radio frequencies. Sensors are used here, making this one of the more interesting methods of astronomy in that the materials will help to get an idea of where the stars will locate. Not only will information on the appearance of the stars be found but the behavior of these stars and a look at how these stars will behave in the future can be found.
There are certain parts of space that cannot be seen easily through standard telescopes or from plain vision. These include black holes. Radio astronomy is used to help find light frequencies to see where these black holes are located. It makes this one of the most important methods of astronomy in that it can be used to find certain things that other methods cannot get.
Another of the more unique parts of this form of astronomy is the SETI system. This is the Search for Extra Terrestrial Intelligence part of the study. It is only a small part of the use of radio astronomy though.
Those are just some of the basics of this field of astronomy. Radio astronomy is one of the most unique parts of astronomy in that it can be used to find information on where stars are located and how they will act in the future. Not only that but it can be used to find certain parts of space that are harder to get to. Some studies even look into finding outside life in space. It is unique and an important part of the study of space.