Most Cited Quaternary Science Reviews Articles
Volume 27, Issues 19-20, October 2008, Pages 1791-1828
Wanner, H. | Beer, J. | Bütikofer, J. | Crowley, T.J. | Cubasch, U. | Flückiger, J. | Goosse, H. | Grosjean, M. | Joos, F. | Kaplan, J.O. | Küttel, M. | Müller, S.A. | Prentice, I.C. | Solomina, O. | Stocker, T.F. | Tarasov, P. | Wagner, M. | Widmann, M.
The last 6000 years are of particular interest to the understanding of the Earth System because the boundary conditions of the climate system did not change dramatically (in comparison to larger glacial-interglacial changes), and because abundant, detailed regional palaeoclimatic proxy records cover this period. We use selected proxy-based reconstructions of different climate variables, together with state-of-the-art time series of natural forcings (orbital variations, solar activity variations, large tropical volcanic eruptions, land cover and greenhouse gases), underpinned by results from General Circulation Models (GCMs) and Earth System Models of Intermediate Complexity (EMICs), to establish a comprehensive explanatory framework for climate changes from the Mid-Holocene (MH) to pre-industrial time. The redistribution of solar energy, due to orbital forcing on a millennial timescale, was the cause of a progressive southward shift of the Northern Hemisphere (NH) summer position of the Intertropical Convergence Zone (ITCZ). This was accompanied by a pronounced weakening of the monsoon systems in Africa and Asia and increasing dryness and desertification on both continents. The associated summertime cooling of the NH, combined with changing temperature gradients in the world oceans, likely led to an increasing amplitude of the El Niño Southern Oscillation (ENSO) and, possibly, increasingly negative North Atlantic Oscillation (NAO) indices up to the beginning of the last millennium. On decadal to multi-century timescales, a worldwide coincidence between solar irradiance minima, tropical volcanic eruptions and decadal to multi-century scale cooling events was not found. However, reconstructions show that widespread decadal to multi-century scale cooling events, accompanied by advances of mountain glaciers, occurred in the NH (e.g., in Scandinavia and the European Alps). This occurred namely during the Little Ice Age (LIA) between AD ∼1350 and 1850, when the lower summer insolation in the NH, due to orbital forcing, coincided with solar activity minima and several strong tropical volcanic eruptions. The role of orbital forcing in the NH cooling, the southward ITCZ shift and the desertification of the Sahara are supported by numerous model simulations. Other simulations have suggested that the fingerprint of solar activity variations should be strongest in the tropics, but there is also evidence that changes in the ocean heat transport took place during the LIA at high northern latitudes, with possible additional implications for climates of the Southern Hemisphere (SH). © 2008 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Volume 27, Issues 1-2, January 2008, Pages 42-60
Long-term sedimentary sequences provide a wealth of useful information for research into the palaeo-environment, especially in relation to past climate change. Shorter records provide similar information in many archaeological contexts. However if such records are to be used to provide precise timing of events, and more critically the relative timing between different records, methods are needed to provide accurate and precise age-depth models for these sequences. Given the imprecision of individual calibrated radiocarbon determinations it is necessary to use the information we have about the deposition process to refine our chronologies and also to provide interpolation between dated levels in any sequence. Even with layer counted chronologies, the uncertainties are sometimes hard to quantify. This paper outlines a range of Bayesian models for deposition which have been implemented in the computer programme OxCal. These models can be used to combine information from the sediments themselves with radiocarbon or other direct dating information. Such models have the potential to integrate information between different records and provide a coherent chronology on which to base environmental or archaeological research. © 2007 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Synchronisation of palaeoenvironmental events in the North Atlantic region during the Last Termination: a revised protocol recommended by the INTIMATE group
Volume 27, Issues 1-2, January 2008, Pages 6-17
Lowe, J.J. | Rasmussen, S.O. | Björck, S. | Hoek, W.Z. | Steffensen, J.P. | Walker, M.J.C. | Yu, Z.C.
The North Atlantic INTIMATE group of the INQUA Palaeoclimate Commission has previously recommended an Event Stratigraphy approach for the synchronisation of records of the Last Termination using the Greenland GRIP isotopic record as the regional stratotype and INTCAL98 for the calibration of radiocarbon dates [Lowe, J.J., Hoek, W., INTIMATE Group, 2001. Inter-regional correlation of palaeoclimatic records for the Last Glacial-Interglacial Transition: a protocol for improved precision recommended by the INTIMATE project group. Quaternary Science Reviews 20, 1175-1187]. Here, we present a revised protocol for time-stratigraphic correlation in the North Atlantic region over a more extended time period (30-8 ka). This employs the new NGRIP isotopic record and associated Greenland Ice Core Chronology 2005 (GICC05) as the regional stratotype, INTCAL04 for the calibration of radiocarbon dates, Bayesian-based statistical procedures for the construction of age models, and tephrochronology to validate correlations between regional site records. © 2008 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Holocene moisture evolution in arid central Asia and its out-of-phase relationship with Asian monsoon history
Volume 27, Issues 3-4, February 2008, Pages 351-364
Chen, F. | Yu, Z. | Yang, M. | Ito, E. | Wang, S. | Madsen, D.B. | Huang, X. | Zhao, Y. | Sato, T. | John B. Birks, H. | Boomer, I. | Chen, J. | An, C. | Wünnemann, B.
We synthesize palaeoclimate records from the mid-latitude arid Asian region dominated today by the Westerlies ("arid central Asia" (ACA)) to evaluate spatial and temporal patterns of moisture changes during the Holocene. Sediment records from 11 lakes with reliable chronologies and robust proxies were selected to reconstruct moisture histories based on a five-class ordinal wetness index with assigned scores from the driest to wettest periods at individual sites for 200-year time slices. The proxies used in these records include pollen and diatom assemblages, sediment lithology, lake levels, and geochemistry (mainly isotope) data. The results of our synthesis show that ACA as a whole experienced synchronous and coherent moisture changes during the Holocene, namely a dry early Holocene, a wetter (less dry) early to mid-Holocene, and a moderately wet late Holocene. During the early Holocene most of the lakes experienced very low water levels and even dried out before ca 8 ka (1 ka=1000 cal a BP). Hence the effective-moisture history in ACA is out-of-phase with that in monsoonal Asia as documented by numerous palaeoclimate records. In monsoonal Asia, a strong summer monsoon and humid climate characterized the early Holocene, and a weakened summer monsoon and drier climate prevailed during the late Holocene, which were mainly controlled by changes in low-latitude summer insolation. In contrast, we propose that the pattern of Holocene effective-moisture evolution in the westerly dominated ACA was mainly determined by North Atlantic sea-surface temperatures (SSTs) and high-latitude air temperatures that affect the availability, amount and transport of water vapor. Also, topography of the Tibetan Plateau and adjacent Asian highlands could have contributed to the intensification of dry climate in ACA during the early Holocene, as a result of strengthening the subsidence of dry air masses, associated with stronger uplift motion on the plateau by intense heating under a stronger summer insolation. Summer insolation might have played a key role in directly controlling moisture conditions in ACA but only after the northern hemisphere ice-sheets had disappeared in the mid- and late Holocene. © 2007 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Volume 28, Issues 5-6, March 2009, Pages 412-432
Variations in speleothem oxygen-isotope values (δ18O) result from a complicated interplay of environmental controls and processes in the ocean, atmosphere, soil zone, epikarst, and cave system. As such, the controls on speleothem δ18O values are extremely complex. An understanding of the processes that control equilibrium and kinetic fractionation of oxygen isotopes in water and carbonate species is essential for the proper interpretation of speleothem δ18O as paleoclimate and paleoenvironmental proxies, and is best complemented by study of site-specific cave processes such as infiltration, flow routing, drip seasonality and saturation state, and cave microclimate, among others. This review is a process-based summary of the multiple controls on δ18O in the atmosphere, soil, epikarst, and speleothem calcite, illustrated with case studies. Primary controls of δ18O in the atmosphere include temperature and relative humidity through their role in the multiple isotope "effects". Variability and modifications of water δ18O values in the soil and epikarst zones are dominated by evaporation, mixing, and infiltration of source waters. The isotopically effective recharge into a cave system consists of those waters that participate in precipitation of CaCO3, resulting in calcite deposition rates which may be biased to time periods with optimal dripwater saturation state. Recent modeling, experimental, and observational data yield insight into the significance of kinetic fractionation between dissolved carbonate phases and solid CaCO3, and have implications for the 'Hendy' test. To assist interpretation of speleothem δ18O time series, quantitative and semi-quantitative δ18O-climate calibrations are discussed with an emphasis on some of the difficulties inherent in using modern spatial and temporal isotope gradients to interpret speleothems as paleoclimate proxy records. Finally, several case studies of globally significant speleothem paleoclimate records are discussed that show the utility of δ18O to reconstruct past climate changes in regions that have been typically poorly represented in paleoclimate records, such as tropical and subtropical terrestrial locations. The new approach to speleothem paleoclimatology emphasizes climate teleconnections between regions and attribution of forcing mechanisms. Such investigations allow paleoclimatologists to infer regional to global-scale climate dynamics. © 2008 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Contrasting impacts of Dansgaard-Oeschger events over a western European latitudinal transect modulated by orbital parameters
Volume 27, Issues 11-12, June 2008, Pages 1136-1151
Sánchez Goñi, M.F. | Landais, A. | Fletcher, W.J. | Naughton, F. | Desprat, S. | Duprat, J.
Terrestrial and marine proxies (pollen, planktic and benthic foraminiferal oxygen isotopes, alkenone- and foraminifer-derived sea-surface temperatures (SSTs), ice-rafted debris) from IMAGES deep-sea cores MD95-2042 and SU81-18 (37°N, 10°W), MD99-2331 and MD03-2697 (42°N, 9°W), and MD04-2845 (45°N, 5°W) show that western European and offshore environments were strongly affected by Dansgaard-Oeschger (D-O) and Heinrich (H) events. We concentrate here on latitudinal variability in the forest cover extent and composition of western Europe during the succession of D-O events, showing new pollen records for core MD04-2845 and for marine isotopic stages (MIS) 3 and 4 of core MD99-2331. In general, cold SSTs characteristic of Greenland stadials were contemporaneous with the expansion of semi-desert or steppic vegetation while Greenland interstadials were synchronous with the expansion of forest. Our data reveal that the amplitude of Atlantic and Mediterranean forest expansions differs for any given D-O warming during the glacial period (74-18 ka). In the western Mediterranean, D-O 16-17 and D-O 8 and 7 (corresponding to minima in precession) were associated with strong expansion of forest cover contrasting with weak expansion of forest cover during D-O 14 and 12; the opposite pattern is revealed at the Atlantic sites. Further north, the strongest Greenland warmings are recorded for D-O 19, 11 and 8. This contrasting latitudinal climatic scenario is compared with other northern hemisphere records, revealing similarities between the Mediterranean climate and the Asian monsoon regime, which may relate to a summer atmospheric teleconnection between the two regions comparable to the present-day situation. Parallels between Mediterranean climate enhancement and peaks in global methane (CH4) during the last glacial period suggest a significant role of monsoon activity in determining CH4 emission from wetlands. © 2008 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Fingerprints and age models for widespread New Zealand tephra marker beds erupted since 30,000 years ago: a framework for NZ-INTIMATE
Volume 27, Issues 1-2, January 2008, Pages 95-126
Lowe, D.J. | Shane, P.A.R. | Alloway, B.V. | Newnham, R.M.
The role of tephras in the NZ-INTIMATE project is a critical one because most high-resolution palaeoclimatic records are linked and dated by one or more tephra layers. In this review, first we document eruptive, distributional, and compositional fingerprinting data, both mineralogical and geochemical, for 22 key marker tephras erupted since 30,000 years ago to facilitate their identification and correlation. We include new glass compositional data. The selected marker tephras comprise 10 from Taupo and nine from Okataina volcanoes (rhyolitic), one from Tuhua volcano (peralkaline rhyolitic), and one each from Tongariro and Egmont volcanoes (andesitic). Second, we use four approaches to develop 2σ-age models for the tephras (youngest to oldest): (1) calendar ages for Kaharoa and Taupo/Y were obtained by wiggle-matching log-derived tree-ring sequences dated by 14C; (2) Whakaipo/V was dated using an age-depth model from peat; (3) 14 tephras in the montane Kaipo peat sequence (Waimihia/S, Unit K, Whakatane, Tuhua, Mamaku, Rotoma, Opepe/E, Poronui/C, Karapiti/B, Okupata, Konini, Waiohau, Rotorua, Rerewhakaaitu) were dated by simultaneously wiggle-matching stratigraphic position and 51 independent 14C-age points against IntCal04 using Bayesian probability methods via both OxCal and Bpeat; and (4) the five oldest tephras, erupted before ca 18,000 cal. yr BP, were dated by calibrating limited numbers of 14C ages using IntCal04 (Okareka) or comparison curves of the expanded Cariaco Basin sequence (Te Rere, Kawakawa/Oruanui, Poihipi, Okaia). Kawakawa/Oruanui tephra, the most widely distributed marker tephra, was erupted probably ca 27,097±957 cal. yr BP. Potential dating approaches for the older tephras include their identification in Antarctic ice cores (if present) or annually laminated sediments for which robust calendar-age models have been constructed, high-precision AMS 14C dating on appropriate material from environmentally stable sites, systematic luminescence dating, or new radiometric techniques (e.g. U-Th/He) if suitable minerals are available and errors markedly reduced. Further application of Bayesian age-modelling to stratigraphic sequences of 14C ages, possibly augmented with luminescence ages, may help refine age models for pre-Holocene tephras with the largest errors. Finally, we discuss the critical role these marker tephras play in the ongoing construction of an event stratigraphy for the New Zealand region, which is a key objective of Australasian and Southern Hemisphere INTIMATE projects. © 2007 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Volume 27, Issues 27-28, December 2008, Pages 2449-2455
Bennett, K.D. | Provan, J.
The term 'refugia' was originally used to describe the restricted full-glacial locations of modern mid- and high-latitude taxa, especially trees and shrubs. We discuss the extension of this original use to other situations, including its widening to encompass 'interglacial refugia'. Recent genetic work with modern populations suggests that, at the glacial-interglacial transition, those taxa that did vastly increase their ranges and abundances did so from a small subset of their full-glacial populations. We suggest that 'bottleneck' might be a more appropriate term to use for temporarily reduced populations, to indicate continuity of the populations, and that individualistic response of taxa to climate change appears to extend to intra-specific levels. The extent to which expanded populations contribute to long-term genetic pools remains uncertain. © 2008 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Volume 28, Issues 21-22, October 2009, Pages 2137-2149
Ivy-Ochs, S. | Kerschner, H. | Maisch, M. | Christl, M. | Kubik, P.W. | Schlüchter, C.
In the Alps, climatic conditions reflected in glacier and rock glacier activity in the earliest Holocene show a strong affinity to conditions in the latest Pleistocene (Younger Dryas). Glacier advances in the Alps related to Younger Dryas cooling led to the deposition of Egesen stadial moraines. Egesen stadial moraines can be divided into three or in some cases even more phases (sub-stadials). Moraines of the earliest and most extended advance, the Egesen maximum, stabilized at 12.2 ± 1.0 ka based on 10Be exposure dating at the Schönferwall (Tyrol, Austria) and the Julier Pass-outer moraine (Switzerland). Final stabilization of moraines at the end of the Egesen stadial was at 11.3 ± 0.9 ka as shown by 10Be data from four sites across the Alps. From west to east the sites are Piano del Praiet (northwestern Italy), Grosser Aletschgletscher (central Switzerland), Julier Pass-inner moraine (eastern Switzerland), and Val Viola (northeastern Italy). There is excellent agreement of the 10Be ages from the four sites. In the earliest Holocene, glaciers in the northernmost mountain ranges advanced at around 10.8 ± 1.1 ka as shown by 10Be data from the Kartell site (northern Tyrol, Austria). In more sheltered, drier regions rock glacier activity dominated as shown, for example, at Julier Pass and Larstig valley (Tyrol, Austria). New 10Be dates presented here for two rock glaciers in Larstig valley indicate final stabilization no later than 10.5 ± 0.8 ka. Based on this data, we conclude the earliest Holocene (between 11.6 and about 10.5 ka) was still strongly affected by the cold climatic conditions of the Younger Dryas and the Preboreal oscillation, with the intervening warming phase having had the effect of rapid downwasting of Egesen glaciers. At or slightly before 10.5 ka rapid shrinkage of glaciers to a size smaller than their late 20th century size reflects markedly warmer and possibly also drier climate. Between about 10.5 ka and 3.3 ka conditions in the Alps were not conducive to significant glacier expansion except possibly during rare brief intervals. Past tree-line data from Kaunertal (Tyrol, Austria) in concert with radiocarbon and dendrochronologically dated wood fragments found recently in the glacier forefields in both the Swiss and Austrian Alps points to long periods during the Holocene when glaciers were smaller than they were during the late 20th century. Equilibrium line altitudes (ELA) were about 200 m higher than they are today and about 300 m higher in comparison to Little Ice Age (LIA) ELAs. The Larstig rock glacier site we dated with 10Be is the type area for a postulated mid-Holocene cold period called the Larstig oscillation (presumed age about 7.0 ka). Our data point to final stabilization of those rock glaciers in the earliest Holocene and not in the middle Holocene. The combined data indicate there was no time window in the middle Holocene long enough for rock glaciers of the size and at the elevation of the Larstig site to have formed. During the short infrequent cold oscillations between 10.5 and 3.3 ka small glaciers (less than several km2) may have advanced to close to their LIA dimensions. Overall, the cold periods were just too short for large glaciers to advance. After 3.3 ka, climate conditions became generally colder and warm periods were brief and less frequent. Large glaciers (for example Grosser Aletschgletscher) advanced markedly at 3.0-2.6 ka, around 600 AD and during the LIA. Glaciers in the Alps attained their LIA maximum extents in the 14th, 17th, and 19th centuries, with most reaching their greatest LIA extent in the final 1850/1860 AD advance. © 2009 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Volume 29, Issues 15-16, July 2010, Pages 1757-1778
Polyak, L. | Alley, R.B. | Andrews, J.T. | Brigham-Grette, J. | Cronin, T.M. | Darby, D.A. | Dyke, A.S. | Fitzpatrick, J.J. | Funder, S. | Holland, M. | Jennings, A.E. | Miller, G.H. | O'Regan, M. | Savelle, J. | Serreze, M. | St. John, K. | White, J.W.C. | Wolff, E.
Arctic sea-ice extent and volume are declining rapidly. Several studies project that the Arctic Ocean may become seasonally ice-free by the year 2040 or even earlier. Putting this into perspective requires information on the history of Arctic sea-ice conditions through the geologic past. This information can be provided by proxy records from the Arctic Ocean floor and from the surrounding coasts. Although existing records are far from complete, they indicate that sea ice became a feature of the Arctic by 47Ma, following a pronounced decline in atmospheric pCO2 after the Paleocene-Eocene Thermal Optimum, and consistently covered at least part of the Arctic Ocean for no less than the last 13-14 million years. Ice was apparently most widespread during the last 2-3 million years, in accordance with Earth's overall cooler climate. Nevertheless, episodes of considerably reduced sea ice or even seasonally ice-free conditions occurred during warmer periods linked to orbital variations. The last low-ice event related to orbital forcing (high insolation) was in the early Holocene, after which the northern high latitudes cooled overall, with some superimposed shorter-term (multidecadal to millennial-scale) and lower-magnitude variability. The current reduction in Arctic ice cover started in the late 19th century, consistent with the rapidly warming climate, and became very pronounced over the last three decades. This ice loss appears to be unmatched over at least the last few thousand years and unexplainable by any of the known natural variabilities. © 2010 Elsevier Ltd.
Volume 27, Issues 11-12, June 2008, Pages 1166-1180
Conroy, J.L. | Overpeck, J.T. | Cole, J.E. | Shanahan, T.M. | Steinitz-Kannan, M.
Paleoclimate records from the tropical Pacific suggest the early to mid-Holocene was a period of reduced El Niño/Southern Oscillation (ENSO) variability, with a transition to modern, increased ENSO frequency occurring some time in the last few thousand years. However, the nature and timing of this shift remains uncertain due to the discontinuous nature and/or coarse resolution of many ENSO proxies, as well as a lack of agreement between previously published records. A new, continuous, climate record from El Junco Crater Lake in the Galápagos Islands reveals several abrupt changes in lake level and precipitation through the Holocene. Hydroclimatic model simulations suggest that El Junco lake level responds sensitively to increases in precipitation associated with El Niño events, rising during wet El Niño events and falling during the intervening dry periods. Grain size data from El Junco sediment cores indicate past lake level variability, likely associated with changing seasonal precipitation and ENSO frequency. The grain size data suggest increased precipitation intensity prior to 9000±120 cal years BP, and after 4200±130 cal years BP, as well as a two-step increase in precipitation at 3200±160 and 2000±100 cal years BP. Maximum Holocene precipitation and inferred ENSO variability occurred between 2000±100 and 1500±70 cal years BP, during the same period that six other independent proxy records suggest higher ENSO frequency and longer, stronger El Niño events. Decreasing sediment carbon/nitrogen (C/N) ratios in El Junco sediments indicate rising lake levels from the early Holocene to present, corroborating the grain size data. The inferred increase in precipitation at 4200±130 cal years BP and at 2000±100 cal years BP coincides with decreasing Southwest Asian and East Asian Monsoon intensity, suggesting tropical Pacific climate and the Asian monsoon were interconnected systems at centennial to millennial timescales during the Holocene. A weakening trend in the Asian monsoon and the trend toward wetter conditions at El Junco also coincide with a trend toward cooler and drier conditions inferred from Cariaco Basin sediment proxies from the mid-Holocene to present, suggesting the migration of the Intertropical Convergence Zone (ITCZ) likely influenced hydrological changes in both the eastern tropical Pacific and the Asian Monsoon region during the Holocene. © 2008 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Climatic patterns in equatorial and southern Africa from 30,000 to 10,000 years ago reconstructed from terrestrial and near-shore proxy data
Volume 27, Issues 25-26, December 2008, Pages 2316-2340
Gasse, F. | Chalié, F. | Vincens, A. | Williams, M.A.J. | Williamson, D.
As part of a wider study of last glacial and deglacial climates in the Southern Hemisphere continents, we here review terrestrial and near-shore marine records from equatorial and southern Africa between 30,000 and 10,000 years ago (30-10 ka). This time interval covers the lead-up to the Last Glacial Maximum (LGM; 21 ± 2 ka), the LGM proper, and the ensuing deglacial. Records selected for review needed to meet three requirements: continuity or near continuity over the period; a well-established chronology; and at least one but preferably several unambiguous proxy(ies). We aim to show how regional climates of the sub-continent have responded to orbital forcing as opposed to other global glacial-interglacial boundary conditions, and how they are related to high latitude climates, sea and land surface conditions, positions of the Intertropical Convergence Zone (ITCZ) and of the westerly belt. Evidence of past climates derived from many independent proxies is given from west to southwest Africa (moisture from the Atlantic Ocean), then from equatorial East Africa to the southern subtropical summer rainfall domain (moisture mainly from the Indian Ocean). The LGM was cooler than today, and generally drier in the tropics. North of 8-9°S, glacial to Holocene increase in monsoonal precipitation, primarily related to orbitally-induced summer insolation in the northern hemisphere, occurred by steps of increasing amplitude (∼17-16, 14.5, 11.5 ka). Major wet-dry spells coincide with abrupt warm-cold events in high northern latitudes and related ITCZ migrations. In the southern tropics, the main post-glacial increase in tropical rainfall generally appears more gradual and in phase with Antarctic warming. Data suggest a restricted northward migration of the ITCZ and concentration of tropical rainfall well south of the Equator during the LGM and the Younger Dryas. Drier glacial conditions prevailed in southeastern Africa, while parts of southwestern Africa point to enhanced humidity during the LGM, suggesting that the winter westerly belt was either stronger than today or displaced further north possibly as a result of more extensive Antarctic sea-ice. Inferred African climatic fluctuations show the competing influences of tropical and high latitude climates of both hemispheres, and suggest changes in both meridional and zonal circulation modes. This review also reveals major geographical and methodological gaps, and a number of unresolved issues providing pointers for future research. © 2008 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Reconstructing past fire regimes: methods, applications, and relevance to fire management and conservation
Volume 28, Issues 5-6, March 2009, Pages 555-576
Conedera, M. | Tinner, W. | Neff, C. | Meurer, M. | Dickens, A.F. | Krebs, P.
Biomass burning and resulting fire regimes are major drivers of vegetation changes and of ecosystem dynamics. Understanding past fire dynamics and their relationship to these factors is thus a key factor in preserving and managing present biodiversity and ecosystem functions. Unfortunately, our understanding of the disturbance dynamics of past fires is incomplete, and many open questions exist relevant to these concepts and the related methods. In this paper we describe the present status of the fire-regime concept, discuss the notion of the fire continuum and related proxies, and review the most important existing approaches for reconstructing fire history at centennial to millennial scales. We conclude with a short discussion of selected directions for future research that may lead to a better understanding of past fire-regime dynamics. In particular, we suggest that emphasis should be laid on (1) discriminating natural from anthropogenic fire-regime types, (2) improving combined analysis of fire and vegetation reconstructions to study long-term fire ecology, and (3) overcoming problems in defining temporal and spatial scales of reference, which would allow better use of past records to gain important insights for landscape, fire and forest management. © 2008 Elsevier Ltd.
Stable isotope records of Late Quaternary climate and hydrology from Mediterranean lakes: the ISOMED synthesis
Volume 27, Issues 25-26, December 2008, Pages 2426-2441
Roberts, N. | Jones, M.D. | Benkaddour, A. | Eastwood, W.J. | Filippi, M.L. | Frogley, M.R. | Lamb, H.F. | Leng, M.J. | Reed, J.M. | Stein, M. | Stevens, L. | Valero-Garcés, B. | Zanchetta, G.
Lake isotope records can be used to assess the spatial coherency of Late Quaternary climate change across the circum-Mediterranean region. We place modern and palaeo-data within a simple conceptual lake response model to show that the isotope hydrology of most Mediterranean lakes has been influenced strongly by water balance, even in those systems that are chemically dilute (i.e. freshwater). δ18O data on biogenic and endogenic carbonates from 24 lake basins are used to reconstruct multi-millennial-scale trends since the LGM. While it is difficult to make direct comparisons between lake records in terms of single climatic parameters, coherent regional isotopic trends can be identified. During glacial times Mediterranean lakes deposited carbonates isotopically heavier in δ18O compared to the Holocene, partly due to source area effects. Isotopic enrichment was most marked during intervals corresponding to the H1 and Younger Dryas events, confirming that Late Pleistocene cold stages in the North Atlantic region were marked by aridity around much of the Mediterranean. Almost all Mediterranean lake records shifted to more depleted isotopic values during the Last Glacial-Interglacial Transition (LGIT). This shift is the reverse of the trend which characterised the same transition in lakes from northern and central Europe, and suggests that temperature changes were not an important direct driver of Mediterranean lake isotopic records over glacial-interglacial timescales. In the early Holocene, many lakes in the eastern part of the region were more depleted isotopically than in recent millennia. This corresponds with marine sapropel formation, both chronologically and geographically, and implies that increases in local rainfall contributed significantly to the creation of a freshwater lid and anoxia in the East Mediterranean Sea. In contrast, no such pattern is currently apparent from lake isotope records from the West Mediterranean, suggesting a possible NW-SE contrast in climate history during the Holocene. © 2008 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Volume 28, Issues 5-6, March 2009, Pages 449-468
Fairchild, I.J. | Treble, P.C.
Speleothems are now established as important palaeoenvironmental archives and contain a number of suitable proxies, although trace elements have been much less widely used than oxygen and carbon isotopes. The complexity of the cave environment helps to explain this since the fluids from which speleothems form vary greatly in composition in space (even within a cave chamber), seasonally, and over longer periods. Understanding the forcing factors for this variability is the key to decoding the significance of the trace element records. A variety of techniques are available for trace element work and it is important to understand the strengths and limitations of each and also to seek an understanding, e.g. by micro-imaging techniques, of whether the elements are associated with inclusions in the CaCO3, or are isolated within the crystal lattice. For some elements there is a more-or-less predictable relationship between element ratios to Ca in the water and in the calcite. Individual trace elements may be derived from atmospheric deposition, superficial deposits or bedrock and can be recycled in soil processes before being transferred to the cave. Some components show an instantaneous response to water infiltration, whereas others are only leached by slow-flowing seepage waters. Changing in the proportion of water from fracture-fed and seepage-flow aquifer compartments is an important factor in influencing trace element supply. High flows lead to higher fluxes of soil-derived colloidally transported elements. Conversely, under relatively dry conditions, degassing of CO2 results in "prior calcite precipitation" upflow of the site of speleothem deposition and leads to higher ratios of Sr/Ca and Mg/Ca. Some trace element variations in speleothems over time are induced during crystal growth whereby faster growth leads to a greater departure from equilibrium element partitioning. Despite the demonstrated temperature-dependence of Mg partitioning into calcite, attempts at deriving palaeotemperature records from speleothems have been so far confounded by variations in solution Mg/Ca and/or crystallographic effects. A number of case studies have effectively used trace elements such as speleothem Mg as records of palaeo-aridity, using supporting arguments from modern monitoring or covariations with other parameters such as stable isotopes. Sr and U isotopes can also be indicators of palaeohydrology, although Sr isotope variations can also reflect varying aeolian input. Considerable progress has been made in decoding the meaning of annual trace element variations using criteria for understanding dripwater hydrology and pH. This should lead in the future to more specific interpretations of how seasonality evolves through time. © 2008 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Volume 28, Issues 27-28, December 2009, Pages 3016-3034
Kaplan, J.O. | Krumhardt, K.M. | Zimmermann, N.
Humans have transformed Europe's landscapes since the establishment of the first agricultural societies in the mid-Holocene. The most important anthropogenic alteration of the natural environment was the clearing of forests to establish cropland and pasture, and the exploitation of forests for fuel wood and construction materials. While the archaeological and paleoecological record documents the time history of anthropogenic deforestation at numerous individual sites, to study the effect that prehistoric and preindustrial deforestation had on continental-scale carbon and water cycles we require spatially explicit maps of changing forest cover through time. Previous attempts to map preindustrial anthropogenic land use and land cover change addressed only the recent past, or relied on simplistic extrapolations of present day land use patterns to past conditions. In this study we created a very high resolution, annually resolved time series of anthropogenic deforestation in Europe over the past three millennia by 1) digitizing and synthesizing a database of population history for Europe and surrounding areas, 2) developing a model to simulate anthropogenic deforestation based on population density that handles technological progress, and 3) applying the database and model to a gridded dataset of land suitability for agriculture and pasture to simulate spatial and temporal trends in anthropogenic deforestation. Our model results provide reasonable estimations of deforestation in Europe when compared to historical accounts. We simulate extensive European deforestation at 1000 BC, implying that past attempts to quantify anthropogenic perturbation of the Holocene carbon cycle may have greatly underestimated early human impact on the climate system. © 2009 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Volume 29, Issues 1-2, January 2010, Pages 8-20
Lemieux-Dudon, B. | Blayo, E. | Petit, J.-R. | Waelbroeck, C. | Svensson, A. | Ritz, C. | Barnola, J.-M. | Narcisi, B.M. | Parrenin, F.
We are hereby presenting a new dating method based on inverse techniques, which aims at calculating consistent gas and ice chronologies for several ice cores. The proposed method yields new dating scenarios simultaneously for several cores by making a compromise between the chronological information brought by glaciological modeling (i.e., ice flow model, firn densification model, accumulation rate model), and by gas and ice stratigraphic constraints. This method enables us to gather widespread chronological information and to use regional or global markers (i.e., methane, volcanic sulfate, Beryllium-10, tephra layers, etc.) to link the core chronologies stratigraphically. Confidence intervals of the new dating scenarios can be calculated thanks to the probabilistic formulation of the new method, which takes into account both modeling and data uncertainties. We apply this method simultaneously to one Greenland (NGRIP) and three Antarctic (EPICA Dome C, EPICA Dronning Maud Land, and Vostok) ices cores, and refine existent chronologies. Our results show that consistent ice and gas chronologies can be derived for depth intervals that are well-constrained by relevant glaciological data. In particular, we propose new and consistent dating of the last deglaciation for Greenland and Antarctic ice and gas records. © 2009 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Archaeology of the continental shelf: Marine resources, submerged landscapes and underwater archaeology
Volume 27, Issues 23-24, November 2008, Pages 2153-2165
Bailey, G.N. | Flemming, N.C.
We provide a critical review of the evidence for the long-term use of marine resources and coastal environments in human evolution and later development. We emphasise the importance of the coastal archaeological record in understanding patterns of human settlement and dispersal and draw attention to the large potential biases introduced by the destructive or obscuring effects of Pleistocene sea-level change. We note that lowered sea levels have been the norm for most of the Pleistocene and that periods of high sea level have been too short-lived to provide other than a fragmentary coastal record and one that is beset with ambiguities and uncertainties. We examine the geological processes of coastal uplift and underwater preservation that may help to mitigate these biases. Coastlines elevated by isostatic and tectonic processes, or with very steep offshore drop-offs at plate boundaries, are important in providing a potential window into coastal landscapes and archaeology formed during periods of lowered sea level. However, we conclude that the opportunities afforded by these geological factors are too limited to obviate the need for underwater exploration. We review the evidence now available from submerged landscapes across the Africa-Eurasia interface from the Atlantic coastlines of Northwest Europe to the southern Red Sea. We show that geomorphological conditions for the preservation of archaeological and palaeoenvironmental data are commonly present, that much material has already been discovered, and that new techniques, technologies and projects are providing the momentum for a rapidly expanding field of investigation. The results do not simply add to what we already know from sites on land, but are likely to produce qualitatively different evidence for coastal adaptations and landscapes that have no analogue on present-day coastlines. We note the strong probability that many coastal landscapes exposed at lowered sea level provided relatively fertile and productive refugia for plants, land mammals and humans at a time when increased aridity would have reduced or deterred hinterland occupation. We conclude that underwater investigation is essential if hypotheses of early human adaptation and dispersal are to be fully tested. © 2008 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Dynamic cycles, ice streams and their impact on the extent, chronology and deglaciation of the British-Irish ice sheet
Volume 28, Issues 7-8, April 2009, Pages 758-776
Hubbard, A. | Bradwell, T. | Golledge, N. | Hall, A. | Patton, H. | Sugden, D. | Cooper, R. | Stoker, M.
We present results from a suite of forward transient numerical modelling experiments of the British and Irish Ice Sheet (BIIS), consisting of Scottish, Welsh and Irish accumulation centres, spanning the last Glacial period from 38 to 10 ka BP. The 3D thermomechanical model employed uses higher-order physics to solve longitudinal (membrane) stresses and to reproduce grounding-line dynamics. Surface mass balance is derived using a distributed degree-day calculation based on a reference climatology from mean (1961-1990) precipitation and temperature patterns. The model is perturbed from this reference state by a scaled NGRIP oxygen isotope curve and the SPECMAP sea-level reconstruction. Isostatic response to ice loading is computed using an elastic lithosphere/relaxed asthenosphere scheme. A suite of 350 simulations were designed to explore the parameter space of model uncertainties and sensitivities, to yield a subset of experiments that showed close correspondence to offshore and onshore ice-directional indicators, broad BIIS chronology, and the relative sea-level record. Three of these simulations are described in further detail and indicate that the separate ice centres of the modelled BIIS complex are dynamically interdependent during the build up to maximum conditions, but remain largely independent throughout much of the simulation. The modelled BIIS is extremely dynamic, drained mainly by a number of transient but recurrent ice streams which dynamically switch and fluctuate in extent and intensity on a centennial time-scale. A series of binge/purge, advance/retreat, cycles are identified which correspond to alternating periods of relatively cold-based ice, (associated with a high aspect ratio and net growth), and wet-based ice with a lower aspect ratio, characterised by streaming. The timing and dynamics of these events are determined through a combination of basal thermomechanical switching spatially propagated and amplified through longitudinal coupling, but are modulated and phase-lagged to the oscillations within the NGRIP record of climate forcing. Phases of predominant streaming activity coincide with periods of maximum ice extent and are triggered by abrupt transitions from a cold to relatively warm climate, resulting in major iceberg/melt discharge events into the North Sea and Atlantic Ocean. The broad chronology of the modelled BIIS indicates a maximum extent at ∼20 ka, with fast-flowing ice across its western and northern sectors that extended to the continental shelf edge. Fast-flowing streams also dominate the Irish Sea and North Sea Basin sectors and impinge onto SW England and East Anglia. From ∼19 ka BP deglaciation is achieved in less than 2000 years, discharging the freshwater equivalent of ∼2 m global sea-level rise. A much reduced ice sheet centred on Scotland undergoes subsequent retrenchment and a series of advance/retreat cycles into the North Sea Basin from 17 ka onwards, culminating in a sustained Younger Dryas event from 13 to 11.5 ka BP. Modelled ice cover is persistent across the Western and Central Highlands until the last remnant glaciers disappear around 10.5 ka BP. © 2009 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Volume 28, Issues 5-6, March 2009, Pages 399-411
Trauth, M.H. | Larrasoaña, J.C. | Mudelsee, M.
We analyzed published records of terrigenous dust flux from marine sediments off subtropical West Africa, the eastern Mediterranean Sea, and the Arabian Sea, and lake records from East Africa using statistical methods to detect trends, rhythms and events in Plio-Pleistocene African climate. The critical reassessment of the environmental significance of dust flux and lake records removes the apparent inconsistencies between marine vs. terrestrial records of African climate variability. Based on these results, major steps in mammalian and hominin evolution occurred during episodes of a wetter, but highly variable climate largely controlled by orbitally induced insolation changes in the low latitudes. © 2008 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Volume 27, Issues 13-14, July 2008, Pages 1363-1377
Pawley, S.M. | Bailey, R.M. | Rose, J. | Moorlock, B.S.P. | Hamblin, R.J.O. | Booth, S.J. | Lee, J.R.
The lowland region of north Norfolk contains some of the best preserved evidence for glacial deposition during the Middle Pleistocene in northwest Europe. Despite the importance of these deposits, there is limited chronological control and it is debated whether they belong to a single glaciation, equated to the Anglian Glaciation (Marine Isotope Stage 12), or represent deposition over a number of Middle Pleistocene cold stages. In order to develop an improved chronology for glaciation in this region, we obtained 18 samples for optical stimulated luminescence (OSL) dating from glacial outwash facies. Samples of coarse-grained quartz sand were measured using the SAR (single aliquot regenerative-dose) protocol. The low radioactive isotope concentrations in sediments of this region enable the traditionally accepted age limit of luminescence dating to be extended. The form of the dose response curves, pre-heat plateaux tests, and dose recovery experiments also indicate that laboratory doses can be reliably measured in these samples. Age overestimation due to partial bleaching is thought to be insignificant. The OSL ages suggest that the glacial sediments studied were deposited during MIS 12 rather than in different post MIS 12 stages. © 2008 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Synchronization of the NGRIP, GRIP, and GISP2 ice cores across MIS 2 and palaeoclimatic implications
Volume 27, Issues 1-2, January 2008, Pages 18-28
Rasmussen, S.O. | Seierstad, I.K. | Andersen, K.K. | Bigler, M. | Dahl-Jensen, D. | Johnsen, S.J.
We here present a synchronization of the NGRIP, GRIP, and GISP2 ice cores based mainly on volcanic events over the period 14.9-32.45 ka b2k (before AD 2000), corresponding to Marine Isotope Stage 2 (MIS 2) and the end of MIS 3. The matching provides a basis for applying the recent NGRIP-based Greenland Ice Core Chronology 2005 (GICC05) time scale to the GRIP and GISP2 ice cores, thereby making it possible to compare the synchronized palaeoclimate profiles of the cores in detail and to identify relative accumulation differences between the cores. Based on the matching, a period of anomalous high accumulation rates in the GISP2 ice core is detected within the period 16.5-18.3 ka b2k. The δ18 O and [Ca2 +] profiles of the three cores are presented on the common GICC05 time scale and generally show excellent agreement across the stadial-interstadial transitions and across the two characteristic dust events in Greenland Stadial 3. However, large differences between the δ18 O and [Ca2 +] profiles of the three cores are seen in the same period as the 7-9% increase in the GISP2 accumulation rate. We conclude that changes of the atmospheric circulation are likely to have occurred in this period, altering the spatial gradients in Greenland and resulting in larger variations between the records. © 2007 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Size and shape characteristics of drumlins, derived from a large sample, and associated scaling laws
Volume 28, Issues 7-8, April 2009, Pages 677-692
Clark, C.D. | Hughes, A.L.C. | Greenwood, S.L. | Spagnolo, M. | Ng, F.S.L.
Ice sheets flowing across a sedimentary bed usually produce a landscape of blister-like landforms streamlined in the direction of the ice flow and with each bump of the order of 102 to 103 m in length and 101 m in relief. Such landforms, known as drumlins, have mystified investigators for over a hundred years. A satisfactory explanation for their formation, and thus an appreciation of their glaciological significance, has remained elusive. A recent advance has been in numerical modelling of the land-forming process. In anticipation of future modelling endeavours, this paper is motivated by the requirement for robust data on drumlin size and shape for model testing. From a systematic programme of drumlin mapping from digital elevation models and satellite images of Britain and Ireland, we used a geographic information system to compile a range of statistics on length L, width W, and elongation ratio E (where E = L/W) for a large sample. Mean L, is found to be 629 m (n = 58,983), mean W is 209 m and mean E is 2.9 (n = 37,043). Most drumlins are between 250 and 1000 metres in length; between 120 and 300 metres in width; and between 1.7 and 4.1 times as long as they are wide. Analysis of such data and plots of drumlin width against length reveals some new insights. All frequency distributions are unimodal from which we infer that the geomorphological label of 'drumlin' is fair in that this is a true single population of landforms, rather than an amalgam of different landform types. Drumlin size shows a clear minimum bound of around 100 m (horizontal). Maybe drumlins are generated at many scales and this is the minimum, or this value may be an indication of the fundamental scale of bump generation ('proto-drumlins') prior to them growing and elongating. A relationship between drumlin width and length is found (with r2 = 0.48) and that is approximately W = 7 L 1/2 when measured in metres. A surprising and sharply-defined line bounds the data cloud plotted in E-W-L space, and records a scale-dependent maximum elongation limit (approximated by Emax = L1/3, when L measured in metres). For a given length, for some reason as yet unknown, drumlins do not exceed the elongation ratio defined by this scaling law. We also report and compare our statistics to an amalgamated sample (25,907 drumlins) of measures derived from around 50 published investigations. Any theory must be able to explain the drumlin statistics and fundamental scaling properties reported herein and they thus provide powerful tests for drumlin modelling. © 2008 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Climate versus human-driven fire regimes in Mediterranean landscapes: the Holocene record of Lago dell'Accesa (Tuscany, Italy)
Volume 27, Issues 11-12, June 2008, Pages 1181-1196
Vannière, B. | Colombaroli, D. | Chapron, E. | Leroux, A. | Tinner, W. | Magny, M.
A high-resolution sedimentary charcoal record from Lago dell'Accesa in southern Tuscany reveals numerous changes in fire regime over the last 11.6 kyr cal. BP and provides one of the longest gap-free series from Italy and the Mediterranean region. Charcoal analyses are coupled with gamma density measurements, organic-content analyses, and pollen counts to provide data about sedimentation and vegetation history. A comparison between fire frequency and lake-level reconstructions from the same site is used to address the centennial variability of fire regimes and its linkage to hydrological processes. Our data reveal strong relationships among climate, fire, vegetation, and land-use and attest to the paramount importance of fire in Mediterranean ecosystems. The mean fire interval (MFI) for the entire Holocene was estimated to be 150 yr, with a minimum around 80 yr and a maximum around 450 yr. Between 11.6 and 3.6 kyr cal. BP, up to eight high-frequency fire phases lasting 300-500 yr generally occurred during shifts towards low lake-level stands (ca 11,300, 10,700, 9500, 8700, 7600, 6200, 5300, 3400, 1800 and 1350 cal. yr BP). Therefore, we assume that most of these shifts were triggered by drier climatic conditions and especially a dry summer season that promoted ignition and biomass burning. At the beginning of the Holocene, high climate seasonality favoured fire expansion in this region, as in many other ecosystems of the northern and southern hemispheres. Human impact affected fire regimes and especially fire frequencies since the Neolithic (ca 8000-4000 cal. yr BP). Burning as a consequence of anthropogenic activities became more frequent after the onset of the Bronze Age (ca 3800-3600 cal. yr BP) and appear to be synchronous with the development of settlements in the region, slash-and-burn agriculture, animal husbandry, and mineral exploitation. The anthropogenic phases with maximum fire activity corresponded to greater sensitivity of the vegetation and triggered significant changes in vegetational communities (e.g. temporal declines of Quercus ilex forests and expansion of shrublands and macchia). The link between fire and climate persisted during the mid- and late Holocene, when human impact on vegetation and the fire regime was high. This finding suggests that climatic conditions were important for fire occurrence even under strongly humanised ecosystem conditions. © 2008 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
The distribution of late-Quaternary woody taxa in northern Eurasia: evidence from a new macrofossil database
Volume 28, Issues 23-24, November 2009, Pages 2445-2464
Binney, H.A. | Willis, K.J. | Edwards, M.E. | Bhagwat, S.A. | Anderson, P.M. | Andreev, A.A. | Blaauw, M. | Damblon, F. | Haesaerts, P. | Kienast, F. | Kremenetski, K.V. | Krivonogov, S.K. | Lozhkin, A.V. | MacDonald, G.M. | Novenko, E.Y. | Oksanen, P. | Sapelko, T.V. | Väliranta, M. | Vazhenina, L.
We present a database of late-Quaternary plant macrofossil records for northern Eurasia (from 23° to 180°E and 46° to 76°N) comprising 281 localities, over 2300 samples and over 13,000 individual records. Samples are individually radiocarbon dated or are assigned ages via age models fitted to sequences of calibrated radiocarbon dates within a section. Tree species characteristic of modern northern forests (e.g. Picea, Larix, tree-Betula) are recorded at least intermittently from prior to the last glacial maximum (LGM), through the LGM and Lateglacial, to the Holocene, and some records locate trees close to the limits of the Scandinavian ice sheet, supporting the hypothesis that some taxa persisted in northern refugia during the last glacial cycle. Northern trees show differing spatio-temporal patterns across Siberia: deciduous trees were widespread in the Lateglacial, with individuals occurring across much of their contemporary ranges, while evergreen conifers expanded northwards to their range limits in the Holocene. © 2009 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.