Because of its many advancements, ultrasound technology is used in a number of ways to help health practitioners make more accurate diagnosis of patents’ different medical conditions. However, the use of ultrasound in obstetrics and gynecology will always be its number one and most common usage. Whether they are in hospitals, imaging centers, or physician’s office, ultrasound technicians will remain to be very much in demand as long as there are pregnant women. The ultrasound technician salary and benefits package will, as a result, always be very competitive.
Physicians need all the help they can get in order to provide optimal prenatal care. The use of ultrasound, in this regards, to provide accurate basis for diagnoses and evaluations will be very much needed. Highly qualified ultrasound technicians will be there to provide accurate ultrasound images.
Physicians can give the pregnancy’s estimated date of delivery based on when the mother found out she was pregnant in conjunction with the date of the mother’s last menstrual period. However, with ultrasound, this estimate can be more accurately given by measuring the size of the fetus.
Physicians also use a different device to listen to the baby’s heartbeat inside its mother’s womb. Although these are fairly accurate devices, ultrasound can also be used in cases when physicians want to have a more accurate reading regarding the baby’s heartbeat. This is usually done when physicians may have detected an abnormality or she wants to make sure of anything. Birth defects or impending miscarriage can be accurately diagnoses with this technology.
In cases like these, highly qualified ultrasound technicians are very much preferred in order to not give false information based on the ultrasound image the technician created. These technicians play important roles in prenatal care and their abilities to make highly accurate images are highly valued. This is reflected in the often high ultrasound technician salary most of these technicians receive.
The latest development in ultrasound technology that is used in obstetrics and gynaecology is 4D ultrasound imaging. Where as in 2D imaging, you can see the fetus in a two dimensional image, 4D will give the parents and the physicians a more realistic representation of the fetus. They will not only see the fetus in three dimensional, they will also see it move. Technicians are needed to be proficient in the use of this new technology in order to take advantage of it many benefits. The ultrasound technician salary range of those that are able to perform 4D imaging can be potentially better than those that are able to use the more conventional ultrasound machines.