Health Care Clinic
Health refers to the generalized wellness status of a particular individual such as mental and spiritual health and as well as the entirety of the physical well-being.
Maintaining the general human health can be accomplished and promoted via a thorough examination and assessment of various health aspects such aspects of physique, mentation and social wellness collectively known as “triad of health”.
Systematized and scientifically certified treatment and management approaches for the purpose of preventing or curing all health issues as well as for the promotion and enhancement of general wellness of a person is made certain by duly registered licensed health staffs.
In addition, healthcare is provided by licensed healthcare providers from various areas of specialization in medicine such as chiropractors, dentists, nurses, pharmacists, physiotherapists, general or specialized medical doctors and all other allied health providers.Approach of such health care can be provided in various levels of health care service classification such as primary or basic health care, secondary health care services and tertian health care service.
Patients who wished to avail health care services from such health care providers can be availed in hospitals as well as in walk in clinic.
Accessibility and availability of healthcare services from a certified health care clinic is of varying access depending on a particular country and health providers in which access is said to be predominantly affected by socio-economic status of the patient as well as the legal regulating laws concerning health related issues in a particular place. Every nation has its own specific laws governing health matters including big or small health care clinic.
Furthermore, according to a statement from the World Health Organization (WHO), efficiency of certain healthcare facility largely depends on its financial needs as such finance requisite is such a huge amount of money requirement aside from the need of employing versatile and specialty trained healthcare providers.
Allied health sectors in certain health care clinic comprises of various allied health sectors as a provider of specialized health needs of a certain community or individual patient needs.
The union of unified nations set its international standardized classifications as basis for definition of the primary frame work of the said healthcare industry including of which are hospital facilities, health care clinic and other allied health practices.
Factors which Determines Health
Certain factors are believed to have an influencing effect on general health and well-being of every individual. Such said factors are included in the evaluation and assessment of wellness of each patient that visits into any health facility particularly health care clinic.Aside from the common denominators in the medical side which are of quality medical intervention provided, availability of health services and high end medical equipment for a better health management, how well trained and knowledgeable each specialized healthcare provider, the socio-economic factors, life styles and as well as diet and physical activities are said to be an addition to the over-all determining factors of general health status of a particular patient or individual.
Providing Health Care
Basic healthcare services
It has the widest scope of patients and it refers to health services which are primarily essential in maintenance of the general health status of a certain locality. Such primary health service specifically describes the initial health services rendered by duly registered healthcare providers. Commonly, basic care is provided by a general medical practitioner or a family medicine doctor.
It is used to refer to healthcare services rendered by specialized healthcare providers including all other allied health stuffs and as well as professional health care stuffs which are not engaged with the initial encounter of certain patients such as dermatologists, cardiologists and others.
It refers to special consultation by in-patients or referred patients from another healthcare professional to medical practitioners that have the complete medical equipment and medical background and capacity for advance healthcare such as a tertian hospital.