An Open Source Life
A concept is after all, a concept. A concept goes down in history as ‘groundbreaking’ only if its applications charter untested waters, if they dissolve physical boundaries, have far reaching impacts in every sphere of life and influence the lives of millions of people belonging to every strata of society, in every corner of the world. Open Source is a tool by the use of which we can shape our tomorrow and dare to dream even beyond that.
We have done extensive research for this section to bring to you the reality about real life applications which are developed or under development with the aim of betterment of humanity as a whole. The topics covered under this section are education, communication, food and entertainment (the basic requirements of today’s urban world!). We have tried to show that impact the Open Source has made in the lives of normal people outside the area of technological development because after all, the real test is in the real world, and the real world is inhabited by real people.
Inside This Section
Open Multimedia Standards
As explained previously in the Open Standards page, understanding their use in daily life is extremely essential. By using Open Standards, we would not just be helping to spread the unified standards everywhere, but also we would be saving ourselves from the many threats of using a closed standard.
In the super-fast paced world of today, something which is not ‘instant’ is as good as a rock. And above all, we need instant communication. For communication over the internet, we have e-mails and Instant Messengers or IM’s as we call them. Most of the IM’s belong to the line of CSS such as MSN and Yahoo! The developers of these systems do not disclose their source codes.
Educators have been called upon throughout history to combat a closed mindset among people, to let the world know about the ‘other’ side, the ‘free’ side. Censorship has been imposed on all types of flow of information by various powers who don’t want a new world order to be instated.
Open Source in Gaming Industry
Open Source has touched almost every part of the multimedia industry. Why should gaming be left apart? Open Source and Open Standards have left a significant mark on the gaming industry. Here, we will see in brief some of the Open Standards implemented in the Gaming Industry.
Say ‘movies’ and one thinks of big production houses enlisting the service of acclaimed directors, larger than life actors, experienced scriptwriters, stuntmen and movie crews, professional recording, editing, sound mixing and marketing teams.
Now, didn’t you just think that ‘Open Source Food’ is a contradiction of terms? How can open source be possibly related to Open Source?