If you have been feeling sorry for yourself because of financial circumstances during the holiday season, take a look at the Scriptures that narrate the birth of Jesus.
The detail I’m not particularly referring to involves placing a newborn child Jesus in a manger in the stable or cave where the animals stayed. To me, that was making the best of emergency circumstances. Joseph comes across as a responsible man in the infancy narratives, and I’m sure he intended to have found appropriate lodging before Mary went into labor.
The hint that the Magi appear to have visited the Holy Family in someone’s home on a later date supports that theory.
The story of childhood poverty comes from the presentation of Jesus at the temple in Jerusalem, related in Luke 2:22-40. This ritual was a dedication ceremony, similar to today’s christenings, in which the birth of a baby was celebrated by the family and religious community.
Luke explains that the childbirth purification offering provided by Mary, in keeping with the commandment of Jewish law, was two turtledoves or pigeons.
The significance of that detail comes from Leviticus 12:8. In the New International Version translation, that verse is:
“If she cannot afford a lamb, she is to bring two doves or two young pigeons, one for a burnt offering and the other for a sin offering. In this way the priest will make atonement for her, and she will be clean.”
Now remember what Scripture tells about the events of Jesus’ birth:
Joseph and Mary were visited by angels upon or shortly after conception. Mary’s relative Elizabeth exclaimed her delight and gave a prophecy upon learning Mary was pregnant. The shepherds who came to see baby Jesus said they had been visited by angels giving a joyful message.
All of that happened before the Magi visited from far away, explaining what they knew, and King Herod took out his rage in a horrible way upon the youngest children of Bethlehem.
Do you think Mary would have provided just two birds as her offering for such a special child if she and Joseph could have afforded a lamb?
Defying all social expectations as to who the “important” people are in the world, more than 2,000 years later people still sing songs and tell stories of her child’s life.
What impact can you have on the world should you also come from a family of very modest means?