Text Messaging and Literacy – The Evidence
To Be Published August 21st 2013 by Routledge – 160 pages
"Well thought out and timely. This is the leading group in the world working on texting and literacy, and they have a strong track record of publications. It would also be the first book, as they say, to deal with the subject at an academic level. The focus on education is important, as this is where most of the anxieties lie. It will be a major step forward in creating a new climate."
Professor David Crystal, author of The Cambridge Encyclopaedia of Language and The Cambridge Encyclopaedia of the English Language, Television consultant and presenter
As children are given mobile phones at increasingly younger ages, there is considerable media coverage of claims that mobile phones, and text messaging in particular, are responsible for declining levels of literacy in children and young people. Such claims are often adopted wholesale by teachers and parents, despite the fact that there is an empirical literature which has failed to find a basis to these claims, and to the contrary has found that text messaging is supporting children’s literacy skills.
Written by leading international researchers Text Messaging and Literacy presents an overview and discussion of the academic evidence for and against use of text messaging and mobile phones in supporting literate activity and discusses what conclusions we can and should draw about the impact of mobile phones, and their potential role in education.
Areas covered include:
In challenging existing assumptions the authors present the cutting edge of international research, highlighting their own studies involving children of all ages, adolescents and adults. This ground breaking book is essential reading for both researchers and students in education, educational psychology, literacy and new media and it’s impact on learning.
1. Mobile Phone Use and the Rise of Texting; 2. The Media Furore; 3. The Links between Children’s Spelling, Reading and Texting; 4. Does Mobile Phone Use Facilitate Literacy Development?; 5. Texting and Literacy Skills in Adolescents and Young Adults; 6. Understanding Children’s Mobile Phone Behaviours in Relation to Written Language Abilities; 7. Texting and Grammar; 8. Methodology Matters; 9. Lessons Learned and the Future of Texting
Clare Wood is Professor of Psychology in Education at Coventry University, UK. She is Editor-in-Chief of Journal of Research in Reading and is the Director of the Centre for Applied Research in Psychology.
Nenagh Kempis Senior Lecturer in the School of Psychology, University of Tasmania (UTAS), Australia and is also Associate Editor for the Journal of Research in Reading.
Beverly Plester is an Honorary Research Fellow in the Department of Psychology and Behavioural Sciences, Coventry University, UK.