Excel Charting Tricks
For all its power and versatility, the charting engine in Microsoft Excel has a frustrating tendency to make "graphy-looking" chartsthe kind that would impress your high school algebra teacher more than your colleagues or clients. In many cases, the axis lines, legends, centered titles, and square data-point markers that Excel's chart wizard gives you by default distract the viewer's attention from the message you want to convey. To get your point across, you often need much less visual paraphernalia than Excel wants to give you.
The chart needs to say only one thing, but loudly: Something has been moving sharply upward in the year 2000. The illustration deviates from Excel's default line chart in a number of ways that help focus the viewer's attention on the matter at hand. The value axis has been scaled to eliminate low values, and the axis itself has been deleted, as has the legend. The horizontal gridlines are dotted and gray so they define the vertical space without obtruding visually, and the value-axis labels have been tucked in under the gridlines. The category axis has been drawn in dotted gray without tick marks, to look like another gridline. The month labels along the category axis have been reduced to single letters and there are no borders around the chart or plot areas. Moreover, because what matters in this chart is the data's trend rather than the values of individual points, the information has been plotted without markers, using a bright red line drawn at Excel's maximum weight and capped with an arrowhead. To achieve red-on-white contrast, the depressing gray plot area that Excel supplies by default has been eliminated, and the chart area has been left on Automatic.
Because Excel is not really a presentation tool (it's a spreadsheet, after allan analytical machine), you have to punch it in the nose, metaphorically speaking, to achieve the simplicity of Figure 1. Some techniques are straightforward formatting steps. Others are less obvious.
To get the single-letter category-axis labels, double-click the axis, go to the Number tab in the Format Axis dialog box, select the Date category formula and choose M as the type. Note that you have to do this on the graph. If you give your data range the M format, Excel will ignore that when creating the chart.
Tucking the value-axis labels under the gridlines gives your chart a neat, streamlined appearance. But Excel's chart-formatting features don't give you any easy way to accomplish this. Axis labels belong outside the plot area, Excel insists. The regrettably clumsy remedy is to create individual text boxes and move them into position with your mouse. (Select any part of the graph other than a data series, type a number, hit Enter, and drag the bounding box that appears.) Note that you can move or size the chart, and these handmade axis labels will maintain their positions relative to the chart edge and gridlines. (Excel will scale the font upward or downward appropriately if you resize the chart.) But if you adjust the plot area size, you'll need to reposition the labels.
The arrowhead comes courtesy of the Drawing toolbar. Because the arrowhead is a drawing object, not a chart object, you'll want to group it with the chart itself before resizing or moving the chart. To do that, select the arrowhead, Shift-select the chart, and then right-click and choose Grouping | Group.
If you prefer to indicate trend or expected future values by means of a dotted extrapolation line, you need to jump through an additional hoop. Excel won't let you apply two different line styles to the same data line, so you need two connected data lines. Arrange the data as shown in Figure 3, so that you have two separate data series. Note that the point at which the solid line meets the dotted line must appear in both data sets.
Two For One
When the chart is not one chart but two. What you want is to have axis labels appear to the left of positive bars and to the right of negative bars. This, Excel is unwilling to do. Excel lets you position labels Low, High or Next to axis. But if you choose Next to axis, Excel plants the labels right on top of any negative bars you might have. Hence the need for two charts, suitably sized and artfully abutted. Choose the High label option for the negative values and either Low or Next to axis for the positive ones.
Excel's chart wizard always creates graphs at the same default size and position. This means that if your positive and negative data sets each include the same number of points, then you'll automatically get bars of a common width. If not, you'll need to adjust the size of one of the charts to make all the bars look like they came from a single chart. You'll need to make adjustments in any case if you don't happen to love the default chart size.
Unfortunately, the thickness of a chart bar is not a property you can set or read directly. Gap width, a property you can adjust (double-click the data series, then go to the Options tab in the Format Data Series dialog box), governs the thickness of the bars relative to the intervening white space. You might find reducing this parameter from its default of 150 useful, in order to give greater prominence to the bars. But gap width won't help you make sure the negative bars are just as fat the positive ones. The best thing to do is to line the two charts up side by side and eyeball the bars. When they look right, then you can move to your over-and-under arrangement.
Leaving the vertical (category) axes in place can help you achieve accurate vertical alignment of the two charts. But once the charts are aligned, you'll get a cleaner look by making these axes disappear. Unfortunately, you can't just delete the axes without axing your labels (the company names) as well. The solution is to paint the axes the same color as the background of your charts. (Double-click an axis, go to the Patterns tab of the Format Axis dialog box, and adjust the line's color.)
As for the value (horizontal) axis and its labels, you can achieve the look of Figure 4 as follows: Double-click the data series in either graph. On the Data Labels tab of the Format Data Series dialog box, choose Show value, and then click OK. Double-click the newly arrived data labels and go to the Alignment tab. In the Label Position control, choose Inside End.
Once you've gone to this trouble, be sure to group the two charts, along with any drawing-toolbar elements you may have added, so that you don't inadvertently pull it all apart. Shift-click each element in turn, then right-click and choose Grouping | Group.
A picture behind your graph can help you tell a story or express a point of view. Excel gives you several ways of combining pictures with charts. The easiest, perhaps, is to click the Fill Effects button on the Patterns tab of the Format Chart Area dialog box. On the Picture tab of the ensuing dialog box, you can click Select Picture and choose an image in any of almost two dozen formats. (You can use the same technique to put a picture on the plot area, as opposed to the chart area, or on certain kinds of data markers.)
The good thing about using Fill Effects is that your picture stays put, no matter how you size or relocate the chart (even if you move the chart to its own chart sheet). The biggest drawback is that Excel stretches or scrunches your image as you size the chart. In Figure 5, Teddy is doing the splits, thanks to some lateral expansion of his chart area. At the moment he appears to be giving a benevolent fuzzy hug to the market's bad year, but if we added some more data and made the chart any larger, he might begin to lose credibility.
If you add a picture to a data marker, Excel presents a handy set of option buttons that let you choose between stretching and tiling. You can tile an image on the plot area or chart area, as well, but the method is not so obvious. Instead of clicking Fill Effects and going to the Picture tab, click Fill Effects and go to the Texture tab. Once there, click Other Texture and choose a picture. Tiling an image on a chart works best with small images, of course.
Incidentally, you might suppose that to remove an image from a chart you would go back to the dialog box where you chose it, and then pick something like None. You do not. Go instead to the Area section of the Patterns tab and choose Automatic or None.
The second serious drawback to using Fill Effects for a background image is that clip art is not available. To use clip art or to use any image and avoid having that image scaled when you resize the chart, you can put the image directly on your worksheet and then superimpose a transparent graph.
To make the graph transparent, set the Area parameter to None in both the Format Plot Area and Format Chart Area dialog boxes. You'll probably also want to remove gridlines from your worksheet and create the superimposition in a worksheet area that you don't plan to use for any other purpose.
The superimposition method has an additional advantage, aside from allowing the use of clip art. After you plant an image on your worksheet via Insert Picture or by clicking Insert Clip Art on the Drawing toolbar, you can use the Format Picture dialog box (or the Picture toolbar) to adjust the brightness of your image, convert the image to black and white, or convert it to a watermark. Any of these steps can help you tone the image down so that it conveys its message without overpowering the chart. Remember: With images, as with many other kinds of chart formatting steps, less is often more.
Craig Stinson is a contributing editor of PC Magazine.
blog comments powered by Disqus