Favorites from Tom Yack, Canton Township Supervisor and a Canton Public Library patron.
Check our other Fave Five lists, too!
John Maxwell has identified 21 essential leadership characteristics. These basic laws of success can be applied in all facets of one's life. He uses practical examples to illuminate each characteristic. It is a quick read and when the leadership principles are applied can help individuals reach their full potential. I am constantly looking for new insights on leadership and read the book based upon a recommendation.
The Tipping Point is about change... an explanation of how change may occur quickly. Gladwell uses many examples from history to buttruss his thesis that small changes can lead to big changes in society. These changes are often linked to a new idea, behavior or product. They start small, reach a critical mass and then are epidemic in their impact. I selected this book on a recommendation of a co-worker. They thought the concept might have application to program and service development.
This book identifies and explains the essential ideas of American culture that promotes unity in the United States. The author traces three early colonization efforts in the Americas; what is today Canada and the United States and South America. Each of these efforts were undertaken for a different set of reasons. As a result each has developed in a different fashion. From these early beginnings the author identifies the reasons for the American belief systemgovernment, culture, values, and religion. This book was read to gain a greater understanding of the basis for our system of government and our culture (religion and values).
This recording was released in 1961 and it is a light hearted presentation of U.S. history as seen through the eyes of comic Stan Freberg. Beginning with Columbus and continuing through the Revolutionary War, Stan Freberg uses music and outstanding writing to make light of some of the most historically signifcant events in the history of the United States. I was introduced to this disc in 1962 by an uncle who knew that I was very interested in history and political science.
This begins by describing the conditions in the United States and England prior to the beginning of World War II. Most of the book deals with the relationship of Winston Churchill and FDR. Tremendous insight is shared into each man's personality, behavior, and those that influenced their actions. The author also carefully and methodically develops for the reader insight into the Churchill-Roosevelt relationship.