A team of pathologists has published a paper revealing how, for
the first time, crime investigators identified the body of a burn
victim by conducting a DNA analysis of the gastrointestinal
contents of the maggots feeding on the remains.
The revelatory study,
published in the Journal of Forensic Sciences, cites
the case of an unidentifiable body found in the woods by
Mexican police. It was suspected the body was that of a woman who
had been abducted ten weeks earlier -- her graduation ring was
found near to the scene, however, the body was burned so badly it
was impossible to collect any DNA samples from the damaged and
It had already been suggested by other researchers that the
gastrointestinal contents of maggots could be used to identify the
subjects they feed on. However, never before has the theory been
trialed in a legal, criminal case. Pathologists at Autonomous
University of Nuevo León in San Nicolás, Mexico, led by María de
Lourdes Chávez-Briones and Marta Ortega-Martínez, carried out short
tandem repeat typing tests (a common method of
DNA profiling) on the matter extracted from three dissected
maggots found on the victim's face and neck, and seperately on the
alleged father of the missing woman. Preliminary results showed
that the body was female, and the final outcome was a 99.685
percent probability of positive paternity -- the victim had been
Speaking to the
New Scientist, Jeffrey
Wells, a biologist at Florida International University who
specialises in genotyping and insect evolution in relation to
forensics, explained that the method could have plenty of practical
applications, including identifying a victim through analysis of a
maggot found in a vehicle transporting a body.
Maggots are already commonly used in criminal
investigations to help police calculate time of death,
particularly in bodies left to decompose for more than 72 hours.
This is done by identifying the species of maggot infesting the
corpse and working out how long that species has been alive by
measuring it -- shortly after death, blowflies and flesh flies are
attracted to the body and lay larvae, which become maggots. By
taking the maggots back to the lab and letting them grow to
adulthood, thus ensuring the species has been correctly identified,
police can get a pretty accurate timeline of events.
One etymologist is even setting up a DNA sequence database
so maggot species can be detected earlier.
Investigators are now catching up with research that has been
ongoing in this area for some time now, recognising the other
potential practical benefits provided by corpse-loving insects.
Pathologists are, for instance, also keen to use DNA extracted from
hematophagous arthropods (blood-feeding insects) to identify
corpses. In one
study, adult crab lice removed from volunteers were frozen,
air-dried and then profiled using the same methods designed for
extracting mitochondrial DNA from human hair, teeth and bone. A
comparison with DNA extracted from the volunteers' saliva showed
the method could work in real-world cases, such as the one in
Mexico. It can even be done with bed bugs.
The stomach-churning possibilities of this burgeoning field seem to
be wide open, and heralding in a new age of insect-aided criminal