Interactive & Fun Math Games
Math games are a way for students to learn while simultaneously having a good time. Having a positive learning experience is particularly important in subjects such as math, which can be difficult and tedious for some students. Math games can take place in the classroom, at home or on the Internet, depending on the needs of the parents, teachers and students.
Flash cards can be used for any subject in math, such as geometry, algebra, basic arithmetic and calculus. Flash cards are convenient because they are portable, inexpensive and can be made at home. They can be used in groups, pairs or individually to help students learn concepts related to mathematics. Using flash cards is more fun for students than sitting and practicing skills on a sheet of paper, and when used repeatedly, they work well to help students remember important information.
Many puzzle-style games can be used to help students learn math more efficiently. Crossword puzzles can help with important words and phrases related to the subject, while logic puzzles can help students reason out a word problem. Number puzzles involve using a certain group of numbers to come up with a numerical answer, using only addition, subtraction, multiplication and division. The same idea can be done with coins, which can be brought into the classroom for further interactivity.
Many interactive math games on the web can be used at home or in school if computer access is available. Jigsaw puzzles, brain teasers, numbers games, Sudoku, fractions games and many more are available (see Resources). Three-dimensional games include Tetris, cube games and other strategy games in which planning is necessary to win. These games are fun for children because they get to use technology as well as learn about math.
If the facilities are available at home or school, cooking can be a good game for learning about measurement. Another idea is for a group of children to use a game involve squeezing each other's hands to learn about graphing. The students stand in a circle and one child begins by squeezing the hand of the person next to her. Once her hand is squeezed she says so out loud, and the teacher records how long it took, measured with a stopwatch. The students continue around the circle with the teacher recording the times, and then graph the results.