In the exercise that follows, underline the parallel structures and re-write those that have incorrect parallel structures.
There has always been the potential for the development of stem cell research since scientists discovered that the cell is the building block of all living organisms. In 1998 at Johns Hopkins University, the potential became reality when researchers isolated the cells that hold the potential to bond to any type of organ or tissue. The stem cell, because it is necessary building block, can help to repair damaged cells and multiply into healthy tissue. In doing so, these cells hold the likelihood of curing some forms of cancer, juvenile diabetes and Parkinson’s disease.
Stem cells are found in many forms, from adults to embryos, but the adult stem cells (ASC) do not hold the same capabilities for manipulation as the embryonic stem cells (ESC) do. As research has discovered, the adult stem cells are not as flexible as embryonic cells in their ability to develop into cells other than those from which they were derived, meaning that the adult stems cells taken from a liver can only form into another liver. They are, however, more sensitive to manipulation than previously thought. Other difficulties involved with using ASC are that they are not only hard to isolate but also hard obtaining and purifying. These facts make a strong argument for the use of ESC.
ESC are known to be pluripotent; they do not have a fixed potential for development. According to the NIH fact sheet, only the ESC can be manipulated into any type of tissue or organ needed because it is undetermined what exactly they should become. Due to the high potential of ESC, the promise to provide better specialized health care and curing degenerative diseases is greatly increased.
View the answers to this exercise (A new window will open; close the window to return to this exercise.)
Degree Information Session - 5/29/2013
President's Regional Advisory Board - 6/4/2013
Vietnam War Conference - 6/13/2013
Vietnam War Conference - 6/14/2013
Freshman Advising and Preregistration Day - 6/15/2013
LegalShield Lunch & Learn - 6/18/2013
Degree Information Session - 6/26/2013
Sophomore sings her praises of UHV - 05/24/2013
UHV alumna honored for work with ESL children - 05/23/2013