Albanian is a language spoken by over 6 million people,
primarily in Albania, Kosovo, Greece, Serbia, Montenegro, and the
Republic of Macedonia but also in other parts of the Balkans, along the
eastern coast of Italy and in Sicily, as well as by emigrant groups in
Scandinavia, Germany, Greece, Italy, the UK, Egypt, Turkey, and the USA.
The language forms its own distinct branch of the Indo-European language
family. From "Albanian language", Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia,
en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Albanian_language, 12/8/06, available under the
terms of the
Listen and Learn Albanian
Each topic in the audio course provides a clear
explanation of a particular aspect of Albanian grammar. There are
numerous topics in the package. Topics include the Albanian definite
article, the indefinite article, Albanian adjectives, Albanian
pronouns,Albanian demonstrative pronouns. Each explanation includes
examples of usage.
Internationalized language-learning Software
language-learning software is localized into 21 different languages.
That means the software allows you to choose from 21 languages to
determine what language the lesson and instructions are presented in.
This MLS Easy Immersion course defines itself by providing the power of
Albanian language leaning to speakers of over 20 different languages….
in a single course! That’s true value.
Download Albanian: Lessons 1 to 5: Learn to Speak and Understand
Albanian (Pimsleur) online in MP3, iPod, CD, AM radio, FM radio formats.
Language Courses in London
Albanian is a language spoken by about 6 million people, primarily
in Albania, Kosovo, but also in other parts of the Balkans with an
Albanian population, along the eastern coast of Italy and in Sicily, as
well as by a significant diaspora in Greece, Scandinavia, Germany, the
United Kingdom, Egypt, Australia, Turkey, and the United States. The
language forms its own distinct branch of the Indo-European language
To Speak Albania
Ever wondered how to learn Albanian? The Land of the Eagles - Well
,Pimsleur has the answer.
We at AlbanianPod.com welcome you to our website in order to learn
Albanian. The pods will be in different levels starting with the most
basic Albanian language. The podcasts will be in Albanian and English,
with the Albanian section clearly introduced and unlike many language
learning products we will say the words using the target language
followed by the words in English NOT the other way round.
Essential phrases - Albanian
Albanian essential phrases
You will find every good links on albanian language from
ditionary to grammar
Talk Now Learn Albanian
Talk Now! Is the world's best selling language learning CD-ROM
series for beginners because it gets results fast.
The lessons contain the basics of the Albanian grammar.
Albanian Language resources
You will find every good links on albanian language from ditionary
Pimsleur Albanian Language Courses
With Pimsleur language courses, you will quickly learn to speak Albanian
and understand it as well.
Learning the Albanian
Vocabulary Builder Albanian Software
Learn to speak Albanian today with Talk Now Albanian Language CD-ROM for
£17.50 with FREE UK P&P. Albanian Language CD-ROM for Windows PC and
Quickly learn essential Albanian phrases for travelling, in easy
single-serving doses! Great for beginners!
International Albanian Language Course
Learn Albanian Language. From the comfort of your home.
Free Language Software
Your free Byki software bundle includes a
full working copy of Byki Express, plus a
collection of lists to learn Albanian
It's free and you can use it forever, with no time or session
limits. We think you'll like what you see and hear.
Free stuff on Albanian Language
Albanian lessons online
Albanian Overview is in your extended network
Learn Albanian Language via games.
Information on Albanian Language
This website offers the listener audio recordings in Albanian
from various regions where the language is spoken. Though the dialects
of Albanian are usually mutually intelligible to the listener with an
ear for language, regional differences, deriving largely from the
historical development of the language, can be substantial, and they are
quite fascinating. You can thus listen here to people speaking
in a wide range of Albanian dialects. Some of these individuals
are good dialect speakers, others were recorded at random to give an
idea of how modern Albanian is used in various areas.
Language information and culture
Albanian Language information and basics of the Language
Albanian writing system
Information regarding the alphabets, writing systems etc
Albanian-oriented WebSites on the
We have already been honored with two (2),major awards - CULTURAL
CHOICE AWARD and PEOPLE'S CHOICE AWARD: TOP !00 WEBSITES ON THE
INTERNET. for the little-known or unusual information it provides
about Albania and the Albanians.
Learning albanian language with teacher - online
Albanian learning software
World Language Resource
sells foreign language software in over 450 languages. Products include: language systems,
dedicated word processors, language learning and software tutorials, translation software,
dictionaries, proofing tools, spell-checker
Albanian On Line Dictionary
Albanian On Line Dictionary
Welcome Albanian on-line dictionary add on Albanian - English Dictionary Welcome to
Albanian Software Digest Com
Albanian Telegraphic Agency (ATA)
Albanian Telegraphic Agency
(ATA) ATA is the state news agency of Albania. It first appeared on the Internet the day
of the Albanian elections (May 26, 1996). Since then it has been available on the ALBANIAN
listserver, mirrored on USENET at bit...
BBC World Service - Albanian
ONLINE CULTURE, RELIGION, LITERATURE, ARTS AND
Al Quran - Albanian Es-selamu ..alejkum we rahmetull-llahi we berekatuhu
Es-selamu ..alejkum we
rahmetull-llahi we berekatuhu. Projekti pėr tubimin e literaturės Islame. KUR..ANI. nė
gjuhėn shqipe. (pėrkthim i Sherif Ahmetit)...
More than 24,500 citations spanning 75 years of SIL International's
language research in over 2,000 languages. Books
about languages and cultures of the world for education, research, and
reference.Computer resources including an extensive library for language
researchers and software tools and fonts.
Kosova Crisis Center
Dedicated to Albanian
Students in Kosova and their fight for a basic right, the right of education in their own