Unique hen research facility lays one of a kind opportunity
Chickens sit in their cages Feb. 6, 2013, at the Laying Hen Facility. The facility involves research projects pertaining to poultry housing, including a system which has lights to simulate sunrise and sunset. Julia Nagy/The State News
For animal science junior Justin Warchuck, nothing is wrong with being a little chicken, or egg-headed for that matter.
With the December addition of the nations only Laying Hen Poultry Research facility, Warchuck has a unique chance to study the science behind the widely consumed egg.
“Most people eat omelets for breakfast,” Warchuck said. “Whether you’re eating McDonald’s or buying eggs from the supermarket, the everyday consumer can relate to the
Warchuck, who said he has a soft spot for chickens, is working on a feed wastage research project at the Laying Hen Poultry Research facility, home to nearly 7,000 birds, for his ANS 492 class, an animal science research course. The project aims to find out how much feed is wasted after feeding the hens. By examining fecal matter, he hopes the project will help industry feeding methods become more efficient.
“Everything can be made better and be improved,” Warchuck said.
Animal science research assistant Cara Robison said that the facility allows students to do take on a specific area of research
“With us at the Laying Hen facility, each student was encouraged to come up with their own project,” Robison said.
Research assistant Cara Robison counts eggs Feb. 6, 2013, at the Laying Hen Facility. The facility houses nearly 7,000 chickens. Julia Nagy/The State News
“We let the students think about it first and what they might be interested in answering. Now they’re implementing their methods.”
Darrin Karcher, who also is an ANS 492 professor and a poultry extension specialist for the Department of Animal Science, said the construction of the facility was a three-year process.
“What we’re trying to do is not only explore the production aspects (of producing eggs), but explore the animal side of things as well,” Karcher said.
Karcher said many students in the animal science program work and volunteer at the facility and handle the daily care of the birds, including collecting eggs and keeping track of infant mortality.
Robison mentioned the research that takes place in her class is separate from research that takes place at the facility.
Regardless of the activities of her students, the facility will serve as a center of hen and egg research for MSU’s campus.
In addition to gaining experience on conducting research, Robison said the students will have a unique opportunity at the end of the course.
“At the end of the semester, each student will have their (research) paper and we’re going to have a day where people from the laying hen industry come to MSU and students will give their papers to industry personnel,” she said.
“They’ll also have the chance to interact with (farming) industry professionals. It’ll be a really good networking experience.”