March 30, 2010 -- From Mark, a reader, from Washington, DC, who is affiliated with the site.
As we approach Black History Month I was wondering if you would consider adding a link to the Black Inventor Online Museum (blackinventor.com). The site profiles more than 60 Black inventors and their contributions to society over the last 300 years.
Mark A. Long
The Black Inventor Online Museum provides a look at the great and often unrecognized leaders in the field of invention and innovation. For more than 300 years, black inventors have served as pioneers in the field of science and have made enormous impacts on society. As African Americans sought freedom and equality, many among them, scientists, educators and even slaves, developed the tools and processes that helped to shape the modern agricultural, industrial and technological landscape. While some are famous, many remain unknown, but their contributions have assured that their stories are not only about black history, but about world history.
June 24, 2008 -- From Brian, a reader, from Pittsburgh, PA, who is affiliated with the site.
This site celebrates the rich legacy of African-American inventors, with biographies and images provided for each entry. Many of these black innovators did not receive the recognition enjoyed by their white counterparts. Famous Black Inventors is an ideal site for students and teachers to learn about inventions by people of color in the United States.
January 22, 2008 -- From Lawrence Belts, a reader, from Washington, DC, who is not affiliated with the site.
This site crawls the web for the most positive, inspirational 7 motivational stories in the African-American community everyday.
August 23, 2006 -- From Stephen, a reader, from North Carolina, USA, who is affiliated with the site.
This searchable and selectable daily Black History Facts Calendar Website contains over 2,000 entries highlighting Black history taken from “ON THIS DATE IN BLACK HISTORY: A CALENDAR OF EVENTS.”
February 16, 2005 -- From Natalie Dussault, a reader from Boston, MA, who is affiliated with the site
The Civil Rights Special Collection has added over forty new resources to its digital library of multimedia resources for classroom and independent study just in time for Black History Month. The collection captures the voices, images, demonstrations, and resistance that defined the Civil Rights movement. Free registration is required.
May 2, 2001 -- From Bertram Fitzgerald, a parent from Yonkers, New York who is affiliated with the site
This title was rated 4 stars by the editors of Teacher Education & the Learning Network in the “What Works” category. Millions of hard-copies of the Golden Legacy Series were distributed to schools & the general public.
February 19, 2001 -- From Eric Ward, a reader from Knoxville, TN, who is affiliated with the site
Learn about the history of slavery around the world. Follow the journey of one man who was enslaved in both Africa and the United States. Then, travel back in time to Richmond, Virginiain 1845 to witness a slave auction. Along the way, you’ll learn just how pervasive the institution ofslavery was in the United States and how it differed from slavery abroad.
February 9, 2001 -- From Roberta Sallee, a teacher from Delran, NJ, who is affiliated with the site
Created by a fifth grade class in NJ, this site offers viewers the opportunity to learn about some famous Black Americans through individually created student-made website links on the page and then answer 10 questions with a pull-down menu format for answers. Correct responses received on or before February 28, 2001 will be entered into a drawing for the “Grand Prize”. Check it out. You will enjoy the variety of student presentations and perhaps learn something new, too!
January 30, 2001 -- From Barbara, your editor, who is not affiliated with the site
A nice collection of features, biographies, timelines, quizzes and games for Black History Month.
January 23, 2001 -- From Nadine Ferber, a reader fromNew York who is affiliated with the site
This February, kids and teachers will have a new resource to help them study, teach, and draw inspiration from Black HistoryMonth. We’re launching a spotlight area that focuses on the African American experience in America.