|Noah Webster's Dictionary|
1. (n.) A cause of complaint, or the complaint itself; a wrong done and suffered; that which gives ground for remonstrance or resistance, as arising from injustice, tyranny, etc.; injury.
2. (v. t.) Grieving; grief; affliction.
Int. Standard Bible Encyclopedia
grev'-ans (`amal): Occurs only in the King James Version as a translation of Habakkuk 1:3, "Why dost thou show me iniquity, and cause me to behold grievance?" (the Revised Version (British and American) "look upon perverseness"); `amal is also translated "perverseness" by the King James Version and the Revised Version (British and American) in Numbers 23:21, "perverseness in Israel"; Isaiah 10:1, the King James Version "grievousness," the Revised Version (British and American) "perverseness." In Habakkuk 1:13, the King James Version translates the same word "iniquity" (margin "grievance"), "Thou art of purer eyes than to behold evil and canst not look on iniquity" (margin "grievance"), the Revised Version (British and American) "perverseness." The word means originally "toil," "labor" with sorrow, misery, etc., as the consequence, and is often so translated. It is the word in Isaiah 53:11, "He shall see of the travail of his soul, and shall be satisfied."
W. L. Walker
Grievance (7 Occurrences)
Matthew 5:23 If therefore when you are offering your gift upon the altar, you remember that your brother has a grievance against you, (WEY)
Mark 11:25 But whenever you stand praying, if you have a grievance against any one, forgive it, so that your Father in Heaven may also forgive you your offences." (WEY)
Acts 19:38 If, however, Demetrius and the mechanics who support his contention have a grievance against any one, there are Assize-days and there are Proconsuls: let the persons interested accuse one another. (WEY NIV)
1 Corinthians 6:1 If one of you has a grievance against an opponent, does he dare to go to law before irreligious men and not before God's people? (WEY RSV)
Colossians 3:13 bearing with one another and readily forgiving each other, if any one has a grievance against another. Just as the Lord has forgiven you, you also must forgive. (WEY NIV)
Job 31:13 "If I have despised the cause of my male servant or of my female servant, when they contended with me; (See NIV)
Habakkuk 1:3 Why dost thou shew me iniquity, and cause me to behold grievance? for spoiling and violence are before me: and there are that raise up strife and contention. (KJV DBY WBS)