POSTWAR: A HISTORY OF EUROPE SINCE 1945
By Tony Judt
Penguin, $39.95, 878 pages
REVIEWED BY ARNOLD BEICHMAN
As the history books tell us, the Thirty Years’ War (1618-1648) was a conflict usually fought by mercenary armies principally on the territory of today’s Germany, but also involving most of the major continental powers. It began as a religious conflict between Protestants and Catholics, motivated in part to preserve the Habsburg dynasty.
New York University Professor Tony Judt has written a fascinating history about the aftermath of the 20th century’s own Thirty Years’ War (1914-1945). It was a war which began as a conflict between democracy and fascism in Western Europe and ended in a marriage of convenience between democracy and bolshevism against fascism. And then came the inevitable confrontation between Us and Them which is Mr. Judt’s great story.
Mr. Judt’s luminous reputation as an historian arises from these three great virtues: He is eminently readable, learned and topical. As for topicality, on a day when David Irving, the Holocaust denier, was convicted in an Austrian court, it is interesting to read Mr. Judt’s judgment about such con-men:
“To deny or belittle the Shoah — the Holocaust — is to place oneself beyond the pale of civilized public discourse … . The Holocaust today is much more than just another undeniable fact about a past that Europeans can no longer choose to ignore. As Europe prepares to leave World War Two behind … the recovered memory of Europe’s dead Jews has become the very definition and guarantee of the continent’s restored humanity. It wasn’t always so.”
Perhaps this book, a tour de force, ought to be retitled as “Judt’s Moral Judgments” since he himself concedes that his history “offers an avowedly personal interpretation of the recent European past.” Out of his researches he has produced terrifying evidence for verdicts which reverse long held popular beliefs of Nazi-occupied Europe’s conspiracy of goodness.
Mr. Judt describes what happened when the few surviving Jews returned to what were once their former ways of life and homes:
“The returning remnant was not much welcomed. After years of anti-Semitic propaganda, local populations everywhere were not only to blame ‘Jews’ in the abstract for their own suffering but were distinctively sorry to see the return of men and women whose jobs, possessions and apartments they had purloined.”
Mr. Judt turns his blazing searchlight on Switzerland, which, he writes, “secured a free pass for its wartime record.” Switzerland not only trafficked in looted gold and made a substantial practical contribution to the German war effort, he writes, “but Swiss banks and insurance companies had knowingly pocketed indecently large sums of money belonging to Jewish account holders or to the claimants of insurance policies on murdered relatives.”
Perhaps worst of all, the Swiss government in October 1938 asked that the letter “J” be stamped on the passports of all German Jews, the better to identify their migr status.
As for wartime France, there has been a longtime cover-up in France of the collaborationist Vichy regime under Marshal Petain who did everything he could to legitimize the Nazi occupation. That policy, says Mr. Judt, was “an immense convenience [for the Nazis] since it saved them the trouble of installing a costly occupation regime of their own in so large a country as France, while furnishing them with everything they needed from such a regime: acquiescence in defeat, ‘war reparations’, raw materials, cheap labor … and much else besides.”View Entire Story
By John Solomon
How the government's punishing of the exposure of official wrongdoing can linger for years
Independent voices from the TWT Communities
First over-the-counter column approved for fast and effective relief from even your worst media-induced headache.
A collection of reader guest articles, thoughts and opinions by Communities writers and breaking news and information.
Great discoveries in the world of restaurants and chefs fulfill the quest for delicious food and cooking.
Paul Rondeau dissects the propaganda, media tricks, and other shenanigans targeting our families, faith, and freedom…and even life itself
Benghazi: The anatomy of a scandal
Vietnam Memorial adds four names
Cinco de Mayo on the Mall
NRA kicks off annual convention