Significance and Use
4.1 The principal purpose of irradiation is to reduce the number of pathogenic bacteria, such as Campylobacter, Escherichia coli 0157:H7, Listeria monocytogenes, Staphylococcus aureus or Salmonella spp., in processed meats and poultry to make these foods safer for human consumption.
—Ionizing radiation doses below 10 kGy will reduce but not eliminate spores of pathogenic bacteria including those of Clostridium botulinum, Clostridium perfringens and Bacillus cereus.
4.2 Irradiation treatment can extend the shelf life of processed meats and poultry by reducing the numbers of vegetative spoilage bacteria, such as Pseudomonas species and lactic acid bacilli.
4.3 Irradiation treatment also inactivates parasites such as Trichinella spiralis and Toxoplasma gondii.
4.4 Radiation processing of the final product in its packaging is a critical control point (CCP) of a Hazard Analysis of Critical Control Points (HACCP) concept for the production of Processed Meat and Poultry. It serves as an important measure to control any residual risk from pathogen microorganisms just before the product reaches the consumer.
4.5 The “Recommended International Code of Practice for Radiation-processing of Food” (CAC/RCP 19-1979) of the Codex Alimentarius identifies the essential practices to be implemented to achieve effective radiation processing of food, in general, in a manner that maintains quality and yields food products that are safe and suitable for consumption.
1.1 This guide outlines procedures for the irradiation of pre-packaged refrigerated and frozen processed meat and poultry products.
—The Codex Alimentarius Commission defines “meat” (including poultry and game) as “the edible part of any mammal slaughtered in an abattoir,” and “poultry meat” as “the edible part of slaughtered domesticated birds, including chicken, turkeys, ducks, geese, guinea-fowls, or pigeons.” (CAC/RCP 13-1976)
—Current U.S. regulations limit the definition of livestock species to cattle, sheep, swine, goat, horse, mule, or other equine and poultry species to chicken, turkey, duck, goose, and guinea (2, 3).
1.2 This guide addresses all refrigerated and frozen meat and poultry products NOT covered by Guide F1356.
1.3 This guide provides information regarding absorbed doses used for inactivation of parasites and reduction of bacterial load. Such doses are typically less than 10 kilogray (kGy).
2. Referenced Documents (purchase separately) The documents listed below are referenced within the subject standard but are not provided as part of the standard.
E170 Terminology Relating to Radiation Measurements and Dosimetry
E2232 Guide for Selection and Use of Mathematical Methods for Calculating Absorbed Dose in Radiation Processing Applications
E2303 Guide for Absorbed-Dose Mapping in Radiation Processing Facilities
F1356 Practice for Irradiation of Fresh and Frozen Red Meat and Poultry to Control Pathogens and Other Microorganisms
F1640 Guide for Selection and Use of Packaging Materials for Foods to Be Irradiated
bacteria; cattle; chicken; duck; equine; food; goat; goose; guinea; HACCP; horse; irradiation; labeling; meat; microorganisms; mule; packaging; parasites; pathogens; pigeons; poultry; processing; sheep; swine; turkey;
ICS Number Code 07.100.30 (Food microbiology)
ASTM International is a member of CrossRef.
Citing ASTM Standards
[Back to Top]