Science in the News, October 2005 -- Tests confirmed that an American cow killed in November of 2004 was infected with bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE), or more popularly known as mad cow disease. This is the second case of BSE in the US. The first case, in December 2003, resulted in many countries banning imports of American beef, only a third of which have since been reversed.
BSE is a brain disease in cows that was first recognized in Great Britain in 1986. BSE is one of several transmissible spongiform encepholopathies (TSE). TSE diseases leave the brains they infect riddled with holes, creating a sponge-like texture (hence the term "Spongiform"). Among other animal TSEs, the one most familiar to farmers is scrapie, which has long been known to infect sheep (it was called "scrapie" because infected sheep would scrape themselves against trees and other objects, to relieve the itching sensation caused by the disease). Scientists believe that transmission of BSE to humans has resulted in approximately 145 deaths in Great Britain since the beginning of the mad cow outbreak.
It appears that brain infections similar to BSE and scrapie occur in many different species of animals, from humans to minks. Among human TSE diseases, the first recognized was kuru, discovered among the Fore tribe of New Guinea. Kuru was apparently transmitted through Fore funeral rituals in which participants ate or smeared themselves with the lightly-cooked brains of the deceased. The most common human TSE is the "sporadic" form of Creutzfeldt-Jakob Disease (CJD), though, at one or two cases per million persons, it is extremely rare. Sporadic CJD occurs not through infection but through random genetic mutation, and tends to strike people over the age of fifty-five. When people in their twenties began dying of CJD in Great Britain, it was evidence that an infectious form of CJD (called "variant" CJD or vCJD) had made its way into the human population. Like all TSEs, CJD is invariably fatal. Onset of the disease is generally marked by anxiety, disorientation, and memory loss, as well as other neurological symptoms such as numbness in limbs. Symptoms progress rapidly to dementia and patients almost always die within a year of the first onset of symptoms.
What kind of infection is mad cow disease? Most scientists now believe that the infectious agent (pathogen) in TSE diseases is a protein known as a "prion." If true, this would overturn the pre-existing biological dogma that held the replication of pathogens cannot occur without the presence of nucleic acids (such as those in DNA). Stanley Prusiner won the Nobel Prize in Medicine in 1997 for his theory that prions are the cause of TSE diseases. The Economist magazine clearly describes how prions work: "A prion's unique - and uniquely dangerous - characteristic is that it can impose its shape on others. Like many proteins prions exist in more than one shape. Unlike other proteins, one of those shapes acts as a catalyst that causes neighboring proteins of the same type to take up this same shape." A puzzle for scientists has been to figure out what possible biological purpose prions could serve. Recently, however, scientists have discovered clues that these shape-changing proteins are important in the formation of memories in the brain.
How does mad cow disease spread? It is important to understand how TSEs like mad cow disease are transmitted, and why the discovery of a single cow in the U.S. most likely represents an extremely small risk to the public. TSEs do not move from animal to animal like flu viruses. In order to catch BSE, a cow has to consume the brain matter of another, infected animal. To understand how this happens with a species not known for being carnivorous, much less cannibalistic, it is necessary to know something about the beef business. It is widely believed that the 1980s outbreak of BSE in Great Britain occurred as a result of the practice of feeding cattle protein rendered from the remains of scrapie-infected sheep. The cattle feed used contained remnants of infected sheep brains. Once the cattle herd was infected, even more cows became infected with BSE because cattle feed contains protein rendered from cow carcasses. Before the mad cow scare in Great Britain, it was common for brain matter and nerve tissue, the only parts of an animal that can contain the infectious agent of these diseases, to be included in feed. This practice has been discontinued. British scientists, however, now are concerned that infected brain matter can make its way into soil through animal waste, which would mean that the mad cow epidemic could continue at a low level in afflicted countries indefinitely.
People won't be infected by the mad cow pathogen if they consume a steak or a pot roast cut from an infected animal. They must actually consume the brain or nervous matter. In the past, it was possible for brain matter to find its way into some composite meat products, such as hot dogs. But due to the threat of BSE, the practice of including brain and nervous system material in composite foods has been largely discontinued. In light of the Washington State mad cow finding, the U.S. Department of Agriculture has announced several new regulations aimed at eliminating the chance that BSE-infected material might enter consumer meat products. These new regulations include:
Banning "downer animals" from the food chain (a "downer" is a cow that, from weakness or illness, cannot stand up on its own);
Making BSE testing within the food chain more rigorous;
Prohibiting from the human food chain "specified risk material" - material thought most likely to contain the BSE pathogen, including "skull, brain, trigeminal ganglia, eyes, vertebral column, spinal cord and dorsal root ganglia of cattle over 30 months of age and the small intestine of cattle of all ages";
Prohibiting "air injection stunning," a process in which an air-powered bolt is driven into a cow's brain before slaughtering (this process carries an infection risk because it can drive brain matter into the circulatory system);
Prohibiting mechanical meat separation, a process in which machines strip the last small remnants of meat from cattle carcasses (this process can pick up bits of brain and spinal material, which has a higher risk of BSE infection). (See also, "Beefing up Barricades," at Scientific American).
What are the risks? After the discovery of mad cow disease in Great Britain, a program of intensified testing revealed that the disease was more widespread in European countries such as France, Switzerland, and Germany than was previously believed. A study by the Harvard Center for Risk Analysis (HCRA) however, states that the risk of mad cow spreading extensively within U.S. cattle herds is very low.
What are the uncertainties? The study of TSE diseases has been characterized by uncertainties almost from the beginning. Currently, the theory that the TSE pathogen is a protein that spreads without nucleic acids is widely accepted. This was a difficult idea for many scientists to accept because it was believed that replication of pathogens cannot occur without the presence of nucleic acids, such as those in DNA. Stanley Prusiner won the Nobel Prize in Medicine in 1997 for his theory that prions are the cause of TSE diseases.
NOVA Online: The Brain Eater PBS's NOVA has an excellent collection of web sites corresponding with episodes of their mad cow disease installment, entitled "The Brain Eater." The site contains several pages on BSE and its human form, vCJD. Two articles, one entitled "20-20 Hindsight" and another entitled "When Science Faces the Unknown," address how uncertainty has affected policy makers and scientists during the British BSE and vCJD outbreaks.
Prions: Puzzling Infectious Proteins Scientists now believe that CJD and BSE are spread by an entirely new type of infectious agent: not a virus, nor bacteria, nor a fungus, but a mere protein. These infectious proteins are known as prions. This site discusses the mystery of prions in a way that a student can understand.