December 6, 2009
How to Make a Japanese Kimono
Are you Interested in making Japanese traditional wear, KIMONO? Check how to make it here by simply following the instructions! Good LUck!
Things you need :
1. Fabric (At least 4 yards)
2. A single bolt, or "tan" of cloth measures approximately with its length of 9 meters and 30 centimeters of width
1.Cut four basic rectangle panels of fabric. Two panels should be long enough to reach over the shoulder from ankle to ankle. The other two panels make the sleeves. Cut two smaller panels. One is for the collar; one is for the smaller front panels.
2.Sew together the two larger panels on the long sides until about halfway up. This is the center back seam. Mark with a pin the imaginary shoulder seam on each side.
3.Sew together the short ends of both sleeve panels so that the fabric makes a loop when done. The seam must be on the bottom of the sleeve. Using a pin, mark the imaginary shoulder seam opposite the seam on both sleeves.
4.Match up the pins on the shoulders to the pins on the top of each sleeve. Sew a sleeve on each of the shoulders. Stitch only about five to 6 inches on each side of the centerpoint marked up with the pins.
5.Cut one of the smaller panels in half at an angle. The angle must be a sharp one. Find it by marking the panel on one side about a third up, the opposite side a third down. Draw a line between theses points, and cut in half along this line. The panel pieces can then be sewn on the center front to extend the width of the bottom front.
6.Find the center of the other smaller panel and match up to the center back at the collar. Sew on the panel right sides together for a collar. Extend the collar all the way down the center front. It should reach to the end of the extended front center panels just added in the previous step. Turn the collar over, and sew the collar in a roll over with a hidden stitch.
7.Sew up the side seams of the kimono from the hem to about six to nine inches from the sleeve. The armpits of kimonos are left open. Line the entire kimono and sleeves.
For further information, visit :
Kimono Fabric, Kimono Pattern & How to Make a Kimono