The Junior Zookeeper Program allows children aged 11 to 17 a wonderful opportunity to learn about a variety of animals at the Zoo, and to share their knowledge with the public. We have revamped the 2013 program to provide even more opportunities for teens to broaden their experiences. The program is now three-tiered, divided up according to years of experience at the zoo and individual abilities. The Junior Zookeeper program has proven to be a great way for kids to learn responsibility, build leadership and time management skills, gain self confidence, and get some quality time with animals.
Members of the Junior Zoo Crew will learn how to care for the animals within the Contact Area, keep the area clean, and interact with the public, answering questions about the animals. They will also help clean the glass of other exhibits (old meerkat exhibit, crane, prairie dogs, red pandas and tanukis). Junior Zoo Crew Members will assist 2nd years with the Edu-Carts, and be available to face paint, help with summer camps and participate in Show and Tails.
Zoo leaders have at least one year previous experience as a Junior Zookeeper. Teens will have a higher level of responsibility and will be trained as Junior Docents. They will supervise members of the junior zoo crew, help with the Contact Area and exhibit cleaning, and help with diet prep. They will run the live animal components of the Edu-carts as well as help the 3rd years come up with educational activities for the public. They can also help with summer camps and participate in Show and Tails.
Wolf Pack Members must have at least 2 years previous experience as a Junior Zookeeper. Members of the Red River Wolf Pack have the most experience within the Junior Zookeeper Leadership Program and in turn have the highest level of responsibility. Not only will they be leading their own activities, but they will be supervising the lower years, as well as working with the older Wildlife Explorers and Zookeepers to help them complete their tasks at the zoo (animal husbandry, diet prep and enrichment projects). They can also help with summer camps and participate in Show and Tails.
* All teens can expect to assist with the zoo’s special events by running activity centers or leading interpretive stations*
Here are just some of the things a Junior Zookeeper will do:
This includes assuring the public has an enjoyable experience in the contact area, and that the animal interaction is comfortable and fun for the animals too. Juniors assist the Zookeepers in keeping the area clean for the animals and the public, grooming the animals and monitoring the animals well being.
This weekly story time includes Juniors reading a story to zoo visitors that features animals from the Red Rive Zoo and around the world.
Juniors will be trained to handle and present education animals to the public assisted by the Education Director. Edu-carts are portable stations set up around the zoo meant to bring the public in close contact with live animals and teach the about a variety of topics through hands-on activities.
The Zoo garden helps feed the Zoo’s many animals in the Fall. Juniors design and plant the garden and tend to it during the summer.
Face painting is a fun way to engage younger children visiting the Zoo. Junior Zookeepers have the opportunity to work in the carousel pavilion face painting station on busy days.
To enroll your child in the Junior Zookeeper Program, please complete the Application and Recommendation Form and mail it to:
Red River Zoo
4255 23rd Ave S
Fargo, ND 58104
Deadline for applications is May 15, 2013. This popular program fills up quickly, so please send in your application as soon as possible. Call 701-277-9240 or email email@example.com with any questions.