OF THE 20 COURSES AND SHORT DESCRIPTIONS:
Science or Superstition. Scientific method and epistemology, different
philosophical approaches to astrology, astronomical basis of astrology,
historical overview of astrology, astrological terminology, and basic
language of astrology (planets, signs, houses, aspects), various approaches
to astrological interpretation (natal, mundane, financial, horary, etc.).
Students are encouraged to think critically and develop confidence in
understanding the potential strengths and weaknesses of astrology as
a viable field of inquiry in the 21st century.
After completing Astrology 101, the student
understands the historical evolution of scientific thinking. Students
gain an appreciation for the high development of mathematics in ancient
times and the emphasis on Platonic idealism, the influence of William
of Ockham and other philosophers that preceded the breakthrough discovery
of Kepler's laws and Galileo's experiment around 1600, and the extraordinary
flowering of scientific thought in the 1700's by Newton and others. The
importance and relevance of new paradigms in science beginning around
1900, such as relativity and quantum theory, are also studied.
The influence of philosophers of science,
such as Auguste Comte, Thomas Kuhn, and Paul Feyerabend are studied,
as well as perspectives on science from physicists such as Richard Feynman.
A study of the scientific method, beliefs about how and why astrology
works according to many astrologers, and important critical thinking
skills rounds out the student's ability to think intelligently and critically
about astrological theory. The student also becomes familiar with critically
important astronomical foundations of astrology, such as the 5 great
101 provides a "platform" for
the student from which the information provided in future courses
can be put into proper perspective.
Essentials of Astrology. Students master the fundamental language of astrology,
with emphasis on modern techniques, but including information on
ancient astrological methods as well. Students explore alternative
astrological significations of planets, signs, houses, and aspects.
Topics such as element balance, hemisphere and quadrant balance,
rulerships, dispositors, midpoints, and asteroids are also covered.
The primary objective of this course is to enable the student to
be conversant with the basic language of 20th century astrology and
to develop the ability to very rapidly identify rulerships, aspects,
and other essentials in the birth chart.
Experiential Work with Astrological Fundamentals: Do planets in zodiac signs,
houses, and in aspect really work. Do rulerships work?
If so, what exactly do the zodiac signs tell us in a consistent way
that we can be confident of in our interpretations? In this course
empowered to understand the basics of astrology in a way that you
feel comfortable with. As we shall discover, not all the ideas
in astrology work consistently and we will use insights from different
astrologers to help us gain greater clarity and confidence in understanding
the basics of astrology.
and Counseling Skills. Professional standards, ethics,
and counseling skills required in other professions such as in marriage and
family therapy, financial consulting, etc., and current standards in astrology.
Ethical and legal requirements for the practice of astrology. How to refer
clients for proper treatment, consultation, or advice by various kinds of psychological
and medical practitioners, financial and business consultants, and other services
Case studies and research evidence on therapeutic
value of various health-related problems or psychological problems that
clients of astrological consultants may have are used. Social statistics,
medical data, and other data is presented that provides factual information
on the effectiveness of potential services and practitioners to whom
your clients can be referred for specific problems, whether they are
medical, psychological, financial, or personal.
- Completion of this course fulfills
the ISAR Ethics Training Requirement and the ISAR Counseling
of Astrology. Detailed study of astrology from its
throughout the world. How astrological practice and theory varied in different
geographic regions, how astrology was practiced, and which theories survived,
and which theories were lost in the traditions that survived to the 20th century.
Selected readings of notable astrologers throughout history. Students explore
Babylonian, Hellenistic, Vedic, and other ancient traditions, as well as the
impact of philosophical, cultural, and scientific developments on astrology.
Horary and Electional Astrology.
Classical horary astrology as practicied by William Lilly and
other late Medieval and Renaissance astrologers is studied and
practiced. Students learn the techniques and methods as practiced
by these astrologers, and compare them to modern methods. Students
test the ideas by attempting to answer common horary questions
such as where a lost object is, etc.
Century Analytical Methods and Manual Calculations. Perfecting chart interpretation
by applying the ideas and insights of modern psychological astrologers,
and practice analyzing charts ensures that students develop expertise
in chart interpretation. Students are also introduced to harmonics,
cosmobiology and other scientifically oriented systems of the mid
20th century. Students also learn how to calculate birth charts
manually, i.e. with a Table of Houses and Ephemeris.
and Cosmobiology. About half
of this course is devoted to the cosmobiology system developed
by Reinhold Ebertin and half is dedicated to harmonic astrology
developed by John Addey and further developed by later astrologers.
Students also learn how to develop AstroSignatures using advanced
features of modern astrological software, and test Ebertin’s
formula for predicting accidents with the AstroSignatures that
are created. Students also develop facility using the graphic
ephemeris and in recognizing planetary patterns in harmonic charts.
Methods. Secondary, tertiary, minor, and solar arc directions,
various alternative calculation methods, primary directions, transits,
solar and lunar returns. Mundane forecasting with ingresses, lunations,
and eclipses. Synthesizing different methods, time line profiles,
triggering natal patterns, progressed lunation cycles and declinations,
and cyclic approaches to forecasting. Bernadette Brady's book The
Eagle and The Lark is required reading.
20th Century Astrological Techniques; Archetypal Astrology: Mythic
Signatures in the Astrological Birth Chart. In the ancient
world divination was understood as a means of communications where
gods, as spiritual agencies, gave advice or foretold the future
to humans. These interactions were often mediated by oracles, prophets,
astrologers, seers, or other kinds of diviners.
earliest astrological omens in Babylonia were from gods who were
embodied as planets, and the appearance of a
planet in the sky heralded a manifestation of that deity on the
Ishtar (the planet Venus) stands on high, lovemaking on the land.” In
the Vedic tradition, planetary and nakshatra deities represent
the celestial keys to understanding the ancient astrology of India.
Thus the roots
of astral divination, both East and West, reside in the mythic
archetypes of the celestial gods and goddesses, and from an astrological
it is the essence of the deities that gives shape to human experience.
celestial bodies bearing deity names make a prominent appearance
at the time of an individual’s birth,
the attributes of that deity function as a guiding presence and
mythic signature for the unfolding of the life. Join Dennis and
a comprehensive, inspiring, and profound discussion of how the
myths associated with celestial bodies, whether they are planets,
decans, nakshatras, constellations, asteroids, centaurs or dwarf
planets illuminate the deep imaginal substructure that underlies
the natal chart,
and in the process points the way to meaning and healing.
and Compatibility. Synastry, variations of composite charts, potential
conflicts and complementary qualities of natal configurations,
generational differences, astro*cartography, local space charts,
Treasure Maps, geodetic charts, use of political charts, and temperament
analysis for selecting locations and life style choices.
students enrolled in the Diploma program must fulfill all course requirements
of the 3rd and 4th semesters. Students who finish their studies at
Avalon after completing the requirements for the Certificate program
are required only to fulfill the course requirements of the 1st and
2nd semesters described above, and are NOT required to take any of
the courses described below.
Astronomy for Astrologers: We will learn the astronomical definition
and description of: tropical and sidereal zodiac signs, various
house systems, declination, and other astronomical phenomena and
measurements that astrologers use. We will learn why a planet in the
12th house is
sometimes above the horizon and sometimes below it, and why the
Moon is usually not visually in the sky where an ephemeris gives its
We will also discover why the time of a New Moon or an eclipse
may be different according to astrologers and astronomers. We will also
how ancient western astrologers used different ways of describing
where the planets are from the way modern astrologers do. We will also
the astronomical basis to various ways of progressing houses and
the astronomical theory behind various systems of progression. We will
learn about how the understanding of the solar system has changed
and what some of the implications for astrologers are. Many other issues
in astronomy that are relevant to astrology will be covered.
of Vedic Astrology. Vargas,
dasas, yogas, whole sign houses, North Indian and South Indian
wheels, nakshatras, planetary strengths, Vedic aspect system,
identifying most important influences using Vedic methods. Emphasis
is on how Vedic methods may be useful to modern western astrologers
and the potential for incorporating these methods into modern
western analytical methods.
and Hellenistic Astrology II.
Readings and materials from Lee Lehman, Rob Hand, Demetra George,
Joseph Crane, Robert Schmidt and other astrologers who are actively
uncovering ancient methods are studied. Because new material
is being uncovered regarding ancient methods and translations
of previously untranslated materials, poorly translated materials,
and unpublished materials are becoming available every year,
the subject material in this course will evolve as new information
becomes available in the coming years.
Research Study and Statistics. A closer look at the scientific
method and statistical methods such as chi square, t-tests, and
analysis of variance. Understanding different kinds of distributions
of data, standard deviation, practical problems in developing control
groups, and other issues in conducting research. Critical study
of research studies of Gauequelin, Urban- Lurraine, Ann Parker,
Merriman, Cochrane, and others to determine whether the research
results are valid or spurious.
and Interpretation 1. Perfecting astrological interpretation. Students
interpret the charts of volunteers in the local area who come to
class. Students perfect their counseling skills as well as astrological
analysis by meeting with clients in these practice sessions. Students
learn from one another as well as from the volunteers and instructor,
as they develop advanced professional competency.
Comparing the techniques and methods of
different schools of astrology provides valuable insights and depth of
understanding. Students are encouraged to continue developing a system
of astrological analysis and counseling style that is appropriate and
suitable to their interests and abilities.
Students are required to complete 4 electives
from the following list of courses. Availability of courses depends on
student interest, emerging developments in astrology, and availability
of qualified instructors.
Communication, and Computer Skills. Rules for writing effective
letters, and addressing audiences, and teaching. Effective way of communication
in business settings,
such as in giving customer support, or in conducting business
transactions and negotiations. Importance of body language, dress,
and demeanor in communication. Cultural differences in communication
and how to be effective in an international business world. Students
receive intensive training in perfecting their grammar, spelling,
and effectiveness as speakers, writers, negotiators, and consultants.
Skills: Learning the "tricks" and
tips on starting a successful business and locating businesses
that provide employment opportunities. Surprising information on
priorities of employers
when seeking employees, and opportunities and pitfalls of providing
various kinds of astrological services. Everything from a review
of what an amortization
schedule is, getting loans and grants, to obtaining a business
license or incorporating is covered.
This course is practical and covers many
details that provide the student with the knowledge and skills needed
to succeed. Graduates of Avalon cannot be guaranteed a successful career
but this class is designed to give you every advantage possible, and
to help prevent you from making many of the mistakes that others have
made through trial and error.
Computer Skills: Practical guide on how
to create a website. Use of accounting, database, spreadsheet, and graphic
software programs for running a business, keeping records, and for creating
files for advertising in magazines and publishing in books. This course
takes the mystery out of computer terminology, and trains the student
to be able to understand the advantages and disadvantages of different
file formats, different kinds of software and hardware, and how certain
hardware and software tools are used for various purposes. Students must
be able to type reasonably well, operate software programs, and communicate
effectively with computer experts to pass this course. If you are computer-phobic,
keep in mind that this course will explain the facts of computer technology
in clear and simple terms, from the ground up, so any student who carefully
studies the material presented can pass this class.
and Electional astrology.
How Freudian psychodynamics such as tendency to repression, projection,
and displacement can enhance astrological analysis, and how astrological
influences are affected by environmental influences, other psychological
concepts such as self-esteem, family dynamics, and other environmental
and genetic influences interacting with astrological influences.
Emphasis is on astrological interpretation using modern psychological
theory, not on a study of psychology separate from astrological
Students are encouraged to see if modern
psychological theory can enhance the interpretation of the birth chart
and gain greater understanding of the client. Various psychological models
and psychological therapeutic methods are explored. Research evidence
on the influence of environment and genetics are studied. Scientific
studies on the effectiveness of various psychological treatments are
and Scientific Astrology.
Synthesizing from various traditions the methods that are best
for you. Astrology by Edgar Cayce, the writings of Alice Bailey,
and other theosophical and metaphysical authors. Historical evolution
of astrology, and varying philosophies and trends throughout
different time periods, including a detailed look at current
views. Students are encouraged to develop a philosophical approach
and set of technical methods that is most appealing to them and
appropriate for their particular interests, and to perfect the
approach that is most suitable, whether this be developing expertise
to become a practicing Vedic astrologer, or a skeptic of astrology
who applies scientific studies in an attempt to disprove astrology,
or any other interest or application of astrology.
II. Students apply the knowledge
that they have learned in compatibility analysis by interviewing
couples, comparing their insights with those of other students
and the instructor, and feedback from the clients.
III. Interviews and practice
consultations with clients regarding relocation, electional questions,
and business concerns enables students to perfect their ability
to consult clients in these areas.
Forecasting. Comparison of
different forecasting methods, and advanced software features
for seeing future trends. Various forms of progressions, directions,
returns, and transits are studied. Methods used in cosmobiology,
symmetrical, harmonics are applied and tested to determine which
techniques appear to be most effective.
Vedic. Practice in applying
Vedic techniques for interpreting charts, and Vedic methods for
selecting marriage partners and analyzing relationships.
Tapestry. Detailed study of an
astrological system that integrates the use of harmonics, cosmobiology,
symmetrical astrology, and insights from Vedic astrology and
modern psychological astrology.
Relocation. Practice in applying
the principles of relocation enables students to become experts
in advising clients regarding relocation. Non-astrological techniques
and tools for analyzing demographics, economic data, climate,
and other variables that are important in selecting the appropriateness
of different places for the issues that concern clients.
Topics in Classical Western.
Guest speakers who are leading experts in classical western astrology
present new insights and breakthroughs that can be useful for
a practicing astrologer
Topics in Modern Interpretation.
Guest speakers who have expertise and insights in various areas
of modern astrological techniques assist students in gaining
a comprehensive understanding and expertise using these methods.
Independent Study. Supervised study in a special topic approved by
the instructor. Students are required to submit a final paper of publishable
Project. Students conduct a
pilot research study, and implement the entire project from literature
review, to stating a hypothesis, and carrying out the experimental
procedure, and analyzing the results. Students also submit a
paper on the reasons for selecting this research project, and
the advantages and disadvantages of the research design that
they have selected, as compared to other possible research projects.
and Business Astrology. Astrological
methods for determining fluctuations in economic markets, and
forecasting economic conditions for individuals, businesses,