The Medical Minute: Writing your way to better health
When I have spoken about writing and depression, many people respond that they can understand the relationship -- whenever they have to write, they get depressed. That might have been the situation when they were in school, diagramming sentences and writing with many guidelines and restrictions. But what I’m referring to is how writing can help ease depression. Writing can help improve a number of emotional and even physical illnesses.
Many studies have examined the ways that writing helps. In one inquiry, a group of college students wrote about their basic daily activities. The other group wrote about a past trauma or challenge. Before the study, both groups visited the student health center the same number of times. Afterwards, those students who wrote about their challenge or trauma had a decreased number of health care visits and showed improvement in their overall health.
Writing about challenges can help in other areas. When a large group of men lost their jobs, they were enrolled in a study and divided in three groups. One group didn’t write at all, one wrote about what they were doing day to day to get a new job, and the third wrote about their feelings around losing their jobs. Those who wrote about the difficult experience and their feelings had a much better chance of getting a new job. Why? Those who processed their anger about being fired appeared as better candidates for a new job. They had found a way to deal with their feelings and move on.
Writing about past traumas has allowed individuals with rheumatoid arthritis to experience a decrease in pain. It has helped individuals with asthma to breathe better. It has assisted individuals who have gone through natural disasters to work through the adversity. Those who wrote about the experience had far less emotional difficulties. They had less depression and after-effects from the disaster.
What has become apparent through the studies is that one thing that is important is the creation of a story. This includes writing not only about the details of the trauma, but also your feelings about what happened. This gives you the opportunity to put the trauma into perspective. It is a chance to review how you dealt with the trauma, survived it, and what you learned from it.
When writing about the trauma, a few guidelines are helpful.
-- Understand that although in the end physical and emotional health can improve, in the early moments of writing you might feel worse. If you are writing about a trauma, it is understandable that you will feel pain and sadness. But not writing about it, not experiencing these feelings means that you are keeping them inside and they are affecting your health.
-- You can write in short snippets. Many of these studies had individuals write for 15 to 30 minutes at a time. But they wrote for a number of days and continued the exploration of the trauma. You don’t have to accomplish everything in one day.
-- Try to include as many specific details as possible. What happened? How did you feel? It is the specifics that will get you inside the story and help with letting go of the pain.
-- You don’t have to share the story with anyone else. Often it is the act of writing that is important, not having someone read it.
More information: How can you start? One way is with writing prompts. You can find some at my blog, www.psychologytoda… write-health .
Provided by Pennsylvania State University
- Study shows writing about a romantic relationship may help it last longer Aug 22, 2006 | not rated yet | 0
- Health benefits of expressive writing do not apply equally across all cultures, study finds Apr 12, 2011 | not rated yet | 0
- Reflecting on values promotes love, acceptance Jul 22, 2008 | not rated yet | 0
- Men with testicular cancer benefit by writing positively about the experience, study finds Sep 15, 2011 | not rated yet | 0
- Computerized writing aids make writing easier for persons with aphasia Feb 03, 2009 | not rated yet | 0
- Motion perception revisited: High Phi effect challenges established motion perception assumptions Apr 23, 2013 | 3 / 5 (2) | 2
- Anything you can do I can do better: Neuromolecular foundations of the superiority illusion (Update) Apr 02, 2013 | 4.5 / 5 (11) | 5
- The visual system as economist: Neural resource allocation in visual adaptation Mar 30, 2013 | 5 / 5 (2) | 9
- Separate lives: Neuronal and organismal lifespans decoupled Mar 27, 2013 | 4.9 / 5 (8) | 0
- Sizing things up: The evolutionary neurobiology of scale invariance Feb 28, 2013 | 4.8 / 5 (10) | 14
How can there be villous adenoma in colon, if there are no villi there
16 hours ago As title suggest. Thanks :smile:
How can there be a term called "intestinal metaplasia" of stomach
May 21, 2013 Hello everyone, Ok Stomach's normal epithelium is simple columnar, now in intestinal type of adenocarcinoma of stomach it undergoes "intestinal...
Pressure-volume curve: Elastic Recoil Pressure don't make sense
May 18, 2013 From pressure-volume curve of the lung and chest wall (attached photo), I don't understand why would the elastic recoil pressure of the lung is...
If you became brain-dead, would you want them to pull the plug?
May 17, 2013 I'd want the rest of me to stay alive. Sure it's a lousy way to live but it beats being all-the-way dead. Maybe if I make it 20 years they'll...
MRI bill question
May 15, 2013 Dear PFers, The hospital gave us a $12k bill for one MRI (head with contrast). The people I talked to at the hospital tell me that they do not...
Ratio of Hydrogen of Oxygen in Dessicated Animal Protein
May 13, 2013 As an experiment, for the past few months I've been consuming at least one portion of Jell-O or unflavored Knox gelatin per day. I'm 64, in very...
- More from Physics Forums - Medical Sciences
More news stories
A new study shows there is a gender gap when it comes to behavior and self-control in American young children – one that does not appear to exist in children in Asia.
Psychology & Psychiatry 7 hours ago | not rated yet | 0
Until now, little was scientifically known about the human potential to cultivate compassion—the emotional state of caring for people who are suffering in a way that motivates altruistic behavior.
Psychology & Psychiatry 8 hours ago | 5 / 5 (2) | 2 |
What effect does a father's depression have on his young son or daughter? When fathers report a high level of emotional intimacy in their marriage, their children benefit, said a University of Illinois study.
Psychology & Psychiatry 8 hours ago | not rated yet | 0
(Medical Xpress)—Preschoolers universally recognize that one's choices are not always free – that our decisions may be constrained by social obligations to be nice to others or follow rules set by parents ...
Psychology & Psychiatry 16 hours ago | not rated yet | 0
(Medical Xpress)—Do ethicists engage in better moral behavior than other professors? The answer is no. Nor are they more likely than nonethicists to act according to values they espouse, according to researchers from the ...
Psychology & Psychiatry 16 hours ago | 5 / 5 (1) | 0
Existing research shows that bicyclists who wear helmets have an 88 percent lower risk of brain injury, but researchers at Boston Children's Hospital found that simply having bicycle helmet laws in place showed a 20 percent ...
15 minutes ago | not rated yet | 0
Swiss scientists reveal the mechanism responsible for aging hidden deep within mitochondria—and dramatically slow it down in worms by administering antibiotics to the young.
11 hours ago | 4.9 / 5 (7) | 0 |
Researchers from Queen Mary, University of London have led the largest sequencing study of human disease to date, investigating the genetic basis of six autoimmune diseases.
11 hours ago | 4 / 5 (1) | 0 |
(HealthDay)—Migraines and depression can each cause a great deal of suffering, but new research indicates the combination of the two may be linked to something else entirely—a smaller brain.
7 hours ago | 5 / 5 (1) | 0 |
A new approach for immunizing against influenza elicited a more potent immune response and broader protection than the currently licensed seasonal influenza vaccines when tested in mice and ferrets. The vaccine ...
8 hours ago | not rated yet | 0 |
In a series of lab experiments designed to unravel the workings of a key enzyme widely considered a possible trigger of rheumatoid arthritis, researchers at Johns Hopkins have found that in the most severe ...
10 hours ago | 5 / 5 (1) | 0 |