|Posted by: Valter Hiebert
on May 6 2012 09:32|
Quem são os "menonitas baixo-alemão"?
Os" menonitas baixo-alemão" são descendentes de anabatistas / menonitas que se estabeleceram no norte da Polônia desde o início dos anos 1500 aos anos 1600.
A maioria dessas pessoas eram da Holanda, com grandes proporções vinda da Suíça e Alemanha.
Em 1772 uma grande parte da Polónia foi dividida, sendo que a região onde a maioria dos menonitas vivia passou a ser da Prússia.
Uma segunda divisão colocou quase todos os menonitas em território prussiano. A maioria destes menonitas viviam na província de Prússia Ocidental.
O governo da Prússia era altamente militarista, o que colidia com o pacifismo dos menonitas, que recusavam a prestaçao do serviço militar.
Eventualmente, o governo da Prússia somente autoriza a aquisição de novas terras pelos menonitas caso aceitassem a prestação do serviço militar.
Uma vez que os menonitas não podiam adquirir novas propriedades, sem desistir de seu pacifismo, muitos optaram por abandonar o território da Prússia.
Entre 1788 e 1820 cerca de um terço dos menonitas da Prússia mudou-se para o sul da Rússia (na época conhecida em alemão como Sud Russland, agora conhecida como a Ucrânia) 9Junto foram os Hiebrt, Klassen, Böse, Kasper, etc).
Depois de algumas gerações na Russia começaram a surgir problemas, a primieras foram menores, mas culminaram com o assassinato, estupro, genocidio, desapropriação etc, de milhares de menonitas.
Além da escassez de terras os menonitas estavam sob pressão por parte do governo russo para assimilar na sociedade russa (que incluía a adesão à militar).
Como resultado um grande número de menonitas começaram a deixar a Rússia em 1874.
Na década seguinte cerca de um terço dos menonitas da Rússia havia se mudado para a América do Norte.
A maioria dos alemães menonitas na América do Norte são descendentes daqueles que viviam na Rússia, mas muitas vezes são , erradamente, referidos como os menonitas russos.
Este grupo é conhecido como "os menonitas baixo-alemão" porque durante seus mais de 200 anos na Polónia / Prússia eles desenvolveram seu próprio dialeto germânico, conhecido como "Plaut Dietsch", também conhecido como "Platt Deutsch" em alemão, ou"baixo-alemão" em Inglês.
Esse idioma ainda é falado pelos descendentes dos menonitas no Brasil.
|Posted by: Valter Hiebert
on Oct 9 2011 10:07|
|Dear sirs, |
below is just one example. There are already thousands of matches, I got smart and keep getting, many with very high percentage of coincidences, but has no chance of being the same person.
They are smart suggestions for 12 matches, all rejected, because all items are offered Brother x brother.
You offered matches useless to suggest smart siblings with the same person.
The high percentage of course, as parents and siblings are the same, the brothers are the same, etc., are the same.
How, please, there have been thousands of matches for smart brothers, stop this nonsense, correct your program.
Of course I know that some names were translated, such as Hans, John, Johann, Johannes, Franz, Francis, etc. .. Do not give me answer to this argument.
But it is ridiculous to suggest smart matches Abram x Hans, Gerhard x Abram, Hans Franz x, as in the case below, where such people are brothers and never the same person.
Please do not say it's an isolated case because this has been happening for a long time and thousands of situations.
As the delivery of so many matches absurd smart you are tired your customers and turn people off of a very important work.
I hope I deserve an answer and a solution to this problem and more than my 11 previous visits are finally answered.
Premium Plus Customer prepaid for 5 years in sight.
|Posted by: Valter Hiebert
on Oct 9 2011 10:03|
|Sehr geehrte Damen und Herren, |
unten ist nur ein Beispiel. Es gibt bereits Tausende von Spielen, ich klug wurde und erhalte, hat viele mit sehr hoher Prozentsatz von Zufällen, aber keine Chance, die gleiche Person.
Sie sind intelligente Vorschläge für 12 Spiele, alle abgelehnt, weil wir alle Artikel angeboten Bruder x Bruder.
Voces angeboten Treffer nutzlos Smart Geschwister mit derselben Person vorschlagen.
Der hohe Anteil der natürlich, wie Eltern und Geschwister die gleichen sind, die Brüder die gleichen sind, etc., sind die gleichen.
Wie, bitte, es wurden Tausende von Treffern für smart Brüder, diesem Unsinn aufhören, richtige Programm.
Natürlich weiß ich, dass einige Namen übersetzt wurden, wie Hans, John, Johann, Johannes, Franz, Franziskus, etc. .. Gib mir nicht, dieses Argument zu beantworten.
Aber es ist lächerlich zu behaupten Smart Matches Abram x Hans Gerhard x Abram, Hans Franz x, wie im Fall unten, wo solche Menschen sind Brüder und nie die gleiche Person.
Bitte nicht sagen, es ist ein Einzelfall, weil dies für eine lange Zeit und Tausende von Situationen geschehen.
Da die Lieferung von so vielen Spielen absurd smart Sie sind Ihren Kunden müde und wiederum Menschen aus der eine sehr wichtige Arbeit.
Ich hoffe, ich verdiene eine Antwort und eine Lösung für dieses Problem und mehr als meine 11 vorherigen Besuchen endlich beantwortet werden.
Mit freundlichen Grüßen,
Premium Plus Kunde für 5 Jahre in den Augen Prepaid.
|Posted by: Valter Hiebert
on Oct 1 2011 09:54|
I'm glad to know that we have ancestors in common, ie are of the same big family.
On the home page of your site I was invited to participate as a contributor.
So he called my attention relevant information.
There it is recorded that your tree already has tens of thousands of family members.
I wonder if that number is true or republication of results from the same tree, making each new publication all records are duplicates or together with a correct full tree.
I've asked you to avoid this multiplication MyHeritage family tree because there are many cases of the species.
Nothing has been done to date.
I suggest that everyone who has trees multiplied by the thousands to contact MyHeritage and request the correction of this grave error of each publication resulting from the same tree would simply Altea in some detail, because it generates incorrect trees and thousands of matches samrt repeated.
After a year requesting a correction to the MyHeritage nothing was done to stop this serious problem more or deign to answer my requests repeats.
|Posted by: Valter Hiebert
on May 30 2011 07:34|
|Prezados Hiebert's e Klassen's,|
a cidade de Saint Hübert, na Bélgica, hoje com 5.200 habitantes, deu origem ao nosso nome de família.
Hübert era um nobre e dono do castelo que dominava a região.
O nome Hüebert, francês, evoluiu para Hiebert no alemão.
Hübert era um nobre da região que numa de suas caçadas ia abater um cervo, mas no hora do tiro avistou uma cruz acima da cabeça do animal.
Ele não disparou o tiro mais relatou o fato ao Bispo Católico da região.
O Bispo o convenceu que era obra de Deus e que ele fora predestinado a trabalhar pelo cristinismo pelo resto de sua vida.
Hübert entregou um filho menor para que seu irmão o cirasse, vendeu todos os seus bens e distribuiu sua riqueza entre os pobres.
Hübert chegou a ser nomeado Bispo.
Quando faleceu virou santo, o "Saint Hübert".
Os nomes de família decorrem das profissões, locais de nascimento, filiação, apelidos, aperencias, plantas, etc, de algum antepassado.
No nosso caso as pessoas sairam daquele local mas eram identificadas como sendo de "Hübert", exatamente como ocorre até hoje com muitas pessoas vindas de outros Estados no Brasil.
O apelido depois virou nome de família.
No caso de Klassen o nome significa filho de Klas.
Klas ou Klaas é um nome bastante utilizado e alguém era chamado de filho do Klas, ou seja Klassen, em holandês.
Abaixo voces poderão acessar o brasão da cidade de Saint Hübert, onde aparece a cabeça do cervo e a cruz que gerou toda a história.
|Posted by: Valter Hiebert
on May 1 2011 14:23|
FAMILY HISTORY Klassen
Here's a little history of our family.
THE JOURNEY FROM RUSSIA TO BRAZIL
They came out of Steinfeld in late October 1929.Eram 8 people:. Heinrich Kasper Anna Kasper (grandparents of those listed below), Helena Friesen, Katharina Friesen - after Hiebert, Heinrich Friesen, Julius Klassen, Gerhard Klassen Anna Klassen - Hiebert after the mother of Vernon Hiebert, and a pregnant daughter of Heinrich Kasper, aunt of the grandchildren found. (The half sisters - only the same mother - Anna Katharina Friesen Klassen and married, in Brazil, with two brothers, Jacob and David Hiebert Hiebert;)
The six brothers were with their grandparents because their parents had died in Steinfeld / Ukraine, ambso still young.
Julius Klassen, father of Anna Klassen / Hiebert, was born on October 6, 1877 in Burwalde, South Russia / Ukraine - formerly Chortiza, and died on June 12, 1924 in Steinfeld / Ukraine, 47.
Katharina Klassen (born Kasper), mother of Anna KIassen / Hiebert was born on November 11, 1885 in Steinfeld and died on February 7, 1927 in Steinfeld / Ukraine, after two attacks the brain.
In the first attack was blind. In the second died at age 42.
As you begin to emigrate from Russia and were left by wagon to the train station which was about 7 km from their residence.
On the same evening they boarded a train to Moscow.
The trip to Moscow lasted for two days and two nights.
In Moscow they were hiding in the region by dachas conseguiemr asylum at the German Embassy (Deutsland).
While waiting for asylum to the house where police raided and arrested estvam who saw in the house.
Julius and Gerhard Klassen were under a table and were not seen, not being arrested.
Heinrich and Helena also not been found and were not arrested.
Anna Klassen / Hiebert, Friiesen Katharina Heinrich Kasper Kasper and Anna (Block) were arrested.
Anna Katharina and were later released, were children. Anna Klassen / Hiebert was 12. The year was 1929.
From Heintich Kasper Anna Kasper, their daughter and I were born in dso gêmos prissão in 1929 no one ever news.
The hypothesis is that they died of cold in jail (it was the winter of 1929) or were released and also died of cold.
Julius Klassen, Gerhard Klassen, Heinrich Friesen and Helena Friesen managed asylum and went to Germany.
Anna and Katharina were alone in Moscow. Anna was 12. Katharina was 19.
How were lonely and lost, perhaps wanting to go back to the city of origin, were in a train station, when Katharina fainted.
Katharina was that the last image you had before was the faint cry of Anna.
Seeing a faint cry and another, another Mennonite family rescued the two, taking along with a group that was granted asylum in Germany.
They left Moscow in late November 1929 (winter).
The trip was from Moscow to Riga, in Russia, then to Eydtkuknen Germany.
In Eydtkuknen, as in Germany, took a bath and sauna, to kill the lice, they all had.
All clothes have undergone special ovens to kill lice.
From Eydtkuknen went to Hammerstein, where they stayed until April 4, 1930.
Then went to Mollen in Lanenburg, where they stayed until July 1931, hoping to immigrate to Canada.
It seems that in Mollen and Anna Katharina reunited Helena, Heinrich, and Gerhard Julius.
Because Canada did not accept more immigrants at the time, brothers and Friesen Klassen, except Heinrich Friesen, opted for emigration to Brazil.
The Heinrich Friesen conseguur go to Canada, where he was with Helena Klassen and Agatha, who had previously migrated to Canada. The first and the second widow married. They lived in Winipeg live therein and their descendants to date.
Heinrich Friesen spent some time at the home of Agatha Klassen (in fact they both had no relatives, because her father married his mother). From this location he disappeared and never knew it. The latest information was that was coming from Canada to Brazil, but here never even made contact with the brothers.
Inforamção Another is that it was part of the second world war with troops from Canada.
On July 18, 1931, the port of Hamburg, OS3 (three) brothers, Julius Klassen, Gerhard Klassen and Anna Klassen / Hiebert, then the last 14 years, and two (2) half-sisters Katharina Friesen and Helena Frisen / Hiebert, boarded the ship and Mount Olive went to Brazil.
They traveled with the family of Heinrich Friesen had six children. He was a cousin of Helena Friesen.
On August 6, 1931 arrived in Rio de Janeiro, but did not leave the ship.
On August 7, 1931 stopped over at Santos - SP.
On August 8, 1931 landed in San Francisco - Santa Catarina.
On August 9, 1931 traveled by train to Jaragua do Sul - Santa Catarina.
On the same day were by truck to Blumenau - SC.
On the same day went by train to Morrow - SC (at the time was called Hamon).
On August 10, 1931, with the baggage carts and the elderly in every other walk, went to Mrs. Emma Cologne, where he spent the night.
On August 11, 1931 climbed the mountain by a path in the woods (chopped) until they reached a place of virgin forest Stolz called Plateau or Augen.
It was the last group of Mennonites who arrived in the region.
The five brothers were in the same house with Heinrich Friesen, a kind of protector of five (5) orphans.
Anna Klassen / Hiebert left Russia at 12. Now he was 14.
The journey of the brothers of Russia until the new residence for 2 years.
Helena, Katharina, Julius, Gerhard and Anna had a new home, was called by the neighbors' house Frisen.
But none of them stayed long in the new home. Living conditions in the middle of the jungle were absolutely difficult, especially for a young group and, without father or mother.
Several immigrants were in employment was not aiming to Blumenau, Curitiba to Sao Paulo. Anna Klassen, despite being the youngest of the brothers, was the first out. A friend called and she was working as a maid in the family home Hauer, Curitiba. It is renowned and family to date and what was the manssão where they live today (2011) does Restaurantye Scavolo of the first level. In 2009 I visited the dorm room that was Anna Klassen for several years.
EARLY DAYS IN BRAZIL
Information that highly values the report: The following is the writing of Julius Klassen, whose original is with Vernon Hiebert. These are answers to questions in a letter by Valter Hiebert, which was not found, but allow us to understand the rspostas qeu was asked. The same letter referred her to Jakob Hiebert, who also answered the same questions.
"The region was only virgin forest with lots of hardwood, such as walnut, cinnamon, cedar and others. Every now and then a clearing in the woods, open for those who arrived a little earlier than us. Land were more or less, very rough, so we had no impression. "
"Since the immigrants were accustomed in Russia to work with modern agricultural equipment at the time, had to change the system working in virgin forest with hand tools such as ax, hoe, sickle, etc. .. So the printout was not the good, but still thanked God for having led them to a country (Brazil) with full freedom of speech and a gracious people. "
"The problems were many. In the beginning there were only bites, it was later expanded and turned into roads. In the rainy season they became impassable. To get some groceries, had to walk 5-6 km to the first we lived on a ranch 6 x 4 meters, built with palm wood, the walls and roof covered with a kind of leaves. "
"Our trip from Germany alongside Brazil was funded by the German government. In the first year of Cologne had much assistance from the Mennonite Church in Holland."
"We had no doctor in Cologne, the closest was 60 miles away."
"Early in the immigrants gathered to build a primary school. The school served as a church on Sunday for religious services, Sunday school, finally, to all the religious festivities. Help to build these schools also came from Holland and Germany. Earlier in the schools was taught only German. But then the direction of Cologne had some teachers for our Florianopolis to take a course in Portuguese. Returning to Cologne, the teachers immediately began teaching English, and German. "
"Unfortunately, the Brazilian government has not provided any assistance."
"The land was not very good and the crop did not have much future."
"Nobody was forced to stay in Cologne, but also in the beginning nobody was able to seek alternative livelihoods."
"None of the immigrants had been in place previously."
"There was no government oversight."
"The language that immigrants spoke (Plattdeutsch), a dialect of German and Dutch, and German classic."
"Already in 1932/33 we started to learn Portuguese."
"The Colony was led by Mr. Heinrich Neufeld, had the job as mayor."
"Despite many difficulties there was progress in Colonia. Ranches have given way to modest houses of wood, because I worked a good sawmill, also donated by the Netherlands. Also ran a corn mill. The daily bread was made from corn. With the overthrow of the bush settlers increased planting of corn and cassava. "
Following a brief biography of the brothers and Klassen Friesen.
Born in Grunfeld - Ukraine on May 5, 1905.
Died in Curitiba, Parana, Brazil.
Helen worked in Curitiba and Sao Paulo. She never married nor had children.
KATHERINE FRIESEN after Hiebert
She married Jacob Hiebert, brother of David Hiebert, who married Anna Klassen, ie two half-sisters married two brothers.
Lived in Blumenau. He had three sons, Rudi, and Wlali Elfride. When abandoned by Jacob was living in Witmarsun in-law.
She returned after Blumenau Walli passed away. Who brought it back to Blumenau was the half brother Julius Klassen, who took Rudi Hiebert to be an apprentice mechanic in the workshop Breitchkof Walter.
Julius Klassen worked in Blumenau and was married to Mary Dertzen in Curitiba.
After some years in Blumenau, where Ingrid was born, they moved to Curitiba, where they were born and Ilka Karin. Julius died in Curitiba.
His first attempt at Siar the Colony was in March 1935, employment in Blumenau tried, but failed.
He returned to Cologne and was harvesting corn. Sold 10 bags of maize to 5000 kings each bag, to afford the trip to Curitiba, where he was his sister Anna Klassen, who welcomed him and helped him land his first job.
He arrived in Curitiba May 5, 1935, after three days of travel.
On June 30, 1942 returned to Blumenau, this time with guaranteed employment in the Manufacturing Firm Garcia SA, where he worked from July 1, 1942 until February 6, 1948. At that time resided in the house of his sister Anna Klassen, now married to David Hiebert in 1948 and mother of 4 (four) children. Rosita, Irene, and Charles Vernon.
At first it was a weaver and from 1946 worked in quality control of tissue and towels.
On February 6, 1948 entered in the Office of Breitkopf Brothers, also in Blumenau, in the beginning of the street Itajai, to work in the office.
It was in that company until May 15, 1953, then returned to Curitiba to be a partner in the representations of shoes with his with brother Emilio Roda. This activity was the end of his days.
Gerhard Klassen went to Curitiba in 1935, where he stayed with his brothers Julius and Anna. Having failed to work, went to Sao Paulo.
It has been 11 years without reunite the brothers. This only occurred with the end of World War II in 1945.
While not reappeared, there was concern that the brothers were arrested, for it occurred to many Germans during the war in Brazil.
In Sao Paulo, he worked as a carpenter and was also a furniture designer.
He married Paula, in Curitiba, July 14, 1956, but has lived in São Paulo. She came from Germany.
They had two sons: Thomas Klassen, Wolfgang Klassen, both Paula and her mother live in Toronto, Canada. Both are married and have two children.
Gerhard died on September 7, 1967 in São Paulo (in Brazil holiday - Independence Day).
The cause of death was stroke, the same as his mother.
Paula and the children moved to Canada in 1969.
ANNA Klassen, after Hiebert
Anna Klassen worked in Blumenau, Curitiba. She married David Hiebert (brother of Jacob, now married with Katharina) in Plateau Stoltz, when I lived in Blumenau.
He was working in Curitiba in 1935 as a domestic in the family home Hauer at the invitation of a friend who was walking in the colony. She was 17 years.
Before marrying David Hiebert, also worked in Blumenau, Tabajara club, which was and still is the club of elite Blumenau.
He had seven children: Rosita (who died aged 18), Irene (deceased), Walter Carlos, Adolfo, Ivo and Alex.
Anna died in Blumenau on November 4, 1973.
RATHER THAN ON THE BROTHERS CAME TO BRAZIL
Helena Klassen. Friesen then
He emigrated to Canada before the other brothers and grandparents tried to get out of Russia. It was widowed when he left Russia. Her husband was arrested and shot by the Communists. Their descendants live in Vancouver, the same town she lived and was buried. Their son changed his name from Hans Hiebert John Hiebert. When she married it was renamed Helena Frisen, the same name as another half-sister of Julius, Gerhard and Anna Klassen. The other Frisen Helen never married.
AGATHA Klassen, Klassen also after
He emigrated with her husband, Jakob Klassen (note that it is the same surname) to Canada rather than the 6 brothers also tried the same. Lived in Winipeg, where many of their descendants who visited in 2006. It was they who gave me information on the whereabouts of the missing Heinrich Friesen.
Mary Klassen, after Loven
She, a widow (her husband was murdered by the communists in Russia) and daughter Maria Löwen (same name) from the mother) in 1944 emigrated from Russia to Poland after the Second World War, along with the retreat of German troops. With the continued decline of German in 1945 she emigrated to Germany. It was in occupied territory by the British and from there managed to emigrate to Brazil, Curitiba, Parana, now with the company of her daughter's boyfriend, Peter Dick.
His daughter was married in Curitiba and stayed here until 1956. The two Marys and Peter Dick, and son Peter, moved to Winipeg, Canada where Mary Klassen / Loven died and many of their descendants reside ..
He was alone from Germany to Canada in 1930, where there were Agathe Klassen and Helena Klassen. Agathe and lived with her second letter to Julius Klassen, even before the marriage of Julius, Heinrich would have gone to Brazil, where he never came or at least never made contact with the family.
Julius Klassen tried to locate it for many years, looked even close to the Canadian embassy, but got no clue half-brother.
In 2006 Vernon Hiebert was told by the daughter of Agatha Klassen Heinrich Friesen that never left Canada, but neither knew of their whereabouts after leaving the home of Agatha Klassen in Winipeg. Regsitre that there were half-brothers, both poos already existed when the father of Agatah married mother of Heinrich.
A LITTLE ABOUT Mennonites
The Klassen Friesen and were part of a religious group closed and very radical chamnado of Mennonites.
On the Trail of atheistic communism, they dispersram by various countries around the world, there is a lot of biography on the subject.
The Mennonites who came to Brazil, from 1928, founded the first colonies in the Alto Vale do Itajai, which are now the counties of Witmarsun Dona Ema and Victor Meireles.
The land purchased was covered with virgin forests. They were the first inhabitants of the region.
How were producers of wheat and rye in Russia and land in the Upper Valley was unfit for such grains, spent 20 years cultivating maize and cassava.
Given the difuldades were moving slowly being closed several schools, and cooperative hospital.
Those who stayed longer divided into two groups. Founded a new colony, district Aceguá in Rio Grande do Sul, and another purchased land between Curitiba and Ponta Grossa, creating the District Witmarsun in Palmeiras - PR.
From the beginning, 1929/30, a minority of Mennonites moved to the nearby cities of Blumenau, Brusque and Curitiba, where they still live a few immigrants and many of their early descendants.
Maria Derksen / Klassen, Mary Fast / Agatha Hiebert and Hiebert / Unruh, my aunts, who were born in Russia, still living (2011) in Curitba.
My parents came from Russia in 1931 and stayed a few years in the upper valley, having worked in Curtiba and Brusque, and finally settled in Blumenau.
My father worked at the company Indusrial Garcia until his retirement. Five of his seven children were born and raised on the street October 12, Garcia, operate in the village of OIG.
The headquarters of the prefecture Witmarsun - SC was the old hospital of the Mennonites in the city. There is a plaque at the entrance of the hall by thanking the donation of the building by the Mennonites.
The Mennonites are Anabaptist Christians, or only his faithful baptized as adults.
The name derives from the name Mennonite Menno Simon, a Catholic priest, who differed from Luther and created his own religious segment.
Simon was born in Witmarsun Meno, a village that is now part of Holland.
is the name of the birthplace of the founder of the Mennonite religion.
In recent drive by Witmarsun - SC, I found that nobody knew the origin of the name of the city where they were born and live.
About the language spoken by the Mennonites prevailing throughout the world is a dialect that mixes Dutch and German, called plautdeutch.
Blumenau and nearby there are several families who opted to stay in the region, not getting in the closed group that predominates today in Mennonite colonies.
Before the final migration of the Upper Valley, a group of ITS menon moved to Boquirão, Curitiba, initiating the settlement of the region, especially Xaxim neighborhood, where several churches and a Mennonite seminary.
The first that came out of the upper valley sold their properties, ú.ltimos simply abandoned for lack of buyers.
ON COMING TO BRAZIL Mennonites
In November 1929 (winter temperature -20 / 40) were approximately 13,000 Mennonites who were in the suburbs of Moscow trying to emigrate from that country (the shape it as they arrived there was already an epic).
Of that total only 3,885 managed temporary shelter in Germany, the refugee camps of Moelln, Prenzlau and Hammerstein.
Of these, in turn, only 1,200 came alongside Brazil.
The first 33 families left Hamburg on 16/1/1930 on the Ship Mount Olive.
In Rio de Janeiro took another ship to San Francisco (where my mother / Klassen) and others until Itajaí (if my pa / Hiebert).
From San Francisco to the route Jaragua do Sul was made by train.
Jaragua do Sul Blumenau was up by bus.
Who came up with the steam came from Itajai to Blumenau Blumenau.
Blumenau by Hamon (now Morrow) again by train.
Hamon's up "NeuBreslau" (today Presidnte Vargas) was the wagon.
The following passage was done on foot.
Founded the colony of Witmarsum; Waldheim and Gnadental in the region called Krauel. Finally they created a village in the hills "Stolzplateau.
The latest Mennonites arrived in June 1934, were 34 families who fled from Russia to China and then to Brazil. China was only one escape route for Mennonites who spread throughout the world.