Cold Laser Therapy
Cold Laser therapy is a form of photonic light therapy that focuses on balancing cellular activity in the body. It comes out of the modern Western medical tradition and is rather cutting edge. The laser is a “cold laser” which means it doesn’t cut, unlike hot lasers currently used for surgery, which can cut through skin. The cold laser works by providing a specific light frequency that tunes in to each cell in the body and makes its biochemistry work better (i.e. skin cell, nerve cell, liver cell, etc.).
As a result, it directly affects diseased, or injured tissue with light-speed accuracy and quickness, to heal a particular physical problem from the inside out. For example, a bacteria will create a particular infection within the body. Once this infection is determined, the laser can be set at a particular frequency, applied to the area experiencing the infection, and help in killing the bacteria.
Or, immediately after surgery, the laser light can stimulate collagen cell growth, heal the area 50% to 75% faster and prevent unwanted scar tissue from forming
All in all, the laser creates healing within the body by restoring balance to the affected area.
Tagged: accelerated healing, acne, ADD, ADHD, advanced western medicine, alternative health, alternative medicine, anxiety, arthritis, autism, bacteria, bone growth, burn care, candida control, cardiovascular disease, carpal tunnel syndrome, cellulite reduction, chronic illness, chronic pain, cold laser, digestive disorders, Dr. Grace, dyslexia, heart disease, hormone balancing disorders, HRT, hypothyroidism, infection, joint problem, light healing, Los Angeles, meiopia, multiple sclerosis, muscle strength, neurological disorders, pain relief, parasites, Parkinson's Disease, Peter’s Blog, scar tissue, scleroderma, skin regeneration, speech disorders, super healing, surgery, therapy, tinnitus, tissue oxygenation, toxicity, urinary tract infections, wellness
45 Responses to “Cold Laser Therapy”
Leave a Reply
Episodes by Category