If you have finished taking in the beauty of Vermont's Green Mountains and want to next visit New Hampshire's state capital of Concord, then traveling southbound on Interstate 89 across the Connecticut River is the ideal way to go. It is a straight shot that involves passing by 20 exits during an approximately 1-hour drive. Here are 7 exits you may want to visit along the way:

Exit 20 is for West Lebanon, Plainfield, and Claremont and is very popular with tourists due to its retail hub. Best Buy, Chili's, Shaw's Supermarket, Kohls? They are all here!

Exit 19 takes you to "The Miracle Mile" in Lebanon if you make a left off of the exit. The Miracle Mile has a Price Chopper supermarket and is the home of Timken Aerospace, which manufactures precision parts (such as ball bearings) for many leading aerospace companies.

Exit 18 takes you to either Hanover or Lebanon. Lebanon was devastated by a major fire in 1964 but has managed to recover nicely. Hanover is the home of the well-known Ivy League school Dartmouth College and has some very upscale dining choices such as The Hanover Inn.

Exit 17 brings you to either Enfield, Canaan, or Lebanon. Canaan is best known for the Canaan Motor Club, which has a popular auto racetrack.

Exit 16 displays the non-existent town name of Purmort, but most tourists know the exit as the way to get to the Whaleback ski area, which has 30 trails.

Exit 12A mentions Georges Mill and Springfield, but most people use this exit to get to Lake Sunapee, which is very busy during the summer. Lake Sunapee is where Steven Tyler and Joe Perry first met; they took their eventual Aerosmith band idea to Boston, and the rest as they say is rock and roll history!

Exit 9 takes you to either Warner or Bradford, but it is a great place to unwind! Immediately off of the exit, you will find a few fast food places such as McDonald's as well as a Market Basket supermarket.

Please note that at the end, 89 South gives you the option of going southbound on Interstate 93 toward Manchester and Boston or northbound on Interstate 93 toward Concord.
