Volleyball and basketball athletes may be interested in how to jump higher exercises. These athletes are trained to develop this skill for daily games and practices. Increasing your vertical jump requires a physically demanding workout. Injuries can happen when not properly facilitated, including knee injuries and other complications affecting the lower limbs. This is why shaping an athlete’s body for the sport using the “Plyometrics” method is essential.
Muscular activities can improve your ability to jump higher. What is anatomically important in jumping is the so-called degree of the fast-twitch versus slow-twitch fibers, which can be found in the leg muscles. The key is having rapid muscle contractions. Rapid muscle contractions are needed for speed; therefore, the greater the distribution of fast-twitch fibers, the higher the jumping ability of the athlete. Here are the major ways to improve your jump:
Jump higher with muscle strength and flexibility training. Speed and explosive movements of an athlete determine his jumping skills. These can be developed by doing lots of bounding, hopping and jumping drills. The natural condition of the person in this area would qualify him for further training called “Plyometrics.” However, you must have a lot of will power to push yourself to that level during training.
Jump higher using “Plyometrics.” This method aims to push an athlete beyond his limits. You should practice vigilance throughout this program; progress must not be done abruptly and hastily. Rest intervals are imposed to help the body adapt to the intensive drills. Stretching programs enhance your flexibility to increase jumping ability and minimize injuries. The ankles, knees and hips are the focus of this technique.
Jump higher by positioning your body properly. Once the body is strong and flexible enough, it is time to practice your jumping stance. The hips should be flexed at 30 degrees. Knees should be bent at 60 degrees, and ankles should be flexed at 25 degrees. This minimizes injury and guarantees full power, a vital ingredient for learning how to jump higher. Spectators may think that this position is a mere display of power, but for the athletes, it is a serious precaution for injuries.
Jump higher by deliberately following safety precautions. Follow details like the “knees are not supposed to point inwards to make a knock knee position, as they should be placed over the second toe while the arms rests at your side.” Push the body upwards with your legs by springing off the balls of the feet. Raise your hands upwards into the air for additional momentum and breathe out after this movement. Make sure to land on the balls of the feet first and bend the knees to absorb the shock of impact.
When learning how to jump higher exercises, an athlete must make safety a priority. Intense trainings will just go to waste once a valuable athlete is injured during a game. Professional trainers know this, and it is their goal to minimize injuries as much as possible. If the athletes’ bodies are flexible enough, they are more likely to survive sports injuries.