Earth-Moon Institute for Teachers
Best Ways to Bring the Moon into Your Classroom
Register Here for the July 27-31, 2009 Earth-Moon Institute
Held at the Lunar and Planetary Institute
(click here for a map of our location)
Who: 5th – 8th grade in-service and pre-service teachers
What: A 35-hour NASA-sponsored institute, investigating the Moon
Bridges content from the Moon’s to the Earth’s geology and environment
Uses hands-on activities modeling science concepts
Provides tools to address student misconceptions
Incorporates authentic inquiry experiences
Receive professional development and TAGT Awareness credit hours, and numerous classroom resources
Topics address science content TEKS: 2.7D, 4.6A, 5.6A, 5.12C, 6.5A, 6.5B, 6.13A, 7.13B, 8.12A, and multiple science process TEKS:
Moon Phases and Eclipses
Tides and Gravity
Formation of the Moon
Geology of the Moon
The Rock Cycle
Size and Scale of the Solar System
Cost: Institute registration is $150, and includes lunches. Transportation and accomodations are not provided; however, we are happy to facilitate carpooling and searches for roommates.
Local hotels are available at a wide range of prices; those on Bay Area Boulevard are closer and have a variety of restaurants within walking distance.
Travel grants are not available through the Lunar and Planetary Institute, however, there may be scholarships that teachers can apply for through their state's Space Grant Consortium.
Participants will be able to receive college credit for participating; contact us for further details.
Earth-Moon Institutes are being offered by the Lunar and Planetary Institute, with support from NASA's Science Mission Directorate.
- NASA Astromaterials Research Exploration Science (ARES) Education and Public Outreach . ARES has many hands-on activities and background information on lunar geology and more. This site contains teacher activities appropriate to be done in the classroom for middle school and high school students.
- Harris County Department of Education
is a nonprofit tax-assisted organization dedicated to the equalization of educational opportunity and to the advancement of public schools. HCDE has been serving the county's public schools for 117 years. The organization impacts the educational community through visionary leadership, shared resources and innovative programs.
- Moon Mineralogy Mapper (M3) Instrument Education and Public Outreach . M3 is is one of NASA’s instruments aboard the Indian Space Research Organization’s Chandryaan-1 spacecraft. It will map the entire lunar surface, and reveal the minerals of which it is made. This education site includes a suite of hands-on inquiry based activities engage middle-school students in understanding and interpreting reflectance spectra from Earth and Moon rocks. These activities are part of a suite of educational resources that investigate the geologic history of our Moon, the Chandrayaan-1 Mission, spectrometry, and future lunar exploration.
- Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter (LRO) Mission Education and Public Outreach. LRO will return detailed information about the surface of the Moon and the lunar environment, in preparation for future human habitation of the Moon. This site includes games, feature stories, media resources, and a monthly newsletter for librarians.
For further information, contact:
Lunar and Planetary Institute
3600 Bay Area Boulevard
Houston, TX 77058