Pennsylvania Caves and Other Rocky Roadside Wonders
PENNA GB605.P4 P38 2004
A roadside travel guide to and history of Pennsylvania's nine commercial caves (including Laurel Caverns) and other geographical sites within the state.
Blind Descent: The Quest to Discover the Deepest Place on Earth
Chronicles attempts by scientist-explorers to locate the deepest cave on Earth, focusing particularly on the 2004 efforts of American Bill Stone in the vast Cheve Cave of southern Mexico and Ukrainian Alexander Klimchouk in the supercave Krubera in the Republic of Georgia.
For additional titles, browse the library catalog under the subjects:
a 430 acre geological park featuring Pennsylvania's largest cave located just fifty miles south of Pittsburgh on Route 40, east of Uniontown, in Farmington.
Mid-Atlantic Karst Conservancy
The Mid-Atlantic Karst Conservancy was established by Western Pennsylvania cavers in 1997 to preserve, ensure access to, acquire, and manage caves and karst areas for conservation, scientific study, and recreational caving; and to educate landowners, cavers, and the general public about the importance of karst resources and ways to preserve them. The MAKC is affiliated with the NSS as a Conservancy of the National Speleological Society. Includes a list of local "grottos" (caving enthusiasts).
of the National Speleological Society. (or NSS) is a caving club located in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania (USA), and is affiliated with the American Association for the Advancement of Science.
A fossilized coral reef cavern located 7 miles west of Bedford, Pennsylvania
Located near Kutztown in the Pennsylvania Dutch Country.
Eastern Region of the National Cave Rescue Commission
The Eastern Region of the National Cave Rescue Commission covers the states of West Virginia, Virginia, North Carolina, Maryland, Pennsylvania, Delaware, and New Jersey. Information on training and rescue reports as well as what to do in case of an emergency while caving.
A limestone cavern located near State College
Indian Echo Caverns
Located near Hershey, Pennsylvania
Located in Huntingdon, PA, near Raystown Lake north of Breezewood.
Lost River Caverns
Hellertown, PA near Allentown, PA.
Pennsylvania Cave Conservancy
A non-profit conservancy of the National Speleological Society protecting cave resources within the Mid Appalachian Region (Pennsylvania, Maryland, New Jersey and Delaware). Included on their website is a list of restricted access caves.
America's only all water cavern and wildlife park, located in Centre Hall, near State College, PA.
Located east of State College, Woodward Cave is the largest live cavern in Pennsylvania with many common and rare formations, such as Helictites.
Northern central West Virginia
Potomac Speleological Club
The Potomac Speleological Club, incorporated in the State of West Virginia as the Potomac Speleological Society, is dedicated to caving, conservation and the science of speleology.
West Virginia Cave Conservancy
Included on their website are educational resources for landowners.
National Caves Association
a non-profit organization of publicly and privately owned show caves and caverns - caves developed for public visitation. If you input your zip code, you can find a cave near you.
National Speleological Society
advances the study, conservation, exploration, and knowledge of caves with more than 10,000 members in 200 grottos. On their website you can find cave organizations by state.