</span><blockquote><span class="smallfont">Quote:</span><hr size="1" />Originally Posted by (jpapadpapa,)
But, for something to actually be scientifically proven, doesn't it have to be observed? That it cannot be observed in a lab is the entire point. <hr size="1" /></blockquote><span class='postcolor'>
Actually it doesn't. Gravity has never ever been observed in a lab. The effects of gravity have but never gravity itself. For example...
We observe an apple falling out of a tree
From that we can draw at LEAST two hypotheses...
1) A natural force acted upon the apple causing it to move toward the Earth.
2) A Supernatural force named God plucked the apple from tree and put it on the Earth.
Both are valid hypotheses. The first only became a theory because of other observations that supported it and all of the hypothesis' predictions that held true. Because of these observations we now know that when we see an apple falling to the Earth, the Earth is also falling toward the apple.
Now, lets take another look at an Effect of an invisible force...
There are thousands and thousands of different species on this Earth.
From this we can also draw at LEAST two hypotheses...
1) A natural force/process is responsible for the huge variety of species.
2) A Supernatural force named God is responsible for creating all of the species we see today.
Again, both are valid hypotheses. The reason the first became a theory is because of the mounds of other observations that scientists have made. Plus, the predictions made by the first hypothesis have all been found to be true.
Now, if you want to challenge either the Theory of Gravitation or the Theory of Evolution you must first understand them. Since I don't think you wish to challenge the Theory of Gravitation lets go with Evolution.
Evolution can be seen as a fact and a theory.
Evolution as a fact - Change in allele frequency in a given population over time.
This happens. It is a fact. To deny this is to be considered a retard.
Evolution as a theory - The process of Factual Evolution has given rise to every species on Earth and started from one or a few living common ancestors
PLEASE NOTICE THAT NEITHER OF THESE MENTION HOW LIFE FIRST STARTED. TO LUMP ABIOGENESIS IN WITH EVOLUTION IS A FALLACY
The Theory of Evolution requires a physical mechanism. That mechanism is Genetics.
Given genetics as the mechanism, the effect we see (Many different species) couldn't happen very quickly. So here we come to one of the first predictions of the Theory of Evolution, that the Earth has been around for a LONG time and life has been around for a long time too. It just so happens that the Earth and Life have been around for a long time. (If you don't agree, please don't try to DISCREDIT the evidence for an old Earth. Please provide evidence that it is short. Also, please don't use old arguments like Moon Dust or anything you find on Kent Hovind's site http://www.drdino.com because it is complete bullshit.)
Ok, back to challenging the Theory of Evolution. If you want to challenge it please provide an alternative that is supported by the observations. This alternative has to be testable and must make predictions that we can test.