Brave New Schools, Chapter 6
Serving a Greater Whole
"Service in the Hitler Youth is honorary service to the German people. All young people are obliged from the age of 10 to their 19th birthday to serve in the Hitler youth. " ( Nazism: A History in Documents and Eyewitness Accounts)
"As young people mature we must help them develop...a service ethic... the global servant concept in which will educate our young for planetary service and eventually for some form of world citizenship.... Implicit within the 'global servant concept are the moral insights... that will help us live with the regulated freedom we must eventually impose on ourselves."  Harold G. Shane, Phi Delta Kappan
"A really efficient totalitarian state would be one in which the all-powerful executive of political bosses and their army of managers control a population of slaves who do not have to be coerced because they love their servitude.... Aldous Huxley, Brave New World
This chapter opens with the story about The Giver, which is now a separate article. We suggest you read it before you read the rest of the chapter below. In order to make this complex chapter easier to understand, I have outlined the main points:
1. Voluntary service is becoming a normal part of public education
2. Service sounds good, but there are reasons for concern
3. Community service has a hidden agenda
4. National service has been used to force free people into involuntary servitude
"Voluntary" community service. Anne Mecham loves her community service class. "It's kind of cool," said the seventh-grader at Standford Middle School. "It's a school class, but you're not stuck in a class learning; you actually get to go out and do something."
Anne and her friends do volunteer service four days a week. They may be sent to a day care center, to a housing complex for the elderly, or to a local elementary school. To them, it's more fun than class. To educators, it's a hands-on way of teaching compassion, responsibility, citizenship, and team work. To busy parents, it offers children a simple path to positive, character-building experiences.
"In California, we encourage service learning as a highly effective tool for teaching students the true meaning of citizenship and caring for one's community and people," said Linda Forsyth, an education programs consultant.
It sounds almost too good to be true. Could anything be wrong with such noble motives and selfless service? There could be--when service supports a hidden agenda, or when it ceases to be voluntary. Involuntary service involves coercion, and coercion can take many forms. Peer pressure, implied social obligations, and classroom assignments are subtle ways of coercing students to postpone their studies or change the emphasis of their education. However, when "volunteer" service is planned by the government, assigned by educators, and required for high school graduation or college admission, it borders on violating constitutional rights. 
"....community service is a mandatory part of the curriculum in more than 200 public and private schools nationwide," wrote Lori Aratani in a 1994 article titled "Out of the Classroom, Into the Community." Basing her observations on a New York research program called the National Center for Service Learning in Early Adolescence, she continued, "Thousands more support voluntary community service projects, and some even make it a graduation requirement." 
"Volunteer" service is required for graduation in Woodside, California. Thirteen-year-old Ayelet Arbuckly spends some of her weekends folding curtains and doing chores at a homeless shelter. Eliott Butler, also thirteen, helps build houses for the needy. "It's hard work sometimes," says Eliott. "But when you're finished, you feel really good about what you've done." 
Most people feel good about service! Back in 1988, when President Bush first shared his vision of a Thousand Points of Light shining as beacons into needy neighborhoods, our nation felt good. When his Points of Lights Foundation began to plan national service as an antidote to hunger and homelessness, expectations grew. But when we heard that the Points of Light payroll has tripled to $4.1 million and the Foundation "may have misspent millions,"  we learned a sobering lesson: big government and big foundations are easy targets for human greed and big ambitions.
"I challenge a new generation of young Americans to a season of service," said President Clinton in his inaugural address five years later. "There is so much to be done--enough, indeed, for millions of others who are still young in spirit to give of themselves in service, too."
Vice President Al Gore echoed Clinton's message. "This is the beginning of national community service in our country," he told 1500 young adults selected to launch the national youth service corps at Treasure Island Naval Base in California. "And you are the first... I expect you to change the world!"
Change the world? Keep in mind, there is nothing new about voluntary service. Long before Jesus demonstrated it to his followers, Old Testament prophets taught it to ancient Israel. More recently, the United States has led the world in voluntary service to its own poor as well as to distant victims of war, famine, plagues and floods. So what does today's "voluntary" service offer that past service didn't? How can it change the world?
The hidden agenda. The student service movement began with 1983 report by the Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching (CFAT).  The following year David Hornbeck, State Superintendent of Maryland's Public Schools and a member of the Carnegie Foundation Board, testified before Maryland State Board of Education concerning the need to "mandate community service at state-approved places."  He quoted from the "much-acclaimed" book High School by CFAT president, Ernest Boyer:
"The goal of service in the schools is to teach values -- to help all students understand that to be fully human one must serve.["19]
To understand the meaning behind Boyer's statement, let us look at the history and philosophy of the Carnegie foundations. Together with the Carnegie Corporation and the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, CFAT has been funding futuristic and globalist causes for nearly a century.  Their combined wealth has bought astounding and alarming political favors. "All three organizations are so well-heeled financially that they are entrusted by nearly every administration, Republican and Democrat, with performing all sorts of vital functions, from negotiating foreign treaties with the Soviet Union to setting policy in education,"  wrote Beverly Eakman in Educating for 'The New World Order.'
In 1985, the U.S. Department of State gave the Carnegie Corporation, "authority to negotiate with the Soviet Academy of Sciences, which is known to be an intelligence-gathering arm of the KGB, regarding 'curriculum development and the restructuring of American education.'"  As a result, the Soviet strategies for organizing centralized communities as well as the behavioral psychology used to train Soviet youth began to infiltrate our tax-funded educational laboratories and training centers. Now they are a part vital part of the community-wide transformational system being implemented by Goals 2000.
Why, you might ask, would our government give the Carnegie Foundation this kind of authority? How could a tax-exempt organization with its eye on global socialism be allowed to act on our behalf without any accountability to American voters?
Charlotte Iserbyt, a former Senior Policy Advisor in the U.S. Department of Education, believes American parents deserved an answer. In her exposť of the seditious Soviet-American Exchange, she quotes the response given by Carnegie President Dr. David Hamburg, chief negotiator for the Soviet exchange. His astounding admission gives us a glimpse of the hidden power behind the scenes:
"...privately endowed foundations can operate in areas government may prefer to avoid."
When CFAT president Ernest Boyer wrote that "the goal of service in the schools is to teach values," the emphasis was on changing a student's values, not on encouraging loving service. The values he promotes are the new-paradigm values--those that will replace what Christian students learn at home. These objectives have characterized the Carnegie foundations for decades.
In 1989 the Carnegie Council on Adolescent Development issued a report titled "Transforming the Education of Young Adolescents." Reprinted from Turning Points: Preparing American Youth for the 21st Century, it emphasized--not the needs of those who are served--but the new attitudes to be developed in students through service.
"Every middle grade school should include youth service -- supervised activity helping others in the community or in school -- in its core instructional program.... Teachers will need to provide opportunities for students to reflect on and learn from their service experience, arrange student placements, coordinate with site supervisors, and oversee students' service activities on campus."
So far, it doesn't sound too bad, does it? Perhaps a 1994 article in Teaching Sociology will help us look beyond the innocuous facade. Titled "Community Service-Learning: Promises and Problems," it describes the Joint Education Project (JEP) at the University of Southern California which offers experiential learning by "placing students in community volunteering positions."
The "fundamental goal" of JEP is "the enhancement of academic learning," wrote the authors, Pierrette Hondagney-Sotelo and Sally Raskoff. "Sociological concepts come alive when they are complemented by firsthand experiences and guided reflections."
Notice the words experiences and guided reflections. In this project, students are not free to think for themselves. The experiences and conclusions of the 32,000 students who have passed through the program were carefully planned by new-paradigm sociology teachers determined to convert students to their beliefs.
Even so, some students refused to see community problems through the new-paradigm perspective--nor would they embrace the politically correct outcomes. Using facts, observation and reason (remember the old-paradigm tools?), these students drew independent conclusions, causing great consternation to their teachers. The authors shared their dismay:
"The most serious and frustrating problem... is the tendency to reach unwarranted, often racist conclusions based on selective perceptions. In these cases, observations are made through the prism of prejudice and individualism. This tendency reflects both U.S. racist ideology and the legacy of viewing social problems as the product of individuals character deficiencies. Such a view is antithetical to the goals of sociology...."
Did you hear what they said? Society, not individuals, are responsible for behavior. Humans, like animals, are conditioned by their circumstances. This anti-Christian social philosophy (based on B. F. Skinner's behavioral psychology) is the basis for today's Mastery Learning, Outcome-based Education, Performance-Based education, and any other temporary label identifying our international world-class education.
In case you are wondering if the non-compliant students above were actually racist, let's put the authors' comments into the new-paradigm context. Remember in Chapter 3, I wrote that only the right kind of thinking will transfer students from the old to the new paradigm. Only the new-paradigm context will give the right meaning to words and experiences. The context determines the meaning of words.
In the old context, racism meant racial prejudice: judging a person by skin color. In the new context, it refers to everything tainted by Western culture or Christian beliefs. No matter how many multiracial friends you have, you would be called racist if you considered America or Christianity better than any other nation or religion.
To see the absurdity of this reasoning, read Illiberal Education by Dinesh D'Souza. He quotes Donna Shalala, then chancellor at the University of Wisconsin, saying, "I would plead guilty to both racism and sexism. The university is institutionally racist. American society is racist and sexist. Covert racism today is just as bad as overt racism was thirty years ago...."
You can't win unless you join the march into the new paradigm. If you are still not convinced, may I suggest you read the JEP report with the statements from the concerned, caring statements by those accused of being racists. You should be able to find it in any university education library. Then read Illiberal Education. It opened my eyes to the astounding new socialization process at our politicized universities. For example, the American emphasis on individual rights and freedoms is now considered a racist principle by pacesetting educators:
"When the University of the Pennsylvania recently announced mandatory 'racism seminars' for students, one member of the University Planning Committee voiced her concerns about the coercion involved. She expressed her 'deep regard for the individual and my desire to protect the freedoms of all members of society.'
"A university administrator sent her not back, with the word 'individual' circled and the comment, 'This is a RED FLAG phrase today, which is considered by many to be RACIST. Arguments that champion the individual over the group ultimately privilege the 'individuals' who belong to the largest or dominant group." 
In the Joint Education Project described above, written observations and conclusions that disagreed with the teachers' politically correct values were not acceptable. To encourage greater conformity to the new-paradigm values, the authors suggested that future teachers help students "place their community service-learning experience in a sociological framework." In other words, first teach students new-paradigm sociology (introduce the new context). Later, explain the experience in light of that context or "sociological framework."
To prevent a student's "lapse into racist, culturally deterministic, individualistic views," wrote the authors,
"we suggest that an initial orientation session on diversity--which has already been instituted.... and the [instructors' vigilance.... Unless students already are speaking and thinking within a sociological framework, placing them in a community where they work with individuals may encourage them to reify [treat as real] rather than dispel stereotypes." 
Did you get the point? Students who view reality from a traditional "individualistic" perspective will draw conclusions that reinforce their old beliefs. That would undermine the strategy for change. Teachers can avoid that pitfall by "integrating the curriculum more closely with the student's community experience." In other words: more indoctrination before the experience and more surveillance during the experience.
Genuine voluntary service doesn't need a government mandate. Practical training would help, but manipulation and mandates undermine both motivation and personal rewards. True service flows from hearts moved with love for people and compassion for the needy. Service-learning, on the other hand, is a strategic tool for transformation.
You have seen the goal: to produce world-class citizens ready to serve a greater whole--be it the community, the state, the Earth, or a pantheistic union. Capitalism, nationalism, individualism, and biblical truth are major obstacles to that goal. Could we be staring at Huxley's programmed utopia?
Brave New World. Most high school graduates have read Huxley's futuristic fantasy. To some students, it sounds as frightening as George Orwell's 1984. To others, it inspires utopian visions that seem both plausible and fun. After all, Huxley's revolutionary world promises what change agents demand: socialist security, spiritual meaning, global oneness, and vast opportunities for free sex and fun "feelies."
In this Brave New World, parents can no longer set limits on sensual thrills or government indoctrination. The family has ceased to exist. Children are born in laboratories, programmed through daily behavior modification exercises, and conditioned to enjoy sexual experimentation, group consciousness, unquestioning service, and the right ways to think. Peace, order and conformity have won the day. But the trade-off hurts. Tracked by the watchful eyes of the state and peer informers, few dare challenge the prescribed boundaries of world-wide political correctness.
The official promotion of sensual indulgence serves a social purpose. "As political and economic freedom... diminishes, sexual freedom tends compensatingly to increase," writes Huxley. "And the dictator... will do well to encourage that freedom. In conjunction with the freedom to daydream under the influence of dope, movies and the radio, it will help to reconcile his subjects to the servitude."
Compliant servitude is essential to Huxley's world. Together with an all-inclusive global spirituality marketed under the banner of unity, it sets the stage for a peaceful transition to a new world order:
"A really efficient totalitarian state would be one in which the all-powerful executive of political bosses and their army of managers control a population of slaves who do not have to be coerced because they love their servitude. To make them love it is the task assigned... to ministries of propaganda, newspaper editors and schoolteachers...
"If persecution, liquidation and the other symptoms of social friction are to be avoided, the positive sides of propaganda must be made as effective as the negative."  Brave New World
Compare Huxley's totalitarian world to 20th century dictatorships for a moment. Both Nazi and communist regimes believed that individual people--young and old--belonged to the state. Both used positive propaganda, nice-sounding notions like service and personal sacrifice, to hide their totalitarian controls and sadistic cruelty. Both used the threat of intense persecution and "liquidation" to back up the negative side of their propaganda.
Coming from Hitler and Stalin, who showed nothing but hatred for their own poor and handicapped, the word service became meaningless. Their purpose for youth service was social transformation, not charity. The bottom line was control. The children belonged to the state, not the parents.
In her article, "Mandatory National Service Is a Tool to Indoctrinate Youth into Socialism," Maxine Shideler shows that parental resistance meant nothing to Hitler. In a 1933 speech, the Nazi leader told the spellbound crowd,
"When an opponent says, 'I will not come over to your side,' I calmly say, 'Your child belongs to us already... What are you? You will pass on. Your descendants, however, now stand in the new camp. In a short time, they will know nothing else but this new community."
"All totalitarians, whether Nazis or Fascists or Communists, consider national service and the nationalization of education to be extremely important," wrote Dr. Dennis Cuddy. His conclusion is confirmed by an interesting book prepared through the Department of History and Archaeology at the University of Exeter titled Nazism: A History in Documents and Eyewitness Accounts. To see the amazing parallels between Outcome-based education and the Nazi education system, read the comparison in Part 2. "service learning" was a major part of the Nazi indoctrination:
"The purpose of labor service was partly practical -- to... provide a source of cheap labor--but mainly ideological. It was apart of the cult of community current in the youth movement now manipulated by the Nazis for their own end. Students would be confronted with Real Life and, by being forced to mix with the less privileged sections of the community, would be reminded that they were all [national comrades] together."
Hitler's occult connections are no secret, and his life showed the consequences. His blend of seductive words and social manipulation created a political monster with a global appetite. Because the gullible masses believed his grandiose dreams and promises, they chose to trade their individual freedom for national servitude.
Sobered by the inhumaness of slavery, our 1865 Congress saw the dangers in national service. To guarantee our safety from the abuses of involuntary service, they wrote Article XIII of the U.S. Constitution: "Neither slavery nor involuntary servitude, except as punishment for crime whereof the party shall have been duly convicted, shall exist within the United States...."
History's record of successes and disasters offer a storehouse of wisdom--if only we would remember and take it to heart. But unless we can identify with the event, we quickly forget. Since I was born in Norway during the Nazi occupation, I still remember how fast a nation can shift from freedom to tyranny. I also know that America's two centuries of freedom from persecution is an anomaly in the history of mankind. If that doesn't sober you, read some of the Bible passages showing what happens when God withdraws His hand of protection from nations that reject His truth.  For we too, like ancient Israel, are blindly chasing every false god and seductive piped piper that offer counterfeit morsels of God's eternal promises.
Like Hitler's enticing talks, the writings of contemporary occult leaders are salted with deceptive phases. Positive labels such as World Servers, Goodwill, Points of Light and global oneness flow through the writings of Alice Bailey, the medium for spirit guide Dwhjal Khul. They permeate Robert Muller's books and his World Core Curriculum, who based his philosophy on Khul's occult messages. They enchant the disciples of the Dalai Lama, the world's best-loved ambassador for Buddhism, who exudes the hollow promises of love, unity and compassion. Few in his worshipful global audience realize that the Tibetan leader represents cultures based on karmic passivity that historically have ignored the suffering of its poor and maimed. Rich in noble sentiments, Buddhist communities are poor in the practical demonstrations of self-giving love.
Remember, truth, facts and logic fade in significance as America drifts into the new paradigm. But most old-fashioned Americans still trust that people will speak truth and facts. That makes us more gullible. The noble words that sugarcoat educational philosophy and occult visions have blinded Americans to the transformation.
We need to consider--with caution and prayer--what globalist and occult change agents are really saying. If Germans had read Hitler's Mein Kamf before the holocaust began, perhaps his devilish ambitions and cruelty would have rallied enough opposition.... Remember, the Old and New Testament prophets didn't hesitate to warn God's people about the nature of demonic deception.
The apostle Paul warned us that "in later times some will fall away from the faith, giving heed to deceitful spirits and doctrines of demons." (1 Timothy 4:1) Today's "doctrines of demons" expose some of the world's most seductive schemes. They are spread through high-tech channels unimaginable to former generations. Never has it been more urgent for God's people to be "wise as serpents and innocent as doves." If we don't know truth, we will love deception. Millions do.
Most people have never heard of Alice Bailey. It doesn't really matter. Her message is everywhere--not because people read her books, but because Satan whispers the same message through most of today's self-focused, New Age, Neopagan and mystical literature. You will find his popular deceptions in school libraries and curricula as well as in your major bookstores. In our post-Christian culture, Satan's seductions are everywhere. Alice Bailey summarized one of his most seductive lies in Education in the New Age. Notice again the noble words that hide totalitarian intentions:
"Through education... self-consciousness must be unfolded until man recognizes that his consciousness is a corporate part of a greater whole... Self-interest becomes group interest. Such should be the major objective of all true educational endeavor. Love of self (self-consciousness), love of those around us (group consciousness), become eventually love to the whole (God consciousness). Such are the steps."
That "self-interest" leads to "group interest" and eventually to God is a cunning demonic lie that appeals to today's self-focused masses. That man's consciousness can be part of a greater whole when all members follow the same spiritual source, only applies to the Body of Christ. There is no genuine unity among those who follow demons.
According to God's Word and the historical record, hatred, divisions, segregation and oppression is the norm in cultures that reject God's love and enabling strength.  We are beginning to see it in America. The quest for justice and equality apart from God has brought the opposite: rising violence and division. God's word warned us it would happen.
New Group of World Servers. In spite of their nice-sounding words and promises, today's elite educators seem to be pulling our children toward an end that looks strangely similar to an occult prophecy first published by Lucis Publishing Company started by Alice and Foster Bailey (now posted at http://www.lucistrust.org/goodwill/ngws.shtml#new):
"People in the world at this time can be divided into four groups....."First the uninformed masses.... They are, however, enough developed to respond to the mental suggestions and control of more advanced people.
"Second, the middle classes - both higher and lower... Because they can read and discuss and are beginning to think, they form the most powerful element in any nation.
"Third, the thinkers everywhere... They are steadily influencing world affairs - sometimes for good and sometimes for selfish ends.
"Fourth, the New Group of World Servers. These are the people who are building the new world order... They own to no creed, save the creed of Brotherhood, based on the One Life. They recognize no authority save that of their own souls. 
The last line brings the deception full circle--back to Goals 2000, Bloom's Taxonomy and Outcome Based Education. Dr. Bloom showed educators how to disarm and shape a nation of servers naive and malleable enough to flow with the revolution. Purged of absolutes, children "recognize no authority save that of their own souls." Without solid convictions, they cannot resist the tempting visions of peace and oneness. The most "intuitive" students will be molded into tomorrow's leaders through programs for the gifted. The rest will be programmed to fit their slot in the global economy - just like the mindless masses of human capital in the Brave New World.
In Huxley's nightmarish novel, people were programmed from their test-tube conception until the end when their usefulness ended. Conversations, beliefs and attitudes were tracked, documented and - if they deviated from the plan - corrected, sometimes by the banishment to remote regions.
A far more sophisticated system of controls threaten us. Europeans are already using "smart cards" - little plastic cards that store personal information. "Seeking convenience and security, Americans may soon be persuaded to accept a new ID system," says Roy Hanson, Jr., founder of Family Protection Ministries. "One or more of several brewing crisis could be the final catalyst. This crisis could come in the area of health care, education, banking and finance, gun control, drug traffic or delinquent parents. An implanted microchip with a transponder for tracing any person anywhere at any time would sound wonderful to many parents concerned about baby switching or missing children." 
Since people lose things, and since loss of a "smart card" would cause endless confusion, it may not be long before the bio-medical technology already available and used to track animals would be used to insert a tiny "smart" microchip through the skin of every individual. According to Scriptures, something like this will happen one day. By that time, service will be involuntary - and it will serve an agenda that opposes everything that true Christianity represents.
"And he performed great and miraculous signs... He also forced everyone, small and great, rich and poor, free and slave, to receive a mark on his right hand or on his forehead, so that no one could buy or sell unless he had the mark..." (Rev. 13:13, 16-17)
Keep in mind, service itself is good. God tells us to "serve wholeheartedly." No one demonstrated the role of a servant more perfectly than did Jesus Christ Himself. The real issue is: Whom do we serve? God makes it very clear that we cannot "serve two masters. Either [we] will hate the one and love the other, or [we] will be devoted to one and despise the other." (Matt. 6:24) We see this choice today. Those who serve the mastermind behind the globalist agenda will hate God and His followers. Conversely, when children know and serve God, they will recognize and resist deception.
As Jesus began His three-year ministry, Satan tried to divert His course. He offered Jesus "all the kingdoms of the world and their splendor" - the very riches he eventually would give the antichrist - for a moment. The condition: Jesus had to worship him. Centuries later, the coming antichrist would win that dubious reward by bowing to the global mastermind and serving his purpose. But Jesus refused. His answer ended the temptation: "Away from me, Satan! For it is written: 'Worship the Lord your God and serve Him only." What a perfect response to the seductive voices that beckon American students to serve an illusion of global oneness - but reject God!
[i]Harold G. Shane, "America's Next Twenty-five Years: Some Implications for Education," Phi Delta Kappan, September 1976. Cited by Charlotte Iserbyt, Back to Basic Reform Or... OBE Skinnerian International Curriculum?
[ii]Aldous Huxley, Brave New World (New York: HarperCollins, 1932), xv.
[iii]Oregon, a national model for implementing the Certificate of Initial Mastery (CIM), established the CIM by law in 1991. When fully implemented, the Oregon code will require students to earn their CIM before they can enter college, university, or the workplace. Those who fail to pass the affective qualifications for the CIM, including homeschoolers, will be indoctrinated with global beliefs and attitudes at special learning centers before they can take their place in the new society.
[iv]Finn, We Must Take Charge, 257.
[v]The Tennessee Education Association, "Kill It," TEA News, January 1995.
[vi]Ibid. The first half of this statement was also included in Lamar Alexander's address at the 1989 Governor's Conference on Education.
[viii]J. Noakes and G. Pridham, Editors, Nazism: A History in Documents and Eyewitness Accounts, 1919-1945, Department of History and Archaeology, University of Exeter (New York: Schocken Books Inc., 1983), 420.
[ix]Lori Aratani, "Out of the Classroom, Into the Community," San Jose Mercury News, March 3, 1994.
[xi]The Thirteenth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution states that "Neither slavery nor involuntary servitude, except as punishment for crime, whereof the party shall have been duly convicted, shall exist within the United States...."
[xiii]Lori Aratani, "Service becomes requirement," San Jose Mercury News, September 25, 1995.
[xiv]Glenn F. Bunting, "'Points of Light' Group May have Misspent Millions," San Francisco Chronicle, January 9, 1995.
[xv]Bob Herbert, "A Season of Service," The New York Times, September 31, 1994.
[xvi]William Carlsen, "Gore rallies Idealists at 'Boot Camp,'" San Francisco Chronicle, June 22, 1993.
[xviii]Charlotte Iserbyt, Back to Basics Reform Or... OBE Skinnerian International Curriculum (Bath, ME, 1993), 14.
[xix]Ernest L. Boyer, High School (New York: Harper & Row Publishers, Inc., 1983). Quoted by David Hornbeck in testimony before the Maryland State Board of Education in support of mandated community service, January 25, 1984. Cited by Charlotte Iserbyt, 14.
[xx]According to The Blumenfeld Educational Letter (February 1994);6, "prominent educators were among the earliest trustees of the various foundations. For example, Nicholas Murray Butler, who was president of Columbia University from 1901 to 1945, was an original trustee of the Carnegie Foundation for The Advancement of Teaching, a trustee of the Carnegie Corporation of New York, and president of the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace. He was also president of the National Education Association in 1895."
[xxi]Beverly Eakman, Educating for the 'New World Order' (Portland, OR: Halcyon House, 1991), 218-219.
[xxii]Charlotte T. Iserbyt, "Soviets in the Classroom: America's Latest Educational Fad." (America's Future Inc., 514 Main St., New Rochelle, NY 10801).
[xxiii]Charlotte Iserbyt, "The Soviet-American Exchange," America's Future, Box 1625, Milford PA 18337.
[xxiv]"Transforming the Education of Young Adolescents," reprinted from Turning Points: Preparing American Youth for the 21st Century (Washington, D.C.: Carnegie Council on Adolescent Development, 1989), 51-52.
[xxv]Pierrette Hondagneu-Sotello and Sally Raskoff, "Community Service-Learning: Promises and Problems," Teaching Sociology, (July 1994); 248.
[xxviii]Dinesh D'Souza, Illiberal Education (New York: Vintage Books, 1992), 16.
[xxxiv]Maxine Shideler, "Mandatory National Service is a Tool to Indoctrinate Youth into Socialism," Colorado Christian News, October 1994; 15.
[xxxv]J. Noakes and G. Pridham, Editors, Nazism: A History in Documents and Eyewitness Accounts, 1919-1945, Department of History and Archaeology, University of Exeter (New York: Schocken Books Inc., 1983), 440-441.
[xxxvi]1 Corinthians 10:1-12; Deuteronomy 8:10-20, 28:1-50; Numbers 14:9.
[xxxvii]Alice Bailey, Education in the New Age, (New York: Lucis Publishing Company, 1954), 20.
[xxxviii]2 Thessalonians 2:9-10; 2 Timothy 4:3-4, 12-14.
[xl]See Anita Hoge's report in Part II.
From personal telephone interview with Roy Hanson, Jr..
Home | Armor of God | Persecution | Articles