this class will participate in a set of historical research projects that are
documenting the history of social justice activism in the
The University of Washington History Department is home to a set of online public history projects that examine this history and make it available to the public. Used by more than one million online visitors, these website projects are also taught in high school and college classrooms throughout the region. Students in earlier HIST 498 seminars have been involved in producing these projects. Some have had their research papers published. Here are the principal projects:
General method of instruction
This seminar is a hands-on historical research project. We will not only read about the history of civil rights and labor movements, we will also be producing historical materials and interpretations that will be valuable to others interested in this subject. There i s one major assignment: produce a 15 page research report on an issue, incident, organization, or individual. If the quality of the work warrants it, these interviews and research reports may be published as part of one of the project websites. In addition, students will be expected to complete several short writing assignments and to participate fully in discussions and other class activities. This is very much a group research effort and I expect we will work together closely over the course of the quarter.
Sept 26: introductions; look over the list of Research Topics and Sources
Oct 3: Read: Quintard Taylor, The Forging of a Black Community: Seattle’s Central District from 1870 through the Civil Rights Era (Seattle: University of Washington Press, 1994), pp.49-134
Gigi Peterson, "Recobrando / Recovering The Struggle against Racial Discrimination: The Journey of the Pablo O’Higgins Mural for Seattle Ship Scalers Union," Labor: Studies in Working-Class History of the Americas, Volume 8, Issue 4 (2011) pp.7-40.
Assignment: One page response to each reading. (1)
What does Taylor argue about civil rights activism in the Black Community and the Japanese American community.
Summarize Peterson's argument in one paragraph. Evaluate her sources in a second paragraph
Assignment: One page response to each reading. (1) What does Taylor argue about civil rights activism in the Black Community and the Japanese American community. (2) Summarize Peterson's argument in one paragraph. Evaluate her sources in a second paragraph
Assignment: Examine the Seattle Civil Rights and Labor History Project website “Research Reports” to get a sense of what students in other 498s have done. www.civilrights.washington.edu
Oct 10: Due in class: 1-2 page description of your research topic.
Locate and read two secondary sources and at least one primary source .
.Due in class: 1-2 page report on sources
Oct 24: Turn in research journal pages for week
Oct 31: Turn in research journal pages for week
Nov 7 : Turn in research journal pages for week
Nov 14: TBA
Nov 21: no class but draft of essay due
Nov 28: TBA
Dec 5: TBA
Final paper due Sunday Dec 9