Active Worlds and Education
Since the inception of the Active Worlds technology, it has been a hit with teachers around the world.
From architecture departments to science labs to ThinkQuest projects, Active Worlds has been adding new
dimensions to learning for over four years.
Active Worlds Educational Universe
In response to the growing demand from educators, Activeworlds Inc. launched
The Active Worlds Educational Universe (AWEDU). The AWEDU is a unique
educational community that makes the Active Worlds technology available to educational institutions, teachers,
students, and individual programs in a focused setting. Via this community, educators are able to explore new
concepts, learning theories, creative curriculum design, and discover new paradigms in social learning.
More about the AWEDU...
River City Project
As visitors to River City, students travel back in time, bringing their 21st century skills and technology to address 19th century problems. Based on authentic historical, sociological, and geographical conditions, River City is a town besieged with health problems. Students work together in small research teams to help the town understand why residents are becoming ill. Students use technology to keep track of clues that hint at causes of illnesses, form and test hypotheses, develop controlled experiments to test their hypotheses, and make recommendations based on the data they collect, all in an online environment.
More about the River City Project...
Education in the Active Worlds Universe
University Of Colorado's
University of London's
In addition to the over 80 educational worlds available in the AWEDU, there are a number of educational
worlds in the main Active Worlds Universe where classes are taught, experiments performed and meetings are
held. Activeworlds Inc. offers educational pricing packages for institutions interested in hosting
virtual worlds in the Active Worlds Universe or within their own intranet servers.
More about educational solutions in the Active Worlds Universe...