This archive of companion sites to NOVA broadcasts is no longer being updated. To see new content, go to NOVA's beta site.
The Big Energy Gamble
Can California's ambitious plan to cut greenhouse gases actually succeed?
Darwin's Darkest Hour
A two-hour drama on the crisis that forced Darwin to publish his theory of evolution.
Seven doctors, 21 years... Saving lives is only part of the story.
An acclaimed photographer teams up with scientists to document the runaway melting of arctic glaciers.
Hubble's Amazing Rescue
The unlikely story of how the world's most beloved telescope was saved.
The Incredible Journey of the Butterflies
Follow the 2,000-mile migration of monarchs to a sanctuary in the highlands of Mexico.
Meet the monitors, the largest, fiercest and craftiest lizards on Earth.
Megabeasts' Sudden Death
Scientists propose a radical new idea of what killed off mammoths and other large animals at the end of the Ice Age.
Oliver Sacks explores how the power of music can make the brain come alive.
June 30, 2009 (NOVA scienceNOW)
Visit a factory that grows diamonds, learn how experts identified the source of the 2001 anthrax attacks, hear amazing results from pitch-correction software, and meet a computer scientist who wants to harness the brainpower of 500 million people.
July 7, 2009 (NOVA scienceNOW)
Join astronomers hunting for Earth-like planets, see how computers distinguish authentic art from forgeries, meet a spider biologist who studies sexual cannibalism, and learn about genes that may be involved in causing autism.
July 14, 2009 (NOVA scienceNOW)
Watch how an "exercise pill" turns couch-potato mice into athletes, explore a controversial new theory of what killed the dinosaurs, meet the first Latino-American astronaut, and find out why the beautiful northern lights signal a threat to our electronic society.
July 21, 2009 (NOVA scienceNOW)
Discover why picky eaters may have a genetic excuse, learn about a new strategy for capturing carbon dioxide from the atmosphere, see just how intelligent marine mammals can be, and meet a biomedical engineer who has figured out a way to make tiny livers in her lab.
July 28, 2009 (NOVA scienceNOW)
Follow a NASA satellite looking for water on the moon, see what ancient salt deposits reveal about life 250 million years ago, learn how bird brains are remarkably similar to our own, and meet a climatologist who digs for clues to climate change in the world's highest glaciers
August 18, 2009 (NOVA scienceNOW)
Explore the controversies behind genetic testing and genome sequencing, learn about algae fuel, follow an expedition to the Arctic Ocean seafloor, and meet a woman engineer designing prosthetic limbs controlled by human thought.
August 25, 2009 (NOVA scienceNOW)
Get an astronaut's view of the Hubble repair mission, find out why cowbirds are called "gangster birds," meet a Mexican immigrant farmworker-turned-brain surgeon, and learn how neuroscientists are finding ways to erase memories.
September 1, 2009 (NOVA scienceNOW)
Learn about a massive earthquake potential in the U.S. Midwest, meet a South Korean geophysicist with unique talents, and more.
Why do huge swarms of rats overrun a bamboo forest in India once every half-century?
The Spy Factory
Examine the high-tech eavesdropping carried out by the National Security Agency and the pitfalls of surveillance in an age of terrorism.
What Are Dreams?
Psychologists and brain scientists have new answers to an age-old question.