Depression, depending on how severe it affects a person, can make just about everything tough. Simple or routine activities may seem huge or impossible. That’s one way depression nails a person’s motivation. Fatigue is often at play too.
Depressive symptoms rarely go away quickly; it is almost always gradual. During the low times, it is tough to want to get outside, go for walks, or be active physically. Some obviously still work at their jobs, but I am talking about healthy activities outside of work. Since depression typically involves a gradual recovery, the benefits of being active are delayed. That means if you go for a 20 minute walk every day for a week, you may not feel any increased motivation or benefit to your moods for maybe another week or two.
This delayed benefit is one of the main reasons why it is so important to actively maintain your health when you don’t feel like it. Depressive thoughts will tell you things like, “ Even though I walked yesterday, it didn’t help “, or even “ Nothing is helping, so there’s no use trying “. Try to remember that your thought-patterns themselves are infected by depression as much as the rest of you.
Keep these points in mind:
You will feel tired and unmotivated, and you will think it will continue that way. Remember your brain is affected by depressive symptoms too.
Regular, healthy nutrition is like medicine that can give your body and mind the strength needed to fight the depression directly, and allow you to have enough energy to stay somewhat active.
Drink an appropriate amount of water daily. Dehydration is never good, but during a depressive time it’ll rob you of even more energy.
Avoid alcohol. Alcoholic beverages will probably affect your mood for a short time, maybe even positively. But they will also keep you in a depressive state for days afterward, or make your depression more severe. While you are under the influence of alcohol and other substances your judgment is affected, and if you have had any suicidal thoughts or urges you are risking your life.
Talk to a health provider, whether it’s a doctor, therapist, psychiatrist, nurse, physician’s assistant, chiropractor, school counselor, psychologist, or social worker. These people can remind you that you can get through depressive states, and help you to monitor yourself. They may also prescribe a medication that might help your system fight depression (anti-depressant).
Maintain your hygiene daily; it helps.
Limit your caffeine intake, since caffeine can negatively affect your ability to sleep and your quality of sleep.
Your depression is not you. Depression is a condition that is affecting you on a deep personal level.
Don’t give up hope. Even if you feel unmotivated, do something healthy every day.