| Home Earth
___ BelarusA virtual travel guide to Belarus. This page aims to give you a broad overview of Belarusian art, culture, people, environment, geography, history, economy and government.
Beside a country profile this page contains links to sources that will provide you with in-depth information about this Eastern European nation, e.g.: official web sites of Belarus, addresses of Belarusian and foreign embassies, domestic airlines, city- and country guides with travel and tourism information on accommodation, tourist attractions, events and more like weather information, maps, statistics and local newspapers from Belarus.
Minsk - the Capital City of Belarus
Photo: Sergej Melnik
Republic of Belarus | Respublika Bielarus
Flag of Belarus
After seven decades as a constituent republic of the USSR, Belarus attained its independence in 1991. It has retained closer political and economic ties to Russia than any of the other former Soviet republics. Belarus and Russia signed a treaty on a two-state union on 8 December 1999 envisioning greater political and economic integration. Although Belarus agreed to a framework to carry out the accord, serious implementation has yet to take place. Since his election in July 1995 as the country's first president, Alexander LUKASHENKO has steadily consolidated his power through authoritarian means. The Constitution revision by national referendum of 24 November 1996 gave presidency greatly expanded powers and became effective 27 November 1996, revised again 17 October 2004 removing presidential term limits.
Government restrictions on freedom of speech and the press, peaceful assembly, and religion continue.
border countries: Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Russia, Ukraine
int'l long form: Republic of Belarus
int'l short form: Belarus
formerly: Belorussia, Byelorussia
ISO Country Code: by
Time Zone: Eastern European Time
Local Time = UTC +2h (summer +3)
Actual Time: Thu-June-20 12:09
Country Calling Code: +375
Capital City: Minsk
Other Cities: Baranovichi, Bobruysk, Brest,
Gomel, Grodno, Hrodna, Mogilev, Polotsk, Vitebsk.
Type: Republic (in fact a dictatorship)
Independence: 25 August 1991 (from Soviet Union).
Location: Eastern Europe.
Area: 208,000 km² (80,100 sq. mi.)
Terrain: Landlocked, generally flat with thick forests, much marshland and fields.
Climate: Cold winters, cool and moist summers, transitional between continental and maritime.
Population: 9.5 million (2012)
Ethnic groups: Belarusian (81%), Russian (11%), Polish, Ukrainian, other (8%).
Religions: Eastern Orthodox 80%, other (including Roman Catholic, Greek Catholic, Protestant, Autocephalous Orthodox, Jewish, and Muslim) 20%.
Language: Belarusian, Russian (official).
Natural resources: Forests, peat deposits, small quantities of oil and natural gas, granite, dolomitic limestone, marl, chalk, sand, gravel, clay.
Agriculture products: Grain, potatoes, vegetables, sugar beets, flax; beef, milk.
Industries: Metal-cutting machine tools, tractors, trucks, earthmovers, motorcycles, televisions, chemical fibers, fertilizer, textiles, radios, refrigerators.
Exports partners: Russia 47%, UK 8.3%, Netherlands 6.7%, Poland 5.3% (2004)
Imports partners: Russia 68.2%, Germany 6.6%, Ukraine 3.3% (2004)
Currency: Belarusian ruble (BYB/BYR)
Note: External links will open in a new browser window.
Presidential Administration Belarus
The Presidential Administration of the Republic of Belarus.
National Centre of Legal Information
Belarus legal information exchange.
Ministry of Foreign Affaires
Official website of MOFA Belarus.
Permanent Mission of the Republic of Belarus to the UN
Permanent Mission of Belarus to the United Nations.
Embassy of the Republic of Belarus
Diplomatic Representations of the Republic of Belarus
Address list of Belarusian Diplomatic Missions abroad.
The official Belarusian weather.
Map of Belarus
Political Map of Belarus.
Google Earth Belarus
Searchable map and satellite view of Belarus.
Google Earth Map of Minsk
Searchable map and satellite view of the capital of Belarus, Minsk.
Map of Europe
Political Map of Europe.
Belarus has been heavily criticised by rights bodies for suppressing free speech, muzzling the press and denying the opposition access to state media. (BBC)
Belarusian Telegraph Agency (BelTA)
Official Belarusian news agency.
Sovetskaya Belorussiya (Советская Белоруссия)
Soviet Belarus - main government daily.
Public affair - Council of Ministers daily.
Narodnaya Gazeta (Народная газета)
The People's newspaper - National Assembly daily.
Star - Belarussian daily, sponsored by National Assembly and Council of Ministers.
BDG Delovaya Gazeta (БДГ Деловая газета)
The business newspaper - private, business daily.
Narodnaya Volya (Народная воля)
"The People’s Will" - independent newspaper founded by Iosif Seredich, a opposition daily; banned from government-run distribution network, printed in Russia.
Bel is an analytical weekly. Published since September 1995 in Minsk.
Belarus news partly also in English.
Monthly business magazine. (in Russian)
Free Belarus Now
Global campaign for the human rights of the Belarusian people, with news from Belarus, related to political prisoners in the country.
Belteleradiocompany, government run network.
Nationwide TV (ONT)
Joint venture with Russia's Channel One.
The government-run Belarussian Radio operates three national networks.
Bella Belarus is an online art gallery of Belarusian contemporary art.
Belarus community partly in German.
The National Academic Theatre of Republic of Belarus
The National Academic Bolshoi Opera and Ballet Theatre of Belarus.
NAVINKI International Performance Art Festival
The Performance Festival includes artists from Belarus, Poland, Iceland, Japan, and Switzerland.
National Art Museum
National Art Museum of the Republic of Belarus.
National Library of Belarus
The Library houses the largest collection of Belarusian printed materials.
Palace of the Republic
Venue of the Department of the state, special and cultural-entertainment actions, located in Minsk.
National Bank of the Republic of Belarus
The Central Bank of Belarus.
Belarusian Chamber of Commerce and Industry
Official pages of the Belarusian CCI. (in English and Russian)
Belarusian National Airlines, the flag carrier of Belarus.
Minsk-2 National Airport
Minsk National Airport is the main air gateway to the Republic of Belarus.
The Belarusian Railway is one of the leaders of the national economy. 75% of all cargo and 45% of all passengers of the country are transported by the Belarusian Railway.
The National Tour Operator of the Republic of Belarus.
The Virtual Guide to Belarus, an extensive compilation of information about Belarus.
A Guide to Belarus.
General Information about Belarus.
Official website of the capital city.
Minsk In The Fifties
It's like a slow timemachine.
Gomel Then and Now.
Grodno Online (in Russian).
Information on the City of Hrodna.
Hotels in Belarus
Find a Hotel in Belarus.
Travel and Tour Consumer Information
Belarusian State University
Minsk, founded in 1921.
Brest State University
Brest State University named after A.S.Pushkin (BrSU) was founded in 1945 as Brest State Teachers' Training Institute. It is located in the center of Brest.
Gomel State University
University Homepage (in Russian)
The National Academy of Sciences
Scientific research, founded in 1929.
Belarus: Science and Education
Comprehensive list of links to Belarus science and education.
BelAL - Belarus Agricultural
BelAL is the national information centre for agriculture, food and forestry in Belarus.
Site with information about Belarusian Nature.
Priroda.Org - The Nature
Belarus ecology informational portal. (in Russian)
About Belarus' history by the National Tourism Agency.
Ancient Cities of Belarus
The Ancient Cities of Grodno, Minsk, Mogilev and Polotsk.
History of Belarus (Great Litva)
Comprehensive information about the History of Belarus.
History and Famous Personalities
Linklist of history recources.
History of Belarus
Wikipedia article describes the history of Belarus.
Belarus Online presents Belarusian Internet Resources.
Interesting WWW Sites In & About Belarus
Index of Belarus related websites.
Open Directory Project: Belarus
Russian and East European Network Information Center about Belarus.
Amnesty International: Belarus
BBC News Country Profile: Belarus
HDR - Human development index Belarus
UN Food and Agriculture Organization.
A UK Foreign Office country profile.
Human Rights Watch: Belarus
UNDP - Human Development Indicators: Belarus
Worldbank Data: Belarus
The World Factbook -- Belarus
Search Nations Online
|Bookmark/share this page:
One World - Nations Online .:. let's care for this planet
Actually, freedom can not be simulated... or?
Nations Online Project is made to improve cross-cultural understanding and global awareness.
Stop attempts to suppress freedom of expression.
Don't let the U.S. or anyone else regulate the internet of the World. The net is ours because we've created it!