Answers to science's most enduring questions from "Can I break the light-speed barrier like on Star Trek?" and "Is there life on other planets?" to "What is empty space made of?"
This is an indispensable guide to physics that offers readers an overview of the most popular physics topics written in an accessible, irreverent, and engaging manner while still maintaining a tone of wry skepticism. Even the novice will be able to follow along, as the topics are addressed using plain English and (almost) no equations. Veterans of popular physics will also find their nagging questions addressed, like whether the universe can expand faster than light, and for that matter, what the universe is expanding into anyway.
Gives a one-stop tour of all the big questions that capture the public imagination including string theory, quantum mechanics, parallel universes, and the beginning of time.
Explains serious science in an entertaining, conversational, and easy-to-understand way.
Includes dozens of delightfully groan-worthy cartoons that explain everything from special relativity to Dark Matter.
Filled with fascinating information and insights, this book will both deepen and transform your understanding of the universe.
©2010 Dave Goldberg and Jeff Blomquist (P)2012 Audible, Inc.
I skipped physics in senior high school, doing biology instead. And I managed to fail that in Year 12. But I love reading about cosmology and the universe, and this book has been a great help. It deals with the big questions like whether we'll ever be able to travel through time, whether there's life out there and where we all came from, but, it's written in a way even I could understand. And yet they did it without dumbing things down. There's a lot of meat to chew on, but they made it easily digestible. I hope this gastronomic analogy doesn't put you off, because it's really a great read. The authors explain how atoms work and what the universe looks like, yet they manage this without breaking their promise to use only one equasion. If you're interested in the big questions, don't shy away from this entertaining and informative book.
Mother and catlover
I only made it half-way through! Between the form of the book and the narrator, it was a TERRIBLY yedious and BORING listen! Reading through charts and tables is NOT good entertainment or even education!
Boring and colorless! I would like to hear him with a different work; I'd like to ne able to say that it was primarily the subject.
None. Boredom. Not even curiosity...
Report Inappropriate Content