Overview : Navigation on Window Phone
uses the same navigations techniques which are used in Silverlight. There are
two important elements in the application level which are frames and pages and one
important element in the device level.
Use of frame : Frames are integrated within the whole layout of a Window Phone
application, and only one frame can be used throughout the application. Several
characteristic related to frame are properties that can be used like full screen, orientation, the ability to expose page areas in it and provide a location
for the system tray and application bar.
The system tray is an area in which system status such as battery, signal etc are
displayed. Application bar on the other hand provides space for frequently used
Use of Page: A page fills up the whole content of the frame. Main
characteristics of a page are title and the ability to show an application bar
specifically on certain pages.
Back Button: One important element which has become standard in every
window phone device is a Back button. This button is used to move one page
backward. with this button present , we are advised not to add any back button
in the application, unless absolutely necessary, By default the back button will
also close any pop -up menu displayed and bring users back to the previous
How to navigate between pages in a window phone application; let us try out in
few east steps:
Step 1 : Create a new project, Window Phone Application with name
Step 2 : Rename MainPage.xaml to Page1.xaml. Also change the text of page
to My Page 1.
Step 3 : Add a page and similarly rename it to Page2.xaml and change the
text to My Page 2.
Step 4 : Open Page1.xaml and drag a button and a textbox like below;
rename as in image below;
Step 5 : Change the codes in the Button's click event handler into the
Navigate is a static function from NavigationService which is used to navigate
to desired pages using target URI as the parameter
Step 6 : Press F5 and see the result. Click on the Button to go forward
to the next page.
We can use the Back button to return to the previous page. Additionally, if we
want to go one page backwards using custom button, we can do so by typing the
following code into an event handler.
Step 7 : If we do not want to use Phone back button, then we can create a
custom back button on page two to navigate back.
Open page2.xaml and insert a button and on click write below code;
private void button1_Click(object
Build and this time do not use phone back button rather our custom button it
will work in same way as expected.
Step 8 : Here we will see how to pass value in navigation. Now we will
pass textbox value from page1 to page2 and display there in a textblock.
Open page1.xaml and write below code for button click handler.
//NavigationService.Navigate(new Uri("/Page2.xaml", UriKind.Relative));
+ txtSearch.Text, UriKind.Relative));
Step 9 : On the second
page, we will try to retrieve the sent string and show it on the page title.
Type the following code to do so:
Open Page2.xaml and write below code;
protected override void
msg = "";
Step 10 : Rebuild the application and run it. Press F5 and see the
result. Type any string into TextBox then press Button. The title on the second
page will change according to the input text.
Tune for next hour tutorial