The New Heroes: What Is Social Entrepreneurship? From PBS. “A social entrepreneur identifies and solves social problems on a large scale. Just as business entrepreneurs create and transform whole industries, social entrepreneurs act as the change agents for society, seizing opportunities others miss in order to improve systems, invent and disseminate new approaches and advance sustainable solutions that create social value.”
Social Entrepreneurship from Change.org Change.org is an online hub for social change. It operates leading online communities for 20 major causes ranging from homelessness to women’s rights to poverty, and through a team of 100 expert writers and 3,000 nonprofit partners, serves as a central platform for launching and promoting movements for social change on the web.
Social Entrepreneurship – World Economic Forum “Social entrepreneurs drive social innovation and transformation in various fields including education, health, environment and enterprise development. They pursue poverty alleviation goals with entrepreneurial zeal, business methods and the courage to innovate and overcome traditional practices.”
RISE: Research Initiative on Social Entrepreneurship “The Research Initiative on Social Entrepreneurship (RISE) is a research project atColumbiaBusinessSchoolwhose mission is to study and disseminate knowledge about the markets, metrics and management of for-profit and nonprofit social enterprise and social venturing.”
Office of Women’s Business Ownership Entrepreneurial Development
“The Office of Women’s Business Ownership (OWBO) exists to establish and oversee a network of Women’s Business Centers (WBCs) throughout the United States and its territories. Through the management and technical assistance provided by the WBCs, entrepreneurs, especially women who are economically or socially disadvantaged, are offered comprehensive training and counseling on a vast array of topics in many languages to help them start and grow their own businesses.”
“Ashoka Fellows are leading social entrepreneurs who are recognized to have innovative solutions to social problems and the potential to change patterns across society. Rather than leaving societal needs for the government or business sectors to address, social entrepreneurs are creating innovative solutions, delivering extraordinary results, and improving the lives of millions of people.”