SEEING far using devices less cumbersome than a pair of binoculars is an enduring part of science-fiction lore. But while military top brass would no doubt love to command legions of eagle-eyed bionic fighters, in real life it may be more immediately useful to enable soldiers to see near. Strictly speaking, nearer than the 10cm or so a human eye needs properly to focus on something in front of it.
This ocular limit has meant that existing head-up displays use helmet-mounted optics to make a screen appear to farther away than it actually is. As a result, they have remained restricted to cockpit-bound pilots and others for whom mobility is not paramount. Innovega, a start-up based in Seattle, hopes to change that. It is developing a technology that shrinks the optical gubbins to fit on a contact lens, so as to provide less sedentary soldiers with real-time information about the battlefield.
Innovega's system comprises two parts. First is a tiny lenslet located at the centre of the lens which can focus as close as 1cm to the eye, close enough for the display to be installed on ordinary spectacles. To ensure that light from the display does not create a distracting, blurry image outside the lenslet, Innovega’s second trick is to cover the remainder of the lens with a filter that blocks out all light polarised in a particular way. A second filter behind the lenslet has the opposite effect: it permits only those same polarised rays through.
Adjust the display to emit the right kind of light, then, and the wearer sees a crisp image that does not interfere with normal vision—at least during the day. Because the polarising filter blocks half of all incoming light, wearing the lens would be equivalent to seeing the world through light-tinted sunglasses.
With financial support from DARPA, the Pentagon’s research-and-development arm, Innovega has manufactured several batches of such lenses and two types of polarised displays to go with them (a small LCD screen and a low-power laser that projects images on to the inside of a pair of sunglasses). Having completed more than 100 hours of tests on human eyeballs, Innovega is planning a larger trial with military personnel later this year.
The company is also eyeing the civilian market. The lens, with or without vision correction, could potentially work in tandem with augmented-reality devices like Google Glass, an eagerly-awaited wearable smartphone that boasts (in its current prototype form) a small 1.3cm display tucked away in the corner of a pair of special specs. Google and others are experimenting with different ways to reduce the bulk of the optics. To work with Innovega's lenses, any such gadget would have to be designed with polarisation in mind. This is unlikely to happen before the Food and Drug Administration gives its blessing to start testing a consumer version of the technology in America, which could happen as early as 2014.
Approval, if it comes, will probably carry caveats. Since the lenses amount to sunglasses, driving in them at night is probably out of the question. And by depriving wearers of half of their usual dose of sunlight, they might tip some susceptible souls into the winter blues. (Though a mooted second-generation filter that would block only a fifth of incident light could help here.) Some tweaks to contact-lens manufacturing would also be needed if the technology is to be scaled up. Still, Innovega expects to compete on price with existing corrective contact lenses, even disposable ones. The "Six-Million-Dollar Man" this isn't, at least not yet. But watch this space.