Welcome to the Veterans Oasis Park and the Environmental Education Center (EEC)
Veterans Oasis Park covers 113 acres and feature both lush wetland and arid habitat suitable for the diverse plants and wildlife of the Sonoran Desert. This "non-traditional" facility capitalizes on the divergent and plentiful outdoor recreation opportunities at the site created by the park land, lake, and wetlands/groundwater recharge basins. The shallow basins infiltrate high quality reclaimed water to the subsurface aquifer for storage and recovery as part of the City's comprehensive reclaimed water management plan. The park also includes 4½ miles of trails, wildlife viewing areas; ramadas and picnic areas; a butterfly and hummingbird habitat; an outdoor amphitheatre; a unique, learning-oriented playground; a 5-acre “urban fishing” lake; a Solar System Walk; and interpretive signs and exhibits.
The Environmental Education Center serves as a gateway to the site, offering a diverse roster of programming related to the environment.
Youth Summer 2013 Nature Camp- Parent Packet
Parents: Please download this packet, read, and fill out the required forms
and return to Michael Ballard on the first day of your child's summer camp.
Please Don't Feed The Wildlife - excerpts from the National Park Service
Most people know that hunting and trapping are not allowed in city parks, yet many people may not realize that approaching or feeding animals is also prohibited. These actions are against park regulations because they are harmful to animals. When you approach wildlife too closely, you may cause them stress and interfere with behaviors necessary for their survival. Animals that are fed by people become dependent on human food, and may lose their natural fear of humans and their ability to forage for natural foods. There is a lot of truth to the saying, “a fed animal is a dead animal.” In addition to losing their foraging ability, feeding animals puts everyone in potentially hazardous situations. People who feed animals may be bitten or otherwise injured by the animal they are feeding. Other visitors are at risk as they may be harmed by aggressive animals that have previously been fed.
Seemingly tame animals are still wild, and may behave unpredictably. Animals may use their teeth, claws, hooves, antlers, or horns to defend themselves. View wildlife from a safe distance. Leave animals enough room to make an escape if they feel threatened. You are too close to an animal if your presence causes them to move.
There are other serious hazards associated with wildlife. Numerous species, including rodents, squirrels, coyotes, fox and bats may carry infectious diseases such as Hantavirus, rabies, or plague. In some situations, these diseases may be transmitted through simple contact, such as touching or feeding wildlife.
By treating wildlife with respect and not approaching or feeding them, you are aiding their chance for survival. By keeping wildlife wild, you are protecting their safety—and yours.
Equestrian Trail Map
Map of Equestrian Trails at Veterans Oasis Park (PDF)
Phone & Fax
Hours of Operation
4050 E. Chandler Heights Rd.
Chandler, AZ 85249
Map & Directions
Mail Stop 420
P.O. Box 4008
Chandler, AZ 85244-4008
Monday - Thursday: 8 a.m.- 8 p.m.
Friday: 8 a.m.- 5 p.m.
Saturday: 8 a.m.- 3 p.m.