See all CounterThink cartoons...
Comments by Mike Adams, the Health Ranger
(NaturalNews) A new report released by the National Council on Radiation Protection and Measurement
reveals that Americans' exposure to radiation has increased more than 600 percent over the last three decades. Most of that increase has come from patients' exposure to radiation through medical imaging scans
such as CT scans and mammograms.
Most patients have no awareness of the dangers of ionizing radiation due to medical imaging scans. Virtually no patients -- and few doctors -- realize that one CT scan exposes the body to the equivalent of several hundred X-rays
), for example. Most women undergoing mammograms have no idea that the radiation emitted by mammography machines actually causes cancer
by exposing heart and breast tissue to dangerous ionizing radiation that directly causes DNA damage.
Even low doses of radiation can add up to significant increases in lifelong cancer risk. A study published in the New England Journal of Medicine
(2007) found that survivors of the 1945 atomic bombs unleashed on Japan during World War II still faced significant increases in lifetime cancer risk. And the levels of radiation to which these particular study subjects were exposed is equivalent to receiving only two or three CT scans, explains an ABC News story (http://abcnews.go.com/Health/CancerPreventionAndTreatment/story?id=69...
Yes, it's true: A couple of CT scans can expose your body to as much radiation
as standing a few miles from an atomic bomb explosion. This is a simple scientific fact.
Is modern medicine priming the population for a wave of future cancers?
Exposure to CT scans and mammograms today can lead to cancer much later in life. As ABC News reports, Dr. Len Lichtenfeld, the deputy chief medical officer of the American Cancer Society, says, "Radiation exposure from these scans is not inconsequential and can lead to later cancers."
Thanks to the widespread use of medical imaging scans, hospitals are also becoming a major source of nuclear waste material
. See the NaturalNews report on that topic here: http://www.naturalnews.com/025711.html
This material can be seized by terrorists and used to make dirty bombs. Thus, hospitals are now a major source for potential tools for terrorists
The bottom-line question in all this is simple: Are medical imaging devices causing more harm than good? And do mammograms
actually create future cancer patients
by causing cancer in the breast? In my view, the answers to both these questions are a resounding YES. Medical imaging does more than just detect cancer, it also causes cancer
! And that's in the financial interests of the drug companies and cancer clinics that profit from treating cancer.
To see an amazing collection of quotes about mammography and radiation, read the rest of this story on NaturalNews: http://www.naturalnews.com/025767.html
Permissions to use:
Want to use this cartoon? Specific, limited permission is granted to reprint in any book, movie, website, magazine, newspaper, animation or other media under the following 'professional courtesy' conditions:
- Cartoon creator Mike Adams must be conspicuously credited.
- Web address www.NaturalNews.com must be posted below or adjacent to the cartoon in a conspicuous manner. If on the web, the link must be clickable.
- You may not use this cartoon in a disparaging context or manner.
- You may not charge for this cartoon.
- Truth Publishing retains all ownership, rights and copyrights.
- Reprint rights may be revoked, without notice, on a case by case basis, if reprint courtesy is, in our opinion, abused.
High-resolutions files are available for film and print.