The space shuttle Atlantis landed Friday at Edwards Air Force Base in the Mojave Desert, concluding a 13-day mission to install new solar power panels on the international space station.
Rain and thunderstorms over central Florida caused NASA ground controllers in Houston to bypass a landing attempt at Cape Canaveral's Kennedy Space Center for a second day and instead choose the backup site in California.
It was the 51st time out of 118 missions since the shuttle began flying in 1981 that Edwards has hosted a shuttle landing. The massive, white-bodied space-plane, carrying a seven-person crew, rolled to a stop on the desert runway at 12:51 p.m. Pacific time.
Atlantis will be flown back to its home at Kennedy next weekend atop a specially outfitted Boeing 747 jetliner.
"I'll remember all the things that went right on this challenging mission," Bill Gerstenmaier, associate administrator for space operations, said at a press conference following the landing.
Atlantis did succeed in completing all its tasks, which in addition to connecting the starboard solar array included attaching a new section of the station's truss, which serves as the spine of the station, and retracting a second set of solar panels that will be moved to a new position on another shuttle mission.
But the mission was hardly trouble-free. A thermal blanket protecting one of the orbital maneuvering engines at the rear of the shuttle frayed and came loose during the launch, exposing a portion of the underbody.
Astronaut Danny Olivas performed a spacewalk to repair the blanket by stapling it back down. The aerodynamic forces of the landing caused the repaired blanket to peel back slightly but not dangerously, officials said.
More troubling was the shutdown of two Russian computers at the space station that occurred when two Atlantis spacewalkers attached the new power system.
Engineers in both countries, as well as the German manufacturer of the computers, spent days troubleshooting the system, which controls navigation and oxygen generation. In the meantime, Atlantis used its engines to keep the station properly oriented in space.
Atlantis was allowed to undock Tuesday, after the Russians managed to bring the computers back online using jumper cables to bypass a power switch that protected against power surges.
The problem is still not solved, however.
On Thursday, the Russians tried to disconnect the jumper cables but were forced to reattach them when the computers refused to start in their normal configuration.
The Los Angeles Times is a Tribune Co. newspaper.