Where Are the MDGs?
By investigating the coverage of the Millennium Development Goals in the media, students learn about both the local and global presence of development issues, as well as gain an introduction to the way the media represents these issues in different parts of the world.
Discovering Important Statistical Concepts Using Spreadsheets (DISCUS)
DISCUS is a set of Microsoft Excel spreadsheets designed for teaching first year undergraduate level statistics. Students can use them on their own and do not need prior knowledge of Excel. Topics include descriptive statistics, probability, binomial distributions, and regression etc. This page has links to more info about each topic, an independent review of DISCUS, and a DISCUS download. It also links to information on the creation of a Spanish version of DISCUS called Tutorial para el Aprendi
Water Quality - Total Dissolved Solids
In this activity, students use a microcomputer connected to a conductivity probe to measure the total dissolved solids in local area water samples. Students then compare their measurements with those of others in their class as well as other standard measurements. On this Starting Point page, users ...
Math Test II for Grade 10
A set of 31 multiple choice questions from Xth Standard Math syllabus (of India), intended for use as The Spark Group's the teacher recruitment test.
Physics Test I for Grade 10
A set of 30 multiple choice questions is Physics from 10th standard syllabus (India). The quiz covers a wide range of topics, such as force, pressure, gravity and heat.
Pathophysiology and Pharmacotherapy of Acute Decompensated Heart Failure
The module contains the following levels: Defining Acute Decompensated Heart Failure Precipitating Factors of Acute Decompensated Heart Failure ADHF Pathophysiology Evaluating ADHF via the Forrester Classification System Evaluating ADHF via the Clinical Severity Classification System Lab Parameters and Other Diagnostic Tests Goals of ADHF Therapy Introduction to ADHF Treatment Class Effects Catecholamine-like Agents in ADHF Dosing Dopamine for ADHF Dosing Effects Drug Properties Treatment Consid
The Drug Information Consult
A short introduction on how to write a drug information consult. The module contains the following levels: Introduction to the DI Consult Steps to Writing a DI Consult Sections of the DI Consult Choosing Primary Literature Other Writing Tips Complete Assessment of the Drug Information Consult
Play Plinko and develop your knowledge of statistics. Drops balls through a triangular grid of pegs and see the balls random walk through the lattice. Watch the histogram of final positions build up and approach the binomial distribution.
Geospatial System Analysis and Design
The course provides the geospatial information system professional an overview of systems analysis and design with emphasis the concepts behind the design process including: business use case modeling, business object modeling, requirements definition, analysis and preliminary design, and, finally, detailed design and deployment. The concepts of the geospatial software and database development process are introduced and the limitations of current modeling techniques are addressed within the spat
Open Web Mapping
This course involves the design, development, and deployment of interactive mapping tools distributed via the World Wide Web and using “open” (non-proprietary, community-developed) standards and software code. It will also prepare students to design, develop, and implement custom web mapping applications using open standards and open source software. On completion of the course, students will be able to build and deploy a complete web mapping solution including selecting the spatial data, th
Water: From Neglect to Respect
helps students use graphing, estimating, and writing skills to discover the ways they are dependent upon water to maintain their standard of living.
Hey, Mr. Producer!
It's not that uncommon for secondary school students to study the ups and downs of the stock market, but in this lesson, students will examine the economic roller coaster involved in the production of a Broadway musical. As an introduction to the lesson, students will read a series of online articles to investigate the similarities and differences between nonprofit theater production and Broadway, or commercial, theater production. They will view excerpts from the PBS series BROADWAY: THE AMERIC
Measuring Health Disparities
Measuring Health Disparities is designed to be accessible to a broad audience of practitioners across all sectors of the public health workforce. In contains audio and interactive elements and focuses on some basic issues for public health practice - how to understand, define, and measure health disparity. The material is divided into four parts. Parts One and Two review what health disparities are, how they are defined, and provide and overview of common issues faced in measuring health dispar
adler013 b re-uploaded
Description not set
Nanotechnology 501 Lecture Series
Welcome to the Nanotechnology 501, a series of lectures designed to provide an introduction to nanotechnology.
"Communication System Design, Spring 2006"
" This course presents a top-down approach to communications system design. The course will cover communication theory, algorithms and implementation architectures for essential blocks in modern physical-layer communication systems (coders and decoders, filters, multi-tone modulation, synchronization sub-systems). The course is hands-on, with a project component serving as a vehicle for study of different communication techniques, architectures and implementations. This year, the project is focu
Basic radio physics
A general introduction to basic physics relevant for wireless networking.
These materials were developed as part of the Capacity building for community wireless connectivity in Africa initiative which was funded by IDRC and coordinated by APC.Training units Network planning, WiMax and non standard solutions, Energy for telecommunications systems, VoIP, Long distance wireless link, Community, gender and technology and Sustainability strategies were developed between 2007 and 2008 as part of the project TRICALCAR which was funded by ICA and coordinated by Wilac.net. Thi
Introduction to mailing lists
Introduction to basic mailing list concepts, finding and using mailing lists.
Introduction to OpenOffice.org Impress
An introduction to using OpenOffice.org Impress for presentations - aimed at getting learners comfortable with OOo Impress basics and giving them the confidence to go further on their own.