A to Z Index
Print This Page
Data & Statistics
Safety and Health Program Assessment Worksheet
II. WORKSITE ANALYSIS
A-1. Hazard identification (Expert survey)
Comprehensive expert surveys are conducted regularly and result in corrective action and updated hazard inventories.
Comprehensive expert surveys are conducted periodically and drive appropriate corrective action.
Comprehensive expert surveys are conducted, but corrective actions sometimes lag.
Expert surveys in response to accidents, complaints, or compliance activity only.
No comprehensive surveys have been conducted.
A-2. Hazard identification (Change analysis)
Every planned or new facility, process, material, or equipment is fully reviewed by a competent team, along with affected workers.
Every planned or new facility, process, material, or equipment is fully reviewed by a competent team.
High hazard planned or new facility, process, material or equipment are reviewed.
Hazard reviews of planned or new facilities, processes, materials, or equipment are problem driven.
No system for hazard review of planned or new facilities exists.
A-3. Hazard identification (Job and process analysis)
A current hazard analysis exists for all jobs, processes, and material; it is understood by all employees; and employees have had input into the analysis for their jobs.
A current hazard analysis exists for all jobs, processes, and material and it is understood by all employees.
A current hazard analysis exists for all jobs, processes, or phases and is understood by many employees.
A hazard analysis program exists, but few are aware of it.
There is no routine hazard analysis system in place.
A-4. Hazard identification (Inspection)
Employees and supervisors are trained, conduct routine joint inspections, and all items are corrected.
Inspections are conducted and all items are corrected; repeat hazards are seldom found.
Inspections are conducted and most items are corrected, but some hazards are still uncorrected.
An inspection program exists, but corrective action is not complete; hazards remain uncorrected.
There is no routine inspection program in place and many hazards can be found.
B. Hazard Reporting System
A system exists for hazard reporting, employees feel comfortable using it, and employees feel comfortable correcting hazards on their own initiative.
A system exists for hazard reporting and employees feel comfortable using it.
A system exists for hazard reporting and employees feel they can use it, but the system is slow to respond.
A system exists for hazard reporting but employees find it unresponsive or are unclear how to use it.
There is no hazard reporting system and/or employees are not comfortable reporting hazards.
C. Accident/Incident Investigation
All loss-producing incidents and near-misses are investigated for root cause with effective prevention.
All OSHA-reportable incidents are investigated and effective prevention is implemented.
OSHA-reportable incidents are generally investigated; accident cause and/correction may be inadequate.
Some investigation of incidents takes place, but root cause is seldom identified and correction is spotty.
Injuries are either not investigated or investigation is limited to report writing required for compliance.
D. Injury/illnesses analysis
Data trends are fully analyzed and displayed, common causes are communicated, management ensures prevention; and employees are fully aware of trends, causes, and means of prevention.
Data trends are fully analyzed and displayed, common causes are communicated, and management ensures prevention.
Data is centrally collected and analyzed and common causes are communicated to supervisors.
Data is centrally collected and analyzed but not widely communicated for prevention.
Little or no effort is made to analyze data for trends, causes, and prevention.
Save values and return to the main worksheet page.
Return to the main worksheet page without saving these values.
Clear all form values on this page.
Freedom of Information Act
Privacy & Security Statement
Important Web Site Notices
U.S. Department of Labor | Occupational Safety & Health Administration | 200 Constitution Ave., NW, Washington, DC 20210
Telephone: 800-321-OSHA (6742) | TTY: 877-889-5627