11th Vaccination Week in the Americas - Brazil
The 11th Vaccination Week in the Americas seeks to protect 44 million people in 44 countries and territories against dangerous diseases. The year's slogan, "Vaccination: a shared responsibility", highlights the importance of goverments, health workers, communities and families doing their part to suport immunization. Photographs taken on April 20, 2013 in the UBSF São Deocleciano (Unidade Básica de Saúde da Família São Deocleciano "Lindomar Luis Longo"), located at Avenida João José Lucânia Fernandes, in São José do Rio Preto/São Paulo, Brazil. Photo: ©PAHO/WHO
Brazil, walk for health 2013
Ventana de los mil días
World TB Day 2013
TAG Gender and Equality - March 18-19 2013
1a. Visita oficial a Colombia de la nueva Directora de la OPS Dra. Carissa Etienne
1a. Visita oficial a Colombia de la nueva Directora de la OPS/OMS, Dra. Carissa Etienne
National Plan for Eliminating the transmission of cholera in Haiti
The Pan American Health Organization/World Health Organization (PAHO/WHO) today called on the international community to provide financing for a new $2.2 billion plan from the Haitian government to eliminate cholera transmission over the next 10 years through major investments in water and sanitation. The new National Plan for the Elimination of Cholera in Haiti provides a blueprint for increased investments in water and sanitation infrastructure, water-quality monitoring systems and water and sanitation management. It also includes health measures for prevention, surveillance, and case management; interventions for community-based behavior change; and vaccination for targeted groups against cholera. The plan calls for US$485.9 million in investments during the next two years. Read more at: http://preview.tinyurl.com/bm8vorx
Visita de la Directora de la OPS a PANAFTOSA
La Directora de la OPS, Carissa Etienne, en su primera visita oficial como directora al Centro Panamericano de Fiebre Aftosa (PANAFTOSA). Leer más en : http://new.paho.org/panaftosa/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=772&Itemid=1926
Dr. Carissa F Etienne’s first official visit to Brazil
In her first official visit as director of the Pan American Health Organization (PAHO) to the Oswaldo Cruz Foundation (Fiocruz) in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, Dr. Carissa F. Etienne met with the foundation’s president, Dr. Paulo Gadelha;
Accompanied by PAHO/WHO’s representative in Brazil, Dr. Joaquin Molina, and the director of the Latin American and Caribbean Center for Health Sciences Information (BIREME), Alalberto Tardelli, Dr. Etienne visited the BioManguinhos scientific-technical center, Fiocruz’s Final Processing Center, and the future site of the Integrated Center for Biopharmaceutical Prototypes for Diagnostic Reagents (CIPBR).
At BioManguinhos, Dr. Etienne attended a briefing on the Fiocruz Foundation along with members of its Board of Directors. She also met with Dr. José Temporao, director of the South American Institute of Government in Health (ISAGS) and former minister of health of Brazil.