No One Should Make You Vote | Community Spirit
Through the course of history Black people have fought for the right to be treated and respected as citizens of a country they were forced to travel to on slave ships that crossed the Atlantic Ocean.
The numbers of Blacks that did not survive have been
long forgotten and dismissed by generations of
Blacks that think just because they make a little money,
drive some kind of car, work on a job, but still are
Just Over Broke can take voting as a event that can be
discounted, overlooked or even forgotten. The evidence
of non-participants in voting can be seen in data that
shows the numbers of non-voters. A record that shows
there are still Blacks that either do not care for the sacrifices
of others to allow them to be seen as a resemblance to
equality or they are just ignorant and still lost on mental
slave ships waiting to be mercifully sunken to save their lives.
Yes, the last election brought about a reality in the power
of voting, but statistically Blacks still need to grow in their
political awareness and participation. Too many Blacks
have forgotten the struggles, sacrifices and deaths to be
granted the opportunity to vote.
In the early 1950’s a Civil Rights struggle started; The right
to vote. This was not easily earned, Blacks were not respected
enough to be freely given this right. Blacks had to protest,
fight (legally), seek legal means, demonstrate, were jailed
willingly and unwillingly, some gave the ultimate sacrifice
of their lives, women, children and men died for the right
The murder of voting-rights activists in Philadelphia,
Mississippi, gained national attention along with other murders,
lynching’s and brutal violence that made the United States
Government take action. President Johnson, at that time,
signed the resulting legislation into law on August 6, 1965
The Voting Rights Act of 1965.
Section 2 of the Act, which followed the language of the
15th amendment, applied a nationwide prohibition against the
denial or abridgment of the right to vote the literacy tests on
a nationwide basis.
Blacks at that time were given an unfair test to see their
“worthiness” even to vote. Even if they did pass the test many
were still denied the right to vote in many cases. Does this
sound familiar even in the 21st century?? In the 21st century if
there was a nationwide literacy test in order to vote, graduate
from high school, be employed or even have children, if this
were the law how many Blacks, minorities and women would fail??
The reality is there are tests, but based on other criteria that seem
to grow each year. Blacks still fail to see the writing on the wall
hidden under governmental programs, incentives, and special
This proves several important things,
1. Education and the ability to read will always be important.
2. It is a tragedy that in the 21st century still too many Blacks are
not literate enough to read a voting ballot.
3. Some Blacks still don’t get it, the right to vote can be slowly and
systematically taken away or denied.
4. If incarcerated in any way this can keep Blacks and minorities
5. Voting rights can be re-established even after a felony conviction,
but they must be demanded and not allow threats to work.
The seriousness can still be seen across the nation, legal battles are
building over state laws passed in the past two years that impose
photo ID requirements, scale back early voting periods and restrict
voter-registration efforts. There are other efforts being planned and
will be implemented t he closer election day arrives. This is a warning
of alarm for minorities and women, that the denial to vote is still an
attempt to deny political power for minorities and women through
These are changes that threaten the ability of many to vote even legally.
What more needs to be said to Blacks and other minorities about their
right to vote?
Black voting turnout reached a record 65 percent in 2008, compared
with 55 percent in 1988, according to Pew Research study. Driven by
Barack Obama's Presidential campaign, blacks voted at the same rate
as whites for the first time. This has created both a positive image to
the power of voting and a threat to those in political power that desire
to keep minorities from political and socioeconomic power or even equality.
Denying minorities the opportunity to vote weakens the voting strength
of all minorities, women, the economically challenged, under educated
and even those that were incarcerated and served their sentences are
discriminated against. When I think of the first time I voted, I was proud
to get my ballot and cast my vote in the political process. I was just as
proud that I could read the ballot because I valued education to know how
important reading and comprehension is.
Through the voting process Blacks were liberated physically from slavery
years ago. The psychological / mental liberation is still occurring today.
Too many Blacks are mentally still in slavery with thoughts of low self
esteem, self and cultural destruction, accepting second class citizenship
by not wanting to go back to school to continue their education. Allowing
the media to define their existence and behaviors that result in continued
After looking at this video how can you NOT get out and register to vote,
how can you NOT honor the men and women that sacrificed their lives
to earn the right to vote for you and your children. The effort for equality
and equitable treatment is never over, it is a continuous fight on multiple
fronts from education, politics, economics and human rights.
The first place to start is your vote.
Voting Rights Act of 1965