About Saris (Sarees)
A sari (also spelled saree) is the conventional garment worn by
several women in the Indian subcontinent. The garment is known
by diverse names in different Indian languages; in Hindi,
Gujarati and Marathi, it is recognized as sadi in Kannada as
seere; in Telugu as 'chee-ra and in Tamil as podavai.
The sari is extended strip of unstitched cloth, ranging from
five to nine yards in length, which can be draped in a variety
of styles. The nearly all common manner is for the sari to be
wrapped around the waist, with one ending then draped over the
shoulder. The sari is generally worn over a petticoat (described
lehenga/ghagra in northern India and pavada/pavadai in the
south) and a low-cut, short-sleeved, midriff-baring blouse
recognized in north India as a choli.
Types of saris
Though every region in the
Indian subcontinent has developed over the centuries its possess
exclusive sari style, the subsequent are the well recognized
varieties, different on the basis of fabric, weaving style or
Tangail Tanter Sari
Bandhani Gujarat and Rajasthan
Kota doria Rajasthan
Kantha West Bengal
Baluchari West Bengal
Chanderi Madhya Pradesh
Pochampalli Andhra Pradesh
Venkatagiri Andhra Pradesh
Gadwal Andhra Pradesh
Guntur Andhra Pradesh
Narayanpet Andhra Pradesh
Mangalagiri Andhra Pradesh
Coimbatore Tamil Nadu
Kanchipuram (locally called Kanjivaram) Tamil Nadu
Chettinad Tamil Nadu
Mysore Silk Karnataka
In Pakistan, the wearing of saris has approximately completely
been replaced by the Salwar kameez for everyday wear. According
to numerous observers, the sari has vanished favour in Pakistan
since it is seen as being allied with India. However, the sari
is frequently worn by the elderly, and to formal events.
Sri Lankan saris
Sri Lankan women wear saris in numerous styles. However, two
ways of draping the sari are popular and tend to take over; the
Indian way (classic nivi drape) and the Kandyan method (or 'osaria'
in Sinhalese). The Kandyan style is usually more accepted in the
hill country area of Kandy from which the style gets its name.
Though neighboring preferences play a position, most women make
a decision on way depending on personal favorite or what is
perceived to be most pleasing for their body.
Contrast this case of a Kandyan style sari draping with what Sri
Lankans refer to as the Indian fashion'. The Indian style
usually consists of an uninterrupted flow of sari fabric over
the belly and shoulders. The conventional Kandyan (Osaria) style
consists of a full jacket, covers the midriff entirely, and is
partly tucked in at the frontage as is seen in this 19th century
portrait. However, up to date intermingling of styles has led to
nearly all wearers baring additional of the midriff. The final
tail of the sari is in order pleated rather than free-flowing.
This is rather alike to the pleated rosette used in the 'Darivian'
style noted earlier in the article. Here is an additional
example of a Sri Lankan style of draping the sari.