Although for many years was relegate from the field of alternative therapies, today the use of hypnosis to improve health is becoming harder, both specialists and patients willing to experience it. And such was the progress that hypnotherapy has had, until it has been considered one of the earliest methods of psychological analysis.
But, beyond the mind, hypnosis can act on the physical appearance of people and allowing changes markedly favorable in many pathological conditions and provide important health benefits.
What is Hypnosis?
Although many associate with the dream and being asleep, hypnosis is actually a state where our focus is tuned so that any stimulus provided in a particular direction is captured in a fast and secure for our mind and body, allowing the acquisition of new knowledge, changing habits, emotions and even thoughts.
And far from what is commonly believed, it is very rare to lose consciousness during hypnosis. By contrast, the patient is aware of what is going through its state of wholeness and relaxation and can come out of trance if at any time during treatment is trying to convey an idea or action that conflicts with its principles or values.
In summary, the use of hypnotherapy allows, through psychological treatment, encourage positive changes in people to overcome their health problems, emotional or behavioral through self-healing capacity available to humans.
Benefits of hypnotherapy for health
With hypnotherapy it achieves the individual potential of each person and encourages it within their means to seek to overcome the diverse problems that can range from habits like smoking to diseases such as Irritable Bowel Syndrome, arthritis, or some symptoms of cancer. Also include as a possible treatment for stress, sleep problems, skin conditions, headaches, generalized aches, addictions, phobias or panic.
Does hypnotherapy can be applied to all people?
While this therapy is compatible with many of the individuals, it is true that there are people whom it is impossible to hypnotize. Children and individuals with open minds and more liberal are more likely to be treated with hypnotherapy.
You see, hypnotherapy is far from the practice of the films in which a therapist more upset that the patient swung a pendulum in the eyes of the latter. But this is just a very brief summary of the performance of therapeutic hypnosis in the health field, with many more applications today, and still others that could be developed, such as hypnosis for labor pains.
Enjoy this article?
You might also like