During the early stage of CHEP it's main activities was public awareness and community mobilization.
The community was fully segmented into target groups to adequately address the impact of HIV and AIDS on the communities.
Peer Education became a pivotal methodology and later became a stepping stone that proved to be one of the better methods that CHEP had employed over the years.
In 1991 Sr. Lynn Walker took over from Dr. Chandra Mouli, it was during this period that CHEP embarked on trainings that included; Peer Education, Home Based Care, Counseling Training, Stepping Stones Methodologies. These trainings benefited Community Based organisations. CHEP then started conducting training workshops in the regional countries and still continues do so.
Sr. Lynn Walker served as CHEP’s Executive Director from 1991 to 2000. She handed over the directorship to Alick Nyrienda who took the baton until March 2008. It is during the leadership of Sr. Lynn Walker that in 1998 CHEP's registration status of the project changed to a Company Limited by Guarantee with a Non-Governmental and not for profit status. Today it is one of the leading NGOs in the fight against HIV and AIDS on the Copperbelt Province of Zambia in particular and the nation in general. It is dedicated to ensuring that community responses to HIV/AIDS are accelerated through the provision of technical support to initiatives by community people themselves.
Brief History - The Four Phases of CHEP
Phase 1 : AIDS Kills
At the beginning of the epidemic prevention messages were designed to frighten people. Fear induction was the key strategy. CHEP used scary messages such as an eagle lifting a very thin money with a caption "AIDS Kills." Other information materials depicted grave yards and people mourning as means to scare people that AIDS was a killer disease to be feared by everyone.
Phase 2: We Spread Knowledge not Fear
Information dissemination was the key strategy in this phase. IEC materials were developed and distributed in the communities that CHEP carried out it’s activities.
Phase 3 :Behavior Change
Communities were mobilized and made aware of HIV and AIDS. Emphasis was placed on change in behavior and formation of desirable behavior. Psychosocial life skills were taught to people in communities, as these were vital in reducing the further spread of HIV and AIDS. During this period a number of CBOs were initiated dealing with different aspects of HIV and AIDS. Women groups, youth based and People Living with HIV and AIDS were initiated and are still in existence.
Current Phase : Accelerating Community’s Response through Technical Support
The current phase of strengthening CBO's, NGOs and other Institutions HIV and AIDS and other development programmes. In order to respond effectively to our new role as a Technical Support provider, the organization structure was changed.
Sr. Lynn Walker
1991 to 2000
Mr Alick Nyrienda
2000 to March 2008
Mr Roy Mwilu
Current Executive Director
2008 to date