Category Archives: STEM
The task seemed simple. Program a robot to stand from his seated position and walk to a point two feet forward and one foot to the right. Participant eyes light up and mental gears start turning. The task is fun.
Code.org is a non-profit that is a committed to increasing computer programming education. We think its mission is great and encourage … Read more
Chief Learning Officer Joe Dixon gave two presentations at the Museum of Science and Industry that gave students their first look at the educational robot. From there, Dixon and a team of instructional technologists gave hands-on sessions with students … Read more
Do you play video games, use computer programs, or have a phone or camera? Do you know that someone wrote (coded) a series of instructions to make those amazing technologies work? Did you know that you could do it too? It doesn’t take a genius. In fact, if you can read and write then you … Read more
On Monday and Tuesday, April 8 and 9, Teq’s Chief Learning Officer Joe Dixon will be giving demonstrations to show off NAO, an … Read more
Robots for iPad is a beautiful app created by IEEE Spectrum Magazine. And who — you ask — is the handsome humanoid cover model that graces the front the app’s icon? That’s our friend NAO, who’s featured among more than 100 of his robotic counterparts. The app allows you to explore the history … Read more
When Teq launched its partnership earlier this year with Alderbaran Robotics — makers of the NAO Academic Robot — we were excited about introducing an exciting new tool for STEM education, computer programming and engaging students’ critical thinking skills. But the NAO, as it turns out, is also being used to study the effects that … Read more
New York, NY — About a dozen New York City teachers worked together recently to build wooden structures used to fling balls of wadded paper across a classroom. They weren’t developing new ways to frustrate janitors, the group was learning new ways to create accessible lessons in the areas of Science, technology engineering and Math … Read more
Teq instructional technologists recently concluded their first round of training on Teq’s newest product offering, NAO — an academic robot that promises to be an exciting new learning tool in the classroom.
NAO (pronounced “now”), 23 inches tall, will help schools address the critical shortage of STEM professionals especially in the fields of engineering and … Read more
1. Use Fluid Math to teach acceleration due to gravity. The video below shows how FluidMath’s Animation feature allows you to write a function (such as ay= – 9.8t2) that describes an object’s motion, and then run a simulation of the movement along a path.
2. Use Algodoo to simulate the ascent … Read more