Best Known For
Marie Curie was a Polish-born French physicist famous for her work on radioactivity and twice a winner of the Nobel Prize.
Mae Jemison - Mini Biography (2:23)
Sally Ride - Mini Biography (3:01)
In 1903 Marie Curie became the first woman to win a Nobel prize, paving the way for future women in the field of science.
Watch a short video about Marie Curie and uncover what accomplishments the genius scientist achieved as a female.
A short biography of Mae Jemison, who became the first African American woman in space when she thrust into orbit on the shuttle Endeavour in 1992.
Sally Ride studied at Stanford University before beating out 1000 other applicants for a spot in NASA's astronaut program. Ride joined the Challenger shuttle mission on June 18, 1983, and became the first American woman in space.
Think you know about Biography?
Answer questions and see how you rank against other players.Play Now
In 1995, her and her husband's remains were interred in the Panthéon in Paris, the final resting place of many France's greatest minds. Curie became the first and only woman to be laid to rest there.
Curie also passed down her love of science to the next generation. Her daughter Irène Joliot-Curie followed in her mother's footsteps,
winning the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 1935. Joliot-Curie shared the honor with her husband Frédéric Joliot for their work on their synthesis of new radioactive elements.
Today several educational and research institutions and medical centers bear the Curie name, including the Institute Curie and the Pierre and Marie Curie University, both in Paris.
© 2013 A+E Networks. All rights reserved.
profile name: Marie Curie profile occupation:
Sign in with Facebook to see how you and your friends are connected to famous icons.
Your Friends' Connections
Included In These Groups
Left-handed people are a rare breed—only 10 percent of the general population is a lefty. There isn't a definite scientific explanation of why people are left-handed, and although it might be an inconvenience for some, it's actually an advantage in sports. Legendary lefty athletes include baseball player Babe Ruth and basketball star Larry Bird. They're in good company with a wide variety of famous faces from President Barack Obama and Oprah Winfrey to composer Wolfgang Mozart and entrepreneur Bill Gates.
Famous Lefties 91 people in this group
Examine some of the world's greatest tech-savvy minds, who have bolstered industries like computer science, space exploration and mass communications through their ingenious works. These individuals are responsible for shaping the world we live in today, and have affected how we complete some of our most basic daily tasks. Delevop your own theories about these famous pioneers of technology by exploring Biography.com's Tech Giants group, including Steve Jobs, Elon Musk, Albert Einstein, Isaac Newton, Marie Curie, Bill Gates, Aristotle, Stephen Hawking and several other brilliant minds in the field of technology.
Tech Giants 12 people in this group
presented by Tech Giants
Despite all sorts of institutional obstacles, women have continued to reach stratospheric levels of success in a full gamut of professional pursuits, whether as scientists, scribes, educators, governmental leaders, athletes, designers, film directors or performers. Learn more about the plethora of triumphs obtained by our group of trailblazers.
Visit Biography.com's Women's History group to explore more biographies, photos and videos of some the world's most fascinating women.
Groundbreaking Women 71 people in this group