Table of Contents
The Power of External Standards?
By John Bishop
When the author took up his Peace Corps teaching assignment more than 30 years ago in Ganye, Nigeria, he encountered high school students much more motivated, hard-working, and "on task" than their American counterparts. Here's why.
Anne Frank: Beyond the Diary
A Photographic Remembrance
For millions of young people, Anne Frank's diary has served as a vehicle for connecting their own lives to the innocent young people murdered by the Nazis. Now comes an extraordinary new book that will greatly enrich the reading of Anne's diary.
Fact Sheet on Vouchers: Argument and Evidence
Are market forces and vouchers the route to educational improvement? Yes, say their advocates! No, say their critics! What does the evidence tell us?
Is School Privatization the Answer?
Data from Other Countries Help Burst the Voucher Bubble
By Martin Carnoy
It's not an untried idea. Evidence from the countries that have implemented voucher plans indicates that such systems increase inequality without making schools better.
All of Us Have Come to America
Broadening Student Understanding of the American Ethnic Experience
By Sandra Stotsky
One cannot help but be struck by the incomplete portrait of the American ethnic experience patterned in recent literature anthologies for middle and high school students. European ethnic groups have all but vanished from this literary landscape.
The Horror of R. L. Stein
By Diana West
Go to your local chain bookstore, and next to a few scattered copies of great children's books, like Kidnapped, To Kill a Mockingbird, and Charlotte's Web, you will find shelf upon shelf of the latest in the Fear Street and Goosebumps shock fiction series. Our children deserve better.
Articles not posted online are available. To receive a copy, send an e-mail to firstname.lastname@example.org.
About American Educator
American Educator is a quarterly journal of educational research and ideas published by the American Federation of Teachers. Recent articles have focused on such topics as reducing the achievement gap between poor and affluent students, heading off student discipline problems, teaching an appreciation and understanding of democracy, the benefits of a common coherent curriculum, and other issues affecting children and education here and abroad. Total circulation, as of our most recent issue, is over 900,000.