English Russia -- The Kola Superdeep Borehole
The second deepest hole on earth. from 1970 until 1994 the Russians drilled at least 7.6 miles into the surface of the Earth. This is a minuscule amount, considering what the radius of the planet is. Scientists fought to be included in the project for the discoveries, prestige and enormous salary.
The Kola Superdeep Borehole was frozen in 1994. In 1983 it was already 12 km deep when they decided to stop the digging, and after another 262 meters were dug (it took a decade to “cover” this distance), the project was totally nixed. The official reason for it was a lack of financing, but insiders say that it was because of supernatural things going on inside the hole. The drilling technician assure journalists, that the project was fell-financed by the scientific foundations, and they actually stopped working because “demons started to get from under the ground”.
Distant galaxies happen to be better explored by the humanity than what it has beneath its feet. Getting to the border of the Solar System was easier than to go three kilometers deep. Most of the boreholes couldn’t reach deeper that that because when drills went further, something unbelievable happened – they melt in some super-hot matter (though, its fusion temperature is equal to the Sun one) or were pulled down and the drillers dragged out only ropes. Moreover, from that holes people can hear howling and screams, which can’t be explained by science.
When the drilling machines came up close to the 13-th kilometer, the devices registered strange sounds in the well. Intrigued by this astonishing discovery, workers lowered an extremely heat tolerant microphone, along with other sensory equipment, which recorded sounds of screaming human voices. The workers could swear that it was like “yells of sinners in hell”, and then they detected a powerful explosion of totally unknown nature. In a few days, when the works were resumed, nothing was found inside the well.
The project cost a pretty penny, but the result was really worth it — when the drill reached 9.5 km level, it dug itself into the rocks full of gold and diamonds. The concentration of gold was 80 grams per ton. That was a real treasure, as commercial production can be started if the concentration is just four grams, and the places with ten grams per ton are really few and far between.
English/Russia continues to thrill and amaze me.