When a mountain lion surfaced in North Berkeley's Gourmet Ghetto in late August, it caught everyone but lion experts by surprise. Berkeley police, seeing no alternative, quickly shot and killed the wayward cat, a sexually immature male.
Mountain lion sightings are still rare - escaping notice is this stalking predator's stock in trade - but we're making it harder for them to avoid us. California has some of the best lion habitat in the nation, but it's rapidly giving way to rampant urbanization. Between 1984 and 2006, urban sprawl claimed nearly 970,000 acres, and now more than 5 million houses border the last wild places.
"Anyplace cougars exist, animals wander past that urban-rural fringe," says wildlife biologist Rick Hopkins, who led a 12-year study of mountain lions in the Diablo Mountains near San Jose. "We're putting all our effort and energy into figuring out how cougars affect us. But we're the ones having the greater adverse effect."
The cat's fearsome reputation, says the veteran lion biologist, has more to do with the fact that it's a large predator than with the actual risk of attack - 1,000 times less likely than a lightning strike. When lions are shot, it's almost never because they've threatened someone, Hopkins says, but because the first responders are police, not wildlife experts.
Though some states capture and relocate lions to remote sites, that's not feasible in densely populated California, says Marc Kenyon, the Department of Fish and Game's statewide lion coordinator. The agency would rather shoo cats back to their nearest habitat, but even that's not always possible with just three biologists overseeing nine Bay Area counties. And now that voters have rejected Proposition 21, which would have raised funds for the financially strapped agency, it's even more likely that police will have to handle the next lost lion on their own - without proper training.
Zara McDonald, executive director of the Felidae Conservation Fund in Sausalito, notes that police are "forced to make decisions really quickly based on no knowledge of mountain lions, their ecology or how they live and move."
Lion advocates have increased public education efforts to reduce human conflicts with the Bay Area's largest carnivore - with some success. When a mountain lion and two cubs surfaced around Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory last month, lab officials called wildlife biologist Jim Hale, who quickly signed on to run interference between the lab, local police and Fish and Game. Hale convinced worried residents that it's a "live and let live situation" in which lions are just doing what comes naturally - in less space.
Males can travel nearly 200 miles in search of new territory. The one who ventured into Gourmet Ghetto displayed "classic lion dispersal behavior," says Chris Wilmers, a UC Santa Cruz large-predator expert and lead researcher on the Bay Area Puma Project.
Wilmers, who tracks lions in the Santa Cruz Mountains, has seen animals hit dead-ends, then return to the open space they came from. "If that animal had not been seen," he says, "chances are it would have ended up back above the Berkeley hills."
Most cougars, in fact, navigate human landscapes without incident. Brian Kertson tracks lions navigating the rapidly urbanizing landscape east of Washington's Puget Sound.
Nearly all of his 32 collared lions proved remarkably adept at escaping detection. Cats traveled within 550 yards of residential developments thousands of times but rarely betrayed their presence.
McDonald, whose group helped start the Puma Project, says the same thing happens here: "A lot of our studies show that cats are living and sleeping very close to our trails, and humans never see them."
But that could change as unchecked sprawl carves up ever more habitat, isolating populations, reducing genetic diversity and placing animals at risk - which, for a lion, means run-ins with humans. No one tracks vehicle casualties statewide, but Wilmers found three dead lions on Highway 17 in the past year. An Amtrak train killed a lion trying to cross the tracks near Port Costa last month. And poaching, Hale suspects, "is more significant than we know."
About 4,000 to 6,000 lions inhabit the state. And with no measures to slow growth on the horizon, any hope of keeping lions in the Bay Area - where they're at a "critical threshold," Hale says - depends on conservation corridors. Relief may come with the Bay Area Critical Linkages Project, which is working to identify essential habitat and corridors from Santa Cruz to Sonoma to help expand conservation efforts. Whether conservation can compete with urbanization, however, remains an open question.
With the goal of understanding how habitat fragmentation affects everything from lion physiology to behavior, the Puma Project might expand to the East Bay next year.
"If we lose these cats on the landscape," McDonald says, "we're losing our last great keystone species in the Bay Area. We've already lost the wolves and the bear. This is the last one that can maintain a balanced ecosystem."