Earlier this year, a series of cuts across important undersea cables drastically reduced the amount of bandwidth available to multiple countries. The problem persisted for weeks—several nations were forced to rely on a single, overland cable for all Internet connectivity—and the situation demonstrated a need for additional undersea lines and a geographically diverse network.
Now, international telecommunication companies are planning to lay new cable and potentially turn on existing dark fiber to meet projected bandwidth needs. According to the Financial Times, these buildouts and expansions are driven by a number of factors, including both the rising individual demand for bandwidth, and an increase in the total number of customers using any given line. Assured connectivity is also an issue that's being confronted.
Despite wild accusations of deliberate sabotage, the cable cuts this year did turn out to be accidental, but just two accidents caused major problems that lasted for weeks. Such disruptions are unacceptable to governments or financial institutions that depend on second-to-second updates on what's happening around the world; future buildouts will undoubtedly attempt to ensure that such widespread problems cannot be created by any single series of accidents.
Much of the growth, meanwhile, is occurring in areas where current undersea cables are ill-equipped to handle the needs of maturing economies. International telecom Global Crossing has recently added capacity to its linkages serving North America, Latin America, and Europe, while other telecoms have invested in laying new wire to link both Africa and the caribbean. Japan is also a primary link point; Google announced plans to participate in laying a 6,000-mile US-Japan cable last February, while AT&T is already involved in a number of international projects, including the new Trans-Pacific Express (TPE). TPE is scheduled to come online this year, and will directly link the United States to the gloriously free and unfettered tubes of Red China. Once online, the connection should offer 1.5Tb/s of bandwidth, and could eventually offer up to 5Tb/s.
According to the research firm TeleGeography, global demand for bandwidth increased on average by approximately 50 percent each year from 2002-2007. Thus far, cable layers have managed to stay ahead of demand by simultaneously laying new cable while lighting up unused capacity, but there's a definite physical limit to how much additional capacity can be added in a given year. In addition, companies must choose where, exactly, to lay cable—guessing wrongly could potentially cost more money than doing nothing at all. With so many potential uncertainties, it's not at all clear that demand spikes will translate into higher profits for the international telcos.