When a hurricane watch or warning has been issued, it's extremely important that you are prepared and know what to do. Depending on your location, you could be told to evacuate before a warning or even a watch is issued by the National Hurricane Center.
When a Watch is Issued
Get updates from The Weather Channel, weather.com or your local TV or radio station.
Make sure you have a battery-powered radio, preferably a NOAA weather radio, and listen for up-to-date storm information.
Keep your Family Emergency Supplies Kit, blankets and sleeping bags with you.
Keep children and pets indoors.
Call your family's emergency contact person to report your plans.
Make sure you have extra cash and your car has a full tank of gas in case you must evacuate. Fill all prescriptions.
For Mobile homes, recheck tie-downs then leave immediately and take shelter elsewhere.
Bring in loose objects from outside; anchor objects that could become projectiles in high winds.
Prepare to secure all windows with shutters or plywood.
When a Warning is Issued
Secure all windows with shutters or plywood.
Place all valuables and records in a waterproof container and store on the highest floor of your home or in the safest area.
If You are Told to Evacuate
Follow all instructions from local officials, and leave immediately when told to do so.
Turn off water and electric utilities.
Pack your Family Disaster Supplies Kit, extra blankets and sleeping bags.
Bring copies of important papers such as insurance policies and a list or photos of your home’s contents.
Unplug appliances, turn off electricity and main water valve.
Lock windows and doors before leaving home.
Follow recommended evacuation routes to avoid flooded roads and washed out bridges.
If You are NOT Told to Evacuate
Stay at home! Leave the roads available for those who must evacuate.
Clean the bathtub with bleach, fill with water for washing and flushing, not drinking.
Set the fridge to maximum cold and keep it closed.
Turn off utilities if told to do so by local officials.
During a Hurricane
Go to an interior room on the lowest level of the structure in which you’re taking shelter. Stay away from windows and doors, even though they are covered with shutters or plywood.
During extremely strong winds, lie under something sturdy such as a stairwell or large piece of furniture.
Do not go outside, not even during passage of the eye. If the eye passes directly over you, the winds could become very weak, but only for a very short period. It will not be long before hurricane force winds resume, blowing from the opposite direction.