Human Rights Organizations
Gathered for Integrating Human Rights into the Curriculum: Case Studies from Asia Workshop for Educators, February 7-8, 2004
Published: Monday, August 16, 2004
Action Without Borders
Action Without Borders connects people, organizations and resources to help build a world where all people can live free and dignified lives.
Aid to Children Without Parents, Inc.
Founded in 1988, ACWP is a volunteer, non-profit organization that provides advocacy for, and assistance to unaccompanied refugee minors in Hong Kong, Thailand, Malaysia, Indonesia and the Philippines detention camps, and recently to repatriated unaccompanied refugee minors in Vietnam, including other children who are at risk.
Through social services and relief organizations in the various countries, ACWP provides food, clothing, educational materials and services, youth and sports programs, sponsors Mid-Autumn, Christmas and Tet celebrations, and sends teachers to the camps on year-long assignments.
AI's vision is of a world in which every person enjoys all of the human rights enshrined in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and other international human rights standards.
In pursuit of this vision, AI's mission is to undertake research and action focused on preventing and ending grave abuses of the rights to physical and mental integrity, freedom of conscience and expression, and freedom from discrimination, within the context of its work to promote all human rights.
Anti-Slavery International, founded in 1839, is the world's oldest international human rights organisation and the only charity in the United Kingdom to work exclusively against slavery and related abuses.
Artists for a New South Africa
Artists for a New South Africa (ANSA) is a nonprofit organization dedicated to combating the African AIDS pandemic and advancing democracy and equality in South Africa. ANSA also works to further civil rights and safeguard voting rights in the U.S.
Captive Daughters seeks to encourage national and international attention to sex trafficking by informing the general public about the scope and severity of the problem.
The Coalition to Abolish Slavery and Trafficking was created to assist persons trafficked for the purpose of forced labor and slavery-like practices and to work toward ending all instances of such human rights violations.
Children First regards the physical and emotional well-being of all children, their welfare and their free development as the most paramount priority under all circumstances and views the position of the child as a fundamental measure of the worth of any society and culture.
Children International's mission is to help children living in dire poverty. Through the generosity of contributors we provide needy children with a variety of programs and services to meet their basic needs, enhance their human dignity and raise their physical and educational levels in a meaningful, lasting way.
COCOA (Care of China’s Orphaned Children)
COCOA fundraises for China’s orphaned and abandoned children.
Doctors Without Borders
Médecins Sans Frontières (also known as Doctors Without Borders or MSF) delivers emergency aid to victims of armed conflict, epidemics, and natural and man-made disasters, and to others who lack health care due to social or geographical isolation.
East Timor Action Network (ETAN)
The East Timor Action Network/United States was founded in November 1991 to support genuine self-determination and human rights for the people of East Timor in accordance with the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the 1960 United Nations General Assembly Resolution on Decolonization, and Security Council and General Assembly resolutions on East Timor.
Freedom House, a non-profit, nonpartisan organization, is a clear voice for democracy and freedom around the world. Through a vast array of international programs and publications, Freedom House is working to advance the remarkable worldwide expansion of political and economic freedom.
Fund For Peace
The mission of The Fund for Peace is to prevent war and alleviate the conditions that cause war. The Fund promotes education and research for practical solutions. It is a consistent advocate of promoting social justice and respect for the principles of constitutional democracy.
Global Fund For Women
The Global Fund for Women, an international network of women and men committed to a world of equality and social justice, advocates for and defends women's human rights by making grants to support women's groups around the world.
Human Rights Internet
HRI is dedicated to the empowerment of human rights activists and organizations, and to the education of governmental and intergovernmental agencies and officials and other actors in the public and private sphere, on human rights issues and the role of civil society.
Human Rights Watch
Human Rights Watch is the largest human rights organization based in the United States. Human Rights Watch believes that international standards of human rights apply to all people equally, and that sharp vigilance and timely protest can prevent the tragedies of the twentieth century from recurring.
Indonesia Human Rights Network (IHRN)
The Indonesia Human Rights Network (IHRN) is a U.S.-based grassroots organization working to educate and activate the American public and influence U.S. foreign policy and international economic interests to support democracy, demilitarization, and justice through accountability and rule of law in Indonesia.
International Campaign For Tibet
The International Campaign for Tibet (ICT) works to promote human rights and self-determination for Tibetans and to protect their culture and environment.
International Centre for Human Rights and Democratic Development
Rights & Democracy works with individuals, organizations and governments in Canada and abroad to promote the human and democratic rights defined in the United Nations' International Bill of Human Rights. Although its mandate is wide-ranging, Rights & Democracy currently focuses on four themes: democratic development, women's human rights, globalization and human rights, and the rights of indigenous peoples.
International Federation for East Timor (IFET)
The International Federation for East Timor is a federation of Non-Governmental Organizations (NGOs) with an interest in the decolonization process of East Timor as well as various aspects of life of the people in and from the territory as they are effected by that process of decolonization.
International Human Rights Law Group
The International Human Rights Law Group is a non-profit organization of human rights and legal professionals from over 20 countries engaged in advocacy, strategic human rights lawyering and training around the world. Our mission is to empower local advocates to expand the scope of human rights protections and to promote broad participation in building human rights standards and procedures at the national, regional and international levels.
International Women's Rights Action Watch Asia Pacific (IWRAW Asia Pacific)
Promotes the domestic application of international human rights standards by building the capacity of women to claim their rights. Contains information on the CEDAW Convention and other human rights treaties.
Lawyers Committee for Human Rights
Since 1978, the Lawyers Committee for Human Rights has worked in the U.S. and abroad to create a secure and humane world by advancing justice, human dignity and respect for the rule of law.
MADRE is an international women's human rights organization that works in partnership with community-based women's groups around the world to
address issues of health, education, economic development and other human rights.
Oxfam GB is a development, relief, and campaigning organization dedicated to finding lasting solutions to poverty and suffering around the world.
Physicians for Human Rights
Physicians for Human Rights (PHR) promotes health by protecting human rights.
Save the Children
Working with families to define and solve the problems their children and communities face and utilizing a broad array of strategies to ensure self-sufficiency. Through the decades, Save the Children has evolved into a leading international relief and development organization. Countless events and achievements have shaped the development of the organization and helped change the lives of the children it serves.
Soros Foundation Network
The goal of the Soros foundations network throughout the world is to transform closed societies into open ones and to protect and expand the values of existing open societies. The concept of open society is, at its most fundamental level, based on the recognition that people act on imperfect knowledge and that no one is in possession of the ultimate truth. In practice, an open society is characterized by the rule of law; respect for human rights, minorities, and minority opinions; democratically elected governments; a market economy in which business and government are separate; and a thriving civil society.
Tibet Information Network
TIN monitors and reports on the political, social, economic, environmental and human rights situation in Tibet today.
Tibetan Centre for Human Rights and Democracy
TCHRD is the first Tibetan non-governmental organization (NGO) to be formed with the goal of protecting and promoting human rights of the Tibetan people.
U.S. Committee for Refugees
USCR defends the rights of all uprooted people regardless of their nationality, race, religion, ideology, or social group.
United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF)
“For every child: Health, Education, Equality, Protection – ADVANCE HUMANITY”
Part of the United Nations system, UNICEF's mandate and mission is to advocate for children's rights and to help meet the needs of children worldwide.
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
The United Nations vision is of a world in which the human rights of all are fully respected and enjoyed in conditions of global peace. The High Commissioner works to keep that vision to the forefront through constant encouragement of the international community and its member States to uphold universally agreed human rights standards.
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC)
The United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime is a global leader in the fight against illicit drugs and international crime.
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR)
UNHCR is the United Nations organization mandated to lead and coordinate international action for the worldwide protection of refugees and the resolution of refugee problems.
United Nations Development Fund for Women (UNIFEM)
UNIFEM promotes women's empowerment and gender equality. It works to ensure the participation of women in all levels of development planning and practice and acts as a catalyst within the UN system, supporting efforts that link the needs and concerns of women to all critical issues on the national, regional and global agendas.
United Nations Human Settlements Programme (UNHABITAT)
War Child is a network of independent organizations working across the world to help children affected by war.
Witness for Peace Southwest
Witness for Peace is committed to nonviolence and to working for change in policies that exacerbate poverty and injustice.
World Health Organization (WHO)
Youth Advocate Program International
Youth Advocate Program International works with and for young people worldwide, providing voice and visibility to new ways of improving the lives of children, and casting light on dark issues.
Youth for Human Rights
In support of the United Nations Decade for Human Rights Education, Youth for Human Rights International is working on projects to bring the Universal Declaration of Human Rights to youth through essay and art contests and by providing materials for students and teaching guides for schools.