the course of his career Sir
places where no human being had gone before, and by making the first
successful accent of Mount Everest captured the world’s imagination. His
achievement in successfully scaling Mount Everest for the very first
time was one of the Twentieth Century’s
Limited edition bronze of 29 pieces celebrating the esteemed
accomplishments of Sir Edmund Hillary show his hands holding an
Ice Axe. Produced in Bronze from life cast molds created by Raelee Frazier,
Highland Studio, Denver, Co.
Sir Edmund Hillary in Chicago with the sculpture
"THE SUMMIT" after being shown the finished art for
the first time, November 1999.
art and a brief history of the 1953 British Everest Expedition
Edmund Hillary and Tenzing Norgay about to leave
the South Col to establish camp IX below the south summit. May
History of the 1953 British
In the first half of the 20th century
expeditions to conquer Mount Everest took the form of an
international competition between the major nations of the world. At
this time in history the summit of Everest represented one of the last
of the unconquered frontiers of the planet. Reaching Everest's
pinnacle was considered to be a prize of momentous proportion. Many had
tried and failed to make the accent. The death of the
two British climbers, Mallory and Irvine during a previous
attempts in 1922 and 1924 had proven the conquest of Everest was not only
extremely difficult but life threatening.
In 1952 members of the Swiss
contingency had come close only to be turned back less than a thousand
vertical feet from the summit. In the same year
England received a permit from the Nation of Nepal to do a reconnaissance
of the southern approach to the mountain. The announcement of the
letting of this permit was an unprecedented diplomatic success for
up until this time Nepal had closed its boarders to visitors from
the European Nations.
This breakthrough in diplomacy and the
receipt of the permit caused a stir in England and set the stage for the
selection of the expeditionary force of 400 souls to conquer Everest. Because of his
reputation for mountaineering Edmund Hillary had qualified himself to
become a member of the team selected to attempt the accent. After
another party from the British contingent had attempted to scale Everest
had failed Hillary and the Nepalese Sherpa, Tenzing Norgay were
selected to make a second attempt and finally succeeded in reaching the summit at 11:30 am May 29, 1953.
Edmund Hillary took this photograph of
Tenzing Norgay using an Ice Axe as a standard for the British Flag as
they became the first human beings to set foot on the summit of Mt.
Everest, the highest point on earth. Ironically Tensing would be
required to use this
same axe to save Hillary's life during a mishap in a crevasse field during
the parties decent from the Summit.
Hillary's successful accent was truly
a Crowning Glory for England
The British Empire having suffered the
losses of India, Palestine and South Africa to the commonwealth
during the course of the Second World War was about to enter a new era
in the rule of the Empire. The war and post war periods had
been earmarked with sacrifice and the severe restrictions required for
the survival of what remained of the Empire. The most significant event
marking the beginning of a new era was the Coronation of Queen
Elizabeth II. As fate would have it the announcement of Hillary's
successful accent of Everest was made by the London Times in England on the day of
her Coronation June, 2, 1953.
The combination of the coronation
and the successful accent of the one of the planets last frontiers by
the British Everest Expeditionary Force helped set a positive and
forward looking atmosphere within the commonwealth. In History the
timing of an event often is as important as the event itself and
Hillary's accomplishment couldn't have come at a more opportune moment
to help set a positive tone for the next decade. As a result the
importance of Sir Edmunds accomplishment assured his continued status
within the British Empire. Edmund was later to be Knighted by Queen
Elizabeth in recognition of the overall importance of his contributions
to the British Commonwealth of Nations.
Sir Edmund Hillary as Humanitarian
Edmund says about himself "In some ways I believe I epitomize the
average New Zealander: I have modest abilities, I combine these with a
good deal of determination, and I rather like to succeed."
Sir Edmund Surrounded by School Children
Sir Edmund has used his notoriety with wisdom and
grace and has continued to be a positive force for the
betterment of the Nepalese people as well as an outspoken advocate and spokesman for environmental
causes. He is the founder and leader of several Foundations
dedicated to improving the social and physical conditions of the
Nepalese people. He has succeeded in building schools, hospitals and
infrastructure vital to trade and commerce for the Nepalese. History may eventually record Sir Edmund's
humanitarian efforts to be his most lasting and meaningful legacy
despite the monumental proportion and significance to the
human Psyche of his determination, will and physical abilities on
Sir Edmund and Lady Hillary at the presentation
of the art at "The Hillary Foundation"
board meeting Chicago. Il November 1999
Sir Edmund Hillary Signing Certificates of
Authenticity for "The
Summit" in Chicago, November 1999
The Most Famous Living New Zealander
80 years old, Hillary is no longer an active mountaineer, but is still
a tireless fundraiser and worker for education and health projects in
Nepal. Hillary has been widely honored in New Zealand, England and
around the world, and is the only living New Zealander to be featured
on a bank note.
Certificate of Authenticity
Issued by Highlands Studio with each limited edition
sculpture Signed and Authenticated by the artist and Sir Edmund
To inquire about
art please E-mail: firstname.lastname@example.org
Books By Sir Edmund Hillary
- High adventure.
- East of Everest.
- No latitude for error.
- High in the thin cold air.
- Schoolhouse in the clouds.
- Nothing venture, nothing win.
- From the ocean to the sky.
- Two generations.
- The view from the
these web sites for more Information on Sir Edmund Hillary
Hillary Biography From:
American Academy of Achievement
Follow the storied and often tragic history of climbing on Mt.
Everest, from the early years to the present day.
From the Salon writer Don George’s
man to match his mountain," in the ‘Brilliant Careers’ series