About Carpal Tunnel Syndrome
Carpal Tunnel Syndrome (CTS) is considered a Repetitive Stress Injury (RSI) by the Centers for Disease Control (CDC).
Did You Know?
- The CDC reports that CTS effects over 2.5 million people in the United States (2)
- 70 percent of those effected with CTS are women. Click Here to learn more.
- Sleep issues related to CTS are one of the most common reasons for patients to have surgery.
- You don’t need to use a rigid splint at night to reduce symptoms.
- CTS is a common issue during the third trimester of pregnancy.
James W. Strickland M.D. in his monograph titled "Carpal Tunnel Syndrome" copyright 2001 by NEUROMetrix Inc., describes the symptoms of Carpal Tunnelndrome as "Compression of the median nerve at the wrist results in irritation that is known as the clinical disorder Carpal Tunnel Syndrome (CTS). Major symptoms include pain in the wrist and hand that radiate to the forearm and (numbness and tingling) in the thumb, index, (and) middle fingers.
(Nighttime) symptoms may be particularly severe and it is common for affected patients to awaken with numbness or tingling in their fingers that requires shaking the hand or other positional changes in order to gain a measure of relief.
Discomfort, numbness or tingling in the median nerve distribution may also occur with repetitious activities such as using a keyboard or assembly line work or with prolonged flexion or extension of the wrist such as driving an automobile.
Advanced stages of median nerve compression can result in the ulnar muscle weakness, and patients may tend to drop objects as the weakness becomes more pronounced. Atrophy of the ulnar muscles and demonstrable sensory changes are seen in severe, longstanding median nerve compression."(1)
Download the full text of Doctor Strickland’s monograph, courtesy of NEUROMetrix Inc., by clicking on the following link,
Click here to download Dr. Strictland's monograph
While excessive computer use is commonly associated with Carpal Tunnel Syndrome, you can reduce discomfort and potential injury with improved ergonomics. Proper posture, correct chair height, and hand placement are all factors that you should have reviewed at your work. Many employers offer free ergonomic evaluations to help reduce RSI injuries. Ask your Human Resources department for more information.
Texting and Carpal
Video on Teen Texting - Teen Diagnosed with Carpal Tunnel from excessive texting
BBC News - RSI danger from excessive texting
Virgin Mobile - Virgin Mobile launches new 'TMI' text message safety campaign
Additional information on Carpal Tunnel Syndrome can be found at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC).
Click Here to go the CDC web site.
At the CDC site, search on "Carpal Tunnel" for additional information on CTS, ergonomics, and other resources.
Download James W. Strickland M.D. monograph titled "Carpal Tunnel Syndrome" Click Here to Download
Consult your doctor for the diagnosis and treatment of Carpal Tunnel Syndrome. The information on this site is not intended as a substitute for medical advice. You should always consult a qualified physician for answers you have about your health.
- "Carpal Tunnel Syndrome", by James W. Strickland M.D. published by NEUROMetrix Inc.
From the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in its summary of Vital and Health Statistics.
Dr. Gonzani holds a B.S. degree in Computer Science, an M.S. degree in Biomedical Engineering, and a Ph.D. in Neurobiology, from the University of California, Berkeley. He also received an M.D. from Harvard Medical School and the Harvard-M.I.T. division of Health Sciences at M.I.T. He is the Chairman and CEO of Neurometrix, Inc. a publicly traded neurotechnology company.
Based on information gathered in various reports from the Occupational Safety and Health Administration and the Bureau of Labor Statistics, "Number and percent of nonfatal occupational injuries and illnesses involving days away from work".