Wonder Woman's history has evolved to reflect the interests and social acceptance of comic book lovers across the globe. Created by William Moulton Marston in 1941 for DC Comics, Wonder Woman was one of the characters and plotlines that emerged during the golden age of comic books in the 1930s and 1940s. Over the course of time, Wonder Woman's story was modified, as were her powers and costume, in order to satisfy new generations of fans. Her history has developed over time to include a long-running TV show, graphic novels and highly-hyped discussion of a possible major motion picture in the future.
Wonder Woman is really Princess Diana of Themyscria, part of an Amazon civilization dedicated to peace and prosperity. She was formed of clay and brought to life by the gods. As a young child, she excelled in every task, from strength to intelligence. After a military plane crashes in her homeland, she befriends pilot Steve Trevor. She accompanied Trevor back to his world and became a champion for justice and an ambassador for peace.
Her supernatural powers included advanced intelligence, extra strength and the beauty and talents of Hellenic goddesses. She is also in command of the animal world and can communicate with creatures large and small. Advanced scientific knowledge and military strategy aided her in fighting injustice. She is skilled at hand-to-hand combat as well as sword fighting and has mastered modern weaponry.
Weapons and Gadgets
Wonder Woman is best known for her invisible airplane, bracelets that deflect bullets, a boomerang tiara, and her truth lasso, which forces anyone it ensnares to tell the complete truth.
Wonder Woman initially fought crime on her own, but soon became one of the founding members of the Justice League, a syndication of superheroes that includes Superman, Batman, Flash, Green Lantern and Aquaman. Wonder Woman's costume has also changed to match fashion standards. Her original costume featured a blue skirt with white stars, while later versions popularized her famous leotard and knee-high red boots. Her invisible plane has evolved over the years as well, from a propeller airplane in the 1940s to a sleek modern jet.