Certainly! Here is a list of four fun things to do in the Moroccan Sahara desert.

Discover Desert Wildlife
Many animals and reptiles call the Sahara Desert home such as the desert fox and the desert mouse. These normally shy animals are hard to spot but they can be lured out of their dens and their burrows with food. Save some of your food from dinner and place it somewhat away from the campfire. Animals are quick to sniff out a meal and will gladly follow the scent back to camp. Stay quiet and be patient and you may get some great pictures of a desert fox up close!

Surf the Dunes
Desert dunes not only look like water waves but can be surfed as well. Decide whether you want to ski, surf or snowboard down the dune then grab your board and walk up to the top. The ride down a steep dune is fast and matches the fun of surfing on a wave. You can stand up on the board or sit down and enjoy the ride. You'll want to bring your own board or rent one before setting out to the dunes. And remember to bring your hat, sunglasses, sunscreen and plenty of water to drink. Deserts are hot!

Spa Break Desert Style
If you're tired and sore from sand surfing and camping, you can find relief in a sand bath. Akin to the mud baths found in day spas, sand baths are said to ease aches and pains and restore your peace of mind. At the small village of Merzouga, which is near the Moroccan-Algerian border, you can join the locals in an early morning sand bath. After digging a hole in one of the dunes, you lie covered in sand and watch the beautiful sunrise for a maximum of 30 minutes. 

Watch the Stars
It's quiet out in the desert. Deafeningly so. It's also inky dark so the stars shine brightly in the night sky. There's no light pollution to interfere with the view or traffic noise to bombard your ears. Just watch as dusk gives way to night and the stars take center stage. In addition to stars, you can see planets and identify constellations. Downloading a  star-gazing app is a great way to identify what you're seeing in the night sky.
