1. Your alarm clock is a tool, not a miracle worker
Waking up in the morning is an important part of starting the day (go figure) and alarms can help remind us when we have to drag ourselves out of bed to fulfill our daily responsibilities. However, waking up early won't do anything for you if you're not going to bed early, too. Make sure you're letting yourself get your much-needed beauty sleep in the night so that you can wake up refreshed and feel less dread at the idea of getting out of bed.

2. Remember how to breathe
When waking up, it's important to remember basic functions such as breathing. Unfortunately, for some of us, we're quick to remember all the things we possibly missed online, and reach for a phone quicker than we are to take a moment and breathe. In the morning, make a note to remind yourself that breathing is just as important, and maybe take a minute or two to do so before you think about all the things that could've gone wrong while you were asleep. (It might help you feel less stressed while you're at it, too.)

3. Hydration is important, too
A lot of us rely on coffee to help us wake up in the morning and keep our eyes open during some of the more depressing/tiresome days. Coupled with the fact that we wake up thirsty, we might be tempted to brew a cup of joe before we've even had any water. However, it's best to start off the day with that cup of water instead, which can help you feel more alert anyway by boosting your metabolism. Remember that we're mostly made up of water, and actually having it is good for us.

4. Limber up, why don't you?
While you're at it, one of the things we also need after sleep is some movement. After being still in bed all night, we can get stiff and need to relieve that after waking up. Instead of just doing a quick stretch, put some effort into it and really move about. Make sure you get as much of your body, maybe even run through a quick yoga routine to make it more guided and deliberate. (Maybe more convenient, too, if you like being told what to do.)

5. Speaking of moving, put your back into it!
It might be hard to put an exercise regimen in your morning routine, but maybe you can intersperse exercise throughout it. Maybe you could do some push-ups or sit-ups while you wait for the aforementioned cup of coffee. (If you really can't let that one go: trust me, I know.) Maybe you could also exercise while doing things that require you to stand still.

6. Take a break from the endless buzz of the modern world
Getting your mind off of all the things that the day will throw at you can bring some serious peace (once again, I know). Set aside a short amount of time like ten minutes to sit and meditate, using whatever means are the best for you. That could be an app or video which gives a guided experience, or just a timer and yourself. Whatever works best — if you can stand to be alone with your thoughts, at least.

7. Be grateful for the things you have
I know it sounds cheesy, but bear with me. Practicing gratitude in the morning — or even throughout the day — can markedly improve the way you feel and respond to the challenges of daily life. It mostly involves simple activities like taking a moment to appreciate the sunrise, writing in a journal about the things you are happy to have, or maybe focusing on them during your meditation. It can have a dramatic impact on your mood, especially if you've got a long and boorish commute in the morning.

8. Clean up after yourself
Taking some personal accountability and tidying up your bed in the morning can be big for establishing that you've got a handle on yourself. Keeping your personal space neat and clean is a way of showing yourself that you're willing to take the initiative and follow up on it. Who knew?

9. Be reliable and keep at it
The most important thing is sticking to your guns and keeping your routine. Don't beat yourself up for small setbacks or personal failings, but don't let that get in your way, either. Reliability is key, and you kind of owe it to yourself to at least try. (I certainly know I do.)
