All About The Quran
The Quran is a Divine Miracle of Literature [Prophesy - Science - Warnings - Wisdom - Truths]...and it has been Preserved 100% In the Original Language - for over 1,400 years!
Humanity has received Divine Guidance only through two channels:
The Word of Almighty God ("Allah" [in Arabic]) [scriptures, Bible, Psalms, etc.]
The Prophets sent by the Allah to communicate His Will to mankind
These two things have always been going together, hand in hand.
More important though, there were at that time, tens of thousands of his companions ("sahabi" in Arabic) who memorized the complete Quran from the instruction of the prophet Muhammad (peace be upon him). Even the prophet himself (peace be upon him) used to recite it with angel Gabriel once a year and in the last year of his life he recited it two times just before the month in which he died.
Next, the leader who came after the prophet Muhammad (peace be upon him) (Abu Bakr) entrusted the collection of the Quran to be written in one volume by one of the Prophet's scribe, Zaid Ibn Thabit. He kept it till his death. Then the next leader, Umar and after him to his daughter, Hafsa who had been one of the wives of Prophet Muhammad (peace be upon him).
Then from the original text which now resides in Topkope Museum, in Istanbul, Turkey, the next leader, Uthman prepared several other exact duplications and sent them to various Muslim territories such as; Uzbekistan and Turkey and other places. These scriptures are still in museums there and one has found its way to a museum in England as well. All of them are exactly the same. Today many of the Muslims from these areas are still memorizing the Quran.
The Quran was so meticulously preserved because it is the Book of Guidance for all of humanity for all times. That is why it does not address just the Arabs, in whose language it was revealed. In fact Arabs today do not comprise more than 13% of the Today of Muslims in the world today.
The Quran speaks to "mankind"
Quran speaks to all of mankind on a general basis without regard to race, tribe, color, social position, financial condition or genealogy.
Allah the Almighty says:
"O Mankind! What has seduced you from your Lord so Generous?" [Noble Quran 82:6]
The Practical Teachings of the Quran
Teachings of Quran are established by the example of Muhammad (peace be upon him) and the good Muslims throughout the ages have endeavored to emulate his teachings both in thought and conduct.
The distinctive approach of the Quran is that its instructions are aimed at the general welfare of the mankind and are based on the possibilities within his reach.
The Quran is Wisdom Conclusive.
It neither condemns nor tortures the flesh nor does it neglect the soul.
It does not humanize God, nor does it deify man.
Everything is carefully placed where it belongs in the total scheme of creation.
Yet it obviously is not written in human style (chronological order). Those who would claim that the prophet Muhammad (peace be upon him) was the author of the Quran are claiming something that is humanly impossible.
How could any person of the 7th century utter such scientific truths as those found in the Quran?
Could he describe the evolution of the embryo inside the uterus so accurately as we find it now recorded in modern science?
[See: Dr. Keith Moore's book - on embryology]
Secondly, is it logical to believe that Muhammad (peace be upon him) who up to the age of forty was marked only for his honesty and integrity, began all of a sudden the authorship of a book matchless in literary merit and the equivalent of which the whole legion of the Arab poets and orators of the highest caliber could not produce?
And lastly, is it justified to say that Muhammad (peace be upon him) who was known as "Al-Ameen" (trustworthy) in his society and who is still admired by the non-Muslim scholars for his honesty, would lie about receiving the Quran (which forbids lying) from the Angel Gabriel and then still be able to establish the best human society on the face of the earth, based on truth?
Surely, any sincere and unbiased searcher of truth must come to the conclusion that the Quran is the revealed Book of Almighty Allah.
Readers can easily see how the modern world is coming closer to reality regarding the truth of the Quran.
We appeal to all open minded scholars to study the Quran in the light of the aforementioned points.
We invite all to challenge the validity and accuracy of the sciences known to man today and keep in mind that this is the EXACT TEXT used by the Prophet Muhammad (peace be upon him) over one thousand four hundred years ago.
We are sure that any such attempt will convince the reader that the Quran could never have been written by any human being ever.
A Source of Guidance
The ultimate manifestation of God's grace for man, the ultimate wisdom, and the ultimate beauty of expression: in short, the word of God. If one were to ask any Muslim to depict it, most likely they would offer similar words. The Quran, to the Muslim, is the irrefutable, inimitable Word of God. It was revealed by God Almighty, through the instrument of Prophet Muhammad (peace be Upon Him). The Prophet (peace be upon him) himself had no role in authoring the Quran, he was merely a human secretary, repeating the dictates of the Divine Creator:
"He (Muhammad) does not speak of his own desire. It is no less than an Inspiration sent down to him."
[Noble Quran 53:3-4]
The Quran was revealed in Arabic, to Prophet Muhammad (peace be upon him) over a period of twenty-three years. It is composed in a style so unique, that it cannot be deemed either poetry or prose, but somehow a mixture of both. The Quran is inimitable; it cannot be simulated or copied, and God Almighty challenges mankind to pursue such an endeavor if he thinks he can:
"Or do they say he forged it? Say: Bring then a chapter like unto it, and call (to your aid) anyone you can, beside God, if it be you speak the truth."
[Noble Quran 10:38]
The Quran's language is indeed sublime, its recitation moving, as one non-Muslim scholar noted, it was like the cadence of my heartbeat. Due to its unique style of language, the Quran is not only highly readable, but also relatively easy to remember. This latter aspect has played an important role not only in the Quran's preservation, but in the spiritual life of Muslims as well. God Himself declares,
"And We have indeed made the Quran easy to understand and remember; then is there anyone that will receive admonition?"
[Noble Quran 54:17]
One of the most important characteristics of the Quran is that it remains today, the only holy book which has never changed; it has remained free from any and all adulterations. Sir William Muir noted, "There is probably in the world no other book which has remained (fourteen) centuries with so pure a text." The Quran was written down during the lifetime and under the supervision of the Prophet, who himself was illiterate, and it was canonized shortly after his death by a rigorous method which scrutinized both written and oral traditions. Thus its authenticity is unblemished, and is its preservation is seen as the fulfillment of God's promise:
"We have, without doubt, sent down the Message, and We will assuredly guard it from corruption."
[Noble Quran 15:9]
The Quran is a book which provides the human being the spiritual and intellectual nourishment he/she craves. Its major themes include the oneness of God, the purpose of human existence, faith and God-consciousness, the Hereafter and its significance. The Quran also lays a heavy emphasis upon reason and understanding. In these spheres of human understanding, the Quran goes beyond just satisfying the human intellect; it causes one to reflect on implications. There are Quranic challenges and prophecies. One of the most exciting fields in recent years has been the discovery that, of the significant amount of scientific information in the Quran, including the event of the Big Bang, embryological data, and other information concerning astronomy biology, etc., there is not a single statement that has not been borne out by modern discoveries In short, the Quran fulfills the heart, the soul, and the mind.
Perhaps the best description of the Quran was given by Ali, the cousin of Prophet Muhammad (peace be upon him) when he expounded upon it as,
"The Book of God. In it is the record of what was before you, the judgment of what is among you, and the prophecies of what will come after you. It is decisive, not a case for levity. Whoever is a tyrant and ignores the Quran will be destroyed by God. Whoever seeks guidance from other than it will be misguided. The Quran is the unbreakable bond of connection with God; it is the remembrance full of wisdom and the straight path. The Quran does not become distorted by tongues, nor can it be deviated by caprices; it never dulls from repeated study; scholars will always want more of it. The wonders of the Quran are never ending. Whoever speaks from it will speak the truth, whoever rules with it will be just, and whoever holds fast to it will be guided to the straight path."