Home » Americans eating their way to health
Americans eating their way to health
12/28/2004American food shoppers are increasingly focusing on their diets to improve health, and they believe healthful eating is the best way to manage illness and prevent health problems later in life, according to a new report by the Washington-based Food Marketing Institute (FMI) and Prevention magazine.
The "Shopping for Health 2004" report found 34 percent of respondents believe they have a healthful diet, and 55 percent say they are trying “a lot” to eat more healthfully. Fifty-nine percent want to lose weight but have different objectives for doing so.
Three-quarters (77 percent) want to prevent health problems later in life. Other goals of healthier eating are to manage current health problems (54 percent), boost self-confidence (44 percent) and look younger (20 percent). More than half (56 percent) strongly agree that healthy eating is a better way to manage illness than taking medications.
Interestingly, 46 percent report that they have become less trusting of the advice of health professionals in the past year. Meanwhile, 46 percent want their store to offer more nutritious prepared foods, and 36 percent want their store to provide more information about weight loss. Other shopper requests: 45 percent seek more foods without trans fatty acids, 40 percent want more low-fat foods and 39 percent want more low-carb choices.
Some other findings of the survey:
- Nutrition labels influence purchases: 83 percent regularly look at the Nutrition Facts chart when buying a product for the first time, 91 percent make a purchasing decision based on this information, and 26 percent decided against a purchase in recent months because of product labeling information.
- Specific product claims shoppers look for: low-fat (63 percent), whole grain (62 percent), low-calorie (52 percent), low-salt-sodium (48 percent). Roughly one-half of all shoppers say they have purchased foods because of certain nutrients -- high in calcium (51 percent), vitamin C (51 percent), vitamin-rich or vitamin-fortified (47 percent).
- Organics perceived as healthier: Fruits and vegetables remain the strongest organic category, with dairy products showing the strongest growth in recent years. Organic products purchased in the past six months: fruits and vegetables (37 percent), dairy (24 percent), cereals, breads and pastas (24 percent).
- Barriers to healthy eating: Shoppers take more interest in information, including news stories, about health and nutrition, but many find the information confusing. In fact, shoppers think major media outlets do only a fair or poor job of providing nutrition information in an understandable way. Nearly 60 percent of shoppers believe there is too much conflicting information in coverage of nutrition issues, particularly what constitutes a healthy diet, and 30 percent feel the confusion contributes to an unhealthy diet. Shoppers cite the higher cost of healthier foods as another barrier to healthful eating. And finally, 23 percent of respondents say they are too busy to eat healthily.
Happy Family Bought by Groupe Danone
Dannon parent acquires 92 percent of seven-year-old toddler food company.
Anuga 2013: A Taste of Global Innovations Set to Take Place October 5-9
The huge global food show will be October 5-9 in Cologne, Germany.
Vermont Passes Genetic Labeling Bill
The Vermont House of Representatives approved H.112 on May 10. The bill will go to the senate next in fall 2013. If passed, the earliest the act could become law is January 2014.
GMO Labeling Effort Reaches Washington
Senate and House bills would require the FDA to develop regulations for the labeling of food containing bioengineered ingredients.
Burger King CEO To Take Over at Heinz
Bernardo Hees of 3G Capital is new CEO of Pittsburgh acquisition.
The New Hostess Company Resumes Operations
The Metropolous-Apollo-controlled company plans to reopen four plants and hire workers, but not union labor.
- 04/19/2013 Cheesemaker, Restaurant Chain Hold Mac and Cheese Cookoff
- 04/19/2013 Restaurant Chain That Also Supplies School Lunches Goes Trans Fat-Free
$10 Billion Offer for D.E Master Blenders 1753
Former part of Sara Lee eyed by European fund Joh. A. Benckiser.
Pinnacle Foods Goes Public
Blackstone Group sells 32 percent of Pinnacle Foods into stock market.
- All news »
Access Food Processing and Wellness Foods magazines on-line and receive an e-mail each month when your new issue is ready. Subscribe Now »
Biweekly updates delivering feature articles, top industry news, company news, product announcements, technical issues and more. Subscribe Now »