Right Triangle is a term which almost everybody had used or is using in different situations like construction business, science and technology, aeronautics etc. A right triangle or right-angled triangle is a triangle in which one of the three angles is a right angle or 90-degree angle. The sides and angles of right Triangles are related in many ways and the formulas, theories and properties derived out them are the basis for trigonometry.
We represent the sides of a right triangle as ‘a’, ‘b’, and ‘c’ and these sides satisfy very important theorem of Trigonometry: Pythagorean Theorem or pythagoras theorem, which states that,
In right triangles, the Square of the length of the largest side which is known as hypotenuse (the side opposite to the Right Angle) is equal to the sum of the squares of the lengths of the other two sides which are known as legs (the two sides that meet at a right angle).
a2 + b2 = c2,
Where the largest side is universally denoted by 'c' and is known as the hypotenuse. The other two sides of lengths ‘a’ and ‘b’ of a right triangle are called legs or ‘catheti’.
If the lengths of all three sides of a right triangle are integers, then the right triangles are known as, Pythagorean triangles and their side lengths are collectively known as Pythagorean triple.
There are two types of right angled triangles or right triangles:
1. Scalene Right Angled Triangle: The scalene triangles are the right triangles which include one right angle and two other unequal angles with no equal sides.
2. Isosceles right angled triangle: An Isosceles Triangle is a right triangle which has one right angle with other two angles measuring 45 degree and out of three sides of this right triangle two are equal in length.
A Right Triangle is the triangle, which has one of the angles equal to 90 degrees. It means that if one of the angles of the triangle is Right Angle, then we say it is a right angled triangle. Now we will look at the applications of right Triangles. Suppose a tall building is given and the inclination of ladder is made with the building, such that the dis...Read More
Three angles are present in a Right Triangle angles one of them is of 90 degree and other two angles are less than 90 degrees and sum of all three angles is equals to 180 degrees. Three sides of triangle are in relationship which is described with the help of pythagoras theorem. Figure of a Right Angle triangle is shown below:
In above figure ...Read More
A Right Triangle can be defined as a triangle which contains one Right Angle that is 900 angle in it. All three sides of a right angle triangle are specifically defined and have different names. It consists of three sides that are termed as base, hypotenuse and perpendicular. Hypotenuse is the side of triangle which is just opposite to right angle and it is the lo...Read More
Pythagorean triples or Right Triangle angles triples both are same which consist of three integers which are positive in nature. Suppose these integers be a, b, c so that a2 + b2 = c2. Well known example of these triples is (3, 4, 5). If right angled triangle is in same Ratio of (3, 4, 5) then they will be called as Pythagorean triple for any positive Integ...Read More
The Pythagorean Theorem can only be applied on a Right Triangle; this theorem tells the relation between the sides of the triangle. As we know that if we are having a triangle it consist of three sides and Pythagor...Read More
A special Right Triangle is a right triangle having specific characteristics which make its calculations much easier or for which simple formulas exist. We can classify special right Triangles in two categories: the angles of a right triangle may form some simple relationships, such as 45–45–90. The right triangles in this category are “angle-based" right triangle...Read More
When one side of triangle is makes an angle of 90 degrees, then given triangle is called as a Right Triangle means each right triangle has 90 degree angle. As we all know that geometric Mean of 2 Numbers are ...Read More
A triangle is a geometric figure which is made of three straight lines and the sum of its angles is equal to 180 degree. A triangle is Right Triangle or right angled triangle if any one of its three ...Read More