Any Enterprise consists, at its basics, of business processes delivering the products and the Technology and People resource layers implementing the business processes. As such Business, Technology and People become the key layers of an Enterprise Architecture (EA).
Each layer is further described by Views, filters showing only the aspects of interest to a stakeholder: for instance, the business layer consists of process, information, strategy, value chains, business models...
The people layer is more often than not, left out since, frequently, the EA framework covers solely IT. Not so in this framework. The Technology layer consists of IT Applications and Infrastructure architectures and other non-IT technology. Information is spread across layers: conceptually it exists in the business layer but in physical form, in all layers.
Any Enterprise structure is shaped by its Value Chain.
Fundamental Enterprise Functions, such as Operations (delivering the product), Development (developing the product & capability, R&D...) and Support (HR, technology management) are consistent with the Value Chain representation. A Governance function is specifically defined here, since it is the center of a Virtual Enterprise concept; it is managing the Enterprise, coordinating all other Functions and it, ultimately, identifies the Enterprise. These basic structure of any Enterprise is defined as GODS: Governance, Operations, Development and Support. Each of these functions consists of lower level business functions.
Here is now an EA framework built on these components: business Functions, Flows (Processes), Layers and Views (FFLV) and the GODS (Governance, Operations, Development, Support) structure. The Framework and its application illustrated in the picture is further described in the Enterprise Architecture book listed in the footer.
Each business function consists of at least a process and the technology and organizational role executing the process.
And the EA Framework key views are depicted in the next picture.
The Business Reference Map is a template used to ease the development for all and everybody. It consists of an initial phas eof Marketing and Forecasting/Planning, followed by Operations (Product delivery) and Sales and Servise (the products). This view may change depending of the Enterprise type.
A Single Page Architecture is a the reference for all stkeholders since it describes the basic structure and operation of the Enterprise in one page (size A4 or A3).
A View, is the graphical representation of all objects in a repository which have been selected for a specific purpose - or attribute chosen from the GUI - as for instance the recruitment View.
This is an overview of the FFLV framework described in my book. The extended framework also covers metamodel, references maps for business and templates for technology, best practices process, method and many other
The FFLV Enterprise Architecture Framework
Follow me on Twitter, you can also friend me in Facebook or on linkedin. I am always looking to have more conversations with people, feel free to join up and say hello. The opinions of this article are the opinions of this writer. They are not the opinions of my employers, nor in any way does this blog, these entries, or any information on this site reflect the opinion of my employers or people associated with me. Shortlisted for the Computer Weekly IT Industry blogger of the year 2011. Adrian Grigoriu is the Head of Architecture and EA at OFCOM, the Agency providing regulation to frequency spectrum utilization and broadcasting industry in the United Kingdom. He previously, was the Chief Architect of TMForum, the standards organization providing Frameworx, the Integrated Business Architecture framework for the telecommunications and digital media industries. Adrian also is an Executive Enterprise Strategy and Architecture Consultant and author of "An Enterprise Architecture Development Framework" book available on Amazon and Kindle at Trafford and elsewhere. Reviews of the book are available from BPTrends and the Angry Architect. Here is a short Enterprise Architecture animated slideshow summarising his view. Adrian also offers an EA and business architecture training course on-demand, based on the book. You may get in touch at firstname.lastname@example.org. His website.
Read 4 comments
Leave a Comment
Want to read more from Adrian Grigoriu? Check out the blog archive.
Archive Category: EA, SOA and other technologiesKeyword Tags: Enterprise Architecture framework Enterprise Architecture
Disclaimer: Blog contents express the viewpoints of their independent authors and are not reviewed for correctness or accuracy by Toolbox for IT. Any opinions, comments, solutions or other commentary expressed by blog authors are not endorsed or recommended by Toolbox for IT or any vendor. If you feel a blog entry is inappropriate, click here to notify Toolbox for IT.
Everything you'd want to know about Enterprise and Business Architecture, SOA, frameworks, design, planning, execution, ... more
Everything you'd want to know about Enterprise and Business Architecture, SOA, frameworks, design, planning, execution, organization or anything you'd like to ask! less
Receive the latest blog posts:
Share Your Perspective
Share your professional knowledge and experience with peers. Start a blog on Toolbox for IT today!
Adrian_Grigoriu's Custom Section
Enterprise Architecture Framework Development by Adrian Grigoriu is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-Share Alike 3.0 United States License.