Make-believe leads to better communicators
Children with imaginary friends are better communicators and become more creative, achievement-oriented adults, according to Australian and British research.
In the first study, due to be published in the journal Developmental Science, the team compared children aged between four and six years, with and without imaginary friends.
The children had to have maintained the imaginary friend for more than six months.
Kidd says the study showed those with imaginary friends were better able to get their point across in a conversation with an adult.
"They were good at understanding what the conversational partner needed to know," says Kidd.
This skill was enhanced in children with imaginary friends because they became "the writer, producer, director and actor in their own play".
"It is a different form of interaction [than with real friends]. They are creating dialogue for themselves, but also for their imaginary friend.
"They are trying to get into someone else's role [so] they have a better understanding of someone else's mindset."
Imaginary friends are very common, says Kidd, with estimates suggesting up to 65% of children have them.
But they are most common among only children or first-borns aged between four and the start of primary school, he says.
Kidd says the prevalence among this group is because they have more opportunity for sole play.
He says the imaginary friend can either be a person or an inanimate object, such as a teddy bear, which is given human qualities.
Among the imaginary friends they encountered in the study were: electricity man, a dog called pencil, and a friend known as "shot through the heart" which the researchers discovered were the lyrics of a Bon Jovi song often played by the child's mother.
The benefits of an imaginary friend may also be long lasting.
In another study, yet to be published, Kidd found adults who remembered having an imaginary friend were more creative, more achievement oriented and more emotionally responsive.
From a group of 330 British undergraduate students, 30% recalled having an imaginary friend as a child, Kidd says.
He says the results are not too surprising as children with imaginary friends are more absorbed in fantasy.
In later life this ability to focus on something could translate into being "more likely to be absorbed in study matter and more likely to see things through".