By Harry Austin Clapp
"There is no sense in going farther--it's the edge of cultivation."
So they said, and I believed it--broke my land and sowed by crop--
Built my barns and strung my fences in the little border station
Tucked away below the foothills where the trails run out and stop.
Well I know who'll take the credit--all the clever chaps that followed--
Came a dozen men together--never knew my desert fears;
Tracked me by the camps I'd quitted, used the water holes I'd hollowed.
They'll go back and do the talking.
They'll be called the pioneers.
--Kipling's Five Nations.
When I think of those who came here in 1909 as pioneers I hesitate to make such a classification. According to my dictionary a pioneer is "one who goes before preparing the way for others to follow." With this definition before me it appears that the ones who went before and prepared the way were LaSalle, the early Spanish adventurers, Stephen F. Austin and his followers. We who came in 1909 suffered no hardships for the way had been prepared. We used a Pullman car instead of an ox team. We slept in good beds instead of on the ground. We had servants serve us with good food instead of eating corn pone. Not one of us suffered from the lack of food, shelter, transportation or entertainment. But I suppose after all we may consider ourselves pioneers for we most certainly prepared the way for those who came after 1909 and 1910. We built homes, plowed the land, sowed crops, built schools, churches, harvested and plowed and sowed again. Some of us stayed because we could not go back. Some, lacking the pioneer spirit, returned from whence they came and their names are forgotten. Those who stayed no doubt emulated the example of Cortez and burned their ships behind them. These had the true pioneer spirit. Everyone had made good and are enjoying the comforts which they bought at a high price. They are the ones who have builded in a new land and to give to them we give our congratulations and high respect. But after all, as I review the past and look over the names of those who came, who stayed, who went back to their northern homes, I have a feeling that in that list we do not find the real pioneers. I find their names in the list of those who have taken the only great adventure. Theo Smith, O. B. Kone, I. M. Glasser, D. E. Hurd, E. A. Holsworth, A. J. Palmer, George Black, W. E. Elmer, Mrs. Gussie Elmer, M. A. Nelson, George Braden, S. P. Shuey, Margaret Shuey, Minnie Corse are the real pioneers for they have "gone before, preparing the way for us to follow." It was a great adventure they pioneered in. No land man to show them the way. Only faith and hope like twin stars, lighted their path. Perhaps it was with hesitating and faltering steps they sought the way. They have gone on before and dare spying out the land for us who will follow. Therefore while a taking no credit from the living pioneers let us on this day give hearty praise and honor for those who have passed into the unknown land with their banner inscribed "Adventure and Romance."
Some baseball scouts should watch a game played by the Palacios team. They might find Dean Merck, timber for at least a minor league and perhaps a development into the big yard. Wadsworth played Collegeport Sunday on Van Wormer Field with a score of 5-0 in favor of the visitors. Tuesday, May 23, I received from the Interstate Commerce Commission the final findings of that body in the application of the St. Louis Brownsville & Mexico Railway Company to abandon the Collegeport branch. The document contains eighteen typewritten pages and the report was proposed by J. S. Prichard, examiner. The report ends with "it is therefore recommended that the permission be granted and that an appropriate certificate should be issued." The document is in my files and may be examined by any interested person. One of the reasons for granting the permission was that there is a great probability that the state highway commission will build a viaduct across the bay bringing this territory within three miles of the Southern Pacific service. It appears that we should get busy quite soon or before, on the viaduct proposition. I read in the papers that the Southern and Northern branches of the Baptist Church meet in convention in the city of Washington. Instead of grasping hands in brotherly love they appear to be spending their time quarreling over resolutions condemning President Roosevelt and Mrs. Roosevelt for serving beer in the White House. Why can we not allow our president and his family to live in peace and eat and drink as they wish? I am in favor of organizing the Jews in a protest against the serving of ham or bacon to White House guests. "Thoughts" have not appeared in the Tribune Daily for several weeks for reasons unknown to me. But I am beginning to receive inquiries as to why. Last night came one from a daily reader, "I miss your 'Thoughts' for I appreciate them and look for your column with eagerness."
I read in the papers that the Greyhound bus lines have a rate of $31.70 round trip to Chicago effective May 15 to October 31. I also notice that one railroad makes a round trip rate of $59. The latter ought to be able to haul one passenger for the same price the bus charges, but they will not do it and cry their eyes out over unfair competition. Railway coaches will trip to Chicago with room a plenty, but the Greyhound bus will be loaded.
If Bachman's asked forty cents per pound for ham and another store offered it for fifteen cents which store would sell ham? You're smart to guess it the first time. I wonder when railroads will learn how to sell ham. It appears that when the grading was done for the "nine foot sidewalk" that the contractors fed Johnson grass hay to their live stock. Result, a fine stand of this grass along the right of way which is creeping onto the tillable land on each side much to the annoyance of the farmers. Wonder if it is not possible for the engineering department to spray the grass with oil or some solution and kill it out.
Thursday came with a heavy rain which was badly needed by all crops. In spite of the rain more than 100 people assembled to observe Collegeport Day. Among those from other parts of the country I saw Mrs. Claire M. Pollard, county superintendent of schools, Mrs. T. C. Ford, Miss Katherine Ford, the two latter from Orange, Miss Eleanor Chapman, Mr. and Mrs. Robert M. Jeter (Merle Wainer) of Houston, Mrs. Patricia Martyn, county health nurse, Mrs. Della Braden, Will Shuey. Mrs. Burton D. Hurd was in charge of the program and after God's blessing had been asked by H. A. Clapp, she arranged that the pioneers or those who arrived during 1909 should be served first and seated at special tables. The long tables in front of the main room were loaded with chicken fried, chicken pressed, meats of other kinds, potatoes in cream and in salads, vegetables of several kinds, pies and cakes too numerous to mention and glory be to the gods three big tanks of those Famous Carrie Nelson Noodles. Golden in color, all gooey with rich gravy, big gobs of tender chicken floating around, wonder I piled my plate high and for three days went around with a satisfied tummy. Coffee was grand as it always is when made by our official coffee maker the same Carrie. After the dinner Mrs. Hurd started the regular program. Vernon Hurd gave a fine description of the first farming. He was then thirteen years old but turned the first furrow and made a crop of peanuts. I can vouch for the truthfulness of his tale for I saw him plowing, sowing and reaping. H. A. Clapp discussed the pioneer men, while Mrs. Liggett told all about the pioneer women; Mrs. Claire Pollard told about her early impressions. These talks were followed and short talks by L. E. Liggett, Roy Nelson, O. Gableman, Mrs. Robert Murry, Frank King, Mrs. Anna Crane and others. Each of these talks were real gems of briefness. Ice cream and a delicious punch served by the ladies of the clubs. The punch was a delight and the bowl was presided over by she whom I thought was my friend in the person of Emily Hurd. I had left my money at home with the miserable wretch, so when I wanted a drink of that temping punch on credit, my friend coolly informed me that she was doing a cash business, so I was forced to stand around looking at the punch bowl with dribbling lips until Mrs. Martyn came and staked me to a nickel. Boy! That was the finest punch I have ever tasted which had not been spiked. Emily made it. During the program Mrs. Hurd asked all to stand with bowed heads in silent prayer, for one minute in memory of those who had passed. I feel sure that those of the pioneers who are now spying out another country, paused in their trekking and give us their blessing. It was a good day, a fine day of friendship, a day of closer association and all departed determined that so long as they live each year will witness another celebration in memory of the past. The community canning club had arranged a program for the evening, but this because of the weather was postponed as was the game of baseball on Van Wormer Field. Had it been a pleasant day perhaps as many as three or four hundred would have been present and there was abundant food for all. Many who lived close by were forced to return to their homes because the dirt roads were impassable. Had the viaduct been open half of Palacios would have been present, among them my old friends, the Farwells and Duncan Ruthven and family. O well, God willing there will be another day on the 25th of May, 1934. It was a grand day and we went to our homes thankful that God has blessed us with homes, shelter, food, raiment and friends. What more do we wish? I missed my old friends, Mr. and Mrs. Gustave Franzen, the Walter family, the Haisley family all among the pioneers.
The Daily Tribune, Thursday, June 1, 1933
By Harry Austin Clapp
[Local information taken from longer article.]
Friday, a young matron called on us and during the conversation she said "my husband told me that if Mr. Clapp brought this fine rain, he was entitled to kiss me." "Of course," I replied "I did bring the rain and every one knows I did" so I proceeded to collect. After I had made the collection and it takes some time to extract all the honey from the comb,
"She looked at me so shy
With a merry twinkle in her eye."
and asked "do you think it will rain tomorrow?" "Yes," I replied "I feel sure we will have a very good rain tomorrow." And it did not rain.
When I was a lad the razor was the special weapon of men who grew hair on their face, but since woman suffrage and women have come down from their high pedestal to the equal of men, they have assumed possession of this tool and with it shave various portions of their anatomy thinking they are making an improvement on God's work. They mail.
The other day I saw a girl with eye brows shaved or plucked until all that was left was a thin pencil line. Her face ghastly white with powder, lips an unusual red and I'll say she looked like a peeled onion. And I wonder why they do it.
The cloud effects in the northern sky Sunday night formed wonderful pictures. Among them, I saw a bust of Washington, a fine profile of Lincoln, a big dog and a small terrier, two Esquimaux dressed in white fur and one had a pack on his back. A little girl with a white fur hat pulled close on her head, a big long snake, two airplanes, one quite close the other more distant. The planes were so perfect as to almost fool the observer. I enjoy watching cloud pictures. Try it some day.
Another five inch rain and the ground is saturated. Much seed will rot in the ground. For some crops too late for replanting. Not too late for the feeding stuffs and that is something all farmers can use to advantage.
When the eighty-four individuals and business houses of Bay City paid for a Memorial Day page in Monday's Daily Tribune and by doing so subscribed to the beautiful sentiment displayed in a box at the bottom of the page, they did more than the placing of flowers on the graves of those who wore the Blue, the Grey, and the Khaki. They subscribed to the fact that today there is no North, no South, but a united country, every man proud and willing to wear the colors of his country. I honor the men who in this thoughtful and loving way remembered those who have given their lives that America might live. They are better citizens for their act. Men, I salute you!
By the way, I congratulate the Tribune on the work of the society reporter.
A bill in the legislature will require that a worked over auto battery be marked "worked over." Now if some one will put through a bill requiring bad eggs to be marked "rotten," he will be doing the people of Texas a great service. More people use eggs than autoes, so the service rendered will be greater.
Every day it seems to me a new poet blossoms and I give the last evidence of this gift of the gods. One of my very precious and charming friends is named Ruth. The other day she asked me to inscribe my name in her album which I gladly did over that splendid poem, "The Coin" from Flame and Shadow by Sara Teasdale. In a few days I receive this:
"Life is sweet
Because of the friends we meet,
And the things in common we share.
We want to live on
Not because of ourselves,
But because of our loved ones who care,
'Tis living and doing for somebody else
On this all life's pleasure depends.
When we sum it all up
Is found in the love of a friend."
Well, anyway, such things are perfumed flowers along life's way and the perfume is but a breeze from the sweet soul of the writer.
June 3rd is a memorable day. Two very important events came to pass on June 3rd for it is the birthday of two great characters in the persons of King George V of England and Bill Hurd of Collegeport. King George is only sixty-eight, but Bill has reached the advanced age of nine whole years and is some prince.
Us Homecrofters happened to be guests at the birthday party and it finished a delightful week. The table was a bower of beauty. From the brilliant lamp suspended over the table, big yellow streamers depended to each corner and they were glittering with silvered streamers. White linen, scintillating glass, rare china, a big white and pink birthday cake with nine candles, formed the centerpiece and a delicious punch with salads, stuffed eggs, tender delicate sandwiches and other goodies completed the ensemble. Candy and gifts galore. As I sat at the table and looked at the faces of the devoted parents, I thought "Bill you certainly area a lucky kid to have such a father and such a mother." King George is ending his race. Bill is beginning and if spared the years his great grandfather enjoyed, he is sure to participate in the building of a new world. We congratulate Bill and his parents and pray that God may grant them many happy years and that Bill may become as fine and useful man as is King George.
When I reported that Wadsworth came over here and trimmed the local baseball team to the tune of 5-0, I did an injury to our brave locals. Wronged them, offended them, aggrieved them, and I hereby apologize. They are after my scalp. I am trying to escape and so report that the local team trounced the visitors with over twenty in favor of the home team. I trust they will read this and I may go after my mail without fear of ambush.
The Woman's Union met with Mrs. John Heisey last Thursday with an attendance of fifteen. A petition asking the county court to call a special election for the purpose of allowing our people to vote on the question of changing from a rural high school district to an independent district. I am informed that about thirty names were on the petition. I signed it, but am not certain how I shall vote for must have time to study the subject. It has many advantages and may be a forward step in our desire for a better school. Anyway, I'll hold my two votes for a while.
Had a call Saturday from Mr. LeTulle, station agent at Bay City and Mr. Marshall, trainmaster of the Brownsville railroad and they assured me that changes had been made in the train schedule so that they would be no further delayed mails. Good news.
The local canning club gave their regular monthly program Thursday night with a large attendance. The evening was brightened by the presence of the Bay City Serenaders, a splendid musical organization. The musicians of Bay City have been kind to us and we appreciate their frequent visits. These programs are a delight to our folk as is evidenced by attendance and interest shown. I am informed that they will be regular events.
The Matagorda County Tribune, Thursday, June 8, 1933
By Harry Austin Clapp
[Local information taken from longer article.]
Monday was enlivened by a visit from Mr. and Mrs. G. B. Davis who live near Simpsonville. They were accompanied by Miss Annie Ross of Agua Dulce, Texas. Miss Ross is a graduate of the Kingsville College, has taught primary grades for three years and is an applicant for a position in Bay View High.
We have some fine girls in this burg. They come from the nobody knows, they grow like young plants and then they flower into delicate, perfumed blossoms, gorgeous flowers of young womanhood. Frances King is one of these. I saw her yesterday and was amazed. She is bright, intelligent, ambitious, sweet, gentle and has grown into a flower we all may be proud of.
Monday the miserable wretch accompanied the King family to Bay City and on her return she was able not only to neck me, but to bite me.
Well, anyway, a few tubs of three point one and I care not how hard she bites.
The other day I bought a can of salmon with net weight one pound and paid the sum of twelve cents. The can was enameled outside and in, a beautiful can and covered with an attractive label in nine colors. The package must have cost two cents. The retailer made a profit of two cents, which leaves eight cents for production and distribution. For that sum the fish was caught, cleaned, packed, processed and delivered from Alaska to Collegeport. How can it be done is the first question that came to me. Only one answer and that is volume. Fish caught in the bay right at my door sell for twelve to fifteen cents per pound, head, tail, guts and I have to dress them.
The King's Daughters met Thursday night with an attendance of forty-five at the home of Mrs. A. E. McCune. It was held in the evening so it might be a moonlight party. No miracle was performed in feeding this gathering and after it was over, twelve baskets were not filled with the fragments for it only required half that number. No daughter thought of me so I stayed at home, with floats on my feet, a corn jimmy in my mouth filled with R. J. R., a book The Faith of Our Fathers by James Cardinal Gibbons, Archbishop of Baltimore, in my hand and under the bright light, I read this wonderful tale and so to bed and fine dreams.
Among our callers Thursday were Mamie Franzen who thinks strongly of living in Illinois and Mr. and Mrs. Douglas Whitehead, who wanted to borrow the shot gun and go a squirreling.
Mrs. Oscar Vernon Chapin and her mother, Mrs. Luce of San Antonio, were here Wednesday visiting old friends. Mrs. Chapin at one time was Collegeport's Guinea Queen, but is no longer a queen for she is manager of a chain store in the Bexar capitol.
Much to our regret, the Guy Hutchinson family will leave for Corpus Christi next week to make that their home. We have known Guy for many years and have great respect for his family.
Saturday I walked down Central Street and looked over the sanitarium site and looking clearly it appeared that some dirt had been moved and my heart leaped in anticipation of seeing a great building filled with health seekers. I gazed across 4200 feet of water and wished the county court would issue a proclamation advising me that the viaduct was open.
Tomorrow, being Sunday, we, meaning I and the miserable wretch, would walk to service at St. John's Chapel.
The library was visited by many folk Friday and a large number of books put out.
Mr. Duffy having leased the LeTulle pasture south of town is now moving cattle in.
L. E. Liggett brought in a car of cattle Friday. If business continues to pick up like this the Mopac will soon be out of the bankrupt court.
Saturday night another drizzling rain came to us and it will be of great benefit to those farmers who have just planted the second time.
Miss Ellen Travis, daughter of Rev. M. A. Travis, is here for a short visit with the Carrick family. Mrs. Merle Groves, her son, Frank Simpson Groves and her mother, Mrs. Joe O'Leary arrived Friday for a week's visit with the Burton D. Hurd family. They are enroute to Kansas City their home port. Wish they could stay here all summer so Frank and I could hunt elephants, lions, tigers, and bandits. Gertrude Hunt is home from Houston. She has been employed in Houston for the past year and is now taking a well earned vacation.
Lera is expected home in a few days.
The Matagorda County Tribune, Thursday, June 15, 1933
By Harry Austin Clapp
[Local information taken from longer article.]
Saw Pat Jenkins in the post office and asked "how does your cotton look?" He replied "looks pretty and coming fine." Now when that boy says cotton looks pretty, one knows it is making a very satisfactory growth for Pat was raised on a farm with a first class cotton farmer for a father and he knows cotton.
Most of our cotton is late this year, later than I have seen it for twenty-five years, but boy, most of it looks pretty.
W. H. Gussie has about sixty acres of late cotton and although he lost his first plantings, the second is up and looks pretty. Would not be surprised if he took off a bale to the acre. A man must just love cotton to be a successful grower of that staple. Gussie loves his cotton. The late cotton will make in plenty of time for picking and I predict a good crop.
More rain Sunday and Monday and light showers Tuesday and not needed for we have a splendid season in the ground. Rice looks fine and feed crops are luxuriant. Looks as though the goose hangs high for those who live in the Magic Bottle.
Some weeks ago a petition was signed by about thirty-five voters asking the county court to call a special election so that the people of school district No. 26 might vote on a proposition to have an independent district. Now comes another petition asking those who signed the first one to request that the court ignore their signatures on the first petition. I think the people should always have the right to vote on any question whether it be prohibition or school problems. This is their right. The opponents claim that those who started the first petition had an ulterior motive. Maybe they did, but why not be charitable and give them credit for having an ambition to improve school conditions and provide our children with better opportunities. I am broad minded enough to realize that there are two view points to every question. One should try to understand the psychology of the other person, but I confess that I am unable to understand the psychology of vacillation that urges some folk to repudiate their signatures. Baptist today--Methodist tomorrow. Republican this election--Democrat the next. Such persons are never dependable.
The Woman's Club held its usual monthly meeting in the community house. The only officer present was the secretary and four members. Routine business being dispatched, a program of unusual merit was given by Mrs. Richard Corporon, the subject being "Better Homes and Gardens,"
Mrs. L. E. Liggett, who has been in Dallas for two weeks at the bedside of her mother, is expected to return this week.
The Burton D. Hurds have returned from a two week's trip to Graham County, Ariz.
Mr. Douglas, president of the board of school trustees, called on me Friday and informs me that all the teachers have been selected and in his opinion a good faculty has been provided.
Sam Franz, our local tonsorial artist is still keeping open shop and doing excellent work as I can testify.
June 16 is the date of two very important events in the world's history for on that day were born Gustaf V of Sweden and Harry Austin Clapp of Michigan. Gustaf was born in 1858 while the other was born in 1862. The remarkable thing about these births is that each had a mother. I presume Gustaf had a father. I know I had a good father. So it came about that Friday, June 16, 1933 that I reached my 71st day [year?]. Many friends brought me remembrances, most of them from the field, orchard and vine. I had roastin' ears, cucumbers, tomatoes, parsley, new spuds, eggs, sausage, cheese, butter, three quart jars of preserves, six bags of R. J. R., candy, peanuts, a swell birthday letter from my Mary Louise and a very welcome telegrams from my Toddie Boy. Along about five p. m., I heard what sounded like Christmas carols. As the singers came nearer, I soon found that they were singing birthday carols. The singers were Vernon, Emily and Bill Hurd, Mrs. Merle Groves and Frank Groves and the song was "Happy Birthday to You! Happy birthday to you!"
They brought a big box of fruits and vegetables and a peg puzzle. Among my gifts was a two-pound box of Kraft-Phoenix Old English Cheese from Miss Imogene Powell, Chicago. For many years, I have taken pride in making "Welsh Rarebits" and considered myself quite a "rabbit" hound, but his Old English Cheese is the one ingredient I have always desired but never knew where it might be obtained this side of Old England. Soon as I opened the box, I knew that at last I had the desideratum and proceeded to make a rarebit the like of which never graced our oaken board. As usual, I opened a bottle of beer and let it growl until it was a very dead old soldier and then I weighed grain by grain each ingredient with meticulous care. Adding the cheese, it melted down into a flow of gold, full of good humor, genial, soft as the kiss of an angel, yet as passionate as a Sybarite. It was creamy beyond imagination. It gave the master touch to a priceless creation. As served, we experienced a new deliciousness of flavor, exquisitely different. Old English cheese has the quality of sharpness, tamed to a new zest. This cheese was made in Denison, Texas by the Kraft-Phoenix Corporation. It was my first experience with cheese made in Texas and it will not be my last for I shall in the future use Old English cheese in my "rarebits," excuse me I mean "rabbits."
Well, anyway, while it may be time to cheese it about birthdays, I am unable to close without informing my readers that we had a swell day and hope we may enjoy another next year.
I read in the papers that the state highway commission has been asked to designate a road through Collegeport to Palacios Bayou and Palacios Point to connect with the Intracoastal Canal. This will be a splendid improvement but it looks to us fellows living at the end of the road that now is the time to ask designation of the Hug the Coast across the bay from Palacios to Matagorda, Gulf, Freeport and Galveston. We, meaning I and the miserable wretch, need this viaduct so we may walk to service at St. John's Chapel in Palacios. Those who should be interested appear lukewarm, those who should be active in pushing this project seem to be chilly and stoical. Wonder why. Sixteen hundred folk living in the Magic Bottle are about to lose rail transportation. They are tired and disgusted with life at the end of the road and crave a through route. Now is the time to ask for designation. Never again will so much money be available.
Friday night a party of seventeen, including Mr. and Mrs. Carl Boeker, Mrs. Ben Mowery, Mr. and Mrs. Jno. Merck took passage on a fair built ship to Pass Cavallo to stay until Sunday night. As we had a good breeze Saturday, I fear that some of them will need a sniff of anti sea sick. I hope they have a big catch of fish and bring one to us Homecrofters. If they fail me, I shall not write a word about the trip next week.
The Matagorda County Tribune, Thursday, June 22, 1933
By Harry Austin Clapp
[Local information taken from longer article.]
Mr. and Mrs. Arnold Franzen drove down from Houston to spend the week-end with the Franzen family. Glad to report that Gustave Franzen was able to attend services Sunday. Wonder how Gustave Junior knew that June 16th was my birthday. He brought me a bundle of delicious roastin' ears that day.
Monday I received a belated birthday gift from a sugar girl, a princess of the Illini tribe. It was in the form of a jig saw puzzle, which solved, developed into a beautiful birthday card. When I read the instructions with the jig saw and learn that a boy of six should solve it in thirty minutes. I find that it, as a rule, requires about three hours of my time. Considering that the left half of my brain is like a dish of jello on a hot day and the other half quite mushy, and that I have a wooden leg, looks as though I am quite smart after all.
Tuesday, the day was enlivened, vivified, gladdened by a visit from our old friend and neighbors Mr. and Mrs. Charles Heck. Mr. Heck for years ran the engine on the Portsmouth Limited and made his home here. He was one of the school trustees for several terms. His family was raised here and his daughter with Mary Louise, Helen Duckworth and Lois Coffin, form a quartette hard to equal. Mr. Heck is now on the night passenger run from Houston to Kingsville.
The St. Louis Brownsville & Mexico Railroad Company has asked permission from the state railroad commission to modify the service on the Collegeport branch from one train each day to one train each week and otherwise not to be required to come here on extra runs unless ten cars of freight are offered. The case is known as R. R. Docket No. 3174 and has been set for hearing on June 25, 1933 at Austin. The request is in accordance with senate bill No. 312 passed by the last legislature, which allowed relief to branch lines, by modification of service.
I read the bill recently passed by our national congress which provides an enormous grant of money to the states for construction purposes. In that portion devoted to an explanation of highway work it frequently made reference to "free flow of traffic." Now that sounds mighty good, but how in the world can traffic flow freely, when it reaches the end of the road?
The other day two autoes, with perhaps ten people drove blithely down the "nine foot sidewalk" expecting to cross the bay to Palacios and on down the coast. When they saw that the viaduct was not open to traffic, I am informing you that although there was no free flow of traffic, there was a very free flow of execration, denunciation, anathema which was visibly and audibly increased when they were informed that to reach the other side, just over there a few hundred feet, it would be necessary to drive 32.6 miles. Slimy snails how I blushed as I listened. Now with the viaduct open, all this suffering and kussing will be saved and we, meaning I and the miserable wretch, may walk to service at St. John's Chapel.
I am informed that those who oppose the formation of an independent school district are telling our folk that if we vote an independent district we will lose all state aid. The following letter from A. A. Bullock, chief supervisor, rural schools dated Austin, Texas, June 19 appears to refute such statements:
"If a common school district changes its status and becomes an independent district, the change will not effect in any way the right of the school to receive a consolidation or bonus or any other form of rural aid.
It is entirely up to the board of trustees of the independent district, as to whether or not the tax rate or the valuation of the property in the district be raised or lowered. The board of trustees of an independent district should, after the tax rate has been set, appoint a board of eqaulization consisting of three persons to adjust and equalize tax values in the district. An independent district has no effect directly or indirectly upon another independent district as far as the legal status of the district is concerned. Another district desiring to consolidate with an independent district may do so as provided by law.
This letter is addressed to Mrs. Frank King and she will gladly allow it to be read by any interested person.
Monday, Mrs. Joe O'Leary, her daughter, Mrs. Merle Groves and grandson, Frank Simpson Groves, left for their home in Kansas City after a ten day's visit with the Burton D. Hurd family. They were accompanied as far as Topeka by Mrs. Vernon King Hurd II from which point they went on to Denver, where they will visit with their family folk for the summer months. Practically every one in this community will miss the charming young matron for she has endeared herself to us all by her sweet and wholesome ways and her eagerness to assist in all civic work. Us Homecrofters will miss her frequent visits with us and we regretting her absence, look forward to her return.
Frances King is in San Marcos attending the summer course and in the fall will enter the regular college course. She is a good student and will be a credit to our community. Abel King will go to Markham High to finish his pre courses.
Clarence Vaughan, who is associated with W. H. Gussie in the operation of a tract of land on the northeast corner of the townsite is so kind to his mules that he has provided a trailer in which they ride to work and back to barn for feeding. Mr. Vaughan is a man with plenty of dinero to handle a considerable acreage and with that this is a first class farmer. The townsite company is fortunate to have such a man working its land.
The Matagorda County Tribune, Thursday, June 29, 1933
Copyright 2009 -
Present by Bay City Newspapers, Inc.
|This page was created
Mar. 14, 2009
|This page was updated
Apr. 29, 2009