What are ESDs?
ESDs link local public and private schools with state and national educational resources. ESD programs allow districts to eliminate duplication of services, realize significant savings and receive special programs that might otherwise be unavailable to them. Washington's nine ESDs are similar to regional support systems in other states struggling to stretch limited dollars over demands for ever-increasing services. Nationwide, the value of regional service agencies has been emphasized by their inclusion in reauthorization language of federal school mandates and funding.
Purpose of ESDs
Educational Service Districts are established by laws of the State of Washington (RCW 28A.310) as regional agencies responsible for:
- Providing cooperative and informational services to local school districts,
- Assisting the State Superintendent of Public Instruction and State Board of Education in the performance of their respective statutory and constitutional duties, and
- Providing services to school districts to assure equal educational opportunities for all students.
History of the ESDs
Washington’s education system is divided geographically into nine regions, each served by an educational service district, or ESD. The nine ESD regions have evolved through a series of legislative directives. Prior to 1969, each of Washington’s 39 counties housed an education office that was responsible for meeting the needs of local school districts. In 1969, the Washington State Board of Education created a statewide system of intermediate school districts, or ISDs, that would replace the individual county offices. That year, the state board established fourteen ISDs. In 1972, the state board reviewed the needs of each geographic region, and reduced the number of ISDs from fourteen to twelve. In 1975, the ISDs were renamed educational service districts, or ESDs—the name they still carry today. In 1977, the state board further reduced the number of ESDs from twelve to the current nine.
Educational Service District 123 Defining Events
The Educational Service District 123 Board of Directors
has identified the following as defining events in the history of ESD 123.