From Cairo and Benghazi to Madison, Albany and Washington, it’s hard to keep up with all that is going on at this unique moment in history. Here in the United States, politics is being driven by a new anti-investment, pro-pollution majority in the House of Representatives and statehouses in Wisconsin, Ohio, and elsewhere. Negotiations between the House, Senate and White House on the new federal budget will reach a critical juncture in the next 14 days.
The House of Representatives, on February 19, passed a spending bill by a vote of 235-189 that not only cuts dramatically from investments in clean energy, but blocks the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) from addressing dangerous carbon pollution and cuts the agency’s budget in ways that will cripple critical programs to protect public health. Amendments were passed which prevent the EPA from carrying out its mission to protect the air we breathe. According to a summary from the US Climate Action Network, these include:
Amendment #165 sponsored by Rep. Carter (R-TX), would prevent the EPA from enforcing new standards to cut air pollution from cement plants. The amendment passed 250-177. As a consequence, the EPA would not be able to protect the public from mercury – 16,000 pounds a year of it – and other toxic emissions in the air we breathe, potentially leading to 1,500 heart attacks, 17,000 cases of aggravated asthma and 2,500 premature deaths every year.
Amendment #466 offered by Rep. Poe (R-TX), passed 249-177. It would prevent the EPA from setting any limits on emissions of carbon dioxide, methane, nitrous oxide, sulfur hexafluoride, hydrofluorocarbons, or perfluorocarbons.
Amendment #84 offered by Rep. Pompeo (R-KS), passed 239-185. It would shut down the EPA greenhouse gas registry. This amendment would prevent EPA from collecting basic data from large emitters on how much carbon dioxide and other heat-trapping pollutants are being released into the air.
It’s really quite clear. What are being described as “job killing regulations” are really measures that protect public health and open the door to job creating investments that will allow the United States to compete in the clean energy future. More than ever, it’s time to stand up to the fossil fuel industry – especially the oil and coal interests – that are trying to keep us mired in the past.