In the beginning days of the Texas Revolution, the Texian rebels were mauled at the Alamo and at Goliad. A Mexican victory seemed imminent. This was not to be, though.
On April 21, 1836, in what is now Harris County, a retreating and feisty army of Texian volunteers and professionals did an about-face and surprised the pursuing Mexican army and routed them. The actual engagement lasted less than 30 minutes; approximately 630 of the Mexican soldiers were killed and 730 were captured while only nine Texians died.
The Mexican leader, Santa Anna, disappeared during the battle but was captured the next day, disguised in a private's uniform.
He was born Antonio de Padua Maria Severino Lopez de Santa Anna y Perez de Lebron. He called himself the Napoleon of the West. History remembers him as Santa Anna and he was president of Mexico on seven nonconsecutive occasions over a turbulent 22-year period from 1833 until 1855.
His victories against the Texas rebels were brutal and decisive, and his defeat by these same rebels was as brutal and decisive as it was swift. The Mexican president and commander in chief found himself prisoner of the Texians, who, almost to a man, hated him intensely and wanted him dead or, at the least, severely punished and imprisoned.
But a different fate altogether awaited Antonio Lopez de Santa Anna.
Sam Houston was a pragmatist. Despite strong emotions to do otherwise, Houston realized the fledgling republic, to survive, must maintain sound relations with its large neighbors to the south and north.
He, along with acting President David G. Burnet, elected to negotiate a treaty with the Mexican government, represented by Santa Anna, to recognize the sovereignty of the new republic, thus the Treaties of Velasco.
The first, an open treaty, declared hostilities would cease and Santa Anna would lay down his arms. The second, a secret treaty, allowed Santa Anna to return to Mexico via Vera Cruz, and "a commission sent by the Texas government should be received, and that by means of negotiations all differences between Texas and Mexico should be settled and independence of Texas acknowledged. The Rio Grande was agreed upon as boundary ..."
On June 3, 1836, El Presidente, likely elated at this successful bargain for his life, boarded the schooner Invincible anchored at the mouth of the Brazos and bound for Vera Cruz.
But once unleashed, the dogs of war are difficult to stop. A group of recently arrived and heavily armed volunteers defied the provisional government, boarded the Invincible and took Santa Anna prisoner with the intent of trying and hanging him. He was imprisoned at the Phelps plantation, 30 miles up the Brazos from Velasco.
Dr. Phelps, one of the Original 300, and a humanitarian, kept Santa Anna imprisoned but alive and, as it was, General Santa Anna lived to fight yet another day.
And live he did. President Andrew Jackson strongly suggested he be released and on Nov. 25, 1836, a military entourage that included Santa Anna left Velasco, passed through the now-quiet San Jacinto battlefield and headed north through Louisiana to the Mississippi River, where they took a steamboat to the Ohio and up that river to Kentucky.
Along the journey the party was greeted with curiosity and respect, even in Kentucky, the home of many of those killed at Goliad.
Santa Anna was greeted warmly in Washington, D.C., and met privately with President Jackson on several occasions. Finally, after more than a year, the U.S. frigate Pioneer transported Santa Anna home to Mexico where he promptly retired to his opulent hacienda near Veracruz, Manga de Clavo.
Santa Anna could not stay retired and he would leave and re-enter Mexican politics six more times before his death on June 21, 1876, at age 82.
Former San Angeloan Ron Cosper lives in Evergreen, Colo.