Pergidae of the World
An online catalogue of the sawfly family Pergidae (Hymenoptera, Symphyta).
by Stefan Schmidt & David R. Smith
The Pergidae are, after the Tenthredinidae and the Argidae, the third largest family of Symphyta. Their morphology, habits, and food plants exhibit a diversity which is not found in any other family of the Symphyta.
The Pergidae show a Gondwanan distribution, with the majority of species occurring in South America and Australia, but no species known from Africa. They are the dominant sawfly family in Australia and, with the Tenthredinidae and Argidae, are one of the major families in the Neotropics.
This website provides full information on original descriptions, synonymy, and taxonomic changes, subsequent references, recorded distributions, parasite and food plant data, and remarks on the biology, and taxonomy of certain species. For a few, mainly Australian species images are available.
Totals in this catalogue are 34 valid genera and 276 valid species for the Western Hemisphere and 26 valid genera and 163 valid species for the Australasian Region (see summary table of species in the world). Of the 163 Australasian species, 140 species occur in Australia and 23 species are confined to Indonesia (Sulawesi, West Papua) and Papua New Guinea.
The information provided in this website is based on the following print publication and includes additional information that became available after the catalogue was published:
Schmidt, S. & Smith, D.R. (2006). An annotated systematic world catalogue of the Pergidae (Hymenoptera). Contributions of the American Entomological Institute 34(3): 1-207.
The print catalogue is available for download as PDF (1.3MB).
Please note: the catalogue has been published as a Contribution of the American Entomological Institute, the only definitive repository for the content that has been certified and accepted after peer review. Copyright and all rights therein are retained by the American Entomological Institute. This material may not be copied or reposted without explicit permission. Copyright © 2006 by American Entomological Institute.
Schmidt, S. & Smith, D.R. 2006. Pergidae of the World - an online catalogue of the sawfly family Pergidae (Insecta, Hymenoptera, Symphyta). World Wide Web electronic publication.
www.pergidae.net [accessed 2-Feb-2009]*
*replace with date of access
The Illustration on this page were taken from: Bennett, G. & Scott, A.W. 1859. Description of a species of Perga, or Saw-fly, found feeding upon the Eucalyptus citriodora of Hooker, or wide bay Lemon-scented Gum-tree. Proceedings of the Zoological Society of London 27: 209-212.