The JEDI-ACE project (Japanese-European De-Icing Aircraft Collaborative Exploration) is a joint European and Japanese R+D programme that investigates how to prevent, detect and remove the ice that builds up on certain parts of aircraft, particularly the wings. The URV’s Physics and Crystallography of Materials group is leading the development of sensors that will warn of the build-up of ice on parts of the aircraft and activate systems for eliminating it. Ice formation is one of the commonest causes of aircraft accidents because it affects the machine’s ability to remain airborne and can cause its instruments to give incorrect readings, as happened with the flight Air France 447 that crashed into the Atlantic when flying from Rio de Janeiro to Paris in 2009.
Antoni Llobet studies the design of a photoelectrochemical cell for the generation of solar fuel
Natural structures can have quite exceptional properties. Some surfaces are highly efficient at repelling water – hydrophobic surfaces – and some insects are so good at cleaning themselves that they cannot be contaminated by such particles as dust, spores or bacteria. And it has now been discovered that the wings of some insects such as the cicada have another property: they are lethal to such gram negative bacteria as Pseudomonas aeruginosa, a common bacteria that can cause diseases in plants animals and humans.
The URV group Physics and Crystallography of Materials and Nanomaterials is taking part in Clean Space, a programme that is designing a new laser to clean up space. The aim of this research programme is to design a new, extremely powerful pulsed laser which will be able to eliminate space junk and debris. It is a joint project between companies and research groups from four European countries.
This is the first time that the URV has been included in the ARWU 2012 (Academic Ranking of World Universities)
ICIQ research on heterogeneous catalysis published in Nature Chemistry
The objective of this programme is to promote research in chemistry and energy, one of the priority areas for the Campus of International Excellence Southern Catalonia (CEICS). Financing will be provided from funds provided to CEICS and earmarked for measures designed to attract talent within the framework of the International Campus of Excellence programme. Researchers who are hired will work on research projects to develop new adhesive stickers. The funds allocated for the grant programme (120,000 euros) will be provided jointly and in equal amounts by Henkel and the URV.
Creating a Technology-Based Enterprise (TBE) can represent a great opportunity for young university graduates seeking employment. These are the words of Francesc Medina, one of the founders of APLICAT, a Rovira i Virgili University TBE which provides solutions to environmental problems through catalysis. In the company’s first five years, it has worked for 11 companies and billed 1.5 million euros. This year, turnover is expected to be between 400 and 500 thousand euros. The founders believe that creating the TBE was a good professional decision and is an excellent way to transfer technology generated in the university to the business sector. APLICAT has developed technologies in the region and hopes to now export these technologies to the rest of the world. They have already made contacts in Canada and Hong Kong.
We can see objects because each material reflects light differently. On the basis of this principle, the URV research group NePhoS is working to create a sensor that is able to capture the photoluminescence spectrum of a given substance and identify its composition or the presence of other elements. Among the advantages of sensors based on optical concepts are that they are more accurate, less prone to error risk and can be used to create manageable and economical appliances. This is one of the doors that has been opened up by nanotechnology.
CEICS Campus of International Excellence Southern Catalonia
Phone +34 977 29 70 11 • C. de l'Escorxador, s/n 43003 Tarragona • info(ELIMINAR)@ceics.eu
© CEICS Campus of International Excellence Southern Catalonia 2010
Financed by the Spanish Ministry of Education at the 2009 call for proposals.