Pistacchio di Bronte
Pomodoro di Pachino IGP
Pomodoro San Marzano DOP
Prosciutto di Cinta senese
Prosciutto di Norcia IGP
Prosciutto di Parma DOP
Prosciutto di San Daniele DOP
Provolone Val Padana DOP
Ricotta romana DOP
Spalla cotta di San Secondo
The city of Bronte is perched at the top of slope of volcanic rock, located about half a mile northeast of Etna. The Arabs, who once controlled the region, are ...
Tags: Spring, Summer, Autumn, Fruits and vegetables, Winter, Sicilia
Pachino tomatoes have been grown since the 1920s in the coastal area of Pachino and neighboring territories. Initially, the tomato crops had to fight for space with the grape vines.
Tags: Summer, Fruits and vegetables, Sicilia
The tomato, originally from Central America, arrived in Europe during the 16th century. At the time, the plant had primarily an ornamental value.
Tags: Summer, Campania, Fruits and vegetables
Prosciutto di Cinta Senese owes its sweet, slightly gamey flavor, oily fat and aroma to the heritage Italian breed of pig called “Cinta Senese” used to make the prosciutto.
Tags: Spring, Summer, Autumn, Winter, Meat and sausages, Toscana
Prosciutto di Norcia can be made is two ways: the ancient or modern method. The ancient method was codified at the end of the Roman period. In his book De ...
Tags: Spring, Summer, Autumn, Winter, Meat and sausages, Umbria
The history of Prosciutto di Parma dates back to the Roman period. Parma was located at the heart of the Cisalpine Gaul, a province of the Roman Republic. In De ...
Tags: Spring, Summer, Autumn, Winter, Emilia Romagna, Meat and sausages
This prosciutto most likely dates back the Celtic period, when hunters needed a method for meat conservation. The microclimate around San Daniele is perfect for conserving and drying ...
Tags: Spring, Summer, Autumn, Winter, Friuli Venezia Giulia, Meat and sausages
Provolone Val Padana is a whole cow’s milk cheese in the shape of a pear or cone. It is a semi-hard cheese with a white to straw color.
Tags: Spring, Cheese, Summer, Autumn, Winter, Emilia Romagna, Lombardia, Trentino Alto Adige, Veneto
There has been a lot written about ricotta, a cheese that has been made for centuries. There are even sources from the Roman age that document the use of residual ...
Tags: Spring, Cheese, Summer, Autumn, Winter, Lazio
Salame Felino is a pure pork salame from Felino, a small town located in the green Baganza valley, full of forests where herds of pigs were raised in an ancient ...
Spalla cotta of San Secondo is a type of traditional cured pork product made in precise area of the Bassa Parmese, outside of Parma. It takes its name from the ...
For a long time, the word speck referred to lard, from the Latin lardum, meaning the fat part of the pig.
Tags: Spring, Summer, Autumn, Winter, 15 minutes, Meat and sausages, Trentino Alto Adige, 20 minutes
Taleggio is a soft, table cheese produced predominately in Lombardy with a couple of cheese-makers working outside the region, in Novarese and Treigiano. The cheese’s name comes from the Taleggio ...
Tags: Spring, Cheese, Summer, Autumn, Winter, Lombardia
The Crocus Sativus Linneo is a famous, ancient plant. Originally from Asia, saffron was brought to Tunisia through the trade route and then to Spain. And it finally arrived in ...
Tags: Abruzzo, Spring, Summer, Autumn, Winter, Spices-dressings-sauces