Work as founder
To reinstate primitive Christianity and its lost element of healing was the stated purpose of the Church of Christ, Scientist, which she founded with 15 students in Lynn, Mass., in 1879. A promising move to Boston in 1882 began with a jolting setback: the death of her third husband, Asa Gilbert Eddy, on whose support she had relied since their marriage in 1877. Nonetheless, during her years in Boston from 1882 to 1889, Christian Science began to make an impact on American religious life.
Boston was an intellectual centre where new ideas, especially in religion, traveled fast. Eddy contributed to the ferment in the religious life of New England, especially since she maintained that her teaching, while thoroughly Christian, offered a distinct alternative to both liberal and orthodox forms of Christianity.
The demands on her were enormous during this period. Eddy taught hundreds of students in the Massachusetts Metaphysical College, for which she obtained a charter in 1881. She continued to revise Science and Health and wrote a number of shorter works, including numerous articles for a monthly magazine she founded in 1883. And she also preached intermittently at Christian Science church services, which were attracting a growing number of disaffected mainstream Protestants.
Her successes in the 1880s, especially her conversions of mainstream Protestants, exposed her to growing criticism from concerned Boston ministers. The fledgling Christian Science movement was further threatened by internal schism and the rivalry of various mind-cure groups that appropriated her terminology but sought healing not through divine help but through the powers of the human mind, which she saw as engendering disease in the first place. In response to these challenges, Eddy's writings repeatedly underscore the biblical basis of her teachings and the Christian demands of practicing it. She also explicitly differentiated Christian Science from theosophy and spiritualism, both antecedents of 20th-century New Age movements.
Eddy moved to Concord, N.H., in 1889, and eventually settled into a house, called Pleasant View, with a small staff. During the next decade she gained both authority within the movement and public recognition outside it. In 1892 she reorganized the church she had founded in 1879, and over the next decade she established its present structure as The Mother ChurchThe First Church of Christ, Scientistand its worldwide branches. In 1895 she published the Manual of The Mother Church, a slim book of bylaws that she continued to revise until her death and that she intended would govern the church in perpetuity.
Her growing public stature as a religious leader, together with the practical challenge her teachings posed to conventional religion and medicine, made her the subject of mounting controversy, as seen in a set of articles in 1902 and 1903 (published in book form in 1907 under the title Christian Science) by Mark Twain, who severely criticized Eddy while speaking at points warmly of her teaching. There was also a highly misleading series that ran in McClure's Magazine for two years and an unsuccessful lawsuit against her (the so-called Next Friends Suit of 1907) that Joseph Pulitzer's New York World newspaper orchestrated to question her mental competence.