|[This is a MPIWG MPDL language technology service]|
Rest (v. t.) To arrest.
Rest (n.) A state of quiet or repose; a cessation from motion or labor; tranquillity; as, rest from mental exertion; rest of body or mind.
Rest (n.) Hence, freedom from everything which wearies or disturbs; peace; security.
Rest (n.) Sleep; slumber; hence, poetically, death.
Rest (n.) That on which anything rests or leans for support; as, a rest in a lathe, for supporting the cutting tool or steadying the work.
Rest (n.) A projection from the right side of the cuirass, serving to support the lance.
Rest (n.) A place where one may rest, either temporarily, as in an inn, or permanently, as, in an abode.
Rest (n.) A short pause in reading verse; a c/sura.
Rest (n.) The striking of a balance at regular intervals in a running account.
Rest (n.) A set or game at tennis.
Rest (n.) Silence in music or in one of its parts; the name of the character that stands for such silence. They are named as notes are, whole, half, quarter,etc.
Rest (n.) To cease from action or motion, especially from action which has caused weariness; to desist from labor or exertion.
Rest (n.) To be free from whanever wearies or disturbs; to be quiet or still.
Rest (n.) To lie; to repose; to recline; to lan; as, to rest on a couch.
Rest (n.) To stand firm; to be fixed; to be supported; as, a column rests on its pedestal.
Rest (n.) To sleep; to slumber; hence, poetically, to be dead.
Rest (n.) To lean in confidence; to trust; to rely; to repose without anxiety; as, to rest on a man's promise.
Rest (n.) To be satisfied; to acquiesce.
Rest (v. t.) To lay or place at rest; to quiet.
Rest (v. t.) To place, as on a support; to cause to lean.
Rest (n.) That which is left, or which remains after the separation of a part, either in fact or in contemplation; remainder; residue.
Rest (n.) Those not included in a proposition or description; the remainder; others.
Rest (n.) A surplus held as a reserved fund by a bank to equalize its dividends, etc.; in the Bank of England, the balance of assets above liabilities.
Rest (v. i.) To be left; to remain; to continue to be.