It is no surprise to me that we have cancer and many other diseases on the rise these days. Our food chain is broken and much of the foods we consume are proceessed and loaded with chemicals that over time will negatively affect our health. I would much rather be able to prevent a disease than have to react to it. I believe the best way we can prevent cancer and disease from happening is to make sure you are taking care of your body through the correct nutrition and exercise each day. It is difficult to get all of the nutrition we need through the food we eat each day and that is why it is important to supplement our diet with the correct supplementation. There are many supplements on the market but most are synthetic and not recognized by our bodies. Zija is made from Moringa Oleifera, which is one of the most nutrient rich plants to ever be discovered and is loaded with nutrients that our bodies can absorb and recognize. That is why many people are experiencing incredible benefits with Zija products. Be proactive and not reactive with your health. Got Zija!
(NaturalNews) Diet, pollution and modern living conditions have been implicated as the factors responsible for cancer, concluded researchers, after analysing the remains of almost 1,000 individuals from ancient Egypt and Greece.
The investigation, conducted by a team from Manchester University, looked into medical literature of the time for descriptions of cancer symptoms as well as examining today’s remains for signs of the disease. They did, for the first time, manage to identify cancer in one Egyptian mummy but this remained the only example in their widespread search. With this in mind, the scientists concluded that cancer was even rarer than previously thought.
Professor Rosalie David, who led the study, said: “In industrialised societies, cancer is second only to cardiovascular disease as a cause of death. In ancient times, it was extremely rare. There is nothing in the natural environment that can cause cancer. So it has to be a man-made disease, down to pollution and changes to our diet and lifestyle.”
The research team painstakingly pieced together the development of cancer over the last 3,000 years, much longer than several other scientific papers. They found that cancer only began to emerge as a common disease in the 1700s, and its rate of occurrence dramatically rose during the 20th century.
Some critics attempted to dismiss the findings, arguing that individuals in ancient societies did not live long enough to develop cancer. However, the doctors dismissed this suggestion, noting that the ancient Egyptians enjoyed a long life expectancy and lived long enough to develop other chronic disease like atherosclerosis and osteoporosis.
As may be expected, there was no comment from any of the major cancer charities. This mini-industry, which has been regularly accused of existing only to serve the drug companies that contribute so heavily towards their income, has consistently distanced itself from research that supports the concept of preventing cancer. Instead, these charities maintain focus only on more advanced and more lucrative ways to manage the condition.
Dr Rachel Thompson of the World Cancer Research Fund instead spoke out about the study: ‘This research makes for very interesting reading. About one in three people in the UK will get cancer so it is fairly commonplace in the modern world. Scientists now say a healthy diet, regular physical activity and maintaining a healthy weight can prevent about a third of the most common cancers so perhaps our ancestors’ lifestyle reduced their risk from cancer.’
The conclusion from this research backs the logic offered by many nutritional therapists across the globe; they have continually stated that cancer is an expression of an individual’s environment and is also totally preventable, too. Despite the position of many so-called cancer charities, it remains inconceivable that nutrient deficiencies and the choking influence of man-made toxins would not have some sort of effect on the mechanics of the body. This data suggests the effect may be even more than we had imagined.
Learn more: http://www.naturalnews.com/030363_cancer_origins.html#ixzz17CEsMo7d
Filed under: Zija Benefits | Tagged: Cancer, Disease, Moringa Oleifera | 1 Comment »