Treating sleep disorders in people with traumatic brain injury may not eliminate symptoms
...ent with CPAP therapy while those suffering from narcolepsy, post-traumatic hypersomnia
and PLMS received predetermined dosages of medications that were not adjust...ing to the authors, research has shown that some OSA patients have residual hypersomnia
despite adequate CPAP therapy, which may explain the lack of improvement in...
Sleep Directly Affects Mental Condition In Children
...n children. Children suffering from insomnia //and hypersomnia
are severely depressed when compared to their peer...
Sleep-disturbed children, with both insomnia and hypersomnia
were more likely to face severe depression than th...nce, 53.5 percent had only insomnia, 9 percent had hypersomnia
alone and 10.1 percent had both these disturbances...
Link Between Insomnia and Hypersomnia, Depression in Children
...eep disturbance, of which 53.5 percent had insomnia alone, nine percent had hypersomnia
alone and 10.1 percent had both disturbances. Depressed girls were more lik...dy found that across sleep-disturbed children, those with both insomnia and hypersomnia
had a longer history of illness, were more severely depressed and were more...
Hypersomnia in other areas
Hypersomnia - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
, Nonorganic insomnia · Parasomnia (REM behavior disorder, ... Insomnia · Hypersomnia
· Sleep apnea (Obstructive, Ondine's curse) · Narcolepsy ...
Hypersomnia Information Page: National Institute of Neurological ...Hypersomnia
information sheet compiled by the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke (NINDS) ... Hypersomnia
may be caused by another sleep ...
WebMD - Sleep and Hypersomnia
WebMD looks at the condition called hypersomnia
, where a person has trouble staying awake during the day. ... a diagnosis of hypersomnia
, your doctor will ask ...
is the opposite of insomnia. People with hypersomnia
sleep too much. ... Some people appear to have a genetic predisposition to hypersomnia
Hypersomnia - iVillage Your Total HealthHypersomnia
... About hypersomnia
- Risk factors and causes - Signs and symptoms - Diagnosis methods ... There are two main categories of hypersomnia
Hypersomnia: Definition from Answers.comhypersomnia
( ′hīpər′sämnēə ) ( medicine ) Excessive sleepiness. ... Primary hypersomnia
is characterized by excessive daytime sleepiness over a long ...