Admit it: You've asked your 6-year-old to walk on your back. Or you pop your knuckles after hours at the keyboard. But what are you really doing to your body when you crack your spine, neck, or other joints? We asked Joseph Feinberg, chief of physiatry who specializes in nonsurgical treatments of musculoskeletal and some neurological disorders at the Hospital for Special Surgery in New York, to crack the code.
What is happening when we crack a joint?
The belief is that there can be some misalignment, called a subluxation, in the joint, and a sudden movement or manipulation can lessen the tension on the ligament, muscle or joint. But the science hasn't been well demonstrated—you don't generally have an X-ray before and after a manipulation. When that has been documented, the clinical assessment hasn't always shown true realignment.
And that horrible 'pop'—what makes that sound?
The joint has negative pressure in it naturally. By moving a body part quickly, the pressure changes—air bubbles move out of the joint. Other sources of the sound could be a ligament or tendon slipping over the joint or bones. Occasionally, a joint can get locked into place by torn cartilage or a piece of bone or ligament, and moving that piece out will realign the joint and make a loud crack. That second and third type of sound tend to be associated with pain rather than relief.
What about other areas, like the neck or knees?
When someone stands up and his knee caps pop, he is likely just loose-jointed, hyperflexible or has patellas that are slipping with age. If you hear a pop or a crack periodically, it's probably not a big deal. All the time? There may be some micro-trauma happening, so go get yourself evaluated.
Chiropractors make their livelihood cracking people's backs, but can you hurt yourself by doing those sorts of adjustments on your own?
There have been cases of patients causing permanent nerve damage to themselves by forcing their joints to crack. Sudden rapid motion is generally not a good thing for the joints.
But if a joint-sufferer just leaves it be, could he also cause damage?
Actually, yes. If you have abnormal tension, that can change the alignment over time, putting extra pressure on the joints and discs. If you feel the need to crack your joints frequently, stretch instead, and see a specialist.
Are there appropriate ways to crack one's joints? Back-walking?
No one has ever told me that his daughter walking on his back makes him feel better, to be honest. As a physician, I certainly wouldn't recommend any of those methods. Your joints will crack by themselves if they need to. If not, a slow, sustained stretch, or even just icing the muscles or applying heat around the joint, will achieve the same effect.
So, you're saying you never lean back in your chair and crack your knuckles?
No, I really don't. I do a stretch and some ergonomic postures, but I can honestly say I never crack my joints intentionally.—Heidi MitchellPrinted in The Wall Street Journal, page 10