Steve Jobs and his partner Steve Wozniak jump-started the personal computer revolution with the introduction of the Apple II in 1977 and followed that with the creation of the user-friendly Macintosh computer eight years later. When Jobs left Apple in 1985, he bought Pixar Animation Studios from George Lucas. Under Jobs' leadership, the digital film studio won awards with ground-breaking films like "Toy Story."
Jobs came back to Apple in 1997, and his reboot of the company created a digital powerhouse with the introduction of the iPod, the iPhone and the iPad.
People all over the world are mourning the loss of Steve Jobs. Some are leaving floral tributes, lit candles and other tokens of remembrance outside of Apple stores. Others are using social media sites to express their thoughts about one of the giants of the digital age.
This New York Times article about Steve Jobs tells more about his life and legacy. Biography.com also has an updated article about Steve Jobs.
Titles about Steve Jobs from the Springfield-Greene County Library:
Steve Jobs by Walter Isaacson
Written with Jobs' cooperation by a former managing editor of "Time Magazine," this biography is based on over 40 interviews with Jobs himself.
The Innovation Secrets of Steve Jobs: Insanely Different by Carmine Gallo
The author shares the Apple CEO's most original and effective strategies for sparking true creativity - and real innovation - in any workplace.
The Steve Jobs Way: iLeadership for a New Generation by Jay Elliot
The author shares the lessons based on Jobs' intuitive approach to show how the creative and technological brilliance of iLeadership can be utilized to drive breakthroughs in any organization, irrespective of size.
Inside Steve's Brain by Leander Kahney
A tale of two Steves: a perfectionist, charming, charismatic executive but also a man who’s known as an elitist, manipulator, and sociopath, all in search of the dream of providing easy-to-use technology for individuals.
The Pirates of Silicon Valley by Martyn Burke
A DVD dramatization of the early lives and rivalries of computer pioneers Steve Jobs and Bill Gates.
Find this article at