Cryptography is about more than just primitives like hash functions, encryption algorithms, signing methods, and the like. It's also about the schemes that use those base building blocks. It's kind of a gray area where "cryptography" ends and "implementation" begins sometimes, but there will always be specs that piece together cryptographic building blocks for a security purpose, and I think those qualify as "cryptography".
The recent Flame worm used a cryptographic attack to forge a signature and propagate via falsely signed Windows Updates. (In specific, it used an MD5 collision.) That's a cryptographic attack against an actual cryptographic primitive.
The Beast attack made use of a cryptographic flaw in how the encryption worked. (Bad CBC IV choices.) You could chalk it up to an implementation flaw, but I think it makes more sense to think of it as a cryptographic flaw since it was the design itself, not just the code, in an open and widely used spec that was wrong.
The XML padding attack was able to effectively cheat around the encryption and recover plaintext through what is arguably an implementation flaw. It worked regardless of the encryption algorithm.
The cryptography primitives are pretty good right now and have been for a while. Breaks in them are not only uncommon, but rarely a surprise (aka, we know something will be broken before it actually is and we've had sufficient time to move away from them). There aren't very many primitives, we don't replace them frequently, and they are designed by the best people available. We'll probably have a surprise or two about a cryptographic primitive here and there, but it seems unlikely that we'll be caught off guard more than once or twice a decade.
Cryptography schemes/protocols have a less stellar track record, they're more complicated to design, not always done by the right people, and not analyzed for as long before going into live environments. Worse yet, sometimes various security concerns are only added later on. Flaws in schemes and protocols will probably always persist so long as new ones are being developed.
Cryptographic attacks are certainly not a thing of the past. But cryptography is also rarely the weakest link in the chain.
(Also see this related question on crypto.se.)