Fort Omaha Intertribal Powwow
On the same grounds where Ponca Chief Standing Bear was once imprisoned,
awaiting his trial that established human rights freedoms for native peoples across the United States…on those same grounds each September is the Fort Omaha
A celebration of Native American cultures, the Powwow honors the traditional dance, music, artistry, storytelling and foods of the four Nebraska Indian tribes: the Northern Ponca, Omaha, Santee Sioux and Winnebago. Nearly 400 native artists participate
annually in this special, family-friendly event. Free and open to the public, the Powwow has attracted crowds of more than 3,000 students, teachers, artists and community
members who come to learn, dance and grow.
The Powwow offers a variety of events and activities each year. Following native
traditions, an elder opens and closes the Powwow with prayer in both native and English languages. Music, dance and art demonstrations are provided for participants to learn from instruction or observation. Study circles led by native experts are held throughout the day to help newcomers learn more about Native Americans and the significance of the Powwow. Traditional crafts, storytelling and indigenous games are taught
throughout the event; credit and non-credit classes on Native American cultures are
Native vendors come to sell their art, crafts and goods while sharing the story of their tribes. Artists are selected to bring rich traditions and experience while helping participants and novice artists enhance and learn new skills. Instructors from the tribes, various colleges and universities and consultants come to share their knowledge, as well as local and national experts.
The Powwow currently partners with the Omaha Public Schools and the Dreams of Eagles organization, to offer 4,000 fourth graders field trips about Native American
culture the week prior to the event. The youngsters are encouraged to attend the
Powwow with their families.
With your support we will be able to continue this important event, assist with transportation for student field trips, assist artists with travel expenses and provide speakers on Native American history and culture.