There’s no shortage of coral news this week. In addition to the research off the coast of western Australia described here by Justin Gillis, a second study emerged this week delving into climate change and coral’s fragile future.
More frequent extreme weather events, both hot and cold, are predicted to freeze and fry coral in coming decades. But are these two climate extremes equally detrimental for coral survival?
Melissa Roth, a marine biologist at the University of California, Berkeley, and other researchers set out to explore how corals’ responses differ depending on whether they are subjected to hot or cold temperatures.
“Given that climate change is increasing the frequency and intensity of both hot and cold events, it’s important to compare these effects,” said Dr. Roth, the lead author of a paper that appeared on Thursday in Scientific Reports.
Dr. Roth, who led the study while working at the Scripps Institution of Oceanography at the University of California, San Diego, separated individual branching corals into three groups. One group was kept at normal, healthy temperatures, and the other two were exposed to temperatures that were either 9 degrees above or below the norm for 20 days.
As expected, both the cold and the heat negatively affected the corals. But the researchers were surprised to find that the opposite extremes elicited different responses depending on the timing. Over the first five days, the decrease in temperature caused more stress to the coral, whereas the heat caused more damage after the first five-day period had passed.
Those differences can be attributed to the reactions of tiny algal organisms called dinoflagellates, which provide corals with energy through photochemistry. Without them, branching coral cannot survive.
The corals in turn shelter the dinoflagellates. When dinoflagellates experience overly extreme temperatures or too much sunlight irradiance, this symbiotic system collapses, and the corals then decline or die. The phenomenon is known as coral bleaching.
In both corals subjected to the extremes, dinoflagellate populations were reduced. But the heat-stressed coral dinoflagellates declined to less than 1 percent of their normal numbers, whereas the cold-stressed ones leveled off at around 40 percent of the control population.
The heat-treated corals were “clearly under severe irreversible stress,” the researchers write. But the cold-treated corals seemed to stabilize during the final phase of the experiment, suggesting that they are able to acclimate somewhat. “It definitely seems like they would grow and continue to live,” Dr. Roth said, “but probably with a reduced fitness and at slower rates. There would definitely be a cost.”
Branching corals used in the experiment depend on dinoflagellate-driven photosynthesis for survival, Dr. Roth explained, so corals that glean their nutrition by catching plankton might perhaps have a better chance for surviving extreme temperatures — but only to a point. Too much heat will take a toll on any coral species.
The researchers wrote that while a temporary decrease in temperature is detrimental to coral health, prolonged increases in temperature would ultimately be more harmful.
Around 86 degrees Fahrenheit seems to be the critical threshold for breakdown between symbiotic coral and dinoflagellates, the researchers write. Scientists have determined that certain waters, especially those around the tropics, have the potential to reach or exceed that threshold.
Coral bleaching is already occurring on reefs around the globe. In 2010, corals off the Florida coast experienced one of the coldest winters on record, while those off Indonesia suffered through one of the hottest summers. Preliminary reports indicate that large-scale bleaching occurred at both sites.
“All corals are affected by climate change — it’s a global problem,” Dr. Roth said. “Even if we have a pristine, perfectly managed reef, it will still be affected.”
Along with climate change comes a predicted rise in sea level and in ocean acidification, both of which are bad news for corals, especially when paired with pollution or coral disease.
As one of the world’s most diverse and productive ecosystems, coral reefs house unique animals and provide a nursery for many economically important fish species.
On the small scale, Dr. Roth said, managers can try to mitigate the impacts of climate change by making sure that reefs are protected from pollution and fishing. The fewer environmental stresses, the greater the chance the reef has of surviving climate change scenarios, she said.
Still, in the grand scheme of things, “the best way to prevent all of this would be to reduce the potential for climate change,” she said.