What East Gippsland Shire Council is doing to manage the local environment.
East Gippsland Environmental Sustainability Strategy 2008 - 2013
East Gippsland Shire Council acknowledges the importance of reducing the human impact on the environment and has developed the East Gippsland Environmental Sustainability Strategy 2008–2013 as a management tool that targets actions towards environmental sustainability.
Council adopted the Strategy at its Ordinary Council Meeting on 7 October 2008.
Summary Brochure (PDF 182Kb)
East Gippsland Environmental Sustainability Strategy 2008 - 2013 (PDF 993kb)
East Gippsland Shire Council Environmental Sustainability Advisory Board
The Advisory Board acts as a consultative mechanism for Council and the community; provides recommendations on the best way for Council to approach Environmental Sustainability in East Gippsland, where Council has a role in acting on, influencing or regulating appropriate strategic outcomes; and oversees the implementation of the East Gippsland Environmental Sustainability Strategy 2008-2013 and yearly action plans that take into consideration the responsibilities of the key stakeholders in the region.
Advisory Board Members currently include:
Two Environment Portfolio Councillors
Two Agency Representatives: Tania Brooker (Department of Sustainability and Environment and Rob Willersdorf (East Gippsland Catchment Management Authority)
Six Community Representatives:
Dr Patricia Fox
For further information, please contact the Sustainability Coordinator
Victorian Local Sustainability Accord
The Victorian Local Sustainability Accord is a partnership between the Victorian Government and Victorian Councils to foster consistent development of environmental and sustainability policies and programs.
East Gippsland Shire Council provided a formal commitment to the Accord via a letter to the Minister for Environment in April 2006, and was the first Gippsland Council to commit to the Accord. A Local Environmental Sustainability Priority Statement was developed in June 2007.
Funding for the Accord is through the Sustainability Fund, which is designed to support projects that foster sustainable resource use and bring economic and social benefits for Victorians.
The Victorian Government established the Sustainability Fund under Section 70 of the Environment Protection Act 1970 (Victoria) which established the Environment Protection Fund. Money paid into the fund from the Victorian Landfill Levy is provided for the purpose of fostering environmentally sustainable use of resources and best practice in waste management, to advance the social and economic development of Victoria.
The Fund is managed by Sustainability Victoria on behalf of the Victorian Government and has supported three rounds of open grants. It also supports sustainability projects in Neighbourhood Renewal Areas, projects outlined in the Environmental Sustainability Action Statement (ESAS) and projects in partnership with local councils through the Victorian Local Sustainability Accord.
Low Carbon Growth Plan for Gippsland
The Low Carbon Growth Plan for Gippsland maps out the lowest cost emissions reductions opportunities for Gippsland in the manufacturing, mining and freight, commercial and services, household and land-based sectors. The Plan, developed with regional and expert input, shows that:
- Gippsland's economy could save almost $100 million a year by reducing its emissions
- Gippsland could reduce its greenhouse emissions by up to 10% below 2000 levels by 2020 (excluding the power sector)
Download the report identifying funding sources available to implement the various recommendations.
East Gippsland Shire Council is undertaking the following steps along its path to workplace sustainability:
- Completed an energy audit on eight highest energy consuming buildings and will implement energy saving actions
- Actively implementing actions from the East Gippsland Environmental Sustainability Strategy 2008-2013
- Implemented worm farms at the Bairnsdale offices to reduce the amount of organics going into landfill
- Developing a “landbank” of high quality native vegetation to be used as an offset for Council projects (e.g. new bridges, roads)
- Have joined the Green Light Our Streets campaign to lobby State and Federal Government to help Local Government fund a switch to more energy efficient street lighting
- Have an internal Resource Smart Action Group to drive actions in the workplace.
Department of Sustainability and Environment