Today’s idea: Westerners see the world in ways that are alien from the rest of humanity, a psychological study finds. In other words, its authors say, we do not know what we thought we knew about the human mind.
Psychology | In The National Post, Adam McDowell reports on research led by Joseph Henrich of the University of British Columbia finding that the Western mind differs in fundamental ways from others.
The paper is “shaking up the fields of psychology, cognitive science and behavioral economics,” the article says, by questioning whether we can know anything about humanity in general if we only study an unusual subset — that is, those who are Western, educated, industrialized, rich, democratic. The study refers to such people with a colorful acronym, Weird:
After analyzing reams of data from earlier studies, the U.B.C. team found that Weird people reacted differently from others in experiment after experiment involving measures of fairness, antisocial punishment and cooperation, as well as visual illusions and questions of individualism and conformity.
Others punish participants perceived as too altruistic in cooperation games, but very few in the English-speaking West would ever dream of penalizing the generous. Westerners tend to group objects based on resemblance (notebooks and magazines go together, for example) while Chinese test subjects prefer function (grouping, say, a notebook with a pencil). Privileged Westerners, uniquely, define themselves by their personal characteristics as opposed to their roles in society.
Moreover, Weird people do not simply react to the world differently, according to the paper, but they perceive it differently to begin with. Take the well-known Müller-Lyer optical illusion, which uses arrows to trick the viewer into thinking one line is longer than another, even if both are the same length. [Diagram, above.]
“No matter how many times you measure those lines, you can’t cause yourself to see them as the same length,” Dr. Henrich says. At least that’s true for a Westerner. For some hunter-gatherers, the Müller-Lyer lines do not cause an illusion. “You do this with foragers in the Kalahari [Desert], and they just see the lines as the same length.”