Boeing Defense and Space
In 1992 the Boeing Defense and Space Pollution Prevention Team began a project on the elimination of ozone depleting materials. The team looked at finding replacements for ODC's that came in contact with our products. Processes using large quantities of these materials were: Freon TMS Batch Degreasing, 1,1,1-trichloroethane In-line Degreasing, and Wave Soldering Conveyor Cleaning using 1,1,1-trichloroethane. Other process areas used small amounts of Class 1 and Class 2 ODC's for miscellaneous purposes. All Class 1 ODC's were eliminated by December 1995, with the large quantity process eliminated by March 1995. The small quantity materials were replaced on a case-by-case basis with non-ODC's after testing various substitutes for effectiveness, safety, and reliability. The degreasing materials were replaced after extensive reliability testing in conjunction with Boeing Defense and Space Group Materials and Processes in Seattle. The replacement chemical (Axarel 32) required the purchase of a Corpane In-Line Semi-Aqueous Cleaner that reduced processing time while retaining the level of cleanliness required for Military Products. Small-lot processing is now accomplished in and ECD Batch Semi-Aqueous cleaner using Axarel 32. The 1,1,1-trichloroethane used for cleaning the fingers on the wave soldering machine conveyor has been replaced with spent isopropyl alcohol used in other cleaning processes.
Class 1 ODC's and all but one Class 2 ODC's have been eliminated. The conveyor cleaning process has reduced both the use of isopropyl alcohol and the generation of isopropyl alcohol waste. The old cleaning processes created hazardous waste, while the new semi-aqueous processes result in a Class-1 waste. In addition, the new processes have eliminated our need for labeling products manufactured with ODC's.
Details of Reductions
Additional Information :
No major cost savings are expected from these projects, however, the future availability and increased cost of Freon and 1,1,1-trichloroethane makes these changes economically viable.