Oregon schools' financial crisis is undeniable. But while supporters and opponents of virtual schools each offer compelling arguments ("Oregon Senate would take virtual charter schools offline for two years," May 4), their views are widely polarized.
Perhaps the solution lies somewhere in the middle.
Multi-model school options within the public school system might offer the best elements of traditional, online and home schools to students with a broad diversity of needs. Children might benefit from any one -- or combinations of all three -- models.
Creative scheduling could offer opportunities for home and online students to participate on certain days in classes requiring physical participation (such as music and team sports). Certain kids might attend on-location school full-time, others one or two days per week, others not at all.
Virtual schools offer an option for students who, for medical or other reasons, are better off studying outside of a school building. The flexibility of including web instruction as one component of public education could limit missed school days because of illness or contagion, if students utilize a home computer. School districts might not have to shut down to ease epidemic fears.
Transferring funds from public schools to distant virtual schools -- requiring local districts to cut not only fat but bone from already-shrinking budgets -- could devastate education efforts for the majority of Oregon's kids. If Internet classes are included in the public school menu, students currently doing well with online classes could continue their progress without bankrupting their local school district.
I worked for several years in public and private schools, both with mainstream and special needs children, before changing careers. Teaching kids is hard work!
In 1972, I taught in a public school. One of my students was bed-bound, unable to leave her home. The school installed a line that connected the student's phone to a loudspeaker in the classroom. She was unable to see her teacher and classmates, but could listen to and interact with them.This occurred decades before technology produced the Internet, computers in classrooms and inexpensive computer networking cameras. With current available tools, off-site students could interact with teacher and classmates on their computers via online school "chat rooms."
With fewer pupils sitting in classrooms and other pupils assisted by learning coaches at home, public education could better-address needs of all children. A school coordinator might assist teachers and learning coaches to enhance learning potential.
Oregon's kids are our future. We need them all well-educated. Our current state budget challenge demands developing new options; we must maintain funding in our public schools to offer the best possible education to every child, recognizing students' diverse needs.The multi-model public school option has the potential to help all of Oregon's children. This is not a finalized plan; it is a starting point.
Let's get creative!
Paula Seibert Manley lives in Clackamas County.