Tia Young is serious about her sweeping.
Miniature broom in her hands, the 3-year-old at Ernestine Rivers Child Care Center in South Memphis sweeps around the "housekeeping area" of her classroom.
Around the little stove, around the child-sized table, she sweeps.
Then she looks up and declares there's too many people in the kitchen.
In her play, she's demonstrating the mastery of skills critical to later success in school.
Her math skills are being fine-tuned as she counts in her head the kids crowding the area; more than three at a time is a no-no.
Her gross motor skills are being honed as she sweeps. And her communication skills are getting a workout, too. She doesn't shove a kid out of the play kitchen, but uses her words to inform the teacher of the rules being bent.
Tia is fortunate enough to attend one of several highly accredited prekindergarten learning centers in Memphis, one that knows how children's minds grow -- through play.
Research into early brain development shows that 80 percent of a child's brain is developed by age 3.
By the age of 5, a year before public education is compulsory in Tennessee, science indicates as much as 90 percent of a child's brain is developed, forming a foundation that can foretell a child's academic success.
Think of a child's brain as a tree. As much as 90 percent of the branches making connections in the brain are formed by the age of 5.
Leaves can be added to branches after that age, but no more branches are formed.
If this science was common knowledge, might parents' interactions with infants and toddlers be different?
John Lovelace thinks so.
"Even the worst parents want the best for their children," says Lovelace, the director of Shelby County Head Start, which in collaboration with the Memphis City Schools serves 5,000 3- and 4-year-olds with a curriculum designed to capitalize on the sponginess of these young minds.
When it comes to early childhood education, Tennessee is a leader in several areas, including the establishment of a star-rating system for child care centers so parents can better judge the caliber of the center.
Tennessee also was one of the first states to fund additional pre-K classrooms, using state revenue and lottery proceeds.
At the end of June, the "Ask First Is It Good For The Children" media campaign began, featuring billboards and posters at MATA shelters that pose different scenarios, such as working late or yelling and asking that all-important question: Is it good for the children?
Still, based on required low teacher-student ratios and the special requirements for quality pre-K classrooms, there isn't enough space or enough qualified teachers to work with all the eligible children in the Memphis area.
There are more than 9,000 3- and 4-year-olds in Memphis who are eligible for Head Start based on family income, but who are not enrolled. Shelby County Head Start is only federally funded to serve 3,186 children.
Then, there are the children who are being cared for at home by a relative or friend. Some of those caregivers may be reading with those children, taking them to the library and engaging in all sorts of age-appropriate learning games.
Often, however, that's not the case and the TV has become the babysitter, says Sharon R. Williams, program supervisor for Memphis City Schools' Early Childhood Department. The district's emphasis, in the past, has been elsewhere.
"We have been so focused on ... coming off the list (of schools that fail to make adequate yearly progress) and passing the TCAP," Williams says.
"But now, with this administration, it's totally different. They're focusing on getting our graduation rate up and reducing the dropout rate, but we're also trying to educate the public on brain research."
That's where proselytizing by people like Dr. Jack Shonkoff comes in.
He's the founding director of the Center on the Developing Child at Harvard University, chair of the National Scientific Council on the Developing Child and considered an expert on early brain development.
In the first five years, the brain is developing 700 new synapses -- connections in the brain -- per second.
But if those synapses are not reinforced by meaningful experiences, Shonkoff says, the brain prunes them away.
"I'm not saying it's all over at age 3 or age 5 ... what I'm saying is that the foundation that's built early on has long-term implications," Shonkoff said in a presentation to the Pennsylvania Early Learning Investment Commission.
And even at 4, differences between children who have been in a high-quality child care center and those who have been under the care of an untrained relative are stark.
In one classroom I visited, a 4-year-old boy, who has only been in child care for two months, struggles to count to four. Writing the number four with a thick marker takes several minutes, as the child seems not to understand the teacher's direction to start by drawing a straight line.
At the table with this boy are other 4-year-olds, working independently or with little help on similar erasable plastic worksheets, easily matching colors and counting, looking to the teacher frequently, who showers praise as if it were confetti on her young learners.
I can't help but wonder how, or if, this struggling 4-year-old will catch up to his classmates. Open in 1967, Ernestine Rivers was one of the first nine voluntary pre-K centers in Memphis, and started that program five years ago.
Director Patrice Jones estimates that 45 percent of the students come ready to learn. "Their minds are developing now into the direction they will go later in life."
This month, Memphis City Schools will open the Ridgeway Early Learning Center, a model center for 180 children in Hickory Hill.
Part of the model is the emphasis on the parents' involvement, says director Divalyn Gordon.
"Once the parents figure out what their role is and are given some simple instructional strategies they can do at home, they do them," says Gordon, who used to teach pre-K.
Parents will be co-teachers, encouraged to come into the classroom and participate in activities with their children. Each classroom will have a teacher, a special-education assistant for the students with special needs and a regular teacher's assistant.
All the learning areas of the classroom are labeled and the children sit at kidney-shaped tables, as does the teacher, who doesn't have a desk.
The school will also have staff to work directly with the parents on their educational goals, whether it's improving their literacy or helping them get a GED.
Because, ultimately, it's the parents' job to be their child's first teacher.
But as a busy mom of a 5-year-old, Gordon knows how hard it can be to run a household and provide the kind of learning opportunities her child needs.
"Trying to find that balance is very hard," Gordon would be the first to admit. But, she adds, "you can use the car ride, the trip to Walgreens, the trip to Kroger." On those trips, she will ask her son to find everything that's blue, everything that's green -- it has to be intentional, but it's workable.
"In the traditional setting, when a child walks into a school, the parents think it's the role of the teacher to prepare that child for the next grade. If the parents don't demonstrate to the child that school is important and (that the parent is) going to be involved in the process, the child doesn't take it seriously."
But early brain development is serious -- and not just for the child or her parents, but the entire community.
"Children who have the benefit of early childhood education are more likely to graduate from high school, avoid costly public services like special education, crime and welfare, and be productive, tax-paying citizens," says Martha Perine Beard, senior branch executive of the Federal Reserve Bank, citing research done by the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis.
Beard was chairwoman of the Shelby County Early Childhood Education Council, which finished its work in 2008.
The solution would be universal quality pre-K education available to all 3- and 4-year-olds, for which Dr. Irving Hamer, deputy superintendent at the Memphis City Schools, is a staunch advocate.
Without additional funds, but by leveraging partnerships, the district will add 500 students to pre-K programs this month, and plans to add another 2,000 by the following school year.
A direct line, Hamer says, can be drawn between those children who have had a pre-K experience and the likelihood of high school and college graduation.
"What we now know is that pre-K is as important as kindergarten," Hamer says.
A kindergarten student without a pre-K background is three times more likely to be held back a grade between kindergarten and third grade.
The child who is retained twice becomes the 15-year-old in seventh grade, bigger and stronger than all his classmates and likely the class bully. He'll be a discipline problem in the school, and in the community, Hamer says.
Undereducated and devoid of self-esteem, the teen is unemployable and is likely to turn to crime.
"You can pay now or you can pay later," Hamer says."
But had this child had a good pre-K experience, his story might have a very different ending, perhaps as a high-skilled employee in Memphis' biotech industry.
Says Hamer: Establishing universal pre-K "is the most important thing this community can do."
Contact Wendi C. Thomas at (901) 529-5896 or e-mail email@example.com.
To read past columns, go to commercialappeal.com/wendi. Follow Wendi at twitter.com/wendi_c_thomas.