Nothing feels better than coming home from a hard day’s work and hitting the sack. Yet, if you wake up the next day and still feel more tired than ever, you could be suffering from obstructive sleep apnea. Discover what this condition is all about.
What Is It?
When you’re resting for the night, you tend to be at peace. However, for some people, during rest, the muscles can relax in the throat to the point where your airway closes and your breathing temporarily stops. When you stop breathing, you send a message to your brain and you wake up. However, the action is so short that you won’t even remember that it happens. Unfortunately, this process can go on all night without you knowing. As a result, you will wonder why you feel so groggy in the morning even though you think you slept the entire night. This is known as obstructive sleep apnea.
What Problems Can It Cause?
Oftentimes, people tend to be more susceptible to high blood pressure. This is because when your breathing constantly starts and stops, your body is overly stressed and your blood pressure is increased. As a result, you are more likely to experience high blood pressure as opposed to someone that does not have obstructive sleep apnea. Also, this condition increases your chance of having a stroke and it doesn’t matter if you don’t have elevated blood pressure. Worst of all, if you have the slightest risk of heart disease, you are more likely to have a heart attack as opposed to someone that doesn’t suffer with obstructive sleep apnea. Furthermore, other issues include difficulty during surgery, increased fatigue, and more.
How Do You Treat It?
There are various ways you can treat this problem. For instance, depending on the severity, you can benefit from a special mask you can wear that will clear your airway and help keep your throat from closing up. It’s connected to a machine that will provide an effective amount of air so that you can breathe easier and stop snoring as well. In addition, there are some devices you can put in your mouth that will help expand your throat. Just keep in mind that you need to see your doctor regularly to make sure the device is fitting correctly and working as it should so that you get the best results. If none of these devices are effective, then you may need to consider surgery for obstructive sleep apnea. Although it has its risks, surgery can help eliminate any extra tissue in your throat or even your nasal area that could be blocking the flow of air.
Can It Be Prevented?
There are a number of things that can help prevent this condition from happening in the first place. One of the best things to do is lose any excess weight that you’re carrying around. Although skinny people can still get obstructive sleep apnea, extra weight does not help the situation. Also, drinking alcohol and smoking cigarettes can increase your risk. Furthermore, genetics also play a significant role in whether or not you’ll experience the disorder.
If you’re suffering from obstructive sleep apnea Denver doctors are ready to help. Click here for more information: http://www.sleepapneadenver.com
Article Source: http://EzineArticles.com/?expert=Anna_Woodward
“Obstructive Sleep Apnea Symptoms” Related Video: