Environment & ICTs
Computer Aid recently launched a guide for NGOs and civil society working on issues of e-waste in their country. The free resource provides practical information and tools on how to conduct campaigns to reduce the impacts of electronics on the environment and people.
A guide on lobbying and advocacy on e-waste issues. The guide is intended for NGOs and civil society organisations wanting to make a positive change to e-waste policy and practice in their countries. The guide was authored by Computer Aid’s Environmental Advocacy Officer, Haley Bowcock and was financed by the European Union.
Country baseline studies from Bangladesh, Costa Rica, Egypt, India and Mexico look at the rising issue of e-waste and the policy environment around it, while a comparative report highlights the main points from the country studies.
Mexico has one of the world’s most diverse ecosystems, and is therefore also very vulnerable to climate change. This report identifies in what ways the use of ICTs has been proposed in public policies as aresponse to climate change.It also points out convergence between the digital and climate agenda, and offers a deeper reflection and analysis on the issue.
In India, the ICT boom in recent years has greatly increased the presence of new dangerous and toxic waste in the environment but no official policies have been created to deal with the informal disposal of e-waste in the country. This study addresses the need for a consolidated study in India of any sorts to measure the policy trends in relation to environmental sustainability, climate change and ICTs.
This report looks at how ICTs are being used in Egypt to mitigate and adapt to climate change as well as how e-waste is managed in the country. It documents the key stakeholders involved, offers an overview of the policy and legislative context, analyses challenges and trends, and identifies several key areas for civil society advocacy.
When the Central American Free Trade Agreement (CAFTA) was approved in Costa Rica in 2008, the telecommunications sector – previously a state monopoly – opened itself to the liberal economic market. This study looks at the different initiatives, policies and actors involved in environmental stability from the telecommunications sector and focuses on climate change and e-waste management.
Bangladesh, like many countries, is particularly vulnerable to climate change. This new report by Partha Sarker and Munir Hasan indicates that information and communications technologies (ICTs) and environmental sustainability issues are still not on Bangladeshi policy makers’ agendas.
ICTs and environmental sustainability: Mapping national policy contexts in India, Bangladesh, Egypt, Costa Rica and Mexico
APC commissioned five of its members to conduct research in their country on the topic of ICTs and environmental sustainability. This report compiles and summarises the findings of research conducted in five different countries.
It’s normal to buy a new laptop when we can afford it. But do you know about the waste or the environmental damage that result from its production? See this new APC video to learn more.