|Previous||1 of 5||Next|
small (250x250 max)
medium (500x500 max)
large ( > 500x500)
Loading content ...
odysseychannel.com 9-11 p.m. : 9-11 p.m. February 8 9-11 p.m. .Jir'lhaUs: I February 5 j February 6 \ February 7 Noon-2 p.m. j Noon-2 p.m. j Nodn-2 p.m. Grade Levels: Middle School and High School "The ancestors of all of us came across that SAME OCEAN IN SOME SHIP. We MUST LEARN NOT ONLY TO LIVE TOGETHER BUT LEARN TO SEE ONE ANOTHER AS PEOPLE RATHER THAN AS STEREOTYPES." -^Mlex ^J4a OBJECTIVES 0 To examine the relationships between cultures and belief systems that shaped African-American and U.S. history 0 To draw connections among family history, ethnic genealogy, and American history o To help viewers consider the degree to which white and black histories are inseparable NATIONAL CURRICULUM'. STANDARDS This educators' guide is designed to help teachers use "Roots" as a springboard for discussion and activities that correlate with selected U.S. history standards found in the K-12 content standards indicated by McREL, Mid-continent Research Education and Learning, and with selected social studies themes indicated by the National Council for the Social Studies. History standards and benchmarks related to this guide: O Eras 2 through 5 of U.S. history standards, which comprise the periods from colonization and settlement through the Civil War. 0 Historical understandings that involve: 1) analyzing chronological relationships and patterns and 2) understanding the historical perspective. Social studies themes related to this guide: o Culture 0 Time, continuity, and change o People, places, and environment 0 Individual development and identity 0 Individuals, groups, and institutions For more information visit <http://www.mcrel.org/standards> and <http://www.ncss.org/standards> copyright © 2001 KIDSNET BACKGROUND When "Roots" first aired as a television miniseries in 1977, it made history. Historians credit the broadcast with being the stimulus that changed the history of American popular culture. "Roots" prompted Americans of many backgrounds to take a closer look into their personal heritage, ancestry, and ethnic identity. Together, Haley's novel and the television program made several distinct contributions. They raised consciousness about the habits, rituals, values, and myths of African culture and ways. They also brought about a new understanding of slavery as an institution. The novel and the television program elevated respect for the oral tradition's imprint on our cultural record, and they cast light on the importance of each family's contribution to American history. Now Odyssey brings this remarkable experience back to American viewers. Author Alex Haley first heard about his African ancestor, Kunta Kinte, while he was a boy living with his grandmother in Tennessee. His family members took pride and pleasure in passing down their history from generation to generation. Kunta Kinte became the centerpiece of stories that were knitted together in an oral tradition for young Haley. For the grown man, these stories spurred 12 years of archival and shipboard research. Those data, along with Haley's imagination, gave rise to Roots: The Saga of an American Family, the novel that inspired this made-for-television series. Roots: The Saga of an American Family was first published in the fall of 1976. Within two years, it had won 271 awards, including the Pulitzer Prize and the 1977 National Book Award. It sold more than 8 million copies and to date, Roots has been published in 35 languages. The "Roots" television program is based on some parts of the novel and was an epic in television history. An estimated 130 million viewers saw all or part of the eight- episode miniseries (later to be six episodes) that was first broadcast on eight consecutive nights in January 1977. The series won 145 honors, including nine Emmy Awards and television's prestigious Peabody Award. After "Roots" aired, interest in genealogy blossomed in the United States. Haley first explored his family heritage in the National Archives. Eventually, his expedition reached into 50 or more archives, libraries, and research repositories on three different continents. In response to the novel and program that resulted from this research, letters of inquiry and applications to use the National Archives rose by 40 percent, and requests to examine census manuscripts tripled. Some 267 colleges included Roots in their coursework. New books on genealogy flourished as heritage research became a popular hobby. Haley's work inspired the PBS 10-part series, "Ancestors." Genealogy Web sites, software, lectures, and clubs are still popular today Note: Both the novel and the broadcast are accepted as "faction," Haley's term that describes his mixture of fact and fiction, a depiction of real people with some aspects of their lives novelized. alex haley died unexpectedly in 1992 at age 71, but he left a tremendous legacy in the character and family of kunta klnte, whose story is recognized around the world.
Children's television programs--United States
Children's television programs--United States--Bibliography
Children's Web sites
|Rights||Permission is granted to reproduce these guides for educational purposes. For additional information about reproduction and use, please contact Temple University Libraries, Special Collections Resource Center, firstname.lastname@example.org, 215-204-8257.|
|Repository||Temple University Libraries, Special Collections Resource Center|
|Repository Collection||KIDSNET records|
|Digital Collection||KIDSNET at Temple University Libraries|
|Digital Publisher||Philadelphia, PA: Temple University Libraries|
|Physical Description||brochure: 4 panel, color, 21.6 x 27.9 cm. (8.5 x 11 in.), unpaged|
|OCR Note||The text presented here is in raw, un-copyedited form, as created through optical character recognition scanning of the originals. It is not always complete or accurate and should be used for preliminary research only.|