Report on a project that provided computers to adult learners for open-ended
learning and play, with back-up support and instruction, low-key and relaxed.
Each of the three approaches supported and increased the effectiveness of the
others. Integration of the approaches was continuous in the way the community
used the available services.
All About ERIC (1998)
A booklet that describes the ERIC system, part of the US Dept. of
Educations National Library of Education. Contents includes: Searching
the ERIC Database; How Can You Get Copies of ERIC Documents and Journal
Articles; ERIC Publications and Products, etc.
Academic Preparation for Science (1999)
A new multimedia package intended for adult learners functioning at a grade
7 to 11 level. Provides a stimulating and motivational learning environment for
adult learners who may not have been successful with traditional methods of
learning science. Materials are Canadian based with an Aboriginal focus.
Equity Across the Curriculum (1997)
Aims to ease the dealing with organizational change and its surrounding
issues. Examines strategies and approaches to achieving equity, and information
is provided on how to plan and start an organizational change process - from
identifying systemic barriers in the delivery of services, to measuring
progress over the long term.
Handbook for Online Board Meetings
A handbook which results from the field development project Meetings
in an Electronic Environment, produced by Laubach Literacy Ontario (LLO).
An instructional guide for nonprofit organizations wishing to hold formal board
meetings on the Internet while following parliamentary procedure.
On the Margins: Creating Opportunities for Learning
with Computer Technology for Homeless People (1998)
Beat the Street is a program of Frontier College offering basic literacy
instruction and upgrading to street youth and homeless adults. This report is
about Beat the Streets study of computer technology and how it can be
Reading the Greens: PGI Golf Tournaments for
A booklet about the PGI Golf Tournaments for Literacy (for Peter Gzowski
Invitationals), founded in 1986 by author and broadcaster Peter Gzowski to
raise awareness for literacy across Canada. Includes photos taken at the
different tournaments, personal accounts as well as a listing of corporate
Personal Life Management Literacy Program for The
Native Womens Resource Centre - Facilitators Manual
An innovative program which focuses on two extremely important areas in the
Native community, Literacy and Personal Life Management. A manual that comes
complete with an overview, ready-to-go activities, handouts and overhead
The language of documents: A guide to information
display in the workplace (1999)
A sequel to an earlier SkillPlan publication, Document Literacy: A Guide for
Workplace Trainers and Educators. Intent of the new guide is to establish a
common language for talking about documents and to advance the discipline of
document literacy instruction.
Research into Providing Literacy/Upgrading Programs
for Youth Who Have Dropped out of School (1999)
A special project of Frontier College, which concluded that strong literacy
skills are a predictor of success in school and in the workplace. Purpose of
the research was to identify those elements which contribute to creating
effective and successful programs for youth who have dropped out of school.
Peppercorn Books Resource Guide (1999)
A resource catalogue that contains material for new adult learners as well
as teachers who are involved in adult education. Includes titles from several
international publishers such as Avanti Books, U.K., Juta Publishing and ViVa
Books, South Africa, as well as Literacy South, US.
Family Literacy Annotated Bibliography of
Includes references on these three headings: Family Literacy Resources,
Internet Resources, Parenting Resources.
The Language of Literacy: A National Resource
Directory of Aboriginal Literacy Programs (1998)
Attempts to gather, in narrative form, critical-core information about the
operations of Aboriginal literacy programs throughout Canada. A comprehensive,
representative sample of Aboriginal literacy initiatives operating in urban,
rural and remote regions of the country.
Easy Does It ! (1998)
This Health Communication Training Package will help health providers serve
the 48% of adult Canadians with low literacy skills. Includes: Easy Does It!
Training Manual with 8 units of information, effective communication tools,
etc.; Face-to-Face video; CD-ROM version of (plain.word)tm which helps you
simplify the language you use with your clients.
|Literacy for the ESL Classroom||Quest for a New Aboriginal Literacy ...|
|Networks Datebook||Hope for Learners with a Mental Illness|
|Teaching Tips||Workplace Literacy at High Liner Foods|
|The Literacy Bookshelf||Regional Tidbits|
|Learner's Corner||Learner's Story|
|Among the Winners Were...||Websites|