Part VI: The Organisms Responsible for Liturgical Renewal
A. Congregation for Divine Worship and the Discipline of the Sacraments
19. The task of promoting the renewal of the liturgy pertains in the first place to the Apostolic See.  It was 400 years ago that Pope Sixtus V created the Sacred Congregation of Rites and entrusted it with responsibility for keeping watch over the exercise of divine worship, reformed after the Council of Trent. Pope St. Pius X instituted another congregation for the discipline of the sacraments. With a view to the practical implementation of the Second Vatican Council's Constitution on the Liturgy, Pope Paul VI instituted a consilium,  later the Sacred Congregation for Divine Worship,  and they carried out the task entrusted to them with generosity, competence and promptness. In accordance with the new structure of the Roman Curia as laid down by the apostolic constitution Pastor Bonus, the whole area of sacred liturgy is brought together and placed under the responsibility of a single dicastry: the Congregation for Divine Worship and the Discipline of the Sacraments. Always taking into account the area of competence of the Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith,  it pertains to this congregation to regulate and promote the liturgy, of which the sacraments are the essential part, by encouraging pastoral liturgical activities,  supporting the various organisms devoted to the liturgical apostolate, music, song and sacred art,  and keeping watch over sacramental discipline.  This is a work of importance, for it concerns above all the faithful preservation of the great principles of the Catholic liturgy as illustrated and developed in the conciliar constitution. It is likewise a question of drawing upon these principles for inspiration in promoting and deepening throughout the Church the renewal of liturgical life.
The congregation will assist diocesan bishops in their efforts to offer to God true Christian worship and to regulate it according to the precepts of the Lord and the laws of the Church.  It will be in close and trusting contact with the episcopal conferences for all that pertains to their competence in the liturgical field. 
B. The Episcopal Conferences
20. The episcopal conferences have had the weighty responsibility of preparing the translations of their liturgical books.  Immediate need occasionally led to the use of provisional translations, approved ad interim. but now the time has come to reflect upon certain difficulties that have subsequently emerged, to remedy certain defects or inaccuracies, to complete partial translations, to compose or approve chants to be used in the liturgy, to ensure respect for the texts approved and last to publish liturgical books in a form that both testifies to the stability achieved and is worthy of the mysteries being celebrated.
For the work of translations, as well as for the wider implications of liturgical renewal for whole countries, each episcopal conference was required to establish a national commission and ensure the collaboration of experts in the various sectors of liturgical science and pastoral practice.  The time has come to evaluate this commission, its past activity, both the positive and negative aspects, and the guidelines and the help which it has received from the episcopal conference regarding its composition and activity. The role of this commission is much more delicate when the conference wishes to introduce certain measures of adaptation or inculturation:  This is one more reason for making sure that the commission contains people who are truly competent.
C. The Diocesan Bishop
21. In every diocese the bishop is the principal dispenser of the mysteries of God, and likewise the governor, promoter and guardian of the entire liturgical life of the Church entrusted to him.  When the bishop celebrates in the midst of his people, it is the very mystery of the Church which is manifested. Therefore it is necessary that the bishop should be strongly convinced of the importance of such celebrations for the Christian life of his faithful. Such celebrations should be models for the whole diocese.  Much still remains to be done to help priests and the faithful to grasp the meaning of the liturgical rites and texts, to develop the dignity and beauty of celebrations and the places where they are held, and to promote, as the fathers did, a "mystagogic catechesis" of the sacraments. In order to bring this task to a successful conclusion, the bishop should set up one or more diocesan commissions which will help to promote liturgical activity, music and sacred art in his diocese.  The diocesan commission, for its part, will act according to the mind and directives of the bishop and should be able to count upon his authority and his encouragement to carry out its particular task properly.