Nurturing the next generation of professional engineers and geoscientists is an important focus for the Association of Professional Engineers and Geoscientists of Saskatchewan (APEGS). The Association's K-12 Committee provides a variety of resources to science and math educators in Saskatchewan. As part of its ongoing effort to encourage young people to pursue science and math education and explore careers in engineering and geosciences, the committee launched the new Student Video Program.
The APEGS K-12 Committee has been working with high school students at Walter Murray Collegiate in Saskatoon to produce videos that highlight career opportunities available in engineering and geosciences.The videos include interviews with several APEGS members from across the province.
APEGS also provides annual support for awards, grants and sponsorships, as well as youth-oriented programs such as Sci-Fi Science Camps, EYES, Saskatchewan Science Fairs, Innovators in the Schools and Spectrum. It is all part of reaching out to the next generation of Saskatchewans science professionals.
The results and effects of Engineering and Geoscience are everywhere. Individuals start developing an appreciation of engineering, geoscience and technology at a very early age. Below are some web sites geared to different ages. There are even sites that are directed at teachers.
Turn the ideas of today into the realities of tomorrow
This booklet describes the various disciplines / careers available in engineering and geoscience. An excellent guide for students who are thinking engineering or geoscience may be the career for them but they are not quite sure what discipline to pursue.
The actual booklet is also available from the APEGS office.
This site promotes engineering as a career choice to all young Canadians, especially woman.
It has good information about engineering as a career, provides scholarships, and help for both students and teachers.
Inspire young minds to learn about the many water quality and quantity challenges they will face in the future.
Click on the menu item "About Water and Sanitation" for useful information for teachers and students.
This site provides information on becoming an engineer in Canada. It is geared to high school students, teachers, guidance councellors, and university students. This very informative site is being spearheaded by the Association of Consulting Engineers of Canada.
Nice "flash" presentation too!