The "underclass" status of minority youths serves to push them into gangs. Feeling marginalized or isolated, adolescents join gangs for social relationships that give them a sense of identity. For some youths, gangs provide a way of solving social adjustment problems, particularly the trials and tribulations of adolescence. In some communities, youths are intensively recruited or coerced into gangs. They seemingly have no choice. A few are virtually born or "blessed" into gangs as a result of neighborhood traditions and their families' earlier and perhaps continuing gang participation or involvement in criminal activity.
The populations that contain most of the gang members in the United States do not live in the more comfortable areas of American cities. These young people
Effective gang prevention should be part of a larger school context that fosters a safe and healthy learning environment and should be closely integrated with community programs. Before educators can respond effectively to gang influence in schools, they must be aware of the reasons that youths become involved in gangs. School personnel should treat gangs as a symptom of underlying community problems, not as the cause.
When gang problems in schools are treated as symptoms, solutions will include a re-evaluation of the school's security procedures, an investigation into the needs that young people are attempting to satisfy through gang activity, and the coordination of community resources to help respond to those needs. These youths should have an opportunity to bond, belong and contribute to the school and community at large and educators must take on the responsibility and assist these marginalized youths in achieving that goal. In a final thought, I highly praise the Las Cruces Police Department's Gang Unit on its diligent and highly professional work to address this community's issue of youth gangs in a systemic, pro-active manner.
Jeremy Baldillez, M.CJ., Ed.S., NCSP (Nationally Certified School Psychologist) is the LCPS school psychologist for CrossRoads, Dona Ana County Detention Center and Del Rey School. He can be reached at email@example.com