He replied next day, refusing to receive them.
Dec. 31.—South Carolina adopted an oath of
abjuration and allegiance, and sent Commission
ers to tho other Slave States, with a view to the
formation of a Southern Confederacy.
Jan. 2, 1861.—Governor Ellis, of North Caroli
na, took possession of Fort Macon, at Beaufort,
the works at Wilmington, and the United States
Arsenal at Fayotteville Georgia troops in pos
session of Forts Pulaski and Jackson, and the
United States Arsenal at Savannah.
Jan. 3.—Florida State Contention met at Tal
lahassee South Carolina Commissioners wrote
an insulting letter to the President, and went
Jan. 4.—Fast-day, by proclamation of the Pres
ident : it was generally observed in the Free and
the Border Slave States, but disregarded in the
South Fort Morgan, at the mouth of Mobile
Bay, and the United States Arsenal in Mobile,
seized by order of Governor Moore, of Alabama
South Carolina"Convention appointed seven
delegates to " the General Congress of the Se
Jan. s.—Steamer Star of the West sailed from
New York with supplies and reinforcements for
Fort Sumter Governor Hicks, of Maryland,
published a strong Union address to the people
South Carolina Convention adjourned, sub
ject to a call by the Governor.
Jan. 7. —Meeting of the Alabama State Conven
tion Meeting of the Mississippi State Conven
tion Meeting of the Tennessee Legislature......
Meeting of tho Virginia Legislature Senator
Toombs, of Georgia, made a violent Secession
speech in the Senate.
Jan. B.—Jacob Thompson, Secretary of the
Interior, resigned, after treacherously betraying
the sailing of the Star of the West to reinforce
Jan. 9.—Star of tbe West rr~ Charleston,
and was fired upon and drtVen back to sea by
rebel batteries Mississippi Convention passed
a Secession ordinance, 84 to 15.
Jan. 10. —Florida Secession ordinance passed,
62 to 7.
Jan. 11.—Alabama Secession ordinance passed,
61 to 39 Philip F. Thomas, Secretary of the
Treasury, resigned, and John A. Dix, of New
York, appointed in his place United States
Arsenal at Baton Rouge, Forts Philip and Jack
son, below New Orleans, and Fort Pickens, on
Lake Pontchartrain, seized by order of the Gov
ernor of Louisiana Legislature of New York
voted to tender the whole military power of the
State to the President for the support of the Con
Jan. 13.—Virginia State Legislature adopted
the bill calling a State Convention Commo
dore Armstrong surrendered the Pensacola Navy
Yard, and Fort Farrancas, to the Florida troops;
Lieutenant Slemmer, in command of Fort Pick
ens, refused to obey Armstrong's order, and
saved that important fortress to the Union.
Jan. 14.—South Carolina Legislature declared
that any attempt to reinforce Fort Sumter would
be an act of war.
Jan. 16.—The Crittenden Compromise practi
cally voted down in the United States Senate, by
the adoption of Mr. Clark's substitute, that the
Constitution is good enough, and Secession ought
to be put down Arkansas Legislature voted
to have a Convention Missouri Legislature
voted to hold a Convention Major-General
Sandford, of New York City, tenderecfto the
President the services of the First Division of
7,000 men ior any service which may be re
quired Colonel Hayne, iv tbe name of Gov
ernor Pickens, demanded of the President the
surrender of Fort Sumter; the President refused
to receive him in any official capacity.
Jan. 18.—Massachusetts Legislature tendered
to the President all the power of the State to sup
port the Federal Government Virginia Legis
lature appropriated $1,000,000 for the defense of
Jan. 19.—Georgia Secession ordinance adopted,
208 to 89; Alexander H. Stephens and Herschel
V. Johnson voted in the negative Tennessee
Legislature called a State Convention.
Jan. 21.—Alabama members of Congress re
signed Jefferson Davis took leave of the
Senate, in consequence of the secession of his
Jan. 22.—Sherrard Clemens, of Virginia, made
a strong Union speech in Congress.
Jan. 23.—Georgia members of Congress re
signed Emerson Etheridge, of Tennessee, in
a speech in Congress, declared Secession to be
rebellion, and to be put down at any cost.
Jan. 24.—Arsenal at Augusta, Georgia, seized
by the State.
Jan. 25.—Correspondence between Governor
Brown, of Georgia, and Mayor Wood of New
York, about seizure of arms by tho New York
police Rhode Island Legislature repealed the
Personal Liberty bill.
Jan. 26.—Louisiana Convention adopted a Se
cession ordinance, 113 to 17.
Jan. 28.—Texas State Convention met at Aus
Jan. 30.—North Carolina Legislature submitted
the Convention question to a vote of the people
—the first recognition in all the South that the
people had any right to a voice in the matter
Ex-Secretary Floyd indicted by a Grand Jury
for malfeasance and conspiracy Revenue
cutters Cass, Captain J. J. Mo»*»»w>n 4 a_<_ McClel
land, Captain Breshwood, surrendered to the
Louisiana authorities by their commanders.
Feb. I.—Mint and Custom House at New Or
leans seized by tho State authorities Texas
Convention passed a Secession ordinance, 166 to
7, subject to a vote of tho people.
Feb. 4.—The Rebel Delegates mot at Montgom
ery, Alabama, to organize a confederate govern
ment—Ho well Cobb was_hosen chairman The
Peace Congress met at Washington, ex-President
Feb. B.—Colonel Hayne, commissioner from
South Carolina, unable to get recognition, finally
left Washington The Montgomery Convention
adopted a Provisional Constitution Governor
Brown, of Georgia, seized New York ships in
Savannah Harbor, in retaliation for the seizure
of arms in New York. The ships were released
on the 10th Little Rock Arsenal surrendered
Feb. 9.—Jefferson Davis and Alexander H.
Stephens elected Provisional President and Vice
President at Montgomery.
Feb. 11.—President Lincoln started for Wash
Feb. 13.—Electoral vote counted—Lincoln and
Hamlin officially declared elected.
Feb. 18.—Jefferson Davis inaugurated Presi
dent of the Confederate States of America.
Feb. 19.—Enthusiastic reception of President
Lincoln in New York City Fort Kearney,
Kansas, taken by the Secessionists; soon after
Feb. 21.—Jeff. Davis appointed his Cabinet —
Toombs, Sec. State ; Memminger, Treasury, and
L. P. Walker, War Governor of Georgia made
another seizure of New York vessels.
Fob. 22.—President Lincoln's night journey
from Harrisburg to Washington, in order to pre
vent an anticipated outrage in Baltimore.
Feb. 25. —News received of the surrender and
treason of Major-General Twiggs in Texas.
Feb. 26.—Captain Hill refused to surrender
Fort Brown, Texas, under Twiggs's order.
Feb. 27.—Peace Congress submitted to the
Senate their Plan of Pacification.
Feb. 28.—Vote on Corwin's report from th*
committee of 33 :—the resolutions-adopted—l3f
March I.—General Twiggs expellod from thfr
March 2.—Revenue cutter Dodge surrendered
to the Rebels at Galveston.
March 4. —Inauguration of Pres't Lincoln
Texas State Convention declared that State out
of the Union.
March s.—General Beauregard ordered to take
command of the rebels at Charleston.
March 6. —Fort Brown surrendered by special
March 18.—Supplies cut off from Fort Pickens,
March 22.—Dr. Fox, of the Navy, visited
Major Anderson, as special messenger of Gov
March 25.—Colonel Lamon, Government mes
senger, had an interview with Governor Pickens
and General Beauregard.
March 28.—Vote of Louisiana on Secession
published—For, 20,448; Against, 17,296.
March 30.—Mississippi Convention ratified the
Confederate Constitution—7B to 7.
April 3.—Long Cabinet meeting on Fort Sum
ter business Great activity in the Navy De
partment Rebel battery on Morris Island fired
into a schooner—nobody hurt South Carolina
Convention ratified the Confederate Constitution
April 4. —Virginia Convention refused, 89 to
45, to submit a Secession ordinance to th«
April 7.—General Beauregard notified Major
Anderson that intercourse between Fort Sumter
and the city would no longer be permitted
Steam transport Atlantic sailed from New York
with troops and supplies.
April 8. —Official notification given that sup
plies would be sent to Major Anderson, by force
—if necessary State Department declined to
recognizo the Confederate States Commissioners.
April 9.—Steamers Illinois and Baltic sailed
from New York with sealed orders.
April 10.—Floating battery of the rebels at
Charleston finished and mounted Large
numbers of troops sent to the various fortifica
April 11.—Fears of the seizure of Washington.
Troops posted in the Capitol—oath of fidelity ad
ministered to the men Confederate Commis
sioners left Washington, satisfied that no recog
nition of their government would take place
under President Lincoln Beauregard demands
of Major Anderson the surrender of Fort Sum
ter. Tho Major declined Bids for Treasury
Notes opened—whole amount taken at a premi
Aril 12.— Actual Commencement of War.—Bom
bardment of Fort Sumter began at 4.30 a. m.,
and continued all day ; partially suspended at
nightfall. Tho rebels had in action 17 mortars,
and 30 large guns, mostty columbiads. The reb
els fired at intervals all night; Sumter was si
lent Pennsylvania Legislature voted $5.0,000
to arm the State Fort Pickens reinforced.
[continued next week.]
xml | txt