Pomegranates are not native to the United States, but according to Clemson University Cooperative Extension, they got here as quickly as possible, traveling with the Spaniards who founded America's oldest city, St. Augustine, Florida. Native to the Middle East, pomegranates grow well in U.S. Department of Agriculture plant hardiness zones 8 through 10. These are the areas where pomegranate trees are more likely to produce fruit. For the tastiest fruit possible, look for signs that indicate the best time for picking.
Age of Tree
During the first year of growth, a pomegranate tree may produce a few fruits, but the first real harvest will not occur until two or three years after planting. Plants between three and 15 years old will have the most vigorous growth and greatest fruit production. Fruit only grows on new growth on pomegranates trees.
Flowers appear on new growth of the pomegranate tree from late spring through early fall. The color, arrangement and style of the flowers depends on the cultivar. Some have double blooms that are bright red, but some pomegranate trees produce yellow or white blooms. Pomegranate trees with double flowers that look like carnations will likely not yield fruit because these cultivars are grown primarily for their flowers. Fruit will appear on the tree between five and seven months after flowering, depending on the cultivar.
Pomegranates stop ripening as soon as you pick them, but if you leave them on the tree until they over-ripen, they will split and lose their flavor. Each cultivar has its own color for the ripe fruit. Rather than focusing on the color of the fruit, look at its size. Fully grown pomegranates will measure between 2 and 5 inches across. If you are still unsure if the fruit is ripe, do what the commercial pomegranate farmers do, and tap the fruit with your finger and listen for the metallic sound of ripe pomegranates.
How to Pick
Picking pomegranates is not the correct wording to use because the fruit should not be pulled off the plant. To ensure that the tree and pomegranate remain free of damage when harvesting the fruit, pruning shears are used to clip the thick stem off at the base of the fruit.
- Comstock Images/Comstock/Getty Images