America in the Age of the Titans
The Progressive Era and World War I
Publication Year: 1988
Detailing the events of the Progressive Era and World War I (1901-20), America in the Age of the Titans is the only interdisciplinary history covering this period currently available. The book contains the results of research into primary sources an drecent scholarship with an emphases on leading personalities and anecdotes about them. Sean Dennis Cashman's sequesl to America in the Gilded Age gives special attention to industry and inventions, and social and cultural history. He covers developments in science, technology, and industry; the Progressive movement and the presidencies of Theodore Roosevelt, immigration, the new woman, and labor, including the Industrial Workers of the World and the Great Red Scare; the transportation and communications revolution in radio and motion pictures; the cultural contribuation of artists, architects, and creatice writers; and America's foreign policies across the world. Written in a lively, accessible style with over sixty illustrations, this book is an excellent introduction to these momentous years. It provides an assessment of the contributions of the titans - political, scientific, and industrial.
Published by: NYU Press
Download PDF (197.5 KB)
Download PDF (360.5 KB)
Download PDF (850.4 KB)
THIS BOOK is intended as a general, interdisciplinary history of the United States from the accession of Theodore Roosevelt to the presidency in 1901 to the rout of Woodrow Wilson's foreign policy in 1920. It charts the course of domestic...
Download PDF (1.0 MB)
THE UNITED STATES in the opening years of the twentieth century experienced an age of titans. The most significant were the three political giants of twentieth-century America, Presidents Theodore Roosevelt (1901-9), Woodrow Wilson (1913-21), and, after...
1. Inventing America: Expanding Industry
Download PDF (8.7 MB)
THE MOST spectacular building of the Pan American Exposition at Buffalo in the summer of 1901 was the central Electric Tower. It stood at the head of the Court of Fountains, rising 375 feet, "the high C of the entire architectural...
2. Bear Necessities: Theodore Roosevelt and the Square Deal
Download PDF (14.2 MB)
THEODORE ROOSEVELT'S accession to the presidency, albeit in tragic circumstances, signaled the end of the Gilded Age of 1865-1901 and the opening of the Progressive Era of 1901-17. It seemed that progress, whether in inventions...
3. The New Nationalism and the New Freedom: The Triumph of Woodrow Wilson
Download PDF (8.6 MB)
THE FRIENDSHIP of Roosevelt and Taft had determined the presidency for one term; their estrangement determined it for two. For some time the growing rift between Roosevelt and Taft had been deepening inexorably...
4. A Future out of the Past: The New Immigration
Download PDF (12.5 MB)
ON DECEMBER I0, 1910, the Metropolitan Opera gave the world premier of an opera by the most famous living Italian composer, Giacomo Puccini. The Girl of the Golden West was a romantic melodrama set in a gold-mining camp...
5. Labor in the Progressive Era
Download PDF (8.4 MB)
IN THE opening scene of his film The Bank, Charlie Chaplin demonstrated the gulf between capital and labor. He strode purposefully into a bank and across to the safe. Having carefully dialed the correct combination, he opened the door...
6. The New Woman
Download PDF (8.0 MB)
WHEN NORA slams the door of a doll's house shut at the end of Henrik Ibsen's play, the bang signals the advent of a new woman. The new, assertive woman of the rising middle class was not content to be toy or drudge to her husband...
7. History Written in Lightning: The Transportation Revolution of Henry Ford and the Wright Brothers
Download PDF (9.3 MB)
"HISTORY WRITTEN in lightning" was Woodrow Wilson's comment on D. W. Griffith's film, The Birth of a Nation (1915). His remark also rings true for the way science and technology were extending American industry and manufacturing...
8. Words Without Pictures; Pictures Without Words: Radio and Movies
Download PDF (10.4 MB)
RADIO BROADCASTING is the transmission and reception of communication signals made up of electromagnetic waves traveling through the air and used in programs broadcast for public information, education, and entertainment...
9. On the Rise: Architecture and Skyscrapers
Download PDF (10.1 MB)
THE DISTINCTIVE skyline of Manhattan with its towering skyscrapers has become a metaphor for modern American cities. The skyscraper itself, a tall building based on a steel frame, has become the most indigenous...
10. American Art Comes of Age and Goes to Pieces
Download PDF (9.7 MB)
CONFLICT BETWEEN old and new has been part of the very fabric of America, and the American worlds of art and literature in the twentieth century have been no exception. American painting and American literature...
11. Pacific Overtures? Imperialism and Realpolitik
Download PDF (7.7 MB)
ONE OF the clearest signs that the twentieth century would be the American century was the great overseas expansion of the United States. This was not simply a matter of acquiring land, whether as colonies, dependencies, or protectorates...
12. It's a Long Way to Tipperary: America and World War I
Download PDF (11.7 MB)
THE ASSASSINATION of Franz Ferdinand, heir to the Austro- Hungarian throne, by a Serbian nationalist in Sarajevo, the capital of Bosnia, on Sunday, June 28, 1914, led to a great war because the incident and its sequels...
13. The Lost Peace: The Eclipse of Woodrow Wilson
Download PDF (8.1 MB)
THE OMENS for an Allied victory were not good in 1917. Britain was being starved of food by submarines that were also destroying its ships. The French army launched an assault on the western front that failed and this led...
Download PDF (349.6 KB)
Download PDF (4.7 MB)
Download PDF (5.3 MB)
Page Count: 622
Publication Year: 1988