It might be the Chinese year of the tiger, but scientifically, 2010 is looking like Iran's year.
Scientific output has grown 11 times faster in Iran than the world average, faster than any other country. A survey of the number of scientific publications listed in the Web of Science database shows that growth in the Middle East – mostly in Turkey and Iran – is nearly four times faster than the world average.
Science-Metrix, a data-analysis company in Montreal, Canada, has published a detailed report (PDF) on "geopolitical shifts in knowledge creation" since 1980. "Asia is catching up even more rapidly than previously thought, Europe is holding its position more than most would expect, and the Middle East is a region to watch," says the report's author, Eric Archambault.
World scientific output grew steadily, from 450,000 papers a year in 1980 to 1,500,000 in 2009. Asia as a whole surpassed North America last year.
Nuclear, nuclear, nuclear
Archambaut notes that Iran's publications have emphasised inorganic and nuclear chemistry, nuclear and particle physics and nuclear engineering. Publications in nuclear engineering grew 250 times faster than the world average – although medical and agricultural research also increased.
Science-Metrix also predicts that this year, China will publish as many peer-reviewed papers in natural sciences and engineering as the US. If current trends continue, by 2015 China will match the US across all disciplines – although the US may publish more in the life and social sciences until 2030.
China's prominence in world science is known to have been growing, but Science-Metrix has discovered that its output of peer-reviewed papers has been growing more than five times faster than that of the US.
Meanwhile, "European attitudes towards collaboration are bearing fruit", writes Archambaut. While Asia's growth in output was mirrored by North America's fall, Europe, which invests heavily in cross-border scientific collaboration, held its own, and now produces over a third of the world's science, the largest regional share. Asia produces 29 per cent and North America 28 per cent.
Scientific output fell in the former Soviet Union after its collapse in 1991 and only began to recover in 2006. Latin America and the Caribbean together grew fastest of any region, although its share of world science is still small. Growth in Oceania, Europe and Africa has stayed at about the same rate over the past 30 years. Only North American scientific output has grown "considerably slower" than the world as a whole.
"The number of papers is a first-order metric that doesn't capture quality," admits Archambaut. There are measures for quality, such as the number of times papers are cited, and "Asian science does tend to be less cited overall".
But dismissing the Asian surge on this basis is risky, he feels. "In the 1960s, when Japanese cars started entering the US market, US manufacturers dismissed their advance based on their quality" – but then lost a massive market share to Japan. The important message, he says, is that "Asia is becoming the world leader in science, with North America progressively left behind".
If you would like to reuse any content from New Scientist, either in print or online, please contact the syndication department first for permission. New Scientist does not own rights to photos, but there are a variety of licensing options available for use of articles and graphics we own the copyright to.
Have your say
Only subscribers may leave comments on this article. Please log in.
Only personal subscribers may leave comments on this article
Thu Feb 18 13:38:32 GMT 2010 by Dan
North America seems to be run more and more by lawyers and accountants. Science and Engineering are pushed to the rear as the accountants say we can get cheaper products offshore....duhhh...pretty soon our kids won't know what a screw driver is for, let alone build complex equipment....same in the UK, you guys gotta turf these politico's.
Thu Feb 18 13:48:07 GMT 2010 by visna
don't worry, you'll discover warp drive time soon... really, i've seen it on star trek...
Thu Feb 18 14:07:35 GMT 2010 by Righty
It's that kind of cynicism that made Britain the great place it is today in the heart of europe and the US is following suit with the same ambitious plan of stagnancy.
The best mushrooms grow on dung.
Leave it all to the arts graduates! Let them run everything! What do people who actually do something know about anything!?
Thu Feb 18 18:50:58 GMT 2010 by Vendicar Decarian
Leave it all to the arts graduates! Let them run everything! What do people who actually do something know about anything!?" - Righty
Corporations prefer hiring arts graduates Righty. I've been told that they are more well rounded in their abilities.
In fact I have known several personel managers at successful companies who will throw out a resume if of anyone who applies if their formal education was technical.
They skip to the end, check the education section and just toss it out without reading the rest.
And that is one of the reasons why only 2% of the students in MIT engineering courses are American.
Thu Feb 18 20:32:49 GMT 2010 by Righty
Well I guess they have to become more rounded.
It would also help if everyperson in a greasy boiler-suit would stop calling themselves 'an engineer' when what they mean is a 'technician' or 'grease monkey'.
Nor some mystic polemical rambler confusing science with science fiction and new age mumbo jumbo passing themselves off as a 'scientist' when they mean 'pop-science wannabe'.
Nor someone who programmed a calculator in BASIC as a 'software engineer' when they mean 'hacker'.
Nor some greedy barrow boy passing themselves off as an 'international banker' when they mean 'betting shop guru' or 'ex-street drugs cutter'.
A paramedic wouldn't call themselves a hospital consultant or a GP, they'd get arrested. Nor a legal clerk as a barrister and I never understood why scientists and engineers don't make more use of their professional bodies and prosecute (no persecute) fakes, raise their profiles more in the media and at government level and justify the fees we pay them for token monikas before or after names. Universities too must concentrate or quality and just who is representing the alma mater.
In short professionalism.
All comments should respect the New Scientist House Rules. If you think a particular comment breaks these rules then please use the "Report" link in that comment to report it to us.
If you are having a technical problem posting a comment, please contact technical support.