The RI VOC Meter is the smallest handheld monitor on the market. It is extremely sensitive and capable of detecting contamination at 0.1ppm level. The RI VOC Meter is 200 times more sensitive than Heated Metal Oxide (HMOS) monitors that have been used until now and for the first time VOCs can be detected and eliminated before they become toxic to embryos. (0.1ppm is below the established threshold of embryo toxicity).
Since 1998 (J Hall et al, Human Reproduction) it is accepted that IVF laboratories are at risk of environmental contamination from harmful Volatile Organic Compounds (VOCs). Exclusively from Research Instruments comes the RI VOC Meter for detection of VOCs at very low levels. It can be surprising where VOCs are found. In field tests we have found VOCs present in laboratories, incubators, incubator gas tubing and lab cabinets. We have also found VOCs present in laboratories where VOC removing filtration was in use.
Why use the RI VOC meter?
The RI VOC Meter is the smallest handheld monitor on the market. It is extremely sensitive and capable of detecting contamination at 0.1ppm level. The RI VOC Meter is 200 times more sensitive than Heated Metal Oxide (HMOS) sensors that have been used until now and for the first time VOCs can be detected and eliminated before they become toxic to embryos. (0.1ppm is below an established threshold of embryo toxicity. )
How is it used?
Simply start the device and use to sniff out areas of high VOC. An audible alarm will sound in areas where VOCs are higher than recommended and the concentration of VOCs present will be displayed on the screen. For added protection, the unit can be wall-mounted and VOC levels logged continuously.
How does it work?
The detection is performed by a technology called Photo-Ionisation Detection (PID). The air is drawn into the detection chamber by a pump. UV light is used to ionize the molecular bonds in any chemicals that are present. These icons are electrically conductive and the meter detects the current that flows. The more contamination, the more conductive the air becomes.
The threshold level of toxicity of Acrolein for mouse embryos has been established as 0.58ppm when dissolved in media. International consensus provides guideline limits for Indoor Air Quality (IAQ) in the range from 0.10 to 0.65ppm depending on location. Field experience suggests the 0.5ppm indicates potential IAQ contaminants in laboratories.
|Compounds that can be detected by the RI VOC Meter at levels above their TWA safety limits:|
2-Bromoethyl methyl ether
Butadiene diepoxide, 1,3-
Butyl acetate, n-
Butyl acrylate, n-
Butyl hydroperoxide, t-
Cellosolve see 2-Ethoxyethanol
CFC-14 see Tetrafluoromethane
CFC-113 see 1,1,2-Trichloro-1,2,2-trifluoroethane
Chloroethyl ether, 2-
Chloroethyl methyl ether, 2-
Chloropicrin Chlorotoluene, o-
Diesel Fuel #2 (Automotive)
Dowtherm J (97% Diethylbenzene)DS-108F Wipe Solvent
Ethylene glycol dimethyl
Ethyl hexyl acrylate, 2-
Gasoline #2, 92 octane
HCFC-22 see Chlorodifluoromethane
HCFC-225 see Dichloropentafluoropropane
Isopar E Solvent
Isopar G Solvent
Isopar K Solvent
Isopar L Solvent
Isopar M Solvent
Jet fuel JP-4
Jet fuel JP-5
Jet fuel JP-8
Jet fuel A-1 (JP-8)
petro.distillate see Jet Fuels
MDI see 4,4′-ethylenebis(phenylisocyanate)
Methyl t-butyl ether
Methyl ethyl ketone
|Methyl isobutyl ketone
Methyl propyl ketone
Methyl-2-pyrrolidinone, N-Methyl salicylate,
Mineral Spirits – Viscor 120B Calibration Fluid,
MonoethanolaminE – see
Nickel carbonyl (in CO)
Peracetic/Acetic acid mix
Piperylene, isomer mix
Propyl acetate, n-
Propyl mercaptan, 2-
Pyrrolidine (coats lamp)
Stoddard Solvent – see Mineral Spirits
- see Mesitylene
Varsol “ see Mineral Spirits
Vinylidene chloride – see 1,1-Dicholorethene
Viscor 120B – see Mineral Spirits – Viscor 120B
V. M. & P. Naphtha
VOC Meter brochure (2.0 MiB, 3,361 hits)
Environmental Monitoring Brochure (170.2 KiB, 1,890 hits)
RI Product Catalogue (6.2 MiB, 933 hits)
Q: Does the unit identify which VOC is giving the reading?
A: No, the unit only identifies that a VOC is present. If you need to identify the VOC, then use the optional gas collection bag, and then send the bag for analysis.
Q: What concentration of calibration gas should be used?
A: Isobutylene in air at 100 parts per million.
Q: How do I measure other gases?
A: The VOC meter simultaneously measures a wide range of compounds.
Q: Is the calibration accurate for other gases?
A: Different gases produce different readings on the meter. For a truly accurate reading for a particular gas the meter would need to be calibrated for the gas, or a correction factor can be applied to the reading. However, maximum safe levels of all possible contaminants have not been determined for IVF, so a standard calibration with isobutylene gives a good indication for all VOCs.