Learning Releases Results of Major Distance Learning
Up the Distance' study completed in conjunction with the League
for Innovation in the Community College
MINN. (June 26, 2000) - It is no secret that many students
who enroll in college are unprepared for the academic rigors
of college work. The overwhelming numbers indicate that nearly
one-half, or 44 percent, of students entering 2-year colleges
each year require some form of remediation. The number of
students underprepared for college level work is amplified
by the variety of developmental learners' needs. The needs
and academic plans are clearly not the same for a 40-year-old
woman returning to college for job development skills after
being out of school for 22 years and an 18-year old high school
student who goofed off in math class. Nor are they the same
for a student who graduated from an inner-city high school
that did not offer advanced algebra classes and a highly skilled
math student whose native language is not English. Internet-based
learning is increasingly utilized to help these students quickly
get up to speed in their courses.
the spring of 1999, the League for Innovation in the Community
College and PLATO Learning initiated a joint research project
exploring the questions and challenges of implementing successful
distance learning developmental math programs for community
colleges across the country. Eight colleges participated in
the study and the findings will be released at the Conference
on Information Technology, Nov. 15-18 in Anaheim, Calif.,
"Adding up the Distance: Critical Success Factors for
Internet-based Learning in Developmental Mathematics."
year, more than $1 billion is spent to provide remedial services
to incoming community college students," said Dr. Rob
Foshay, Vice President of Instructional Design and Cognitive
Learning at PLATO Learning. "This research project focused
on identifying how the Internet, distance learning techniques,
and PLATO Learning can work together to more effectively serve
the developmental needs of students. This is a significant
step in PLATO's ongoing commitment to expand our Internet
offerings. Our project partners are national leaders in postsecondary
education and we are excited to have had the opportunity to
work with them in this effort."
to Edward Leach, Vice President-Technology Programs at the
League for Innovation: "The Internet has opened powerful
new doors to education. The League is pleased to have participated
in this project to further define the best practices for using
online technologies to enhance student success in developmental
project explored "critical success factors" for
computer-based distance learning in developmental math programs
during a summer trial implementation session and a full fall
semester term. Mathematics was chosen because it is the subject
area of perhaps widest need in developmental studies, and
because its content and measures are relatively well defined.
College participants, League research team members, and PLATO
service teams worked together in four principal areas of investigation:
Development of effective, individualized, open entry/open
exit programs for developmental students via distance
Cultivation of learners' motivation through the use of
technology in developmental studies programs using distance
Exploration of successful developmental student profiles
using distance learning technology.
Effective combinations of campus-based support service
and distance learning delivery systems as models of success
for developmental learners.
project began by exploring college administration, instructors,
and students as independent variables of distance learning
developmental math programs and continued with an investigation
of best distance learning practices. Extensive data analysis
allowed PLATO and League researchers to draw some conclusions
about the interdependent relationship of college resources,
instructors, and learners in successful distance learning
colleges that were most successful with students created a
systemic and connected balance in their distance learning
developmental math programs. According to the preliminary
project results, the 10 factors that appeared to be most critical
to success of these programs are summarized below and will
be explained in greater detail within the final "Adding
Up the Distance" report.
of individualized, open entry/open exit, effective programs
for developmental students via distance education.
traditional functions of student services and development
of course objectives, distance learning services and curriculum
should be enhanced to include a more comprehensive plan with
the following variables.
Easy Access to Internet and Easy Navigational Courseware
- Although the majority of students who enrolled in distance
learning courses expressed high levels of comfort and expertise
with computer-based applications, courseware that makes logon/logout
functions and transition from lesson to lesson as smooth as
possible was cited as a recognized benefit to successful students.
Technical Support - Over and over again technical
support (via college helpdesk or program contact) reigned
as the most important factor cited by both students and faculty
to program success.
Alignment of Online Courseware and Course Objectives
- Those programs that correlated course objectives with Internet
courseware lessons in a meaningful way (whether as supplemental
or primary content) and connected assignments and class activities
had more successful outcomes than those programs who used
the Internet courseware as a drill-and-practice exercise.
Individualized Instructional Format
- Faculty who used the computer-adaptive components of the
Internet courseware management system and offered individualized
and targeted assignments for students were recognized more
favorably by students. Students and faculty noted the self-paced,
individualized, any-time/any-place functions of distance learning
as the best features of the project.
of successful student profiles using distance learning
Student Recruitment and Counseling
- Proactive selection, preparation, and counseling with students
entering distance learning programs were noted as key variables
for success and course completion. Students who demonstrated
a sense of motivation, time management, and program/academic
goal were more successful in the project.
Orientation - Students who attended mandatory group
orientations had few technical problems, experienced greater
ease of navigation, and had successful program outcomes.
of learners' motivation through the use of technology in developmental
studies programs using distance education.
Student Connections - Interactive and frequent
contact was an important condition for success. Although many
students appreciated the self-paced and individualized format
of the Internet courseware, they were quick to note that when
questions or issues were resolved via a Web page contact,
email, or phone call, there were higher levels of satisfaction
with the course and comfort level with technology. The successful
programs in the study had structured assignment schedules
with student contact requirements as part of course activities.
of campus-based support service and distance learning delivery
systems as models of success for developmental learners.
Faculty Development - Faculty participants
had varying levels of experience with technology and computer-based
applications. Those colleges who offered more than five professional
development opportunities correlated with faculty who were
active in attending workshops and conferences. The faculty
from these colleges created successful programs in this project.
High Standards of Quality and Content
Development - As might be expected, faculty who had experience
with distance learning had successful program outcomes, however
in a few instances, faculty who were using distance learning
as a developmental math option for the first time were also
very successful. From the research data gathered, it is concluded
that the "first-time successful faculty" showed
great interest in computer-based applications and self-initiated
the learning curve of teaching with technology. Rather than
tag on a few lessons with existing course assignments, they
closely reviewed Internet courseware content and were actively
involved in new curriculum development and content upgrade
for their courses. They were also very active in seeking technical
support and assistance from the PLATO helpdesk and their assigned
PLATO educational consultant.
College Leadership & Program Support - Participating
colleges that designated priority, support, and commitment
of resources for technical investments to this project clearly
saw successful responses from faculty and students. Although
transparent in some instances, administrative support was
recognized as clearing the way for successful implementation,
program development, and student access leading to high quality
services and learning opportunities for students.
these critical success factors is the hard work, dedication
to innovation, and commitment to learning shared by administrators,
faculty, and student participants," said Dr. Foshay.
"Although the project traced the ideas, progress, and
outcomes of students over two short semesters, the need to
expand and lead further research efforts in distance learning
for developmental education should be part of the investment
in our college, community, and country's future. If community
colleges are to journey from the place-bound world of classrooms
and computer-labs within campus walls to the anytime/anyplace
expanse of distance learning, it is imperative that studies
like these chart our course and guide our actions towards
a destination of knowing," Dr. Foshay concluded.
The participating colleges included a considerable diversity
of program structure and size. While all participating colleges
had well-established campus-based developmental math programs,
they had varying degrees of history and experience with technology
in their developmental studies programs. The participants
Central Florida Community College, Ocala, Florida
Delta College, University Center, Michigan
Kapiolani Community College, Honolulu, Hawaii
Kirkwood Community College, Cedar Rapids, Iowa
Moraine Valley Community College, Palos Hills, Illinois
Miami-Dade Community College, Miami, Florida
Santa Fe College, Gainesville, Florida
Sinclair Community College, Dayton, Ohio
for Innovation in the Community College
The League for Innovation in the Community College, as a nonprofit
educational consortium of resourceful community colleges,
stimulates experimentation and innovation in all areas of
community college development and serves as a catalyst, project
incubator, and experimental laboratory for all community colleges.
The League for Innovation in the Community College headquarters
are located at 1333 South Spectrum Boulevard, Suite 210, Phoenix,
Arizona 85048-7690. The telephone is (480) 705-8200. For more
information, visit www.league.org.
With revenues of over $44 million, PLATO Learning, Inc. is
a publicly held company traded as TUTR on the NASDAQ-NMS.
Offering more than 2,000 hours and 10,000 learning objectives
of comprehensive academic and applied skills courseware designed
for adolescents and adults, PLATO Learning Systems are marketed
to middle and high schools, colleges, job training programs,
correctional institutions, military education programs, corporations,
and consumers. PLATO is delivered via networks, CD-ROM, private
intranets, and the Internet.
international training and education company, PLATO Learning's
headquarters are located at 10801 Nesbitt Avenue South, Bloomington,
Minnesota, 55437. Phone (952) 832-1000 or (800) 869-2000.
PLATO Learning has domestic offices located throughout the
United States, and international offices in the United Kingdom
and throughout Canada. PLATO Learning has international distributors
located in Puerto Rico, Singapore, South Africa, and the United
Arab Emirates. The company's Web site address on the Internet's
World Wide Web is www.plato.com.