| How to Help
founded April 25, 1995. Created by
What You Can Do...
Alliance for a Better Earth
C/O Joseph Korn
483 Sugarcreek Dr.
(ABE) is a
are tax deductible.
Resources for Students:
New! Jeanne Dingell shares her article:
The Question of the Polish Forced Labourer
during and in the Aftermath of
World War II: The Example of the
Warthegau Forced Labourers
Triangles and Tribulations: The Politics of Nazi Symbols
"This article explores the politics of
focus is on pink and black triangles, currently used as symbols
for gay and lesbian pride and liberation. Previously, these same
identifiers were worn by those destined for annihilation during
the Holocaust. I suggest that, in [re]claiming these markers,
activists, however well intentioned, run a path dangerously close
to historical denial."
Art As Evidence: The Nazi's Cultural War by Elana Verbin, exploring the recent auction of art works seized by the Nazis.
The CD-ROM "Lest We Forget", with video clips and extensive information for teachers.
Online Study Guide for the Survivors of Shoah series, including a timeline.
A Dangerous Experiment
an experiment in 1967 to teach students how it was like back in Nazi
Germany and the consequences.
Jewish Labor and the Holocaust
The Young Soapmaker (a complete book online) by Gertie Lerer.
Excerpt from Anne Frank: The Biography, a book by Melissa Müller.
Excerpt from Official Secrets: What the Nazis Planned, What the British and Americans Knew by Richard Breitman.
Resources for Teachers:
Annotated Holocaust Bibliography I: General and Specialized History
Annotated Holocaust Bibliography II:
Biography, Fiction, Memoirs, Diaries, Poetry, Drama, Art and Literary Criticism
The Truth About Anne Frank,
a 12 class lesson plan by Daniel Barkowitz
Teaching the Holocaust: Grades 4-12, by Teresa Morretta. With timeline, lesson plan, vocabulary and more.
Survivor Judy Cohen shares a poem, Fifty Years Later: Reflections on Teaching The Holocaust to Young
Seminars for Educators at Yad Vashem
Companies Affiliated With Concentration Camps
submitted by Judy Cohen
MBA Proposal to Learn about the
Warren Thompson's proposal for Holocaust education in
business graduate programs.
My Family: Being German Didn't
Mean You Were Safe
Read a story of one family's ethnic cleansing
in Yugoslavia, by Lori Beckett.
Women and the Holocaust Bibliography
What about Women in the
A Trip in the German Countryside, a
story of visiting Dachau Camp as a child.
The Diary of Hannah
Rosen: Europe's Jews and America's Response, 1937-1945
a student from interviews conducted with important
historical figures, and her family.
Resources for Adult Scholars:
New Jersey's Education and Kristallnacht Commemoration Efforts
Auschwitz Revisited, article by Chuck Ferree (Liberator).
Making Belzec a Memorial
Alan Elsner, a Reuters
correspondent writing in a private capacity, shares his thoughts of the
need to create a Belzec concentration camp memorial.
The Munich Jews Memorial Book Project needs your
A Chance Dialogue with a Contemporary Nazi and
The Vienna Encounter by Dr.C. Samson Munn.
"In Auschwitz wurde niemand vergast." ("Nobody was gassed at Auschwitz") 60 Rightist Lies and How to Counter Them
Medical Experiments by Ronald Bennett
tell him that I...Women Writing the
Holocaust, a thesis by Catherine Bernard.
Survivor Alexander Kimel's poem, In Memory - A Holocaust Prayer
play exploring history, memory, a survivor, and the ways we look at
ourselves. Written, produced, and directed by the webmaster of Remember.org.
the Top of the Page