Java Glossary Term - J Posted on: April 3, 2006 By Deepak Kumar
Java DB is an open source Apache Derby database supported by Sun. Java DB is completely written in the Java programming language having the functionality write once run everywhere.
Java Glossary Term - J
Java DB Java DB is an open source Apache Derby database
supported by Sun. Java DB is completely written in the Java programming language
having the functionality write once run everywhere. It is easy to use, having
fully featured set, small footprint and standards compliance that make it ideal
database for Java developers.
Java 2 Platform,Enterprise Edition Java Platform, Enterprise Edition builds on the solid foundation of J2SE.
It has become an industry standard for developing next-generation web
applications and enterprise-class service-oriented architecture (SOA).
Java APIs for XML Processing JAXP (Java APIs for XML Processing) enables applications to parse, transform,
validate and query XML documents using API. This API is independent of a
particular XML processor implementation.
font color="#000080">Java Jar File In Java, JAR (Java ARchive) is a
platform-independent file format that allows you to bundle a Java applet and its
requisite components (.class files, images and sounds) into a single JAR file.
Java JAR Files
A JAR file is a collection of class files and auxiliary resources
associated with applets and applications.
Java JRE Downloads The Java Runtime Environment (JRE) is intended for software
developers and vendors to redistribute with their applications to support the run time
environment for the java apps.
Java JRE Downloads JComponent.component is more flexible Java
Swing component that allows the user to store, show and edit the data in
tabular format. It displays tables of data, optionally allowing the user to
edit the data.
Java JVM The JVM is a crucial component of the Java Platform introduced by Sun
Micro Systems. It is a set of computer data structures & programs
which use a virtual machine model for the execution of other computer
programs and scripts.
Java questionnaire If you are hunting for career in Java, do check the relevant collections
of the questionnaire asked by the interviewers more frequently.
JDBC JDBC stands for Java Data Base
Connectivity that defines how a client may access a database. It is a Java API
that enables Java programs to execute SQL statements
and provides methods for querying and updating data in a database.