Lesson Plans and Worksheets
Browse by Subject
Entrepreneurship Teacher Resources
Find teacher approved Entrepreneurship educational resource ideas and activities
The Boy Scouts of America need to know their stuff to get an entrepreneurship merit badge. Test your class or use some of the questions from this eight page packet. They'll fill out short answer questions about entrepreneurship in order to get a merit badge, or to show what they know.
Give your class a copy of USA TOday to read through and find articles about companies that offer goods or services. They create a graphic organizer and list the business, product, want or need fulfilled of the companies found in the USA Today. Then, they explore entrepreneurship by creating their own business that meets the needs of their community.
Twelfth graders discuss various operations that occur in businesses and industries. In groups, they compare and contrast leadership styles and the different forms of business ownership. They develop their own business plan and create an advertisement to start their business.
Creativity, cooperative learning, and economics combine in this "Business Magazine" group project. Designed as a class finale, this project designates specific job descriptions to each pupil. Groups use modern business magazines as examples. Guidelines are fairly loose, yet convey high expectations. Most work is done outside of the classroom, however 2-3 days of class-time library research is suggested. Technology is adjustable, but advanced graphic design tools would be useful.
Here are a set of graphing lessons that have a real-world business focus. Math skills include creating a scatter plot or line graph, fitting a line to a scatter plot, and making predictions. These lessons are aimed at an algebra 1 level but can be adapted either for middle school or higher levels.
Do your high schoolers every wonder how to become an entrepreneur? Have them examine real-life entrepreneurs to find out. They discuss the financial needs and responsibilities of entrepreneurs then explore the reality of entrepreneurship. A great way to bring economic to life.
There is no better way to learn about a subject than with a hands on project. Middle schoolers design and create a product that meets the needs of fictitious clients. They view a PowerPoint, consider how the Western marketing style is received globally, and then design and create a marketable product. The lesson is well-developed and includes vocabulary, materials list, and objectives.