For years, Natural News has reported on research from scientists who are sounding the alarm that estrogen-mimicking chemicals in the environment, including bisphenol A (BPA) are ending up in our bodies — with potentially health-harming results. Specifically, in study after study, researchers have found links between these “xenoestrogens” and decreased sperm viability, obesity, ovarian dysfunction, neurodevelopmental problems in children and more.
Unfortunately, this tale of chemicals-changing-humans just got worse. Much worse. (more…)
As we reported on back in June of last year in an exposé titled, Consumer Alert: BPA-Free Goods Still Contain Toxin Bisphenol, the petrochemical bisphenol A (BPA), an ubiquitous ingredient in thousands of consumer products and which has been linked to a wide range of serious adverse health effects,[i] has been removed by many ostensibly scrupulous manufacturers in favor of another equally toxic analog in the same chemical class, known as bisphenol S (BPS). This has enabled manufacturers of products as varied as thermal printer receipts to sippy cups to advertise their products as “BPA-free,” while still exposing consumers to potentially harmful, and less regulated chemicals.
BPS is actually not only within the same range of toxicity of BPA, but is slower to degrade, and therefore will be more likely to remain a persistent toxin and environmental pollutant.[ii] It has already been found to be present in the urine of 81% of those tested from the United States and seven Asian countries.[iii]
Now, new concern is being raised by a study published this month in the journal Environmental Health Perspectives showing that BPS has estrogenic activity comparable to estradiol, the most potent and, therefore, concerning human estrogen, and is even capable of enhancing estradiol-mediated cell signaling activity. These actions indicate it has great potential to disrupt normal endocrine processes. (more…)
Scientists from Duke University in North Carolina have identified yet another major threat to human health posed by the plastics chemical bisphenol-A (BPA). According to new research, babies exposed to BPA in utero, or during their developmental stages in the womb, could experience inhibited central nervous system development, which in turn could set them up for future stricken with neurodevelopmental problems.
Because it mimics the actions of estrogen, BPA is already known to interfere with the body’s endocrine system, causing a host of potential problems ranging from behavioral and weight abnormalities to reproductive and immune disorders. And while awareness of BPA’s dangers is on the rise all across the globe, there is still a minimal understanding as to how BPA exerts these negative effects, including how the chemical interferes with proper nervous system development. (more…)
Two recently published studies have added to the evidence that bisphenol A (BPA) is a highly toxic chemical that poses a serious risk to human health.
BPA is an industrial chemical used in everything from food and beverage cans to CDs, thermal paper (like that used to make receipts), paper money, dental fillings and flame retardants. It can be found in household dust and accumulates in the human body. Studies have implicated it as an endocrine disruptor and linked it to higher risk of cancer, cardiovascular disease, reproductive dysfunction, and even neurological, brain and behavioral problems. Some researchers believe that BPA may also affect metabolism and increase the risk of diabetes and obesity. The European Union and Canada have banned its use in certain children’s products. (more…)
Could bacteria and related microbes, widely believed to be a primary cause of disease, explain how we are capable of surviving through the self-created chemical nightmare of industrialized society?
Environmental chemical exposures number in the tens of thousands among industrialized populations. Our water, air, food, and now bodies, are saturated through with xenobiotic chemicals (compounds foreign to our biochemistry) most of which did not even exist on the planet before the industrial revolution of the late 19th century. (more…)
It appears that food, air, water, power, pets, and your physiology, etc., are targets for control. Think about it. We have already unknowingly eaten GM food, been victims of toxic environmental disasters, un-leashed depleted uranium upon the earth, yet we sit on the sidelines watching total control unfold.
Today we have diseases that did not exist in the past, with odd symptoms. Clever people name them something and they become a new normal ‘abnormal’. For example, fibromyalgia, was not a popular diagnosis in the 60′s, yet today, it is more common, than not. We see ‘run away’ morbid obesity, and people who become helpless pharmaceutical repositories obediently following their prescribed chemical path. Each in hopes to actualize their dreams of being healthy and happy again. (more…)
Dental Composites Linked To Behavioral Issues In Children
Research published in the journal Pediatrics indicates that some dental composites — long promoted as overall safer than mercury-based amalgams — are having a significant negative impact on the psychosocial functioning of children. In fact, bisphenol-A based dental restorations were found to be worse than mercury-based amalgams when it came to learning impairment and behavioral issues. [i] (more…)
When a woman experiences a miscarriage or has a baby born with a birth defect like Down Syndrome, the cause is usually a mystery. Modern medicine simply does not have an explanation in most cases, although there are some clues coming in.
Environmental Chemicals Like BPA May Have Serious Reproductive Effects (more…)
In earlier times it was easier to control a million people than physically to kill a million people. Today it is infinitely easier to kill a million people then to control a million people. - Zbigniew Brzezinski (Council on Foreign Relations, Trilateral Commission, Bilderberg Group, Carter/Obama Advisor).
Breaking new research indicates that manufacturers throughout the world who were using the toxic hormone-disrupting chemical bisphenol A (BPA), may have simply switched to an equally toxic analogue in the same bisphenol chemical class known as bisphenol S (BPS), to evade regulatory oversight and trick consumers with their misleading “BPA-FREE!” labels…. (more…)