VARANASI: While the world will observe the World Meningitis Day (WMD) on Tuesday (April 24) and focus on programmes to raise awareness about the disease that causes potentially deadly inflammation of the brain, the health experts in the region will look for ways to create awareness and enhance the vaccination rate, especially amongst infants and young children, who are more vulnerable to the infection.
"A harsh reality of the region lies in the fact that a majority of people are not aware of the warning signs of infection. Similarly, a number of people do not know that meningitis can be vaccine-preventable and there are vaccines available to prevent this potentially deadly disease. What is more disturbing is the dismal vaccination rate which covers less than 10% of young children (over one years of age) in the region. It is not the case of Varanasi but of entire east UP region," said Dr Alok Bhardwaj, senior paediatrician and secretary, Indian Medical Association (IMA), Varanasi Branch on the eve of WMD on Monday.
Attributing low vaccination rate among young children in the region to lack of awareness along with the exclusion of meningitis vaccination under government vaccination programme, the IMA secretary emphasised on the need to spread the network of children receiving vaccination against the potentially hazardous diseases. "Meningitis can affect people of all ages, but infants, children and adolescents are at an increased risk of infection. However, if the children are vaccinated, almost all forms of meningitis, except viral meningitis (which is not fatal), is preventable," he added.
It may be mentioned here that bacterial meningitis, the severe form of meningitis, is typically caused by one of three types of bacteria - Haemophilus influenzae type B (Hib), Neisseria meningitidis, or Streptococcus pneumoniae bacteria. Before the 1990's, Haemophilus influenzae type B (Hib) was the leading cause of bacterical meningitis. Fortunately, routine Hib vaccination has greatly reduced the number of Hib cases and related bacterial meningitis infections.
Saying that meningococcal conjugate vaccine is recommended for people aged 11 to 54 years, as well as certain high-risk children from nine months to 10 years, the senior paediatrician also added that the latest recommendations call for adolescents to receive the first dose at 11 or 12 years of age, with a booster at the age of 16 to 18 years. "Currently, there is no vaccine to protect against viral meningitis, however, some vaccines on the recommended childhood schedule, such as MMR and varicella-zoster, can help protect against infections that may lead to viral meningitis," he added.As per reports of World Health Organization (WHO), bacterial meningitis, which is the most severe and common form, causes around 170,000 deaths globally every year. In addition, approximately one million people are projected to suffer from bacterial meningitis this year, say reports.