Archive for June, 2012
Our Little Reader Blocks are useful as a sight word game for helping kids learn their first one hundred basic sight words. These 3 inch cube cardboard blocks are manufactured by Smart Monkey Toys and are popular with parents and educators alike. Kids being home-schooled should have at least one set of these toys.
To make sentence forming fun and easy these block toys are color-coded by type (adjectives, nouns, verbs, pronouns and prepositions), using colors kids love; red, blue, green, yellow and white.
Useful for teaching colors and math as well as many other games these are educational toddler toys to make learning fun and exciting. Even when you are not teaching lessons you children will pull out the blocks and read to one another, stack, sort by colors and make up games of their own.
OUR LITTLE READER BLOCKS ARE CODED AS LISTED BELOW
3 green noun blocks (18 nouns)
5 blue verb blocks (30 verbs)
5 red pronoun blocks (30 pronouns)
3 yellow adjective blocks (18 adjectives)
2 white preposition blocks (12 prepositions)
Now being sold at All I Can Imagine, visit us today!
ImagiBRICKS are the award-winning large cardboard building blocks for boys and girls age 18 months and up. Toddlers and children can “work” together to build tall towers, corals, and everything else their eager little minds can design. Block play provides kids opportunities to:
- attain problem solving skills
- escalate eye-hand coordination
- test and discover hot to control their environment
Having giant cardboard building blocks in your child’s play room offers easy play opportunities without parent supervision. These blocks are lightweight and easy to carry around helping children increase their muscle strength. They are crush-proof and have a child resistant coating that allows you to wipe them down without harming the blocks.
Sets are available in several sizes ranging from a beginner set of 16 up to bulk orders. Our 40 piece set of cardboard is on sale and is one of our most sought after toy.
Mon’s who have a day care in their home should definitely have one set of ImagiBRICKS!
We have a line known as “Bouncy Buddies” that are hand-sewn plush stuffed animals that have a hard rubber ball stitched inside their tummies. Cute as can be there are such animal toys as a red ladybug, two different dogs, black and white cow, and our pretty pink pig.
Throughout the years there have been many types of toys involving balls; do you remember the cup-and-ball toy? Still seen in Dollar stores are the ball and paddle. Then there is the Nerf ball which made it possible for kids to play ball inside the house and even bat it around in a larger playroom or a basement.
Wham-O Manufacturing Co., the miracle-working maker of the Hula Hoop ® and Frisbee ® disc, bounced back into the news in 1965 with an explosive knob of rubber called Super Ball.® Dropped from shoulder level, a high potency Super Ball ® snapped nearly all the way back; thrown down, it could leap over a three-story building; flung into a wall with spin, it kicked back with remarkable reverse English.
And now we have these unique, cuddly ball toys that kids can drag around with them everywhere they go! Grab an arm, grab a leg it does not matter. These are quality hand sewn ball toys that your boys and girls will love. We suggest a separate animal figure for you dog since they get dirtier.
Quadro structures made from various kits provide parents and kids plenty of time to bond and work together building and designing creative projects. Even though each kit includes about thirty designs you are welcome to make up your own. They are like a giant tinker toy – only better.
A juice bar is only one of the may structures you can have fun putting together when you have a Starter Set. Besides all the climbing gym designs how about a goal, theatre, or a store. Whether you want to play indoors or outdoors the toys will provide hours of creative fun for your kids.
Here is a toy that will grow with your children; kids even take them to college and build their desk or bookshelves. Kits are passed down from generation to generation – what other toy can you say this about?
Quadro adventure playsets are designed to help children become more secure, confident and socially responsible and will help them develop balance, strength and a range of motor skills. Children’s activities are only limited by their imagination.
When we launched our website, All I Can Imagine, we began with a product line from ImagiPLAY which included 3d wooden puzzles, wood indoor play sets and ImagiBRICKS large toy blocks. Their eco-friendly learning toys are safe toddler toys and coated with child safe, non toxic finishes.
Several years a go they sold their ImagiBRICK line of block toys to Smart Monkey Toys and we are still providing these cardboard blocks that are being shipped from Wisconsin. Since then, SMT has added two new lines of blocks; timber and construction.
Today, six years later since our launch, Begin Again Toys has purchased ImagiPLAY and their line of children’s safe toys. Located in Iowa their warehouse will be re-designing the wild animal puzzles and have chosen different colors. They have discontinued some of the products such as the wood play sets, zoo, farm, and Noah’s ark.
Also being slightly re-designed are the colors of the ever popular snail puzzle, and now it will be packed in it’s own wooden box as will many of the other puzzles. Gift giving and keeping your 3d puzzles all together will now be easier.
Begin Again Toys also has a line of baby toys, bath tub toys and unique kits you will find to be different than anything we believe you have ever seen. They, as was the ImagiPLAY company, make eco-friendly and safe kids toys you want for your children.
The clutching toys will be in pastel colors as seen below.
Revised this blog: October 18, 2012 – see our new website.