Before you head out into the woods, you should make sure that you have the right supplies. This is because you never know what can happen when you are out there in the bush and if you get lost, you will want to have everything that you will need to make it through at least 72-hours. This survival list could be the difference between life and death, so make sure that you update this list every six months and take your kit with you whenever you will be away from civilization.
The most important thing to have involved with your survival list is enough water to last you for three days. This generally means that you will carry four liters of water per person. In addition, you should carry food that you can consume without cooking, since you do not know if you will have a fire or not. This can include granola bars, crackers, cereal, canned juice, canned tuna and trail mix. If you bring cans of food, make sure that they have a pop-top, so that you do not have to worry about how you will open them.
You will also want to keep warm, as hypothermia is a significant danger when you are out in the woods. Bring a change of clothing, which includes a long sleeved shirt, pants, socks and a jacket. You should also put additional underwear on your survival list, just in case yours get wet. Blankets and sheets will provide you with additional warm and will keep you warm throughout the night. Even a plastic sheet can keep you warm, as it will help keep the heat in when it gets extremely cold.
As for the supplies on your survival list, you should start by having fuel and a light, so that you can see where you are going. If you end up spending days in the wilderness, the nights can become very long without light, as you will hear many noises throughout the night and will not have a fire for warmth. Even candles can provide you with a small amount of warmth and can be used to transport fire from one location to another. Waterproof matches are a must, as a lighter can stop working if it gets wet or becomes damaged. You should also try to include items like a radio, a knife, rope, tape and a first aid kit, as these items can help you to survive for a short period of time. An axe to cut wood will help as well.
While you never want to find yourself stuck in the wilderness, it is important to keep yourself prepared for the unexpected. A day hike into the woods can quickly turn into a disaster if you take a wrong turn or run into some severe weather, so having the necessities on hands is of the utmost importance. It is very easy to make a survival list and turn it into a kit, so make sure that you do so before your next excursion.
Tags: Survival List