One of the key aspects to any outstanding lesson is having outstanding resources. Below you will find my top five resources from the Guardian Teacher Network for teaching ICT and computer science. Enjoy.
Have you ever wondered what gamification is? Perhaps you know what it is and would love to incorporate video games into teaching and learning? This is a great resource from Microsoft that will tell you all about games in education and how to use them in lessons. This covers using games as well as making them using Microsoft's own visual programming environment, Kodu. For tutorials on how to use Kodu have a look at my YouTube channel. My year 7 project for Kodu is also worth a look. There are also lots of questions and answers to help you see the potential of games in schools.
Where can it be used? Across the curriculum and in both primary and secondary schools.
Following on from the resource above, is this full project on game design from BAFTA. The project is very detailed and aims to teach students what makes a good game rather than how to programme one. There are five lesson plans covering different aspects of game design. This is so important, as I am sure we have all played a game that looks great but is badly thought out. BAFTA's lesson plans, try to address this.
Where can it be used? In ICT as well as subjects like design and technology. It is aimed at 11 to 16 year-olds.
Alan O'Donohoe reveals his top 10 computer science resources in this fantastic post from the Teacher Network blog. Whether you have been teaching computer science for years or are new to it, there is something for everyone. There are some great web resources for teaching coding here too. Alan also has a rap on the site about computer science.
Where can it be used? Primary and secondary computer science and ICT lessons. It is also great for teachers' own personal development.
This is my new ICT curriculum booklet and includes 11 original projects. For each project there is a link to an accompanying presentation. The presentations include extra resources like videos and web links. You can find digital citizenship, graphics, computer science and ICT projects in the booklet. Each project could be adapted or perhaps you would just like to use it for inspiration. Although it was created with KS3 in mind, some projects are suitable for KS2.
Where can it be used? KS2 and KS3 computer science and ICT lessons.
Although this is a presentation for Safer Internet Day 2012 it can be used all year round. Creator Ross McGill has included plenty of links and advice for students of all ages. In the world we live in it is so important for students to understand how to stay safe online. This presentation is great for ICT lessons, assemblies and tutor time.
Where can it be used? Assemblies, ICT and PSHE lessons, tutor time. Most content is suitable for primary and secondary school children. Although, it may be worth checking the videos and making a judgment for yourself.
I'd would love to know your experiences of using them, so please do leave a comment on the resource page and if you have any resources that other ICT teachers could benefit from why not upload them onto the site?
Matt Britland is the head of ICT at Kingston Grammar School. He has been teaching for just over six years and taught in both state and independent schools. Follow him on Twitter @mattbritland. Matt is a GTN adviser.