Portrait of James Clerk Maxwell
Image digitized by J.C. Max, Inc. from engraving by G.J. Stoddard from photograph by Fergus of Greenock appearing in "The Life of James Clerk Maxwell" by L. Campbell & W. Garnett (published in 1882).
James Clerk Maxwell
James Clerk Maxwell was a Scottish physicist who lived between 1831-1879. He studied Saturn's rings and first suggested that they were made of actual material.
Maxwell is most famous for his work with electricity and magnetism.
Shop Windows to the Universe Science Store!
Our online store
includes issues of NESTA's quarterly journal, The Earth Scientist
, full of classroom activities on different topics in Earth and space science, as well as books
on science education!
You might also be interested in:
How did life evolve on Earth? The answer to this question can help us understand our past and prepare for our future. Although evolution provides credible and reliable answers, polls show that many people turn away from science, seeking other explanations with which they are more comfortable....more
Charles Darwin was an English Naturalist who lived between 1809-1882. One of the most famous and influential scientists of all time, his ideas changed the ways all other scientists thought. Darwin started...more
Christian Doppler was an Austrian mathematician who lived between 1803-1853. He is known for a principle he proposed in 1842. This is now known as the Doppler Effect. He thought that the pitch of a sound...more
Ben Franklin was an American scientist and statesman who lived between 1706-1790. He studied electricity and learned of its dangers and possible uses. Franklin developed many inventions that made people's...more
Edmond Halley was an English astronomer who lived between 1656-1742. He reasoned that the same comet which he saw in 1682 had appeared before and predicted that it would appear again, about every 76 years....more
William Herschel was born in Germany. He moved to England and worked there most of his life. He lived between 1738-1822. He built powerful telescopes which let him observe the heavens with greater detail....more
Christian Huygens was a Dutch physicist and astronomer who lived between 1629-1695. He made improvements in telescopes allowing people to view objects in space with greater detail. Huygens also invented...more
James Clerk Maxwell was a Scottish physicist who lived between 1831-1879. He studied Saturn's rings and first suggested that they were made of actual material. Maxwell is most famous for his work with...more