The subjects covered by the Nimbus Symposium presentations included:
Dr. Tom Vonder Haar
How Nimbus advanced the understanding of the Earth’s fundamental energy budget so important to the understanding of whether there is a global warming phenomenon. Based on the observations made by several instruments that accurately measured the incoming solar irradiance reaching the earth and the broadband reflected earth radiation. Based on the HRIR, MRIR, MUSE, and ERB instruments.
Dr. Bill Smith
How Nimbus revolutionized weather forecasting methodology by introducing the techniques for the global quantitative measurement of the atmospheric temperatures, water vapor, and other atmospheric constituents. Statistics presenting longer forecast accuracy with a progressive set of comprehensive atmospheric measurements. Based on SIRS, ITPR, HIRS, NEMS, SCAMS, and PMR instruments.
Dr. Arlin Krueger
The role Nimbus played in measuring total ozone in the atmosphere with the BUV instrument and in alerting the world to the degradation of the protective stratospheric ozone with the TOMS instrument. Time-phased total ozone plots.
Coastal Zone Color Scanner (CZCS) (12.1 MB)
Dr. Wayne Esaias
How Nimbus introduced the observation/measurement of ocean color as a means of quantifying and locating the constituents of the ocean and assessing ocean productivity in relation to global climate studies. Based on the CZCS instrument.
IRLS System (29.7 MB)
The initiation of the technology for surface platforms terminal location and data collection through satellites and the application of this technology to study winds, animal and fish migrations, collect data from a very large number of remote environmental sensing platforms, and to operate a worldwide search and rescue system. Based on the IRLS and TWELE/RAMS instruments.
Dr. Dave Staelin
The introduction of the microwave spectrum for measuring meteorological parameters that improved the weather forecasting models by measuring atmospheric temperature in the presence of clouds, oceanic humidity, and cloud water content, and provided a quantitative understanding of violent storm (hurricane) intensities and profiles. Based on the NEMS and SCAMS instruments.
Dr. Per Gloersen
The introduction of the microwave spectrum to make global measurements of rainfall and water vapor, measure the polar ice fields and differentiate ice age, determine surface winds over the ocean, and measure sea surface temperature. Based on the ESMR and SMMR instruments.
A comprehensive history of the Nimbus program covering the initiation of the program and the evolution of Nimbus as the meteorological research satellite program that started in 1963. It presents the earth science research objectives and accomplishments of the seven Nimbus satellites that operated from 1964-1994 and overviews of each of the satellites, covering descriptions of the 33 different multi-spectral experiments. The unique Nimbus Project-managed data system that expedited the availability of data products to the research and application user community is described. An overview of the many benefits to mankind that resulted from the research is provided.
Several of the symposium presenters who were researchers in the science field they covered are also educators of meteorology and related sciences at various universities. They envisioned the breadth and depth of the research activity covered and the exposure to the systematic process of improving the meteorological and environmental research applications to be of interest to their students and requested that this CD of the presentations be made available as an educational tool. This CD has been created at the Goddard Space Flight Center and distributed to the presenters. They are authorized to make copies for their students.
Nimbus Symposium Coordinator, October 26, 2004
Nimbus Project Spacecraft Operations Manager, 1963-1980
rshapirox2 AT aol DOT com