Stasis dermatitis and ulcers
Stasis dermatitis is a change in the skin that occur when blood collects (pools) in the veins of the lower leg.
Venous stasis ulcers; Ulcers - venous; Venous ulcer
Causes, incidence, and risk factors
is a long-term (chronic) condition in which the veins have problems sending blood from the legs back to the heart.
Some people with venous insufficiency develop stasis dermatitis. Blood pools in the veins of the lower leg. Fluid and blood cells leak out of the veins into the skin and other tissues. This may lead to itching, which causes more skin changes.
You may have symptoms of venous insufficiency including:
- Dull aching or heaviness in the leg
- Pain that gets worse when you stand
- Swelling in the leg
At first, the skin of the ankles and lower legs may look thin or tissue-like. You may slowly get brown stains on the skin.
The skin may become irritated or crack if you scratch it. It may also become red or swollen, crusted, or weepy.
Over time, some skin changes become permanent:
Skin sores (ulcers) may develop (called a venous ulcer or stasis ulcer). These most often form on the inside of the ankle.
Signs and tests
The diagnosis is primarily based on the appearance of the skin. Your doctor may order tests to examine the blood flow in your legs.
Stasis dermatitis can be related to heart problems so you may need test to check your heart function.
You may take the following steps to manage venous insufficiency, which is causing stasis dermatitis:
Some skin care treatments can make the problem worse. Talk with your health care provider before using any lotions, creams, or antibiotic ointments.
Things to avoid:
Topical antibiotics, such as neomycin
Drying lotions, such as calamine
Benzocaine and other products meant to numb the skin
Treatments your health care provider may suggest include:
Stasis dermatitis is often a long-term (chronic
- Bacterial skin infections
- Chronic leg ulcers
- Infection of bone
- Permanent scar
Calling your health care provider
Call your health care provider if you develop leg swelling or symptoms of stasis dermatitis.
Watch for signs of infection such as:
Reider N, Fritsch PO. Other Eczematous Eruptions. In:Bolognia JL, Jorizzo JL, Schaffer JV, et al, eds.Dermatology. 3rd ed. Philadelphia, Pa: Mosby Elsevier; 2012:chap 13.
Kevin Berman, MD, PhD, Atlanta Center for Dermatologic Disease, Atlanta, GA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by A.D.A.M. Health Solutions, Ebix, Inc., Editorial Team: David Zieve, MD, MHA, David R. Eltz, Stephanie Slon, and Nissi Wang.