Century Dictionary and Cyclopedia
- In chem., having the same saturating or combining power as six hydrogen atoms, or a valence of six.
- adj. chemistry having a valence of 6
GNU Webster's 1913
- adj. (Chem.) Having a valence of six; -- said of hexads.
- hexa- + -valent (Wiktionary)
“The soldiers were stationed there for months before being informed that the site was contaminated with a chemical known as hexavalent chromium.”
“It contained heavy concentrations of a carcinogen called hexavalent chromium.”
“The suite suit alleges that KBR knowingly allowed exposure to the toxic chemical sodium dichromate, also known as hexavalent chromium.”
“Surrounded by Christmas decorations in his living room, Kearney said he felt certain that the family's ailments were triggered by years of exposure to chromium 6, also known as hexavalent chromium, a substance found in compounds used in metal plating and other industrial processes.”
“This Oregonian story raises the question of whether National Guard soldiers dispatched to Iraq to protect private contractors are suffering medical ailments because of their exposure to a commonly used anti-corrosive agent called hexavalent chromium, the same chemical made famous by activist Erin Brockovich.”
“Max Costa, the chairman of New York University's Department of Environmental Medicine, has called hexavalent chromium one of the most potent carcinogens known to man.”
“A lawsuit claims Prime Tanning, which is now owned by National Beef Leathers, distributed fertilizer that contained the carcinogen chromium 6, also known as hexavalent chromium.”
“An airways, skin and stomach irritant, hexavalent chromium is a known carcinogen.”
“As the eponymous movie from 2000 chronicled, hexavalent chromium dissolved from cooling-tower wastewater at a Pacific Gas & Electric facility leached into the groundwater beneath the town of Hinkley”
“EPA's TSCA authority has been used very narrowly to restrict hexavalent chromium from being added as a water treatment chemical to control corrosion in commercial not industrial cooling systems and towers.”
‘hexavalent’ hasn't been added to any lists yet.
Looking for tweets for hexavalent.