DenominationThe majority of the historians think that Beaune comes from Belenus, Gallic god corresponding to Apollon among Greeks.
The current official designation was founded in 1823, substitute Beaune , name which still remains, in a relatively marginal way, in the current language.
As opposed to what one could think the name of Beaune-the-Rolande does not come from the river which crosses the city but contrary it would be the city which would have named the river (after 1823 thus). The city would hold this name of the denomination Beaune-the-Roland of the name of one of the first lords of the city.
There existed, in a very marginal way, a designation of use: Beaune-in-Gâtinais , which almost completely disappeared after 1823 (there still existed there is little a signpost with this name).
GeographyBeaune-the-Rolande is located at 100 km of Paris, 60 km of Orleans (prefecture of the Région Centers and of the Département of Loiret), 25 km of Montargis (sub-prefecture of the Loiret) and 18 km of Pithiviers (sub-prefecture of the Loiret).
The city is at the western end of the Gâtinais, near the Forêt of Orleans and of the limit is Beauce.
The territory of the commune includes/understands very little relief if the interior of the city and the locality " are excluded; Montagne" in the South.
The river the Rolande who takes her source with a few kilometers crosses the city before throwing in the Charcoal with Basket-in-Gâtinais.
Localities and variationsRomaiville, Foncerive, Vergonville, Elm, the Wood of Leu, Marcilly, Jarisoy, Willows…
Communes borderingIn the canton: Montbarrois, Saint-Michel, Batilly-in-Gâtinais, Barville-in-Gâtinais, Egry, Auxy, Juranville, Saint-Wolf-of-Vines.
HistoryTraces of a Neolithic habitat were attested in the surroundings of the city. Beaune-the-Rolande is then in the territory of the Gallic tribe of the Sénons. According to certain assumptions it could be a question of Vellaunodunum, quoted besieged by Jules César (perhaps also Montargis or Castle-Landon). The current site of the city is inhabited since the Gallo-Roman time (discovery of skeletons, potteries and objects metal) and is near the Voie César which connected Sens (capital Sénons) to Genabum (Orleans).
City strengthened with the the Middle Ages, there remains still today of many vestiges of the enclosing wall (several turns, sections of wall).
The November 28th 1870 was held in Beaune-the-Rolande, a battles of the Franco-German Guerre of 1870 where the painter Frederic Bazille was killed in particular: prince Charles of Prussia beat the Général of Aurelle de Paladines (ordering the Armée with the Loire).
At the time of the Second world war, Beaune-the-Rolande sheltered, close to her center town, a camp of internment and transit, under French command, which saw passing, with that of Pithiviers, nearly 18.000 Jews. The majority were then off-set towards Auschwitz to be exterminated there.
- Church Saint Martin's day , originally of the 12th century and partially destroyed during the War One hundred Year old and of which persists a crypt, a frontage and the turn-bell-tower. It was rebuilt with, with repair of the arrow in 1865.
|Random links:||Vaugines | Joseph Hansen (writer) | Xanthichthys ringens | Dwarf shrew | Lush (film) | Ungulate_Even-toed|