Significance and Use
This practice is designed for researchers, applicators, and end users of pesticides where one or more ingredients are being mixed into an aqueous spray system. The practice is useful in determining physical compatibility of aqueous spray mixtures of pesticides and/or fertilizers.
The practice is not designed to determine physical compatibility of non-aqueous based spray mixtures.
4.3 THe results or the testing should be used to determine the compatibility of the mixture ingredients in dynamic applications. Interpolation of static results to the expectations of the results of this test is not encouraged.
1.1 This practice describes the method for the evaluation of the physical compatibility and stability of pesticide tank mixtures diluted for aqueous application. This practice may also be adapted to use with liquid fertilizers in replacement of the water diluent.
1.2 Tank mix compatibility can be affected by many variables. Care should be taken to duplicate test conditions. This practice addresses the standard variables such as time, temperature, water hardness, method of agitation, and degree of agitation.
1.3 Compatibility is complex and can be affected by other variables such as order of addition, pH of the dilution water, pumping shear, etc. Under the parameters of this practice, the results will define whether the pesticide mixture is or is not compatible in the laboratory. Compatibility or incompatibility should be confirmed under field spray conditions.
1.4 Proper safety and hygiene precautions must be taken when working with pesticide formulations to prevent skin or eye contact, vapor inhalation, and environmental contamination.
1.5 Read and follow all handling instructions for the specific formulation and conduct the test in accordance with good laboratory practice.
1.6 The values stated in SI units are to be regarded as standard. No other units of measurement are included in this standard.
1.7 This standard does not purport to address all of the safety problems, if any, associated with its use. It is the responsibility of the user of this standard to establish appropriate safety and health practices and determine the applicability of regulatory limitations prior to use.
2. Referenced Documents (purchase separately) The documents listed below are referenced within the subject standard but are not provided as part of the standard.
D1193 Specification for Reagent Water
aqueous spray mixtures; compatibility; pesticide sprays; spray mixtures; tank mix compatibility; Aqueous environments; Dynamic shaker method; Liquid fertilizers; Pesticides; Physical properties/dimensions/characteristics; Stability; Tank mixtures
ICS Number Code 65.100.01 (Pesticides and other agrochemicals)
ASTM International is a member of CrossRef.
Citing ASTM Standards
[Back to Top]