February 11, 2013 |
Family history is one of the strongest predictors of heart disease, according to an expert. "If you look at how heart disease occurs, about 80 percent takes place in people with a strong family history," said University of Alabama at Birmingham (UAB) Department of Epidemiology Professor and Chair Donna Arnett. Arnett, who is serving as the president of the American Heart Association (AHA), said this message goes hand in hand with following the AHA's "Life's Simple 7": getting active, controlling cholesterol, eating better, managing blood pressure, losing weight, reducing blood sugar and quitting smoking . "Though we know those seven major factors, we still don't completely know all of the causes of heart disease.
February 6, 2013 |
BHOPAL: Residents of Madhya Pradesh can take comfort from the latest health status indicators released by central bureau of health intelligence which states that mean time spent on work related physical activity range between 191-332 minutes per day in the state, amongst the highest in the country. However, the state's urban inhabitants surveyed spend 4-hours as couch potato or their physical activity was 2/3 as compared to those living in rural areas. Experts attribute lack of physical activity to obesity, hyperlipidemia, diabetes mellitus, hypertension and coronary heart disease.
February 4, 2013 |
For diabetics, blood pressure and cholesterol are the two key factors that could increase the risk of heart disease and stroke , says a new study involving more than 26,000 people suffering from blood sugar . "People with diabetes are often focused on controlling their blood sugar, but our study found that controlling blood pressure and cholesterol is even more important in preventing heart disease," said Greg Nichols, senior investigator and...
February 3, 2013 |
LONDON: Scientists have identified a key molecular mechanism through which high blood glucose raises cancer risk in obese people and diabetics. The diabetic population has up to double chances of suffering pancreatic or colon cancer among others, according to well sustained epidemiological studies. Scientists led by Dr Custodia Garcia-Jimenez at the University Rey Juan Carlos in Madrid have uncovered a key mechanism that links obesity and diabetes with cancer. They found that high sugar levels increase activity of a gene widely implicated in cancer progression.
February 2, 2013 |
Gestational diabetes is a kind of diabetes that comes on during pregnancy. It is often diagnosed on screening tests done between weeks 24 and 28 of pregnancy. According to the American Diabetes Association gestational diabetes affects 4% of all pregnant women. While doctors aren't sure what causes gestational diabetes, it is believed that hormones from the placenta may block the action of insulin in the mother, leading to abnormally high levels of sugar in your blood. Causes of Gestational Diabetes: In gestational diabetes the pregnant mother needs more insulin and many times her pancreas cannot make enough to send the sugar in the blood.
January 31, 2013 |
January 31, 2013 |
PUNE: Blood sugar checking is essential during pregnancy, said physician Aarti Shahade. She was speaking at the conference Focus Diabetes 2013 held in Pune recently. This conference was organized jointly by Indian medical association, Pune and Association of Physicians of India, Pune branch. "India is considered the capital of diabetes of the world where every fifth person will be a diabetic. Considering the mammoth proportion of the burden on health care system and economy of our country, it is essential to train our medical fraternity in the latest topics on the subject and deliberate in detail about its diagnosis, investigation, treatment and preventive aspects," said Shahade, also a convenor of the conference.
January 28, 2013 |
A host of health-tracking devices are available that help ensure patient safety . It's not just apples that are keeping doctors at bay these days. A host of health-tracking devices are helping patients do it, too. From blood pressure, sugar, to eye pressure and general functioning of all body organs, these gadgets beep at the slightest wayward reading, allowing patients to keep tab on their medical condition from the comfort and confines of their homes, and saving them time on clinic visits in cases where regular tests are required.
January 28, 2013 |
DHANBAD: Dr N K Singh, director Dhanbad Heart Research Cent re have been invited to deliver guest lecture at Coimbtore (Tamil Nadu ) on January 31 at the national conference of Association of Physicians of India by the scientific committee. He will talk on 'Diabetic cardiomypathy'. This topic is very important as diabetic patients are at high risk to undergo heart failure, mainly owing to uncontrolled blood sugar. The association is the single largest body of specialist physicians with over 18,000 members in India, Dr Singh said.
January 20, 2013 |
JAIPUR: City-based businessman NavratanKothari , who was arrested from Indore on Thursday for his alleged role in the high profile JalMahal land lease case, was sent to judicial custody by a local court on Saturday. However, he was again admitted to Sawai Man Singh (SMS) hospital for treatment due to poor health. The police had to take him to the court on Friday, however, due to his rising sugar level he was admitted to SMS hospital. Before taking Kothari to jail, the medical board constituted to keep a check on his health, gave their clearance to present him in the court.