An experiment clocks neutrinos at their expected clip—ie, not faster than light
FOUR weeks ago researchers at the OPERA collaboration, in Italy, discovered a glitch that may account for their startling finding last September that elusive particles called neutrinos move faster than light, in flagrant disregard of Albert Einstein's theory of relativity. Now the first crosscheck from a rival experiment seems to vindicate the overwhelming majority of physicists who were convinced all along that an error must have crept in to OPERA's analysis. On March 16th members of the ICARUS collaboration posted a paper on arXiv, an online repository, which reports that neutrinos they looked at are not travelling faster than light.
Both OPERA and ICARUS study neutrinos sent from Europe's main particle-physics laboratory, CERN. The particles are created in one of CERN's accelerators, located just outside Geneva, and travel through the Earth's crust to a laboratory beneath Gran Sasso, a mountainous massif in the Apennines. ICARUS's measurements, all seven of them (not bad, given neutrinos' unwillingness to interact with anything, including detectors), were taken at the end of last year, after the beam had been tweaked to improve the accuracy of the data.
OPERA, too, tapped the modified beam, but reported in November that its un-Einsteinian result persisted. But then, on February 23rd, its researchers owned up to discovering what could be a source of experimental error in the Global Positioning System (GPS) signals used to synchronise atomic clocks at either end of the neutrino beam. Specifically, it concerns the optical-fibre connector that brings the GPS signal to OPERA's master clock. This, the OPERA team said, may not have been functioning properly when the measurements were taken.
According to an anonymous leak published on the website of Science magazine, after tightening the connection and then measuring the time it takes data to travel the length of the fibre, the researchers found that the data arrive 60 nanoseconds earlier. That is precisely the time by which neutrinos appeared to have overtaken light on their 730km (450-mile) trip.
However, in February OPERA still seemed to be hedging its bets. Its researchers pointed to a second potential source of error which, if confirmed, would actually reinforce its surprise result. (This was related to a device called an oscillator, used to provide the time stamps needed to synchronise the clocks at CERN and Gran Sasso.) ICARUS's findings now make that much less likely.
Sergio Bertolucci, CERN's research director, stresses that throughout the superluminal saga OPERA's researchers have behaved with “perfect scientific integrity”. They have opened their methods and data to scrutiny and invited independent measurements. The superluminal jolt spurred physicists to action. “This is how science works,” Dr Bertolucci says.