The young man was nervous. He fidgeted and twitched with anxiety, noticing every flicker of a shadow as it danced in the twilight. At the faintest sound, like a branch brushing against the roof, the young man's pulse quickened. He would cock his head like a dog trying to pinpoint the exact source of a creak in the floor. At night, he chased imagined noises. He was confident that he could hear voices above and below his bed, but he couldn't quite make out what they were discussing. Was it him?

It wasn't always like this. For years, the young man was kind and neighbourly towards the old man who lived next door. The old man had been equally kind in return and lived modestly in his humble home. The two men had no qualms, but the young man began to feel unnerved by the old man's eye. One of his eyes was pale blue and with a film over it. Every time the young man felt the unseeing eye fall upon him, his blood ran cold. Over time, the dreadful sensation overwhelmed the young man until he decided that it, and the old man, had to be killed. 

The young man knew that murder was wrong. He knew that the old man was not to blame for his horrible eye, and so was exceedingly kind to him. He did not wish to kill out of passion or madness but instead chose to methodically prepare for the eye's demise. For a week, the young man crept out of his bed at midnight, picked up his lantern and silently slipped into his neighbour's home. He stealthily made his way to the old man's bedroom and inch by inch pushed open the heavy door until he could fit his head inside the opening. Once able, he slowly slid open the sheath to his lantern until a beam of light struck the old man's eye. Night after night, the eye remained closed in sleep; and so the young man swiftly retreated from the room. After all, it was not the man he wanted to kill, but the evil eye. So every morning, the young man would greet the old man at his home with cheery warmth and faux concern about how the old man had slept. Not once did the old man suspect that his young neighbour was entering his bedroom midnight after midnight as the old man slept, awaiting the appearance of the terrible eye.
