Severn Power Station is situated at Uskmouth near Newport in South Wales and began generating power commercially in November 2010 when the twin gas and steam turbines was brought on-line, and will help with continuity of supply as older power stations are decommissioned. Severn Power Station has the capacity to generate up to 824 megawatts (MW) net of electricity – sufficient to meet the average power needs of around 1.5 million homes or capable of meeting more than 1 per cent of the UK peak electricity demand on its own. Severn Power Station uses combined cycle gas turbine (CCGT) technology, which makes it one of the most advanced power stations of its class. Using some of the most modern energy generating equipment available, Severn Power Station has a thermal efficiency of approximately 58 per cent, making it one of the most efficient natural gas-fired UK power stations of its type. The technology represents a huge improvement on the performance of old style power stations. As a result, it produces far less emissions per unit of energy generated, thus reducing the impact on the environment to a minimum.A good neighbourSevern Power Station is committed to being a good neighbour throughout every stage of the station’s life. The likely environmental impacts of the power station, from its construction right through to final decommissioning, were taken into account when planning permission was sought. Part of the application included a thorough Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA), to ensure Severn Power Station is in sympathy with its environment. The new power station has been purposely located away from neighbouring residents, on the furthermost part of the available site. It uses existing road and rail access into the site, so no new transport infrastructure was required. In fact, some materials and large items of equipment required for the construction were transported to site by barge via the estuary, to minimise the impact on local roads and people.Continuity of supplyThe new Severn Power Station continues a long history of power generation in South Wales. It has been built on the site of Uskmouth ‘A’, an old coal-fired power station that was demolished in 2002. Permission to start on the new power station was given in 2007, and construction started the same year. DONG Energy, Denmark’s leading power generator, acquired the project from Welsh Power in 2009. Over 1,200 people have worked on the construction phase of the project. A staff of around 40 people now manages the day-to-day operation of Severn Power Station. Technical Information
Take a tour around the plant.
This video below will show the layout of the plant.
Severn Power StationDownload brochure