World Space Week, 4 - 10 October 2011
"50 Years of Human Spaceflight" is the theme for World Space Week 2011, which is the largest public space event on earth. Dedicated this year to the first human spaceflight that took place on April 12, 1961, when Russian cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin made one orbit around the Earth aboard the Vostok 1 spacecraft, the World Space Week is celebrated in over 55 nations every October 4-10.
" Outer space is one of the most exciting and challenging topics, and perhaps of all the important topics on the agenda of the United Nations, none quite captures our imagination like outer space. Ever since the United Nations General Assembly in 1999 declared World Space Week , this Week has become a world-wide celebration of science and technology, and their contribution to the betterment of the human condition. The United Nations Office for Outer Space Affairs (UNOOSA), together with its partners, has been working to bring the benefits of space to Earth, to make the seemingly remote and abstract world of outer space of concrete use to people worldwide. The World Space Week, which is under the guidance of the United Nations Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space and UNOOSA, is a perfect opportunity. The Week inspires young people all over the world by making them aware of the importance of space science, technology and applications in every day life, in helping us address some of today's most urgent problems. Coupled with advances made in other fields of science and technology, they offer a wide range of specific tools and solutions that are transforming weather forecasting, environmental protection, humanitarian assistance, disaster management and more. I invite you all to continue to explore the benefits of space science and technologies and to join the World Space Week 2011 celebrations." Mazlan Othman, UNOOSA Director
Capacity-building workshop on Astronomy, 3-5 October, Enayetpur, Bangladesh
In the framework of the UN-declared World Space Week, UNOOSA, together with UNESCO, is organizing a capacity-building workshop on astronomy for secondary teachers in Bangladesh, in cooperation with the Bangladesh Astronomical Society (BAS). The aim of this workshop is to enhance capacity of secondary teachers in their teaching of basic and modern astronomy and introducing it to the school curricula. The 3- day workshop will cover basic and modern astronomy, including hands-on sessions with access to the Faulks telescope as well as issues on how to teach astronomy in the classroom and to integrate it in the school curricula.
World Space Week 2011 at the United Nations in Vienna
On 7 October 2011 at 12.30, a sculpture of Yuri Gagarin will be given to UNOOSA by the Government of the Russian Federation. The ceremony will take place at the Permanent Exhibit of the United Nations Office for Outer Space Affairs, D-Building, Vienna International Centre (VIC), from 12:30 to 13:00. Speakers include the Director-General of the United Nations Office at Vienna (UNOV), Yury Fedotov and the Head of the Russian Permanent Mission, Vladimir Voronkov. The event will be moderated by the Director of the UN Office of Outer Space Affairs (UNOOSA) Mazlan Othman.
|Past World Space Week Events|