Century Dictionary and Cyclopedia
- In botany, having many styles; belonging to the order Polygynia.
- Polygamous, as a male; having more than one female as wife or mate.
- adj. botany Having many styles; belonging to the order Polygynia; polygynian.
- adj. Having more than one female as wife or mate; practicing polygyny.
- adj. having more than one wife at a time
“Aquinas goes on to describe how monogamy benefits women by reducing the female competition inherent in polygynous households, thereby insuring the concentration of emotional and material resources on a single female mate.”
“They are polygynous, meaning each male has up to ten mates in his territory.”
“Gorillas are polygynous in order to capitalize on the approach-avoidance conflict of needing a giant protector who looks scarier than hell but then wondering what to do with him when there is no danger.”
“My research over the past decade, encompassing more than 170 countries, has shown the detrimental effects of polygynous practices on human rights, for both men and women.”
“According to the information I have helped to collect in the Womanstats database, women in polygynous communities get married younger, have more children, have higher rates of HIV infection than men, sustain more domestic violence, succumb to more female genital mutilation and sex trafficking, and are more likely to die in childbirth.”
“Human males are "moderately polygynous," on the other hand, and initiate most of the changes in sexual partnership.”
“What could possibly compel one to watch TLC's The Sister Wives, knowing that it is not an HBO creation, but a real-life depiction of a polygynous family?”
“That is, * mitala was adopted into Swahili with the meaning "polygynous marriage" during the second millennium CE.”
“This incorporation suggests Swahili speakers may have picked up from Ruvu the identification of a polygynous marriage that stood in contrast to Swahili mtaa and/or that Ruvu themselves who became Swahili speakers maintained the word because it was sociopolitically significant.”
“In the case of polygynous households, each wife likely had her own * migunda.”
These user-created lists contain the word ‘polygynous’.
A list of words that are odd or words that I have looked up.
A hodgepodge, jumble, jambalaya, *gallimaufry, circus and tent revival of plant anatomy and morphology terms and phrases - its a big tent, and no tickets are required.
of or relating to women
Note: also gyn-, gyne-, gyno, gyneo-
Looking for tweets for polygynous.