Being a parent is hard work as it is, and raising a child with a learning disability (LD) can add another layer of difficulty. Whether you’re just learning about your child’s LD or you’ve been managing it for years, don’t forget to take care of your own needs and to recharge yourself. As a parent, you're on a potentially emotional journey, and balance is key.
Justin and Jesse Cole discovered they had learning disabilities (LD) in the 3rd grade. They got the resources and support that they needed and are now attending college. Don’t miss this inspiring story. More >
Families in the military face learning opportunities as well as obstacles. Whether you’re a military parent, an advocate, or a teacher, this guide will educate and empower you to help military children who struggle in school. Share it with someone to show you care! More >
Our new e-book, 50 Questions About LD, is filled with answers to common LD questions. Topics include: how to deal with the “LD” label, RTI and working with your child’s school, the emotional impact of learning disabilities at school and home, preparing teens for college and work, and related issues like AD/HD and giftedness. More >
The school year is officially in full swing. Class scheduling conflicts have been resolved, books have (hopefully) been covered, supplies purchased, and homework routines established. The never-large-enough boxes on kitchen calendars are filling up with carpool schedules, music less... More >
Coping with a child's learning disability (LD) is stressful for any parent, and the last thing you need is another demand on your time and energy. But avoiding talking about your child's LD can send a message to well-meaning family members that you're hiding something or feeling ash... More >
Lissa Weinstein, Ph.D., is an assistant professor in the doctoral program in clinical psychology at City College and The Graduate School of The City University of New York, as well as an associae director at the Pacella Parent Infant Center. She has worked as a clinical psychologist f... More >
"Don't Forget about Me!"
I have often mentioned the social-emotional journey toward the acceptance of a learning disability (LD) and shared information and resources that were intended to help adults work though the complex emotions that go hand in hand with having a child who stru... More >
Special needs children are likely to be high maintenance children. Whether a disability is developmentally, neurologically or medically based, these children require significant time, attention, planning and support. They are sensitive on many fronts. Their emotions, behaviors, likes... More >
Have a second helping of stuffing, stay up past bedtime, shop ‘til you drop and eat cookie dough right out of the bowl — it’s the holiday season! For many of us, this is a time to focus on fun, friends, and family, flipping our schedules upside-down and filling our days with ex... More >
Good News, Bad News
You take your child to the doctor because he is not feeling well. There are very specific questions and concerns that you would like to have addressed. After repeated examinations (perhaps by a number of different specialists), different kinds of testing and lot... More >
In this Parent Perspective, two parents, each with several children (some with special needs), talk candidly about the challenges of meeting each child's specific needs and maintaining balance, communication, and understanding within the family.
They share their parenting philo... More >
It’s critical that you have the right professionals (e.g., educators, case workers, and others) supporting your child’s needs, but remember that you are your child’s best ally and advocate. Here are some tips for supporting your military child’s needs if he or she has a learn... More >
Frustration is fuel for the battles we wage on behalf of our kids. Working with educators, academic bureaucrats, and legal protection is a formula for frustration. Add to the scenario that the person everyone is talking about is your child and you have an explosion waiting to happen.
... More >
Through all of the pain and frustration we experienced, in spite of the disappointing teachers and tiresome administrators, the overriding memories that rise above it all are the people who were there for Danielle. Teachers fell into three categories: the ones who did no harm, the one... More >
A rarely discussed and frequent experience of special needs parents is wanting and needing to ask for help from other family members and friends. Many reasons may impede you from enlisting assistance: fear of disappointment, letting go of control, not knowing how your child's behavior... More >
The resource teacher, Susan, became the first and still most outstanding, teacher Danielle ever had. It is important to find the people who are devoted to children and support them. I stopped by Susan's classroom after the meeting. It was in the basement in a small, cramped space. The... More >
Ben Franklin said "an ounce of prevention is worth a pound of cure," and we all know how applicable this advice is during the holiday season. Special events or changes in schedules and routines can be exciting, but can also be disruptive and stressful. This is especially true for chil... More >
The following is a transcription of the podcast, “A Parent's Perspective — Multiple Children, Multiple Challenges (Audio).”
In this podcast, Candace Cortiella talks with Julie Buick and Andy Kavulich, two members of the National Center for Learning Disabilities’ Parent... More >
My work experience has taught me to seek the best minds on a particular problem or subject and to value their opinion. This does not extend to my personal life where a more cynical stance exists. The challenge was to combine my professional and personal processes into a more beneficia... More >
We all face difficult times. Some are short lived and others are longer term. Dealing with a learning disability is a lifelong challenge. It affects all aspects of your child's life and it affects your family. Be tough, because this is a marathon. You will need to pace yourself. Be re... More >
Perhaps you’re familiar with these common symptoms of Back-to-School-itis: rolling eyes, groans, moans, an inability to wake up in the morning — it affects children of all ages! But before you diagnose your child with this seasonal malady, take a moment to reflect on what gettin... More >
When we think about grief and loss, the first things that come to mind are illness and death — very tangible, linear events that have a beginning, a middle, and an end which result in significant, emotional impact. But, what about the events in our lives that are not so black and wh... More >
Books by, about, and for children with learning disabilities offer elementary-aged kids valuable stories and guidance written especially for them. Check out the following books, a mixture of fiction and nonfiction, when you want to give your child something special to read.Worst Enemi... More >
One of the best ways to help you become a better advocate for your child with learning disabilities is to read books by people who know the territory. Browse the following list to find that special book you’ve been looking forRaising Resilient Children by Robert Brooks and Sam Golds... More >
All parents face a daily balancing act. And your child’s learning disability means that you’ve got even more things to keep track of – evaluations, IEP meeting dates, and maybe even appointments with tutors. Luckily, many apps out there can be really helpful, both with school-re... More >
Does the mention of summer camp conjure up idyllic images of rustic cabins by a mountain lake and making s’mores around a campfire? Well, it may have been that simple once, but today’s summer camps go beyond the traditional model of the past — way beyond — to the point where t... More >
Parents of children with learning disabilities are accustomed to working with teachers and school-based teams to find modifications and accommodations that work in their children’s educational settings. But what modifications do parents like us make in our day-to-day lives for the s... More >