When it comes to money, good role models apparently start at home.
A recent survey from Genworth Financial reports that people are more likely to be financially prepared if their parents set a good example in handling money. And although some other surveys have come to different conclusions, the Genworth study found that many parents do provide instructive lessons for their children.
Sixty-one percent of the participants in the Genworth study said they had parents who set a good financial example. Of those, 66 percent had a financial plan and 71 percent said they felt prepared for the future.
For those who said they didn’t have parents who set good financial examples, only 55 percent had a plan while 53 percent felt confident in their financial future.
“I actually was very pleased to see how strong a correlation there was between having a good role model... and how it relates to whether or not you have a financial plan and also how confident you are about your financial future,” said Pamela Nelson, director of consumer insights for Genworth Financial, with offices in central Phoenix.
Dennis Hoffman, an economics professor at the W. P. Carey School of Business at Arizona State University, said he learned how to be financially stable by watching his mother. He said she budgeted paychecks from her job and talked about what they could afford.
“There was always an expectation that I would manage money in a sensible, rational way,” Hoffman said.
Hoffman made it a point to discuss financial concepts and expectations with his own son and daughter. He and his wife agreed to provide their children, as college freshmen, basic resources and monthly stipends to add to their scholarships. Hoffman’s children then had to budget their money and couldn’t complain if they were short one month. If they borrowed money, it was as a loan that would be repaid with interest.
“As a result of that, they made good decisions, they learned from it, and I think it’s carried through,” Hoffman said. Both adult children “are now working for themselves, managing households on their own.”
Hoffman’s daughter, Mary Hamman, said she and her husband use a spreadsheet to budget their money, a technique her father taught her. Hamman, an assistant economics professor at the University of Wisconsin La Crosse, agreed that the model her parents established when she was in college helped.
“It wasn't enough to cover everything — especially not when we moved off campus,” Hamman wrote in an email. “So we had to hold down part-time jobs while in school. But having to control our own finances and pay our own bills at that stage was a big responsibility and one that helped prepare us for larger financial hurdles in the future.”
Hamman plans on discussing finances with her own children once her two-year-old and six-week-old boys are old enough. She said her boys will go through the same model she went through in college, only she will talk more about the influence of potential jobs.
“We'd sit down and look at the tuition and the expected salary in any field they are considering and talk about the long-term debt load they would have and what their lifetime income trajectory would look like,” Hamman wrote in an email. “I think this kind of calculation should be part of the decision process.”
Nelson had college professors as parents as well, but she said people don’t need an educator as a parent to understand financial planning. And it’s not too late for adults to learn sound financial practices if their parents didn’t instruct them on such matters, she said.
Adults who want to improve their own financial behavior should start by writing down goals and planning around those goals. She also suggests becoming more educated about financial concepts and talking with a financial professional.
“It’s never too early to begin planning... starting with having that goal in mind,” Nelson said.
Hoffman said a question he asked his children and current students is ‘where are you going to be in five years?’ This helps them plan their current decisions around long-term career and financial objectives.
Dr. Barbara Nusbaum, a New York-based psychologist and money coach, said the Genworth study confirms the assumed fact that children learn everything from parents, from how to brush teeth to work ethics.
“They learn by watching you. Kids are great observers, but they are poor interpreters,” Nusbaum said. “As parents, we need to be talking about money at a very early age because we need to be their guides and mentors.”
Nusbaum said it’s important for parents to talk about concepts like “needs versus wants” with children and to explain buying decisions.
Another suggestion is to give children an allowance and have them allocate the money among three areas — saving, spending and donating to charity.
If you aren’t talking to your kids about money, said Nusbaum, then you’re allowing others to do the job for you.
Though the Genworth study, which surveyed more than 1,000 people, shows that many parents are serving as strong financial rolemodels for their children, other studies have produced different findings.
A 2012 survey from mutual-fund company T. Rowe Price painted a less-favorable picture of parents as financial role models. On the bright side, 76 percent of parents and 67 percent of kids said they hold money conversations at least fairly regularly.
But many of the roughly 1,000 parents surveyed revealed that they have trouble practicing good financial habits themselves. For example, only 49 percent of parents identified stocks as having better long-term growth prospects compared to bonds or safety-deposit boxes.
Also, many parents admitted that they aren’t always honest about discussing money issues with their kids, including the stresses involved, and many of the more than 800 children surveyed sensed that their parents often don’t agree on what’s right.
The kids surveyed were in the range of 8 to 14 years of age. For them, the topics of most interest were saving and how to earn more money. Subjects such as credit cards, bank accounts, college planning and budgeting ranked much lower on the wish list.
Some 61 percent of the parents in the T. Rowe Price surveys said they felt their own parents had done a good job teaching them about finances.