Native Americans and Non - Natives in the Lower Great Lakes, 1700-1850
Publication Year: 2012
Published by: Michigan State University Press
Title Page, Copyright Page
Download PDF (38.5 KB)
Download PDF (46.9 KB)
Few geographical areas of north America experienced the dynamism of Indian-European interaction that the Ohio Valley and southern Great Lakes offered prior to the mid- nineteenth century. Here was the land marked by native spiritual revitalization...
Download PDF (42.2 KB)
Scholarly work depends on the assistance of many players for its successful completion. this volume is no different. its seed was first planted after a 2005 conference called Cultures in Conflict: New Perspectives on encounters...
Download PDF (111.8 KB)
The Lower Great Lakes region occupies a critical, if often underrecognized, place in the history of America’s post-Revolutionary westward expansion. During the eighteenth century and through the first half of the nineteenth century...
A Year at Niagara: Negotiating Coexistence in the Eastern Great Lakes, 1763–1764
Download PDF (194.3 KB)
In early September 1763, the British garrison of Fort Niagara felt lucky. they had been spared the fates of Fort Michilimackinac and many smaller western forts that had been overtaken or destroyed in the Indian rebellion that would soon be named...
“Foolish Young Men” and the Contested Ohio Country, 1783– 1795
Download PDF (110.2 KB)
In the years following the American Revolution, violence between Native Americans and frontier settlers spiraled into reciprocal and uncontained depredations. Although many Native American leaders and the government of the United States...
Native American– French Interactions in Eighteenth-Century Southwest Michigan: The View from Fort St. Joseph
Download PDF (255.2 KB)
A pervasive trend in historical scholarship has been a move away from broad metanarratives to more detailed examinations of concrete historical moments and contexts to better understand the nuances of events and processes at the local...
Old Friends in New Territories: Delawares and Quakers in the Old Northwest Territory
Download PDF (147.2 KB)
The Delawares and Quakers shared a unique history of alliance and mutual acceptance that began from their earliest diplomatic exchanges in the Delaware River valley at the end of the seventeenth century and remained intertwined throughout the eighteenth...
Delawares in Eastern Ohio after the Treaty of Greenville: The Goshen Mission in Context
Download PDF (134.8 KB)
Clearing “high timber and thick underwood,” a group of Native Americans began the hard work of building a town “on a level, high ground” west of the Tuscarawas River in autumn 1798. This town lay within the Old Northwest Territory...
Miami Resistance and Resilience during the Removal Era
Download PDF (167.5 KB)
The Indian Removal Era marks a painful period for Native Americans with ancestral homelands east of the Mississippi River. Over sixty Native communities, or approximately 50,000 Native Americans from different linguistic families...
The Politics of Indian Removal on the Wyandot Reserve, 1817– 1843
Download PDF (136.8 KB)
In October 1831, James Gardiner, the United States Indian agent assigned to negotiate a removal treaty with the Wyandots of Ohio, accompanied William Walker Jr. and an expedition of Wyandot leaders to Cincinnati and watched...
Download PDF (116.1 KB)
Download PDF (49.2 KB)
Download PDF (59.4 KB)
Publication Year: 2012