Entertainment / Bowling / Action
Action: Another word for spin.
Mole Fraction: Concentration of a substance in a mixture measured as moles of the substance per mole of mixture. For example, the mole fraction of oxygen in air is about 0.21, which means that 1 mol of air . . . View Full Definition
Net Chemical Reaction: A reaction that actually occurs as several elementary steps. Equations for net reactions often omit intermediates and catalysts.
Opening Transaction: Applies to derivative products. (1)Buy or sell transaction that creates a position out of a flat one (writing an option short or buying an option long). Antithesis of closing transaction. (2 . . . View Full Definition
Closed Transaction: A transaction that is completed within the accounting period: both the purchase and payment or sale and receipt of payment occur within the same accounting period.
Accord And Satisfaction: The settlement of an obligation. An accord is an agreement by a creditor to accept less than bargained for from a debtor. The creditors acceptance of the accord constitutes satisfaction of the debt.
Transaction: Any roster change (waiver-wire add/drops, trades, etc.). Some leagues limit the amount of transactions a team can make, often charging for excessive moves.
Coulombic Interactions: Attractions between opposite charges or repulsions between like charges that grow stronger as the charges become closer to each other.
Fractional Basis: Each property in the improvement district is charged a prorated share of the total amount of the special tax assessment. The share is determined either on a fractional basis (four houses may . . . View Full Definition
Fractional Section: A parcel of land less than 160 acres, usually found at the edge of a rectangular survey. Undersized or oversized sections are classified as fractional sections. Fractional sections may occur . . . View Full Definition
Word of the Day:
Penetration: When the ball is dribbled or passed inside the defensive area toward the basket.