To Conserve, Preserve, and Sustain Using Photography, Science, Technology, and Teamwork.
Finding Species’ mission is to:
• Conserve the planet's biodiversity,
• Preserve cultural heritages, and
• Sustain human well-being by promoting a healthy environment for all.
Finding Species takes a unique approach to achieving these goals. We build from four cornerstones: photography, science, technology, and teamwork.
Photography: We photograph species that need to be accurately identified because they are endangered, new to science, native to unique regions, or invasive and therefore harmful to other species. We photograph habitats that need to be seen because they are threatened by humans. We photograph indigenous arts and skills related to nature that need to be documented because they are being lost to new generations. Finding Species ensures that each photographic portrait is of the highest aesthetic quality.
Science: We write profiles of species to accompany our photographs. We write articles about biodiversity science. We use non-technical language, to make field identifications easier for all and to make the science accessible to all.
Technology: We pioneer standardized methods and use professional equipment, to make our photographs a permanent archive for humanity. We employ digital technologies and printed media in innovative ways, to reach as wide an audience as possible.
Teamwork: The combined creativity and knowledge of interdisciplinary teams is essential to our success. Finding Species’ board, staff, partners and volunteers come from different disciplines in biology, photography, policy, and finance. We actively build partnerships with government agencies, conservation organizations, museums, research scientists and universities, and schools.
From these four cornerstones, Finding Species undertakes conservation campaigns, scientific research, and public and community educational outreach. Through all our projects, Finding Species makes the natural world and its species undeniable and uniquely compelling, so that each person is inspired to learn about them and to help protect them.