Remember; you can always reopen this window by clicking the age groups listed for any event
Girl Scout STEM Stories
Stories of Girl Scouts exploring the world of Science, Techonology, Engineering and Math
Troop 2677 Enjoy Science Filled Days
Photographer: Bob Maxwell
SU 51-11 Girl Scouts enjoy a science-filled day during a Bronze Award workshop, lead by Troop #2677 candidates.
Troop #2677 having more fun with science activities. What is that mess?
Troop 2288 Participating in Science Activities
Photographer: Jen Mangeura
Cadettes from Troop 2288 making a mess and loving it during a meeting on science activities
Troop 2288 doing science activities from a Bridging the Gap kit.
Where does the water go? Cadettes from Troop 2288 doing the "making water disappear" activity
Nursing Day in Winchester with Troop 40482
Photographer: Bernadette Martin
These girls are exploring the world of Nursing. Science is a huge part of the medical field and nursing is a very important component.
Troop 5680 at the Science Expo
Photographer: Jen Groat
Girls working with tools at the Aerospace Table.
Troop 5680 make polymers.
Troop 5680 builds a DNA sample.
Science Center Camp In - Troop 518
Troop 518 at the Baltimore Science Center Camp In.
Air & Space Day with Troop 4160
Photographer: Kathy Sears
Girls of Troop 4160 pose with the astronaut suit at the Air & Space Day.
Girl Scout Day at the National Air & Space Museum withTroop 360
Photographer: Anne-Marie Aguiar
Troop #360 from Gaithersburg, MD participated in the Girl Socut Day at the National Air & Space Museum in Chantilly. At this station, girls were encouraged to try on flight suits and goggles and visualize how to fly an airplane.
Troop 2325 Making Science Bags
Photographer: Barbara Leiber-Klotz
Troop 2325 making Science bags for a local charter school in D.C.
Studying Global Climate Change at the National Academies Science Museum with Troop 2210
Photographer: Jennifer Gerstman
Girls from troop 2210 discover the causes and effects of global climate change at the National Academies Science Museum. The exhibits help give them ideas on how to make the world a better place.
Urban Program & Environmental Training Center Grand Opening Celebration
Girl Scouts Make A Long Distance Call
Who says science is just for boys?
Are you a Girl Scout in the Nation's Capital Area? Did you and/or your troop participate in an activity involving Science, Technology, Engineering and/or Math? Tell us your story!
Submit your story and photos on our Flickr photo submissions page or email them to firstname.lastname@example.org subject line STEM. There could be a chance that your story will become a feature on our website either in Girl Scout Stuff or perhaps here!
Parents and Troop Leaders, please make sure Girl Scouts have signed the photo release form. You can find this here:
Want to find out what other Girl Scouts are doing? Check out Girl Scout Stuff for more stories.
Posted: Nov 10, 2010