Note: This message is displayed if (1) your browser is not standards-compliant or (2) you have you disabled CSS. Read our Policies for more information.
Indianapolis- A new research study released today by the Indiana Civil Rights Commission (ICRC) shows that discrimination in Indiana remains a problem. The ICRC's study is based on the findings of their Statewide Perception Survey, which found that approximately 58% of Hoosiers have been discriminated against in their lifetime and more than 88% look at discrimination as a problem within their community.
“This study confirms what we have suspected for a number of years,” said Jamal L. Smith, Executive Director of the Indiana Civil Rights Commission. “Despite state and federal legislation, education and the mounting research on the benefits to diversity in neighborhoods, schools and businesses, discrimination still exists.”
Created by state statue in 1961, the Indiana Civil Rights Commission enforces the Indiana civil rights laws and provides education and services to the public in an effort to ensure equal opportunity for all Hoosiers. The agency cites a lack of understanding and knowledge of civil rights and other anti-discrimination laws as the reason a majority of Hoosiers will face discrimination in their lifetime.
“It is our job to ensure that every Hoosier is aware of their rights and responsibilities under Indiana civil rights laws,” added Smith. “We are more than just a watch dog agency who charges businesses with civil rights violations. Our agency has taken a proactive approach to educating the public to ensure equal opportunities for all Hoosiers.”
Over the past year, the Indiana Civil Rights Commission has gone through a massive re-branding and re-organization effort. In addition to a new logo, training materials, the implementation of social media, a monthly newsletter and video segment, the agency has launched the Power of Diversity™ statewide series.
The series targets employers, educators and housing providers in an effort to prevent illegal discrimination from occurring. The series traveled to more than a dozen locations in 2011, with more stops are planned in 2012.
The Indiana Civil Rights Commission enforces the Indiana civil rights laws and provides education and services to the public in an effort to ensure equal opportunity for all Hoosiers and visitors to the State of Indiana. For more information on the Indiana Civil Rights Commission visit: www.in.gov/icrc.
Click here to view a copy of the survey report.