Replacement Windows – Buy Parts and Spares
Find cheap new or used spares from breaker yards across the UK
A car has many different windows and a significant proportion of the car frame is fitted with glass.
Getting into the details of windows
In a passenger car, usually all of the doors are fitted with a section of glass which makes up the door window, which can be opened or closed either manually or electronically. The number of windows in a car will depend on the make and model of car. Cars can have different types of doors and windows, for example some cars have quarter light glass which is a side window in either the front door or situated on the sides of the car just in front of the rear window of the car. Tailgate hatch glass can be found on the lifting cover for the boot space on a saloon vehicle or the lifting door on a hatchback or estate vehicle. The shape of the windows in a car will again depend on the car make and model.
Glass used in modern car doors is generally safety glass which decreases the chance of injury if it smashes.
The windows are operated by a window regulator mechanism. Window regulator mechanisms are either manual or electric. Manual window regulator mechanisms are operated by a handle on the side panel of the door beneath the window, which is turned by hand and in turn the window regulator mechanism winds or unwinds the window accordingly. Electric window regulator mechanisms are powered by a window motor which is activated by an electric window switch, within easy reach, usually located in the cavity behind the inside trim of the door, which lowers or raises the window as required. All electric windows in the car can be controlled by the driver's controls but individual windows will usually have a switch to operate them individually too. The glass in car windows is held in place when the window opens or closes by track assemblies, which assists with the smooth operation of the window, and sealed with window rubber seals which function to firmly seal the door window with the door flange to stop water, dust and other particles or air coming into the car.
A major body of glass in cars can be found in the front and rear windscreens. The car windscreens are a protective, curved, glass screen at the front and rear of the car.
The front and rear windscreens are made of safety glass, which prevents them from smashing into lots of pieces when broken and fixed to the frame of the car. The front windscreen is positioned directly in front of the driver and front passenger and the rear windscreen is directly behind the passengers sitting in the back of the car. The driver needs to look through the front windscreen to see the road ahead, and through the back windscreen to see the traffic behind, so it is imperative that the windscreens are in perfect condition. The windscreens are fitted with windscreen wipers. The windscreen wiper mechanism is powered by a window wiper motor which enables the wipers to clear rain, dust and dirt from the windscreen of the car. Many car windscreens are also fitted with a windscreen washer. Powered by a windscreen washer motor, it pumps out a spray, which works with the wipers to clean the windscreen.
Some windscreens have tinted, coloured glass around the side of the windscreen which offers some protection from the sun. Some car owners like to fit heated windscreens which de-mists and de-ices the windscreen in a matter of minutes. Some windscreens also have the option of a fitted rain sensor. The windscreen rain sensor is a clever device which automatically switches on the windscreen wipers when it detects rain.
What if something goes wrong with the windows?
All of the windows in the car serve a safety function, offering protection to the people travelling in the car. All windows should be clean and free from cracks and scratches so that safety is not compromised. All window parts and mechanisms should be functioning fully in order to be able to perform properly and safely. When replacing windows or buying new window parts for your vehicle, it is important to make sure they are compatible with the make and model of your car.