English Reading Practice
Story Number 15:
Watch the video at the top of the page.
Read the story "Fulfill Your Obligations" just below it.
Do the exercises at the bottom of the page.
Fulfill Your Obligations
is the Fulfill
Your Obligations video.
You can watch it in your own language at The
Way to Happiness Foundation
click the word "language" at the top right corner of that page.)
Way to Happiness is a common sense guide to
better living which has been distributed to more than 100 million
people in over 100 languages. It describes 21
principles to a better quality of life.
number 15 is "Fulfill Your Obligations."
read the short story about this important principle.
Fulfill Your Obligations
sometimes does not go to work because she is sleepy or she just does
not feel like going. At first, her boss tries to be understanding,
thinking that maybe Samantha is getting sick. Of course she is earning
less money because of all the time she misses, and soon her boss loses
patience. He fires Samantha and looks for someone else to do her job.
Samantha is upset, and she is also a little worried about paying her
bills. But she decides that she really does not like to work very much.
Still, Samantha is lucky because she has lots of friends and family
members who love her. So rather than look for a new job, she starts to
ask them for money.
At first most of them are willing to lend her a
little bit. But, when she does not pay it back, they become upset. Why
is she being so irresponsible? They all stop loaning her money.
Just like Samantha always has excuses for her friends and family, she
also has excuses for her landlord. She usually does not have the money
for her rent, but she always says she will have it soon. Of course,
Samantha's landlord eventually loses patience and tells her that she
must leave her apartment immediately.
Samantha does not know what to do. She does not know where to begin to
look for a new apartment, and anyway, she does not have any money to
pay for rent. She feels desperate and realizes that she has made some
very big mistakes. She begins to call her friends to see if they will
let her stay at their apartments, but they are all still upset about
the money she owes them. They say no.
Finally, Samantha is left feeling very desperate and worried. She dials
her brother's phone number and hopes that he is in a good mood. When he
answers, she explains her situation and admits that she thinks she has
made some big mistakes.
Her brother, Edwin, agrees with her. Her behavior has been very
inappropriate, and he refuses to lend her any money. He tells her that
she can stay with him, but only under very specific conditions. First,
she must begin to look for a new job. And while she is living with
Edwin, she must walk his dog every day, clean the house, and do
cooking. If she does not fulfill all of these responsibilities, she
Edwin sounds very serious, and Samantha knows that her brother is not
joking. She knows he is giving her an important opportunity to make a
change in her life.
She realizes that she must live up to her responsibilities and fulfill
thanks her brother and agrees to his offer. She will do her best
to find a good job soon. She wants to pay everyone back as
soon as possible and get her life back in order. She knows it is going
to be a challenge, but she also knows it will be well worth it!
And now, practice:
1. What does "obligation" mean?
a) something you
want to do
b) something that is a good idea to do
c) something you might do
d) something you must do
2. What does "landlord" mean?
a) the person who
the apartment next to you
b) the person who owns the apartment you live in
c) the person who cleans your apartment for you
d) the person who comes to repair things in your apartment
3. What does "pay back" mean?
a) to return money that
someone lent you
b) to pay in advance
c) to pay your bills
d) to lend someone money
1. She realizes that she must live ________ to her responsibilities.
2. Samantha is worried ________ paying her bills.
3. Samantha ________ know what to do.
a) do not
b) was not
c) were not
d) does not
1. Why do Samantha's friends and family become upset with her?
2. What does Samantha plan to do at the end of the story?
3. In your opinion, why is it important to fulfill your obligations?