When we talk about Mass Extinction, we think of dinosaurs. That was ME5 caused by an asteroid 64 million years ago, species loss around 50%, including 100% of all dinosaurs. Bad, but not the worst. ME3 was, caused by runaway global heating 251 million years ago – associated with the eventual breakup of the then super continent Pangaea – species loss 75% of all land species and 95% of all marine species, including 100% of all corals. ME6, caused by global warming today, and eventually runaway global heating, may rival if not surpass ME3.
Please join us on Sunday, June 25th at 2:00 p.m., for a presentation given by Anthony Marr, right here at UUCSH!
Anthony Marr holds a science degree and has worked as a field geophysicist and an environmental technologist. In 1955, he became a full time wildlife preservationist, which has brought him to India three times, earning him the title of “Champion of the Bengal Tiger” in the [Champions of the Wild] TV series aired in 20 countries.
As founder of Heal Our Planet Earth (HOPE) he has conducted high profile campaigns in Canada for the bears and seals, and been to Japan twice for the whales and dolphins. He is the author of the critically acclaimed [OMNI-SCIENCE and the Human Destiny]. Whether protecting tigers reserves in India, risking his life and liberty in undercover investigations of the illegal trade in endangered species parts, challenging any and all forms of pollution, hosting a radio show, writing visionary books on science, philosophy and cosmology, embarking on marathon coast-to-coast Compassion for Animals Road Expeditions (CARE-tours) covering dozen of US states each (on his CARE-8 tour currently), or awakening the complacent to the imminent planetary ecological collapse, Anthony Marr is raising awareness, effectively campaigning and blazing new trails.
For anyone skeptical of what one person can do alone or in strategic alliance with others, or what can be accomplished without a large bankroll, look no further, for Marr shows what great things can blossom from intelligence, independence, courage, and commitment.