Now showing items 1-6 of 6
Dry season ecology of Anopheles gambiae complex mosquitoes at larval habitats in two traditionally semi-arid villages in Baringo, Kenya
Background: Pre-adult stages of malaria vectors in semi-arid areas are confronted with highly variable and challenging climatic conditions. The objective of this study was to determine which larval habitat types are ...
Ecologists can enable communities to implement malaria vector control in Africa
Integrated vector management (IVM) for malaria control requires ecological skills that are very scarce and rarely applied in Africa today. Partnerships between communities and academic ecologists can address this capacity ...
Assessing malaria burden during pregnancy in Mali
Malaria infection during pregnancy is associated with adverse consequences including low birth weight (LBW) and maternal anemia, particularly in primigravidae and secundigravidae. In preparation for a clinical trial of the ...
Behavioural response of the malaria vector Anopheles gambiae to host plant volatiles and synthetic blends
Background Sugar feeding is critical for survival of malaria vectors and, although discriminative plant feeding previously has been shown to occur in Anopheles gambiae s.s., little is known about the cues mediating ...
Relationships between Plasmodium falciparum transmission by vector populations and the incidence of severe disease at nine sites on the Kenyan coast
(The American Society of Tropical Medecine and Hygiene, 1995)
The transmission of Plasmodium falciparum was studied in relation to the incidence of severe malaria infections at nine sites in the Kilifi District in Kenya. Intensive mosquito sampling during a one-year period yielded ...
Using Nylon Strips to Dispense Mosquito Attractants for Sampling the Malaria Vector Anopheles gambiae s.s.
(Entomological Society of America, 2010)
Synthetic versions of human derived kairomones can be used as baits when trapping host seeking mosquitoes. The effectiveness of these lures depends not only on their attractiveness to the mosquitoes but also on the medium ...