Academic integrity for staff
A culture that supports academic integrity requires that the development of appropriate skills and attitudes is embedded in course assessment and learning activities. There are a number of resources to assist staff in developing a strong culture of academic integrity. These include:
The Centre for Teaching and Learning offers advice to students on academic literacy in the form of printable resources and workshops during Semester. Staff can contact the Learning Development Team to discuss the program of workshops and activities available to assist in the development of academic integrity.
Infoskills is a self-paced online learning module that students or staff can access at any time. Infoskills is designed to introduce students to the basics of academic literacy, including planning for research, finding information, evaluating information, writing and plagiarism, and using information ethically.
Turnitin is an electronic text-matching tool that gives students individualised feedback on referencing in their written work. Staff must provide students with the option to "presubmit" work to Turnitin so they have the opportunity to modify their work on the basis of the "originality report". This helps students refine their academic literacy and referencing skills. Directions for overriding the default settings and allowing students to presubmit are on the Turnitin page.
University Academic Integrity Module
Students commencing from Trimester 1 2013 are required to complete an Academic Integrity Module (AIM) before the end of their first enrolment period (Trimester, Semester or Block). The University AIM takes the form of an online test in Blackboard and students must achieve 100% on the test to pass.
Faculty Academic Integrity Modules
Some Faculties have developed disciplinary specific modules to help students understand academic literacy as it applies to their course, program, or profession. The Associate Director, Centre for Teaching and Learning is working with Faculties to develop specific modules.
Student Academic Integrity Policy and Procedures
The Student Academic Integrity Policy and Student Academic Integrity Procedure support the University’s commitment to the highest standards of academic and personal integrity. It has been developed in accordance with advice from the Independent Commission against Corruption (ICAC). The Policy and Procedure explains student and staff responsibilities in terms of academic integrity. Under the terms of the Student Academic Policy and Procedure a staff member must make an assessment as to whether a possible case of academic misconduct exists. If, in your assessment, a substantive case of academic misconduct appears to exist then the matter should be referred to the Student Academic Conduct Officer in your School.
Student Academic Conduct Officers
Each School has a SACO who provides advice and training about academic integrity to staff and students. A lecturer or tutor should always be the first point of contact for students for advice on academic integrity issues such as plagiarism or collusion. If a staff member finds a suspected case of academic integrity they should consult with the course co-ordinator, supervisor and/or SACO to assess whether a case may exist. If it is believed that a case should be investigated then the staff member must refer it to the SACO.
Advisors in Research Integrity
Each Faculty has an Advisor in Research Integrity to provide advice and training about academic integrity and research misconduct to staff and students. If an allegation of research misconduct is made about a student's work the Advisor will refer the matter to the Dean of Graduate Studies.
Each faculty has a dedicated Faculty Librarian who is a subject information specialist. Your Faculty Librarian can advise students on the best strategies for accessing information efficiently and effectively. They can provide advice on literature searches, research techniques, and training in the use of online resources. They can also assist with strategies for the development of information literacy skills for students.