An area of land reserved in treaty negotiations for the exclusive use of an Indian tribe.
The Lummi elders revived the First Salmon Ceremony to instill in Lummi children a strong sense
of their community’s history and values.
The word first indicates that the ceremony honors the first salmon caught in the Nooksack
River in the spring. The First Salmon Ceremony has been held by generations of Lummi people
over many years.
The First Salmon Ceremony features children’s art, dancing, and eating, too.
You have answered all of the questions in this section. Use these
links to review your answers. To continue, click the arrow below.
Go To My Story Project
Why is it important for this community to educate its young people about this environmental issue?
This interactive experience requires
Adobe Flash Player 9 or higher.
What are the hopes this community has for the future of its culture and environment?
Take notes and save images to help answer these questions. Your images and notes
will be saved to the
Story Project where
you can use them to create your own slideshow.
“Our elders had a ceremony that we recently revived called
First Salmon Ceremony, where we pay respect to the salmon.”
The First Salmon Ceremony is a way of showing respect for the salmon. 2010
“I think the Salmon Ceremony is so important because it...allows us to have the
children understand the identity and the purpose for their life, and to be strong leaders for us.”
Lummi children take part in the First Salmon Ceremony. 2010
“We are salmon people, and we will always be salmon people.”
Lummi student art decorates the room where the salmon ceremony is held. 2010
“I think people need to understand that you have to respect and protect Mother Earth.”
Salmon cooks over an open fire pit for the First Salmon Ceremony, Lummi Nation. 2010
“Clean air, clean water, clean oceans, clean lakes — we need to clean up our act as human beings.”
A clean earth is needed. People can choose to make this happen. 2009
Students make the sticks the salmon is cooked on. 2010
The Lummi Nation is proud of its efforts to bring the salmon back.