Corn Plant, Dracaena, Dragon Tree, Ribbon Plant
The Cornstalk Plant is a slow growing shrub, usually multi-stemmed at the base, mature specimens reaching 49 ft or more tall with a narrow crown of usually slender erect branches. Stems may reach up to 12 in diameter on old plants; in forest habitats they may become horizontal with erect side branches. Young plants have a single unbranched stem with a rosette of leaves until the growing tip flowers or is damaged, after which it branches, producing two or more new stems; thereafter, branching increases with subsequent flowering episodes.
The leaves are glossy green, lanceolate, 7.9–59 in long and 0.79–4.7 in wide; small leaves are erect to spreading, and larger leaves usually drooping under their weight. The flowers are produced in panicles 5.9–63 in long, the individual flowers are 0.98 in diameter, with a six-lobed corolla, pink at first, opening white with a fine red or purple central line on each of the 0.28–0.47 in lobes; they are highly fragrant, and popular with pollinating insects. The fruit is an orange-red berry 0.39–0.79 in diameter, containing several seeds.
In Africa, D. fragrans is widely grown as a hedge plant; it is suited to frost-free climates, in USDAzones 10-11. Elsewhere, it is primarily popular as a houseplant, valued for its tolerance of a wide range of indoor conditions from full sun to low light conditions. It is also very tolerant of neglect, and has been shown by the NASA Clean Air Study to help remove indoor pollutants such as formaldehyde, xylene and toluene.
Poisoning Symptoms include:
Vomiting (occasionally with blood), depression, anorexia, hyper-salivation, dilated pupils.
IMMEDIATELY CALL YOUR VET FOR TREATMENT OPTIONS
Lone Star English Setter Club provides this information
as a partial reference of the potential poisons that could harm your dog.
We are not veterinarian’s and DO NOT provide medical help.
If you think that your animal is ill or may have ingested a poisonous substance,
contact your local veterinarian or
the ASPCA’s 24-hour emergency poisoning hotline directly