Section I: Applied Physiology 1. Applied Physiology of Body Fluids in Dogs and Cats 2. Applied Renal Physiology Section II: Electrolyte Disorders 3. Disorders of Sodium and Water: Hypernatremia and Hyponatremia 4. Disorders of Chloride: Hyperchloremia and Hypochloremia 5. Disorders of Potassium: Hypokalemia and Hyperkalemia 6. Disorders of Calcium: Hypercalcemia and Hypocalcemia 7. Disorders of Phosphorus: Hypophosphatemia and Hyperphosphatemia 8. Disorders of Magnesium: Magnesium Deficit and Excess Section III: Acid-Base Disorders 9. Introduction to Acid-Base Disorders 10. Metabolic Acid-Base Disorders 11. Respiratory Acid-Base Disorders 12. Mixed Acid-Base Disorders 13. Strong Ion Approach to Acid-Base Disorders Section IV: Fluid Therapy 14. Introduction to Fluid Therapy 15. Technical Aspects of Fluid Therapy 16. Monitoring Fluid Therapy and Complications of Fluid Therapy 17. Perioperative Management of Fluid Therapy 18. Fluid and Electrolyte Disturbances in Gastrointestinal and Pancreatic Disease 19. Fluid, Electrolyte, and Acid-Base Disturbances in Liver Disease 20. Fluid Therapy in Endocrine and Metabolic Disorders 21. Fluid and Diuretic Therapy in Heart Failure 22. Managing Fluid and Electrolyte Disorders in Renal Failure 23. Shock Syndromes Section V: Special Therapy 24. Blood Transfusion and Blood Substitutes 25. Parenteral Nutrition 26. Enteral Nutrition 27. Fluid Therapy with Macromolecular Plasma Volume Expanders 28. Peritoneal Dialysis 29. Hemodialysis
The leading reference for the diagnosis and management of fluid, electrolyte, and acid-base imbalances in small animals, Fluid, Electrolyte, and Acid-Base Disorders in Small Animal Practice, 4th Edition provides cutting-edge, evidence-based guidelines to enhance your care of dogs and cats. Information is easy to find and easy to use, with comprehensive coverage including fluid and electrolyte physiology and pathophysiology and their clinical applications, as well as the newest advances in fluid therapy and a discussion of a new class of drugs called vaptans. Lead author Stephen DiBartola is a well-known speaker and the "go-to" expert in this field, and his team of contributors represents the most authoritative and respected clinicians and academicians in veterinary medicine.