Activities in the Amazon Rainforest
The Amazon Rainforest stretches across South America from the Atlantic Ocean in the east to the Andes Mountains in the west. This exotic wilderness occupies regions in Brazil, Peru, Colombia, Ecuador and several other South American nations. The Amazon River snakes its way across the continent over 4,000 miles of terrain, creating the largest basin area in the world. This basin is home to myriad species of flora and fauna, containing 50 percent of the world's biodiversity. Many indigenous tribes also reside in the Amazon, practicing ancient ways of life unchanged over thousands of years. Activities for the adventure traveler abound in the Amazon Rainforest. With so much natural beauty, visitors have plenty of options from which to choose.
One of the primary modes of transportation in the Amazon Rainforest is boating. Locals and tourists alike must use the waterways to get from one destination to another, since the dense jungle makes it difficult to clear roads and landing strips. Numerous river cruise companies are available in most towns and cities throughout the Amazon. You'll find everything from small skiffs to larger barges and pontoon tour boats. Tours and general transportation can be arranged on site or in advance over the phone or Internet if you find a particular company you like for an upcoming trip. Boating is one of the best ways to see the jungle and all the amazing wildlife residing near the fertile banks of rivers. The Amazon River is a major channel for trans-continental travel and industrial transport, but you're still likely to encounter fairly little traffic or crowds due to the immense size of the region and the limited accessibility. Taking a cruise down the Amazon or some of the tributaries is a great activity for adventure travelers looking to cover a lot of ground in a relatively short time period, as well as a longer and more enjoyable means of getting in and out of the rainforest.
Canopy tours are another exhilarating activity in the Amazon Rainforest. Canopy tours involve climbing to the tops of trees high off the jungle floor and moving from canopy to canopy via suspended rope bridges or zip lines. This is a fun way to see the rainforest and its wildlife from an elevated perspective. Imagine something out of an Indiana Jones movie in terms of clambering from one tree-top to another. Not only do canopy tours offer a cool way to traverse the jungle, but they also eliminate much of the impact on the environment. Rather than trekking through the jungle floor and damaging the habitats with foot traffic, eco-tourists slip through the tree-tops without touching the plants and animals below. Skilled guides work for canopy tour companies to provide a safe and educational experience.
Hiking at Parks and Wildlife Reserves
There are numerous national parks and wildlife reserves where travelers an get up close and personal with creatures in their natural habitats. Many parks offer guided hikes to specific sections of the rainforest where tourists can see high concentrations of exotic animals. Two of the most popular parks in the Amazon Rainforest are Jaú National Park in the Rio Negro watershed of Brazil and Manú National Park in the Madre de Dios region of Peru. These parks feature extraordinary biodiversity and relatively modern visitor facilities.
Don't forget about the distinct lodging options when visiting the Amazon Rainforest. The most common form of sleeping accommodations are eco-lodges. These are shelters constructed out of salvaged materials from the jungle. Picture yourself sleeping under a mosquito net in a bamboo bungalow on top of stilts with a thatched roof and a wooden floor. Some eco-lodges are extremely basic, while others feature modern amenities including hot showers, flush toilets, screened-in restaurants and even Internet lounges. You're likely to find eco-lodges in most villages and towns throughout the Amazon, as well as near any prominent attractions deeper in the jungle. Eco-lodges strive to provide sustainable tourist accommodations, taking care to keep the impact on the environment to a minimum. Staying for a few days at an upscale eco-lodge can be a welcome retreat after spending time camping in the jungle or sleeping in a hammock on board a boat. Most lodges also have adventure guides that can help guests plan excursions in the surrounding regions.
- rainforest motorboat image by Sophia Hendrick from Fotolia.com