Vaccination is a medical intervention that carries a risk of injury or death. The right to informed consent to any medical intervention that can kill or injure you or your child is a human right.
You have the responsibility to become fully informed about vaccines and the right to make voluntary choices about whether or not to risk your life or your child’s life with a vaccine or any other procedure a medical doctor recommends. The more educated you become about vaccines, the more empowered you will become and the better able you will be to stand up for your right to informed consent to medical risk taking.
NVIC maintains that vaccination is subject to the same medical informed consent ethic that guides modern medicine today because vaccination is a medical intervention performed on a healthy person that has the inherent ability to result in the injury or death of that healthy person. In consideration of the fact that there can be no guarantee that the deliberate introduction of killed or live microorganisms into the body of a healthy person will not compromise the health or cause the death of that person either immediately or in the future; and with very few predictors having been identified by medical science to give advance warning that injury or death may occur; and with no guarantee that the vaccine will indeed protect the person from contracting a disease; and in the absence of adequate scientific knowledge of the way vaccines singly or in combination act in the human body at the cellular and molecular level, vaccination is a medical procedure that could reasonably be termed as experimental each time it is performed on a healthy individual. To learn more about informed consent, please click here.
NVIC has designd a series of questions and downloadable brochure entitled Ask 8 to assist consumers in understanding what questions should be a part of the vaccination decision making procress. To learn more about this series and becoming an educated consumer, please visit our Ask 8 webpage for more information and links to additional resources.
NVIC also publishes a free online NVIC Vaccine eNewsletter to keep consumers informed of the latest information about vaccines and infectious diseases and offers tools like the Vaccine Ingredient Calculator to assist consumers in becoming knowledgable about vaccines, existing safe standards for toxins found in vaccines and a printable vaccination plan to facilitate parent-health provider dialogue. Be sure to visit our Diseases and Vaccines webpage, which provides informationn on risks and benefits associated with vaccines.