General HADR Information Sources
Relief Web is a service of UNOCHA that consolidates information and analysis from organizations, countries and disasters for the humanitarian community.
PreventionWeb is provided by UNISDR to consolidate disaster risk reduction information into an online, easy to understand platform.
International Federation of the Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies (IFRC)
International Federation of the Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies (IFRC) is an independent, neutral organization ensuring humanitarian protection and assistance for victims of war and armed violence. It takes action in response to emergencies and at the same time promotes respect for international humanitarian law and its implementation in national law.
U.S. Geological Survey (USGS)
U.S. Geological Survey (USGS) provides impartial information on the health of our ecosystems and environment, the natural hazards that threaten us, the natural resources we rely on, the impacts of climate and land-use change, and the core science systems that help us provide timely, relevant, and useable information.
Joint Typhoon Warning Center
Joint Typhoon Warning Center provides advanced warning for U.S. government agencies and organizations in the relevant areas.
National Weather Service
National Weather Service provides weather updates for the United States and other American territories.
USAID carries out U.S. foreign policy by promoting broad-scale human progress at the same time it expands stable, free societies, creates markets and trade partners for the United States, and fosters good will abroad.
Interaction is an alliance organization in Washington, D.C. of nongovernmental organizations that strive to make the world more peaceful.
FEMA supports U.S. citizens and first responders to ensure that as a nation we work together to build, sustain, and improve our capability to prepare for, protect against, respond to, recover from, and mitigate all hazards.
Centers for Disease Control (CDC)
Centers for Disease Control (CDC) works to protect America from health, safety and security threats, both foreign and in the U.S.
The Journal of Humanitarian Assistance
The Journal of Humanitarian Assistance promotes the rapid exchange of new ideas, previously unpublished research, and the critical write-up of field experience by field workers and researchers in humanitarian assistance.
U.S. Department of State’s Humanitarian Information Unit (HIU)
l) U.S. Department of State’s Humanitarian Information Unit (HIU) is an inter-agency office providing U.S. government officials and other aid organizations with geographic data and analysis to prepare for and respond to complex humanitarian emergencies worldwide.
Reuters Alert Net
Reuters Alert Net - Internet news service by Reuters for the relief community and anyone interest in the world of aid agencies.
Humanitarian Practice Network
Humanitarian Practice Network provides an independent forum for policy-makers, practitioners and others working in or on the humanitarian sector to share and disseminate information, analysis and experience, and to learn from it.
Global Disaster Alert and Coordination System (GDACS)
Global Disaster Alert and Coordination System (GDACS) is a cooperation framework between the United Nations, the European Commission and disaster managers worldwide to improve alerts, information exchange and coordination in the first phase after major sudden-onset disasters.
Pacific Disaster Center (PDC)
Pacific Disaster Center (PDC) uses information, science, and technology to enable effective evidence-based decision-making and to promote disaster risk reduction concepts and strategies.
Asia-Pacific Center for Security Studies (APCSS)
Asia-Pacific Center for Security Studies (APCSS) is a U.S. Department of Defense institute that addresses regional and global security issues, inviting military and civilian representatives of the U.S. and Asia-Pacific nations to its comprehensive program of executive education and workshops.
All Partners Access Network (APAN)
All Partners Access Network (APAN) is a collection of communities developed to foster information and knowledge sharing between the U.S. Department of Defense and non-DOD entities who do not have access to traditional DOD networks.
U.N. International Strategy for Disaster Risk Reduction (ISDR)
U.N. International Strategy for Disaster Risk Reduction (ISDR) serves as the focal point in the United Nations system for the coordination of disaster reduction and to ensure synergies among the disaster reduction activities of the United Nations system and regional organizations and activities in socio-economic and humanitarian fields.
Virtual On-Site Operations Coordination Centre (VOSOCC)
Virtual On-Site Operations Coordination Centre (VOSOCC) is an information exchange and coordination of bilateral assistance in the early phase after major disasters for disaster managers. Need login account to use for bilateral discussions.
Humanitarian Response platform
Humanitarian Response platform is provided to the humanitarian community as a means to aid in coordination of operational information and related activities.
Centre for Humanitarian Cooperation
Centre for Humanitarian Cooperation is a not-for-profit organization, created to assist the humanitarian community in developing practices facilitating greater cooperation in preparation for and during response to humanitarian crises.
The Disaster Management Center of the University of Wisconsin-Madison
The Disaster Management Center of the University of Wisconsin-Madison mission is to help improve the emergency management performance of nongovernmental organizations, local and national governments, and international organizations, through a comprehensive professional development program in disaster management, primarily through distance learning.
Geneva Centre for Security Policy
Geneva Centre for Security Policy promotes peace, security and stability through executive education, research and dialogue. GCSP accomplishes its mission through training, research, publications, workshops and conferences for government officials, diplomats, military officers, international civil servants and NGO staff in pertinent fields of international peace and security.
World Institute for Disaster Risk Management
World Institute for Disaster Risk Management is a network for applied research, implementation, and dissemination in the field of disaster risk management. It achieves its aims by filling knowledge gaps, providing a clearing-house for information, building know-how, mobilizing resources, and forging partnerships with governments, private enterprises, international agencies, and NGOs.
International Alert focus on generating greater international and regional political awareness of the deep-seated causes of modern violent conflict.
Overseas Development Institute
Overseas Development Institute, think tank on international development and humanitarian issues that informs policy by locking together high quality applied research, practical policy advice, and policy-focused dissemination and debate.
Partnership for Peace Information Management System
Partnership for Peace Information Management System designs, integrates, and provides innovative technologies and services to facilitate collaboration and strengthen relationships in the Euro-Atlantic and Partnership for Peace community. Need login account to use.
The Stockholm International Peace Research Institute (SIPRI)
The Stockholm International Peace Research Institute (SIPRI) research on armed conflict and conflict management monitors and analyses trends in violent conflict around the world, as well as their causes, dynamics and consequences.
The e-centre is the UNHCR Centre for Emergency Preparedness’ online e-learning platform. It provides distance learning and material for the Asian region, and has extensive UNHCR documentation.
The World Bank
The World Bank provides funding for research and programs for disaster risk reduction and recovery and affects of disasters on GDP.