FACTS ABOUT FLOSSING
Everyone is aware of the importance of flossing. However, a research conducted in USA shows that only 49% of the people there floss regularly and 10% of them do not floss! Dentists are of the view that flossing does not take much time and is even more vital than brushing for stopping loss of teeth in seniors, periodontal gum diseases and cavities. Following are the essential facts about flossing that make it so important.
TIPS FOR FLOSSING
Keep your floss in a bag, your car or in your office cupboards, and start doing it whenever you get time. Just make sure never to floss in front of others as the sight is highly unpleasant. You can also do it without a mirror. Just keep the floss within your reach.
FLOSS ONCE A DAY
The time for flossing does not matter but you must make sure to do it on a regular basis even if you are too worn out after a long day. Flossing your teeth after or before your brush does not matter.
IT REMOVES PLAQUE
Flossing is great for getting rid of plaque from places between the teeth where the toothbrush does not go. If such plaque is not gotten rid of, it slowly builds up into tartar or calculus and leads to gum infections. Also, studies suggest that periodontal germs stick to the greasy plaques in the blood nerves and give rise to an inflammatory procedure that can cause a heart stroke or attack.
IT’S NOT PAINFUL
Flossing is never painful. It might take some time for you to get used to it if you are a new user, but after a week’s time you will start getting comfortable with it.
FOR CLEANING BETWEEN TEETH
There are various options particularly created for the reason of cleaning between the teeth, for example little brushes, pre-threaded flossers, sharp rubber tips or wooden sticks for removing plaque that easily clean your teeth from between. Therefore there is no need of using dental floss for cleaning between your teeth.
FLOSSING FOR KIDS
Kids should begin flossing whenever they have at least two teeth for strong oral health.
GO EASY WHILE FLOSSING
Do not floss very roughly as it may damage the delicate tissues between the teeth. However, do not floss lightly either if you wish to get a positive outcome.
Do you floss your teeth regularly? Make sure to follow a proper routine to maintain your oral hygiene.
Before treating gum, tooth, or other oral problems consult with Dr. JJ Edderai. A dental check-up every three to four months will allow Dr. Edderai to keep a watchful eye on your oral health and prevent cavities before they start. For answers to some of the most commonly asked questions, visit my FAQ page at http://www.northmiamibeachdentist.com/faqs/.
Copyright Dr. Jean-Jacques Edderai -2016