The Well-Being Map displays measurements of various characteristics for each U.S. county based on census data and an analysis of publicly-shared Tweets. Click "Explore" at the top left corner of the Map and select one or two traits from the dropdown menu to view on the Map. Click "U.S. Top 10" or "State Top 10" at the top right corner of the Map to view the highest- and lowest-scoring counties in the nation or within each state for each of the given well-being traits. Click "County Profiles" to enter a county name and view a ranked list of all reported traits for that county.
Color Scale: Counties highlighted in a darker color have higher scores of the selected characteristic.
Hover over or click a county to see its:
County Name Relative degree of the measurement
County Rank: #
Z score: #
Fresno, CA Medium
Household Income: $45,563
County Rank: #1385
Z score: -0.03
The Well-Being Map is an online visualization tool that displays measurements of various characteristics for each U.S. county.
The measurements are generated from two sets of data:
Results from the scientific analyses of the language recently posted in public Tweets across the U.S.
County-level data gathered by professional organizations and institutes.
How can this Map be used?
By clicking "Explore" in the navigation bar at the top left corner
of the Map, a user can select a well-being characteristic from the drop-down menu
and click GO to view measurements for that characteristic
across U.S. counties. For example, if the user selects "Life Satisfaction", the Map
will indicate how much people within each U.S. county are measured to feel
satisfied with their life in general. The specific score gathered for a particular
county is displayed in a text box that appears when the mouse hovers over that
county. (To navigate to different regions within the Map, use the search bar or
the +/- zoom functions at the top left corner of the Map and click and drag
portions of the Map to move left, right, up, or down.) The color key at the top
right corner of the Map can be referenced to determine which counties are measured
to be experiencing high or low levels of the selected characteristic.
How was the Map built?
For characteristics measured with language-based assessment, the Map gathers public
Tweets posted within each U.S. county and analyzes the language
within each Tweet, measuring how much the Twitter language reflects the selected
characteristic (e.g., how much the Tweet reflects Life Satisfaction) based on statistical models. It then
aggregates those results for all public Tweets posted within each county and displays
the aggregate score for the county on the Map using a color coding system.
The Map also features county-level demographic data
(e.g., unemployment rates) measured by professional organizations and institutes
such as the U.S. Census Bureau and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC).
How do we hope the Map will be used?
The Well-Being Map aims to support the production and application
of valuable insights about the drivers and deterrents of well-being to help
individuals, organizations, and governments choose actions and policies that
improve individual and community flourishing.