Dear Jenn,

Excuse me if I sound too philosophical – I’m only talking to you and writing without intentions or goals. I’ve seen deaths – a lot of them. But as I sit here in the waiting room of the hospital with an old friend probably on her deathbed, I have feelings so strong they're almost life-altering. It’s strong enough to change the meaning of life for a person. But I’m resilient – I try to be.

It feels like I give you more bad news than good when we talk. I don’t like that, but I guess life for the two of us is different in that sense. I don’t know if it’s right to talk about hospitals with you all the time, but then I ask myself, "Who else do I talk to?" 

Talking to you is as easy as talking to me. That still doesn’t mean I have a self-proclaimed right to it.

I hope you got my message about my friend. She’s battling hard, but I’m afraid the odds might not be entirely in her favor. I want to skip the disturbing details. She was operated on in the night but suffered internal bleeding the next morning. So they had to operate again, which is quite risky. They put her on a ventilator immediately because her condition was critical, and they said they couldn’t say anything for the next 24 hours. She had four dialyzes in a single day. Her condition gets unstable every 4 to 6 hours. They’re controlling her vitals with medication because her blood pressure drops to dangerous levels and her eyes, nose, and ears bleed. She also suffered from pulmonary edema. It’s a condition when the lungs get filled with fluid, so they had to operate on that too.

It's been more than 24 hours, and it’s still the same. She also had a thyroid problem, so that’s not helping either. She’s also having a blood transfusion reaction, and her body is killing the red blood cells. All of that is damaging her heart. Doctors are still trying to identify the reasons. She’s had multiple transfusions after the surgery, too. I fear her body is rejecting the graft.

But, well, we’ve seen worse cases get better, and there are miracles, too, right?
