1. Google Docs - Google Docs comes equipped with all the features you need to create a broad range of document types. You can use it on your home computer or access it on your smartphone device. It features built-in chat allowing you to collaborate with writers and editors and talk to them in real time without closing your document. You can auto-save your work as you type and gain access to powerful add-ons to help you create a more appealing document. 

2. Scrivener - Scrivener is a leader when it comes to book-writing software. If you are hoping to find a program that will help you edit, proofread, and format your book, this is one worth choosing. It comes with all the features that both new and experienced writers can use. And it allows you to create notes and compile or organize your research for your book all into one convenient document. 

3. ProWritingAid - This is another excellent choice of writing software that offers plenty of high-quality features for writers of all types. Users can obtain suggestions to help improve the readability of their documents. They can also get access to numerous writing reports that will help take their writing to another level. You can edit and learn to become a better writer thanks to the in-app suggestions and find the best synonyms to spice up your work using the word explorer. 

4. Apple Pages - Apple Pages from the world-famous IT brand Apple is a standard word processor that focuses on allowing you to create visually stunning documents. Although it is an Apple product, Pages is also available for PC users. It comes complete with hundreds of professionally designed templates organized by category. 

5. Draftin - Draftin is the ideal program for document version control. But that is just one of the reasons why you should choose this writing software. It comes standard with all the basic writing features but also caters to the needs of teams of content creators. The tool works to streamline document version control and allows for smooth collaboration for all writers and editors on a team. It also makes publishing easy thanks to WebHooks which allows users to publish their content using a JSON payload to any supporting platform including WordPress, Twitter, and Basecamp. 

6. Evernote - Evernote is all about helping you take notes more efficiently. The toolkit provided by this program is especially helpful while doing research. You can create, sync, and organize all your notes in one location. This program also makes the data easy to access and it comes with helpful collaboration features that help your entire team stay on top of the notes they use frequently. 

7. Freedom.to - If you have difficulty staying focused while writing, this software can help with that. Freedom is a writing program that ensures you stay on task, It is great for helping you tune out and stay focused on the task at hand. It is capable of blocking anything ranging from apps to websites that send you notifications. The app can even block games and videos to help you improve your productivity and avoid procrastination. 

8. Microsoft Word - Word is perhaps the most famous writing software of all. It is the go-to for most authors and has gone through many updates over the years to make it a fierce competitor with all other programs. The latest version is packed with features that will help you create, edit, design, and publish your work for all to enjoy. You can use it to convert your documents into ready-to-publish web pages, blogs, and even books.
