Many human lose limb, get stroke, get hurt. Human get slow journey to feel better. Games and virtual reality possibly make human feel better faster.

Amputee human sometime experience big pain in missing limb, and not get coordination with limb. To help, Mindmaze brain technology company make virtual reality therapy. Virtual reality therapy help amputee human believe missing limb come back, to help pain go away.

Mindmaze brain technology company also help create game with body motion camera and movement sensors. This gaming therapy help give back movement and make fun.

Mindmaze brain technology company help make game to help alzheimers, parkinsons, and dementia humans. US department of defence help give money to help veteran human prevent dementia.

Serious physical and neurological disorders need therapy game built on good foundation. San Francisco California school show game may help older human get good brain control and multitasking skill.

Neuroracer simple 3D game help reverse negative brain effect of aging and may help other brain effect like ADHD and depression.

Bad coronavirus pandemic give good result to gaming therapy. Give more contact with doctors. June 2020, Food and Drug Administration enjoy first game therapy for young human with ADHD and depression brain condition. 

Gaming companies seek develop game to promote health and fitness for over decade. Common thing like Xbox and Kinect to Nintendo Ring Fit show how much game companies want to be involved.

DeepWell Digital Theraputics open plan to build existing game research on brain condition ADHD and depression. Game unlikely replace medicine or in-person human care, but game help fill in gap of health.

Boston Young Human Hospital take digital therapy serious. Clinician human at Harvard Medical School make game company Mightier and test strategy. Result showed young human handle stress well with game and change behavior.

Hospital now use game in family human therapy and mental health session, showing doctor human commit to digital therapy. Game industry happy to make gaming good for human.

Game therapy and virtual reality therapy best thing since wheel invention.
