Therapist (T)/Patient (P)

T: What do you feel like talking about today?
P: I've been wanting to improve certain areas of my life.
T: Really? What areas of your life do you want to improve?
P: For starters, I want to learn how to be less worried about things that I can't change.
T: That's a really good lesson to learn and one that will undoubtedly help you throughout your life. What else?
P: I also want to be less irritated when things don't go my way.
T: Yes, that's another good one. Anything else?
P: I think those are the two biggest concerns I have at this moment.
T: Okay, let's focus on being irritated when things don't go your way. Can you give me an example of something that happened to you that made you feel irritated?
P: I can remember one specific day when all sorts of things were not going my way. I remember getting up in the morning and stubbing my toe on my dresser. Then, I made breakfast but I ended up burning the bacon by accident. And then, later that day I was driving to the store and I seemed to be running into every red light along the way. I remember feeling enraged by the end of the day.
T: One thing you can do when this happens to you is to remember that life doesn't cater to you, you just have to accept everything it throws at you. In a way, this also addresses your other issue of being worried about things that you can't change. There are certain things that we can't change so worrying doesn't matter except to give you more stress. It's better to not worry about those things. However, when there are things that happen to you that are within your control and you are not satisfied with the results, you should look at the expectations you've set for yourself and consider whether or not you've been setting those expectations too high for yourself to achieve. Something as simple as cooking the morning bacon and having it burn while you do so can be understandably frustrating, but it is a good reminder to not spread ourselves too thin and instead to lower our expectations just enough that we can achieve them.
