As a teenager, Christine loved taking her dog for a run in the park. One warm spring day, a newspaper photographer was in the park and asked Christine if he could take her picture. The next day, the front page of the paper featured a full-color picture of Christine and her dog, running through a cascade of water from sprinklers at the park. It was a beautiful photo of a young woman full of youth and vitality. 

John was a shy teenager in the same city, and he also enjoyed running. He saw Christine’s photo and was instantly struck by it. There was something that drew him to the girl in the picture and he wondered who she was. John tucked the picture away in his desk drawer and thought about the girl in the picture often. She became his unattainable ideal, and no other girl could quite measure up to this ideal.

The years passed, and Christine and John grew up and moved on. Christine married young and had two children, then found herself divorced and a single parent. John never married but went on to study law and then spent long hours at his law practice. Both of them kept running. 

About ten years after high school, John and Christine both entered a marathon in their city. On the day of the race, Christine struck up a conversation with John and they agreed to meet up after the marathon. That was the beginning of several meetings and dates. Eventually, Christine knew it was time to bring John home and introduce him to her children. 

Christine invited John to her apartment for dinner, and her two boys took to John immediately. While Christine finished up the dinner preparations, the kids gave John a tour of the apartment. The hall leading to the bedrooms was a photo gallery of family pictures, and John stopped to look. His eyes were drawn to a framed picture from a newspaper. It suddenly dawned on him that this picture of a girl running with her dog was one that he had saved from the newspaper so many years before, and this was his dream girl. Reading the caption below the photo, he realized it was Christine and his dream had come true.
