Right in the heart of the village, Kotone is praying. Prayer is a required thing for the women in the village. You have to pray in the middle of the village fountain at least once a day. It is said that the fountain will eventually bless a woman of the village and give her supernatural powers. Enough power to help defend the village from the dragon that lords up in the mountain. Kotone prays that she isn't the one that receives this power. Every day her wish gets granted, but this one day, she wasn't so lucky. The fountain starts to glow, and from below, a geyser shoots up and douses the village in rain. Kotone steps back and looks at herself. She is glowing, her dark hair starts to levitate, and the water starts to surround her. She was picked as this generation's healer. The village folk all walk out and look at her, fascinated and scared. An older woman starts to walk up to Kotone and says to her "You have received the blessing of the goddess, and now you must undertake the trial of healers like the women from generations past." Kotone didn't want this, but she couldn't refuse. Her destiny was already decided. The trial was to take part tomorrow, in the forest close to the village. 

The trial was a simple one. Escape a well and return to the village within seven days and pray. Kotone has never done training like this. She was only given a day's worth of food and two books. One was the history of the women that received the blessing. The other was more practical, detailing how to use her newly found power. She has doubts about if she can do this. She walks to the well with various members of the village surrounding her so she can't run away. Along the way, one of the men collapses out of nowhere. Everyone, including Kotone, ran to the man's side. It looks like he has contracted an illness that started to show signs now. At this moment, Kotone comes up with an idea. If she can heal this man now, maybe she doesn't need to do the trial. Quickly, she grabs the books out of one of the other men's hands and starts skimming for anything useful.
