Orwell stamped around the yard wildly and without inhibition. He had the whole sty to himself and the run of the mill. Today, the farm was finally his, and he was king of the castle.

Little Orwell was only a few months old but growing by the day. His appetite was large, and he loved nothing more than eating, basking in the sun, and oinking to his heart's delight. Usually, the barnyard was pretty busy, and he was always trying to not get stepped on or in someone's way. Today, though, everyone was missing. Stuart the potbelly pig was gone, as were the people that usually stopped by to give him pets and shake hay into the playpen. Even the horses on the other side of the fence weren't out this morning.

Orwell started to get a bit worried. He knew there was a big state fair in town, and Stuart warned him that things would be different when the big day came. Today must be that day, but he didn't even realize it. They must have snuck out while he was asleep, even his Mom.

But now there was nobody around for Orwell to talk to or bother. He roamed from place to place. First, he checked out the sty outside, but the mud didn't seem very enjoyable. Then he went back inside the barn to find a nice parcel of hay to nestle down into. But every time he tried to get comfortable, a hay needle would poke him in just the wrong spot.

Up he got again, pacing around the other stalls in the barn, missing his friends. Orwell didn't realize it earlier in the morning, but he was lonely. He always thought that the others were a bother before and wished they were out of his way. Now that they were gone, all he wanted was for them to be back again. Even his Mom, who always told him to not make such a mess and to quiet down. It was her he missed the most, especially how she kissed his cheek good morning every day. 

Orwell was sad. He sat down in the corner of the outdoor sty in a little shady spot and watched the road, waiting for his Mom to return and hoping she'd have a nice big blue ribbon.
