"Robin! Get in here!" Batman shouted.

It was early morning in the Wayne household, but nobody was sleeping after Batman's booming voice echoed throughout the mansion. Moments later, a bleary-eyed Robin entered the kitchen.
"Good morning to you too, Mr. Wayne," Robin remarked with a snide tone. Batman was seething with rage as his cheeks turned red and the veins in his neck bulged out. He motioned for Robin to join him at the countertop and pointed a finger at the offensive sight: the crumbs that were littered next to the toaster. Nothing upset Batman more than having his morning routine disrupted by someone else's toast crumbs. It was almost like taking a shower after someone and getting in feeling the floor already wet. Sure, you could deal with it, but sometimes, it just feels off. And Robin's toast crumbs felt very much off to Batman. Robin saw the toast crumbs and put his hands up in a shrugging motion, feigning some combination of surprise and innocence.
"Are these not your crumbs, Robin?" Batman asked. "I know it was you. Nobody else eats whole-grain wheat bread but you."
"Batman, I just got up. I swear it wasn't me. I know to clean up my crumbs," Robin said in reply.

"Do you now? Because evidence shows otherwise. I am a detective after all. So why don't you just stop with the excuses and make this right?" Robin had a dumbfounded but defeated look on his face. There was no arguing with Batman when he was in that sort of mood. And so he dutifully went off to the far side of the kitchen to gather cleaning supplies. Alfred was already there with a paper towel in hand for Robin. 
"I wonder why Master Bruce is so upset this morning. For shame, Robin. You should know better by now." Robin grumbled something incoherent and grabbed the towels. He started to turn when he suddenly paused. 
"Wait a minute, how were you already here with a towel in hand?" he inquired.
"Well, Master Robin, you should know better than to steal your Butler's newspaper," Alfred replied.
"Alfred, that was a week ago!" 
"Tut-tut, Robin. Batman is waiting for you."
