Got it! Here is a list of all the home consoles Nintendo developed before the Wii, listed by year.

1. NES - The NES came out in America in 1985, and it helped the North American video game market recover from its crash in 1983. This console was a place to play 8-bit titles, and it was the best-selling gaming console of its time. Originally, the NES was marketed as Famicom in Japan, but it was renamed to the NES when it came to America. When it came out, there was a $99 option that came with Super Mario Bros. There was also a $199.99 deluxe set that came with accessories and two games.
2. SNES - Nintendo followed up the NES with the SNES in 1990. This makes it the second home console developed by Nintendo, and it was also a huge success. When it was released, it had to compete with Sega's Mega Drive. That being said, the Nintendo titles played a role in making it the best-selling console of its time. There were different versions, and cartridges couldn't be played on consoles that came from another country. The SNES was called the Super Famicom in Japan.
3. Virtual Boy - The Virtual Boy came out in 1995, and it was a torchlight in virtual reality. That being said, it was a disaster in terms of its release. This console could be placed on a surface, and players could see it by leaning forward into the visor. This made some players feel sick to their stomachs, and it had a very short lifespan.
4. Nintendo 64 - The Nintendo 64 came out in 1996, and it utilized a 64-bit CPU, making it truly powerful for its time. The Nintendo 64 was less popular than previous consoles, and this was in part due to the competition from Sony and Sega. Today, it's still known as an amazing console.
5. Nintendo GameCube - The GameCube came out in 2001, and it was the first Nintendo console to use optical discs. It also allowed players to save their games through the use of memory cards that went up to 64 MB. The Gamecube came by at a time with a lot of competition. Competitors included Sony, Microsoft, and Sega. It had lots of initial success but didn't sell many consoles in the long run. The Gamecube is historical and iconic, but it was considered a flop in its time.
