I dropped into the tiny cockpit before sealing my helmet. No sense wasting any more pressurized air than necessary, after all. I gripped the control yokes, my flight gloves flexing with familiar resistance. I was ready for this. I felt it in my bones.

According to the briefing, we would be deployed the moment our Star Destroyer dropped out of hyperspace. It was always a jolt to drop from the TIE launch tram. The thing was an engineering masterpiece, but it still hit the pit of your stomach like a prize fighter.

With open space in front of me, though, I was truly in my element. No matter what ship those rebel scum wrapped themselves in, they could never escape the cleansing effect of laser fire. I was eager to show them.

Within seconds of our arrival in the system, my squadron was ordered to disable or destroy the Pelta-Class frigate in orbit around this unimportant planetoid. As one of the largest ships in the system, there was little doubt of its importance. I dove in, spinning around the pathetic defensive fire from a BTL Y-Wing along the way. On my display, I saw that my wingman did the same, barely faltering from our course toward the target. That simple pair of Y-Wings probably constituted the Rebel Alliance’s entire standing defensive screen. Given how quickly we’d appeared on their doorstep, they had almost zero chance of mustering more fighters before we reached our objectives.

I zipped around behind the Pelta, firing my laser jabs at the aft shield motivators. Their destruction wouldn’t kill the shields outright, but it would limit their power across the aft end of the ship. That would make the rest of my squadron’s attacks on the engines far more effective. My wingman and I would now provide covering fire while the remainder of our squadron dug into the ship’s engine section. 

And even given my TIE’s limited visibility, I noticed the flashes from exploding engine chambers. That brought a smile to my face.

A flurry of radio calls confirmed our success. All that remained for my wingman and I now was to clear a path back to the Star Destroyer. Our mission had been a resounding success!
