1. Include specials on odd days. In the restaurant world, Tuesdays and Wednesdays tend to be slower. Include unique specials on those days to ensure all the Tuesday and Wednesday night crowds go to your restaurant. For example, have a karaoke Tuesday, or a beer-chugging competition on Wednesday that includes discounted beers for all who participate. Create fresh competitions and specials you can do on the odd days of the week. If you want to get even more creative, try changing it every week to keep your customers guessing.

2. Prizes for customers. Try making more prizes for your customers, such as discounts, gift cards, and deals. The more your customers feel like they can save, the more they're going to come to your restaurant.

3. Keep up with the technology. Have TVs, radios, and music stations. Most restaurants have other forms of entertainment like TV. If you do not have these other forms of entertainment, you are falling behind. Incorporate TVs, music stations, and radios to give your customers a lot to do while they're in your restaurant.

4. Change up your menu. Create a new design for the menu to get people excited. You can add new dishes and remove the ones that weren't selling. By adding new designs and dishes, you are keeping up with the current trends and offering freshness to your customers.

5. Try internet trends. You can incorporate trends to create a stronger social media presence. Try making trending dishes, participating in challenges, and advertising by making new trends. Although social media is often a hit or miss, you don't lose anything by trying.

6. Don't forget to talk to the customers. Managers, wait staff, and owners alike should all be interacting with the customers. If the customers get abandoned, they won't come back. Focus on getting loyal customers, then work on getting new ones. Engage with the customers, take their feedback, and make them feel comfortable. You will gain regulars if you are initiating conversations with the customers. Along with that, your loyal customers are likely to recommend your restaurant to their friends.
