That sounds like an interesting book! Here are three possible ways for your character to accomplish this:

1. This side of the mountain is too steep to climb, so the character has to go all the way around the mountain to the other side to climb it. However, the other side of the mountain is owned by a different country, which doesn't allow just anyone to enter their borders. You first have to go through all their health tests and prove you are trained in an occupation that they need. The character is not trained in anything that the country is looking for, so he has to create a device that will trick them, pass their tests, and then allow him to climb the mountain on their side. 
2. There is a device that can take people up to the top of the mountain, but it is broken. It is too steep to go up the mountain without that, so the character has to track down the person who can fix it. This person is currently fixing a similar device at another mountain. So, the character has to go to that mountain, only to find the man working at the top part of the device on the top part of the mountain, meaning he has to climb the mountain to get to him or wait at the bottom. He chooses to climb, but the man fixes the device while he does this and comes down the mountain, being at the bottom and having left by the time the character reaches the top. The character then has to go back down the mountain and catch up with the man, who he convinces to help him. However, on getting the man there, it turns out that he needs a very specific part he doesn't have. So, the character then has to go and either get that part or find someone to make it. Maybe the man goes on vacation while the character does this, so then he has to find some old recluse that no one knows where he lives. and eventually convinces him to help. The device gets fixed, and now the character can use it to get to the top of the mountain. 
3. The mountain is owned by a tribe of people who don't allow anyone there but their own tribe past a certain point. There is a way to become a member of the tribe, but this takes a lot of work and involves going through a certain number of trials. There could be any number of these, and they include anything from fighting a certain sci-fi animal without weapons, finding a way through a deep and dark cave system and coming out the other side, and so on.

I hope that one of these ways works for your book or at least gives you some ideas!
