Here are five tips to use when negotiating your pay. 

1. Know your worth.
Before entering negotiations regarding your pay, you must know what you are worth. Knowing what you are worth to a company will give you a base for negotiations. It can be tough to see what you are worth to your company, but luckily, you can use sites like glassdoor.com and payscale.com to get a better idea of what people in similar roles and companies to you do earn. This knowledge will mean you can confidently suggest a number in line with the market rate. Offering a rate identical to others in your field will allow you to have confidence that the company will not be able to find someone better without at least paying an equal rate. Hiring new staff is often tedious and not cost-effective, so forcing your employer into this decision can work in your favor. 

2. Use good timing. 
Timing is everything in negotiations, which is never more true than in salary negotiations. Utilizing good timing can be the difference between a successful salary negotiation and an awkward conversation with your boss. Try to initiate salary negotiations while the company is doing well and you are being seen to impact that success substantially. A salesman who isn't hitting targets regularly would be ill-advised to open negotiations regarding salary. It may be that they can get a higher wage but unlikely to be sufficient if they don't have the data to back up their claimed performances. If you've just completed a profitable project and been a key player, it's probably a great time to strike while the iron is hot and ask for a pay rise. 

3. Be realistic.
It is necessary to know your worth and understand your value to a company, but remaining realistic is also pivotal. If you aim for the stars and ask for 50% more than you are worth, you can expect your employer to grow frustrated and unsympathetic to your request. The better tactic is to have a number in mind you would like, then add a small % to it so that you can work down to your ideal number. This will allow your employer some wiggle room to negotiate and feel they are not being played. It is essential to back your realistic request up with why you deserve it and what others are getting. 

4. Don't ask too often. 
As stated above, alienating and frustrating your employer is not a good idea. If you do this, you risk no negotiations and just a simple no. This will leave you in no better position than you were before. That is precisely why it is essential not to ask too frequently for a pay rise. Think of a similar situation in the car when a child asks the parents are we there yet over and over. The parents become frustrated and eventually will stop answering. The same will happen with your employer. They will revert to a standard no answer if you continuously ask for something. Instead, be sure to research what you are worth and strike while the iron is hot, as we described in point 2. 

5. Don't be afraid to ask. 
It seems silly to put this point straight after point 4. However, the fact is valid and should be discussed. While asking too often is not advised, not asking at all will probably get you nowhere. While this can't be said for all companies, most are reluctant to hand out pay raises regularly and will wait until they are asked or forced. That's why it is crucial that if you feel you deserve a pay rise and the circumstances dictate one, you stand up for yourself and ask. The worst thing they can say is no. If you don't think you deserve a pay raise, that's fine. Don't ask till you do. But if you have been stuck at the same rate for years and are integral to our company's operations, then speak up and ask for your worth.
