Over the two years he was working remotely, Greg has been perfecting his work-from-home setup, including the installation of dual-screen monitors, cozy lighting, and a speaker system for his lo-fi music playlist. No matter how well his home workspace has been crafted, he still needs to switch it up on occasion. When he burns out on working from home, he drives to his area’s local coffee shop to work.

Greg’s task this week was boring, yet awfully thought-intensive. Only one day into the work week, Greg already needed a change. Therefore, he jumped in the car. After a short journey, Greg was inside the coffee shop and scanning the cafe for a table next to a wall outlet. Elated, Greg secured his favorite table. Picking up his iced latte from the counter, Greg sat down and began unpacking. Laptop and charger: check. Notepad and ball-point pen: he had it. Headphones: nothing. Figuring his headphone case had slipped into a crevice hidden somewhere deep within his backpack, Greg conducted a thorough search but found nothing.

As a result of the coffee shop’s policy, if Greg should leave to retrieve his headphones from home, it would be required he purchases a new coffee upon reentry. Music undoubtedly contributed to Greg’s productivity, but he could not afford another drink. Greg was going to have to work au naturale - something he hated. He took a moment to listen to the music playing over the coffee shop’s speakers and, out of character for his local spot, the PA system screamed a fusion of disco and jazz performed in awkward time signatures. Greg thought he might settle into the beat as time went on, so he put his head down and tried to work.

The very moment Greg felt he might be able to get some work done after all, a nearby patron answered their phone and spoke with zero regard for neighboring ears. The voice was worse than the constant coffee grinding noises. Greg’s frustration continued to grow, and just as he was about to say something to the person on the phone they went outside to be picked up by their friend who took them away. Greg had become acclimated to the wild choice of music, but he never would have been able to work if that person had stayed.
