Ramayana is an epic portraying exemplary characters. Rama is the ideal king, Sita the perfect wife and Hanuman the perfect devotee. The character of Hanuman exemplifies how devotional service is practiced in its perfection, how a pure devotee relates with his worshippable Lord and how the Lord reciprocates. He is also called as the Siriya Thiruvadi by the Vaishnavas...
Origin of Hanuman
In Hindu mythology, Shri Hanuman is regarded as the God of power, strength and knowledge. He is known as the ‘parama bhakta’ of lord Rama and is the incarnation of Lord Shiva. He was born to Kesari and Anjanai on the Chaitra Shukla Purnima (Chaitra Shukla Purnima is the Full Moon Day on the Hindu Calendar Month of Chaitra) that is why, he is known as ‘KESERI NANDAN’ and ‘ANJANEYA’. The philosophy of epic Ramayana is incomplete without the understanding of the unfathomable devotion of Lord for Shri Rama. As Hindu Mythology says, He was the incarnation of Lord Shiva the God of Destruction, the Third god of Hindu trinity (All this universe is in the glory of God, of Shiva, the God of Love. The heads and faces of men are His own and He is in the hearts of all - Yajur Veda).
Lord HANUMAN is regarded to be the son of Hindu deity ‘VAYU’ (the wind). He was taken by 'Vayu' to Lord Sun to gain Vedic, shastra's and moral knowledge. He gained his whole knowledge from Lord Sun, as he was considered as omniscient on the planet earth.
As per the mythology, Hanuman is invincible and blessed to be immortal. The supremacy possessed by him is very beautifully described in Ramayana, during the Ramayana war of Lord Rama against the mighty Ravana. The Sundara Kanda, the fifth book in the Ramayana, focuses mainly on the adventures of Shri Hanuman.
When Ravana had become invincible by the boons he had obtained from Brahma, he became a terror to even the powerful demigods. With Lord Brahma at their head, they prayed to the omniscient Lord Vishnu for help. In response, Lord Vishnu confirmed that He would descend as Rama, the son of King Dasaratha. He also ordered the demigods as follows, "Soon My advent on earth will occur. Assisted by all of you I will crush the despicable Ravana. The evil one did not ask for immunity from humans and animals. As promised I will descend as a human. Without leaving your posts as the controllers of the universe, you are capable of expanding yourselves. You should therefore appear on the earth as monkeys." In accordance to the wish of Lord Vishnu, Indra, the king of the demigods, expanded into Vali, Surya, the sun-god, into Sugriva, Vishwakarma, the celestial architect, into Nala and the Ashwini twins into Mainda and Dvivida. Vayu, the wind-god, expanded into the mighty Hanuman.
When appraised of their role in assisting Lord Vishnu, both Kesari and Anjanai became exceedingly grateful and were soon blessed with the birth of an effulgent and powerful progeny they called Bali, one who is extremely powerful. He was also called Bajrang Bali, Kesari-nandana (son of Kesari), Anjanai-putra and Anjaneya (son of Anjanai).
Hanuman as a child:
Vayu-deva finally gave up his anger and resumed his function in the universe and the grateful demigods showered many benedictions on Hanuman. Indra gave him the boon of being able to die only when he desired, Brahma gave his protection from his powerful weapon the brahma-astra and the other demigods showered him with many mystic powers and weapons. Since the weapon of Indra and struck and broken the jaw of Hanuman, he got the name by which he would be most famous. Hanuman which means "one with a broken jaw."
Hanuman accepted the very same Sun god he had tried to swallow as his guru and learned from him the Vedic scriptures and science of war. Later on, Hanuman on several occasions displayed his impeccable grasp on Vedic scriptures, when trying to convince Ravana to give up Sita, when counseling Sugriva and by strictly following the codes of battle in the war against the rakshasas. His strength and skills as a warrior are matched by his keen intellect, knowledge of the scriptures and a deep compassion for all living entities.
Hanuman looses his powers
Meeting with Lord Rama:
While living in exile with Sugriva, Hanuman first encountered Rama and Lakshmana as they searched for Sita. Hanuman on the orders of Sugriva had disguised himself as a Brahman to try and find out if the two mighty bowmen were sent by Vali, the vengeful brother of Sugriva. However on seeing them, all doubts were immediately wiped from the mind of Hanuman who immediately revealed his true form.
From this time, Hanuman became completely absorbed in one and only one thing, the service of Rama. Later when Hanuman and his troop of monkeys were stuck on the southern shore of the country, separated from Lanka by the ocean, Jambavana reminds Hanuman of his great powers. The duration of the curse thus ends and a greatly powerful Hanuman jumps across the ocean to wreak havoc in the golden city of Ravana.
Hanuman the perfect devotee
The relationship between Rama and Hanuman demonstrates the perfection of devotion in the mood of service (dasya-rasa). In an almost classical manner Hanuman demonstrated the symptoms of pure devotional service. Everything that he did was only for the pleasure of Lord Rama, whether it was building bridges, fighting rakshasas or flying across the country to fetch life saving herbs, his constant meditation was how to best serve Rama. When he sought out Sita in Ravana's Lanka, he was not merely satisfied at delivering to her the message of Lord Rama. He also destroyed the forest, killed many rakshasas and burnt down half of Lanka. That is the mood of a pure devotee. To consciously cultivate everything that is positive to the service of the Lord and reject everything that is not.
Even though Lord Rama reciprocated very sweetly with gratitude, praise or benedictions for Hanuman, he never had any expectation for them. Hanuman often presented himself as a simple ignorant monkey in front of Rama. When Hanuman returned from Lanka with news of Sita, an overjoyed Rama embraced him tightly. However a clearly uncomfortable Hanuman stated that his position could only be at the feet of his Lord. The highest reward for him was to serve Lord Rama. Service to Rama was the most exalted destination for Hanuman, and he constantly endeavored to perfect himself in this respect.
Glories to Hanuman
Devotees pray to Hanuman to protect them from material obstacles in the path of devotional service and engage them in the service of the Supreme Lord Rama.
In the Treta Yuga Sri Vayudev came in his expansion as a special kind of Vanara (monkey), and was known to all as Hanuman. Sri Hanuman took his birth as the child to Anjanai the monkey Queen and Keshari her husband, according to Madhwa Vijaya (1:10.). There are several stories from different Puranas and parts of the Ramayana that give reference to Hanuman's appearance in this world. From the Kambha Ramayana Purvakhanda, Hanuman's mother Anjanai tells her story of how she was previously a maidservant of Brhaspati called Punjikasthala. Once in the forest picking flowers, she saw some other women engaged in amorous activities with their mates. Being disturbed by this, which invoked lusty feelings in her mind, she returned to Brhaspati and threw herself at him, covering him with amorous kisses. Brhaspati the high priest of the demigods, was so furious that he immediately cursed Punjikasthala to become a monkey, but out of concern he also added that after some time the son of the wind god Vayu, with the vitality of Lord Shiva, would come as her child and release her from this curse. At that time she would return to him as Punjikasthala, his maidservant.
The Lead Up To Hanuman's Birth:
Once Lord Shiva wished to see the most beautiful form of a woman, that being the temporary incarnation of Lord Vishnu called Mohini Murti. Lord Shiva knew that he could not be agitated by any so-called beautiful woman. He thought, "The Daityas may have been bewildered but the demigods could not be agitated, what to speak of me who am the best of all the demigods? I will certainly remain unaffected by seeing Her." Because Lord Shiva wanted to see Lord Vishnu's form as a woman, Lord Vishnu decided to appear as a woman and show him a form that would immediately put him in an ocean of lusty desires. In effect therefore, Lord Vishnu told Lord Shiva, "I will show you my form as a woman, and if you become agitated and lusty, don't blame Me."
The following is taken from Srimad Bhagavatam (8:12:18-34.), and Bhaja Madhwesam (26.).
"Thereafter, in a nice forest nearby, full of trees with reddish-pink leaves and varieties of flowers, Lord Siva saw a beautiful woman playing with a ball. Her hips were covered with a shining 'sari' and ornamented with a belt. Because the ball was falling down and bouncing up, as She played with it Her breasts trembled, and because of the weight of those breasts and Her heavy flower garlands, Her waist appeared to be all but breaking at every step, as Her two soft feet, which were reddish like coral, moved here and there. The woman's face was decorated by broad, beautiful restless eyes, which moved as the ball bounced here and there from Her hand. The two brilliant earrings on Her ears decorated Her shining cheeks like bluish reflections, and the hair scattered on Her face made Her even more beautiful to see. As she played with the ball, the 'sari' covering Her body became loose, and Her hair scattered. She tried to bind Her hair with her right hand. This was so attractive that the Supreme Lord, by His internal potency, in this way captivated everyone.
"While Lord Shiva observed the beautiful woman playing with the ball, She sometimes glanced at him and slightly smiled in bashfulness. As he looked at the beautiful woman and She watched him, he forgot both himself and Uma, his most beautiful wife, as well as his associates nearby. When the ball leaped from Her hand and fell at a distance, the woman began to follow it, but as Lord Shiva observed these activities, a breeze suddenly blew away the fine dress and belt that covered Her. Thus Lord Shiva saw the woman, every part of whose body was beautifully formed, and the beautiful woman also looked at him. Therefore, thinking that She was attracted to him, Lord Shiva became very much attracted to Her. Lord Shiva, his good sense taken away by the woman because of lusty desires to enjoy with Her, became so mad for Her that even in the presence of Bhawani (his wife) he did not hesitate to approach Her. The beautiful woman was already naked, and when She saw Lord Shiva coming toward Her, She became extremely bashful. Thus She kept smiling, but She hid Herself among the trees and did not stand in one place. His senses being agitated, Lord Shiva, victimized by lusty desires, began to follow Her, just as a lusty elephant follows a she-elephant. After following Her with great speed, Lord Shiva caught Her by the braid of Her hair and dragged Her near him. Although She was unwilling, he embraced Her with his arms. Being embraced by Lord Shiva like a female elephant embraced by a male, the woman whose hair was scattered, swirled like a snake. O King, this woman, who had large, high hips, was a woman of Yoga Maya presented by the Supreme Personality of Godhead. She released Herself somehow or other from the fond embrace of Lord Shiva's arms and ran away. As if harassed by an enemy in the form of lusty desires, Lord Shiva followed the path of Lord Vishnu, Who acts very wonderfully and who had taken the form of Mohini. Just as a maddened bull elephant follows a female elephant who is able to conceive pregnancy, Lord Shiva followed the beautiful woman and discharged semen, even though his discharge of semen never goes in vain. O King, whosesoever on the surface of the globe fell the semen of the great personality of Lord Shiva, mines of gold and silver later appeared. Following Mohini, Lord Shiva went everywhere - near the shores of the rivers and lakes, near the mountains, near the forests, near the gardens, and wherever there lived great sages."(Srimad Bhagavatam 8:12:18-34.)
Some of the semen was carried carefully by Vayu, the wind-god and impregnated into the ear of the monkey Queen Anjanai, and thus Hanuman was conceived, by Vayu. (Shiva Purana, Satarudrasamhita).
This story of Shiva becoming lusty and following Lord Vishnu in the temporary form of Srimati Mohini Murti is to be found also in the Bhagavatam (8:12. adh.), of Sripad Madhwacarya, and the Shiva Purana, Satarudrasamhita.
There is another story from the Ananda Ramayana which is also found in the Bhavishya Purana, Pratisagar parva relates how King Dasaratha, who had at that time no children, performed the 'Putrakamesti Yajna'. From that 'Yajna' some 'prasadam' ('payasam'-'caru') was to be given to Dasaratha's wives so that they could be blessed with sons. However, just as King Dasaratha was going to administer the sweet to his wives, a large kite-like bird snatched some of the prasadam in its beak and flew off into the forest. In the forest was the monkey queen who was sitting performing austerities to return to the service of Brhaspati. As the kite-bird flew over some of the 'payasam' fell from its beak landing on the fingers of Anjanai. When Anjanai finished her austerities she put her fingers to her mouth, and thus eating some of the 'payasam' from the 'Putrakamesti Yajna'. Soon after that by the Lord's divine plan Keshari and Anjanai tried to conceive a child. At that time a fierce aspect of Lord Shiva entered Keshari, and then Vayu entered the ear of Anjanai. Anjanai gave birth to a small baby monkey who was so ugly that in disgust, and angry at Shiva and Vayu, Anjanai wanted to throw him into the Tungabhadra River from the top of their mountain, but Vayu deva appeared on the scene and pacified her saying. "This monkey son of yours in not ordinary. He is actually my son and is a great devotee of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord Rama."
As soon as Hanuman was born, Anjanai was released from the curse of Brhaspati and she wanted to return to her former service.
The monkey child's first questions to his mother after being born were what was there to eat, what his future was, and how he would maintain himself. Anjanai told the boy not to worry, that he would never be destroyed or die, and that fruits were his food, ripened by the sun. She pointed to the sun, and the monkey child jumped up and tried to reach the sun to eat it, thinking it a fruit. Jumping for the sun and caught it in his mouth, then he saw Rahu, so he jumped at him to eat him, for he was bigger than the sun. Then as he flew through the sky he saw Lord Indra's elephant Airavata and tried to eat him too. Indra, seeing this, threw his mighty thunderbolt at the monkey which hit his chin and he fell to the earth wounded.
Sri Vayu deva carried him off and comforted and glorified him. Due to the scar made by Indra's Vajrayudha weapon on his chin ('hanu'), the demigods and Lord Vishnu named him Hanuman. Everyone blessed him. Lord Vishnu said: "May you live all your life as my greatest devotee." Indra said: "No weapon of any kind will wound or hit your body." Agni said: "Fire will never affect or disturb you." Kala (time personified) said: "May death never come to find you." Vayu blessed him to have more speed than air. Brahma said: "He will have more strength than even Garuda."
Sri Brahmaji said, "Don't worry; I will use my mystic powers." And he read Hanuman's mind. Sri Hanuman was thinking "Why is there is no fruit in this world, all I wanted was something to eat?" Brhaspati came to know of his desire and he came forward and said, "Hanuman, I will give you all the fruits in this world, and I will give you the knowledge of Ayurveda by which you will know all the fruits, all the plants, and all the trees. Any plant in the creation, you will know it, what is the proper use of it, and how to apply it. You will know all these things, and what is the medicinal effect of it you will also know. This is my benediction to you." Then Lord Dhanvantari spoke, "I will be at your command. Whatever medicine that you put on anyone they will revive from their ailment and again become alive." So then Hanuman opened his mouth, and the Sun-god was there, he came out and the demigods ('devas') were very much satisfied.
Sri Hanuman is known as the best of the monkeys and is surrendered to the lotus feet of Lord Rama. Upon their meeting Lord Ramachandra glorified Hanuman for his having studied all the Vedic literatures, knowing perfect presentation of philosophy and grammar, with never any faulty expression. Lord Rama said that Hanuman had captured the essence of all the Vedic studies yet still he remained humble rendering menial service to Lord Rama.
Hanuman still wasn't sure how he would recognize his worshipful Lord in the pastimes yet to come. So Brahma gave him a diamond necklace, and told him, "This is the highest benediction you can get. You will be always remain the eternal servant of the eternal Lord, and only you’re Lord will be able to recognize this necklace. That means you will be recognized by him, and he will be recognized by you as the one who recognized the necklace."
Later on when Lord Ramachandra asked the beggar, "What kind of a beggar are you? You have a wonderful necklace on your neck." Then Hanuman immediately recognized that this is my worshippable Lord. And he immediately surrendered to Him...
Sri Hanuman had so many other exploits too, some we have included when he was a small boy. After the sun-swallowing pastime there were so many other pastimes. He used to take elephants and tigers and play with them. One day he caught hold of a very wise elephant. He was holding it by the tusk, and he was also holding a tiger by the tail, and swinging them around. They were making some sounds. This was the innocent nature of Hanuman's fun. As he played like this with the animals he saw an ashram. The sage who lived here had never gotten angry in his life. He was known for his sense control. Hanuman thought to himself, "Now we will test his sense control." So he put the tiger and the elephant tied up together in front of his ashram. This was early in the morning, during the 'brahma-muhurta' time. So the 'rishi' slowly opened the door and took his 'lota' for taking bath. Then to his surprise as he looked out he saw this tiger, so he immediately ran back inside and closed the door. Up to that time he had constipation, but when he saw this tiger suddenly and by the grace of God, he felt nature calling. But what could he do, there was a tiger outside his door? He looked out the door again, and this time he saw the elephant as well, so he quickly shut the door again. He had to pass. But how could he pass inside? He then had some inspiration to climb out of the window, there was a tree outside of the window, and looking up he saw Hanuman at the top of the tree. Seeing him there the rishi said, "Ah! So you are the cause of this mischief. Come here!" Hanuman thought, "He's becoming angry. I must go." So he came down from the tree, and using his mystic siddhis he became very small and entered the window. The 'rishi' then cursed Hanuman that would limit his strength. "Why did you curse me like this?" Hanuman asked. "This is only for you own good. Your strength has been controlled so that you can use it only for the Lord's service, no more of these pranks. And when it is time for you to render service to Lord Rama, the Lord will arrange for someone to remind you." So then Hanuman said, "I will never tie an elephant to a tiger any more. And I will certainly not put it in front of your ashram." Then he came back to his home, and he didn't go out to play for a whole week. Keshari was asking, "Hanuman, how come there have been no complaints from anyone for a whole week? Have you become a good boy?" Hanuman said, "I don't want to give trouble to anyone." Then they heard a sound, a very nice sound. Keshari said, "What is this? It sounds like the great Narada Muni coming!" Hanuman asked, "Who is this person?" Keshari replied, "He is a very great devotee. He doesn't need any introduction. You just go to him and you will find out his greatness." Immediately Hanuman jumped up just as Narada was on his way past their place, going to see some 'rishis', so Hanuman jumped in his path and paid 'pranams', obeisance’s unto you great sage. "Narada Muni, I heard that you are a very great person, so you must bless me. Without blessing me, you are not allowed to go." Narada said, "What blessing do you want?" Hanuman said, "Already the demigods have given me so many blessings. I cannot think of anything else, so you think of a blessing, and you give it to me." Narada thought, "What blessing does Hanuman not have?" And so Narada said, "You will become expert in music." That was the only benediction left to give. So then Hanuman duly received that benediction, and Narada Muni said, "So I have given you the benediction as you requested, and now I am going." Hanuman said, "One minute, one minute." "What do you want now?" Narada asked. "How will I know that I am the most expert in music?" Hanuman inquired. "My father told me that you are the most expert in music, so you must do me a favour today. Give me the benediction that I will be more expert than you." So Narada said, "All right, I will sit somewhere and listen to you." "Shall I start singing?" Hanuman asked. "Yes." Narada Muni put his 'vina' on a rock, and he sat down on the ground. So Hanuman selected a tune, simply by his singing all wondrous things began to happen. His singing changed the nature of things like the rock on which Narada Muni had rested his 'vina'. The rock melted in ecstasy, and then the 'vina' was there sitting in the liquid. He was singing and singing, and the 'vina' was floating in the liquid rock. Narada was closing his eyes and enjoying, and he said, "All right Hanuman, you are the best musician you even surpass me. You can stop singing now." Hanuman said, "You open your eyes and tell me if I should I stop singing." Narada said, "What, how do you mean?" Hanuman replied, "You open your eyes." So Narada opened his eyes and looked around. He didn't notice the vina floating in the 'rock pool'. "Yes, you can stop singing." So then Hanuman stopped singing, and the liquid stone became again rock, and the 'vina' became stuck. Narada said, "I am going," and he went to take his vina, but it wouldn't move. "What did you do, Hanuman?" Hanuman said, "I only sung a song. You told me to sing a song, and you also gave me the ability. Now why are you complaining? I have been a good boy for a whole week?" Narada said, "One week of doing nothing means that before that week you did too much." And then Hanuman told him all about what he had done, swallowing the sun etc, and Narada became very pleased. Then he said, "Now whatever it was, you please sing the tune again, so I can get my vina out." Hanuman said, "Well, I don't know...." Narada Muni said, "Please do it!" "No I won't", Hanuman said, and he jumped up and ran inside the palace. Narada Muni came in there and called out, "Hanuman, come and get my 'vina' out of the rock! I have to go." Just then Keshari came out, and when he saw Narada Muni he touched his feet. "What is my son doing, he is giving you some trouble?" Narada said, "Oh no, no trouble, just that he got my vina stuck in the rock." Shriman Keshari said, "Oh no, he has started his mischief again. Hanuman, get Narada's 'vina' out of the rock!" Then Hanuman said, "I want Narada Muni's feet to touch every room in this palace that is why I was doing this. Now he has touched all the rooms, I will release his 'vina'. The dust from his lotus feet is so rare that what is the use of just having it in one part of our kingdom? We should have it all over." Narada said, "You are already blessed, because you are Lord Rama's eternal servant."
Sri Hanuman went and sung for Narada, who quickly took his 'vina' and left. In this way, Hanuman had so many wonderful pastimes. Then he told Keshari, "I want to begin my education. I have so many benedictions, but I need some education too, I need 'Vidhya'. I am very much hankering for 'Vidhya'." Keshari thought out loud and said, "But who could give you 'Vidhya'? You have so many benedictions, but you also have this uncontrollable behavior. I can't find a 'guru' for you, because you are so strong and so naughty also." Hanuman said, "This means that you are not going to perform the duty of the father. You're not giving me the necessary education." Keshari said, "I have to give you education, but I would like you to do one thing. You go to the Sun-god. He is the most powerful. Some time ago he was suppressed by you, but I can't think of anyone else He is most learned. So you go and approach him." Hanuman went to see the Sun-god, and when the Sun-god saw Hanuman coming, he thought, "It's Hanuman again. What is he here for? He's grown up now, so hopefully he would have stopped playing his mischievous deeds."
Sri Hanuman had changed; he came up and paid his obeisance’s very respectfully. The Sun-god said, "What are you here for now? Whom are you going to swallow?" Hanuman objected, "No, no, all that was because I was a small child in ignorance. I still have so much ignorance, but I want to get some knowledge. I've heard that you are a great 'pandit', so please teach me. I've come to join your 'guru Kula'." So then the Sun-god looked down. He has a big sitting place in the front of his chariot. There, we can understand from 'shastra' that there are six million 'rishis' sitting, and they are constantly reciting Yajur-Veda, Rig-Veda, Sama-Veda and Atharva-veda to the Sun-god. So he looked to see if there was any vacant seat, but the whole place was filled up, so he said, "Sorry, there is no room for admission...” Hanuman said, "If there is no seat then I will stand and learn from you." The Sun-god said, "But I have to keep moving. If you stand in front of me then I won't be able to move and then the various seasons won't be there on time. I will be in trouble, I have my service too." Hanuman said, "Then I will move and learn." The Sun-god said, "All right. But you have to face me and move backwards. In this way you have to listen to me, and whatever I say you have to learn. I won't repeat it." So Hanuman was there in front of the Sun-god, and he was walking backwards. He was so sense-controlled that he could join the orbit of the sun. In 60 orbits he learnt everything, Rig, Sama, Yajur and Atharva, the Upanishads, Puranas everything. As the Sun-god spoke it, Hanuman heard it and immediately he remembered and realized it. The Sun-god said, "Very good, but you have to give me some dakshina." Hanuman said, "Well what do you want? Do you want Indra's crown? You tell me anything that you want and I will get it for you in a second." The Sun-god said, "No, I don't want anything of that nature. Only one 'guru-dakshina' I need from you. I have a monkey friend. You must become his minister. You must always protect his life." Hanuman said, "Oh? This is only glory for me. I will do it; I will protect him as I would my own life."
Sri Hanuman, without haughty thoughts, simply serving his Lord, he jumped across the sea to Lanka to reclaim Sita Devi (Lord Rama's consort) from the wicked King of the Rakshasas, who, like a dog, steals food from his master's house, stole away Srimati Sita Devi by deceit after tricking the loyal Lakshmana away from Her. In the form of a mendicant, the unscrupulous Ravana approached and took the chastest lady to Lanka, his island of gold. The faithful Hanuman searched the city of Lanka and found Sita in the Ashoka grove. Pure, chaste and in separation from Sri Rama, she waited like a beautiful white lotus surrounded by cruel thorny Rakshasas. Hanuman gave Sita Rama's finger-ring to win her confidence, then allowing his own capture by the Nagastra, snake-rope weapon of Indrajit, then caused havoc to the demons in Lanka by jumping from roof top to roof top, his tail acting as a giant fire lighter. When the whole of Lanka was ablaze he sped back to his Lord.
The Vanaras and bears celebrated Hanuman's return by visiting the honey grove and became intoxicated from the honey. When Sri Rama heard about this, he understood that Hanuman had been successful in finding Sita Devi.
Hanuman lifting the mountain:
A Setu, bridge of floating stones was placed on the sea and the army advanced quickly towards Lanka. Sri Hanuman carried Rama on his shoulders and Angada carried Lakshmana. Hanuman was the pride of all creatures that came to help Sri Rama retrieve Sita from the demon Ravana. After Lakshmana killed Ravana's son Indrajit, Ravana became extremely angry and personally came to attack Sri Rama and the Vanara army. At the sight of this ferocious demon, many of the Vanaras ran, but not Hanuman. Ravana first tried to kill Vibhisana, his pious brother and friend of Sri Rama, but Lakshmana saved his life.
Ravana turned on Lakshmana and knocked him unconscious. Sushena, the great physician, was sent for, to restore Laksmana's life, the sun had not many more hours in the sky, and the Vanaras had to act fast. According to the pastime, if the sun rose the next day without the Vishalya Karani herb brought from the Gandhamadana Mountain in the Himalayas, Lakshmana would die. Sri Hanuman, being blessed by Vayu to move faster than the wind, leaped into the sky and headed north to look for the golden creeper with blue flowers. Ravana saw Hanuman cross the sky and sent for the magician Kalanemi to trick him. Taking the form of a hermit in the Himalayas, Kalanemi tried to have Hanuman eaten by a crocodile, but Hanuman killed the crocodile, freeing an Apsara who had been cursed to remain in that form until Hanuman came. Hanuman then killed Kalanemi and threw him back to Lanka with a flick of his tail. The powerful Ravana, mad with anger summoned the sun god. He ordered him to appear in the sky, even though it was not yet his scheduled time for him to rise. When the sun god mounted his chariot to rise early, Hanuman expanded himself larger than the largest and captured the sun god, chariot, horses and all, and placed them under his arm pit.
As he still hadn't found the herb 'sanjivani', and out of deep attachment, affectionate desperation to save Lakshmana he lifted the whole of Gandhamadana Mountain effortlessly with one hand whilst keeping the sun still locked safely under his other arm, and with a single jump flew through the sky and returned to his Lord Rama. Sushena quickly climbed the mountain found the herb and revived Lakshmana by holding it under his nose. Sri Hanuman then flew with the mountain back to the Himalayas and replaced it where he had found it. The sun still had not risen and everyone was confused. Then Hanuman returned, and resuming his normal size, freed the sun god from under his arm to rise into the sky to start the final day for Ravana. Lord Sri Rama killed Ravana that day, and Ravana's pious brother Vibhisana brought Sita from the Ashoka Grove. She was thin and weak, but in her usual natural elegant beauty, and was now free to join her Rama. Everyone was in ecstasy.
Lord Rama told Hanuman, his greatest devotee, that They Sita and Rama would always stay in his heart, and Hanuman will remain as long as the Ramayana is told.
yavad ramakatham vira srosye 'ham prthivitale
tavat sarire vatsyantu mama prana na samsayah
Hanuman vowed, "O My Lord Rama, O Valiant King, as long as I hear your story told, I will remain in this body for you."
As stated in the Puranas, Hanuman perfected his life in servitude to his Lord and to this day constantly worships Sri Ramachandra in Kimpurusha varsha, Hanumans' 'eternal' abode.
After the Ramayana:
Prayer to Hanuman - for help:
Hanuman Kripa mantra:
Asaadhya Saadhaka Swaamin Asaadhyam Thava Kim Vadha /
Sri Raama Dhootha Krupaa Sindhoh Muth Kaaryam Saadhaya Prabhoh //
"Oh! SrI RAma dhootha! (Hanuman) You are the one who can accomplish the impossible. Come! Tell me! Is there anything that by the mercy of RAma, you cannot accomplish? Oh! Ocean of mercy! My Lord! Kindly make my wishes come true"
Prayer to Hanuman - to find lost things:
SRI HANUMAN MANTRA
WHEN ONE HAS / HAD THE GREAT MISFORTUNE TO HAVE LOST SOMETHING , ONE CAN CHANT THE FOLLOWING MANTRA TO RECLAIM THAT OBJECT :-----
THIS MANTRA WAS CHANTED BY HANUMAN TO RECLAIM LANKA-SITADEVI FROM THE HANDS OF RAVAN, THE ASURA.
TO GAIN ITS SIDDHI ONE SHOULD CHANT THIS MANTRA FOR ONE LAKHA OF TIMES. (When chanting mantras for attaining fruit, it is imperative that one is familiar with the mantra, it's essence / purpose, and meter - so that one may concentrate upon what one wants to achieve.)
HOWEVER BY THE MERCY OF SRI HANUMANJI ALSO ALL THAT IS REQUIRED TO GAIN THE EFFECT OF THIS MANTRA IS TO JUST WITH ATTENTION AND FAITH, CHANT THIS MANTRA THRICE, (THREE TIMES), WHILST FACING THE NORTHERN DIRECTION (Hanuman's Direction) WHILST REMEMBERING HOW HANUMAN RECLAIMED MAYASITA FROM LANKHA FOR HIS BELOVED RAMA.
NAMO STU RAMYA SA LAKSAMANAYA
DEVYAI CA TASYAI JANAK ATMA JAYAI
NAMO STU RUDENDRA YAMA ANILEBHYO
NAMO STU CANDRAYA MARUD GANEBHYAH (X 3 = time three)
If it is to be found He will find it!!!
Sri Hanumat Staavam:
atulita-bala-dhaaman hema shilabha deham
raghupati-priya-bhaktam vataa jaatam namaami
I salute the son of the Wind God (Hanuman), the leader of the monkeys and the messenger of Rama, whose strength in matchless, whose body is like a hill of gold, who burns up the forest of asuras (demons) like a jungle fire, who towers among the spiritually illumined ones, and who is a treasure-house of all virtues.
Salutation to the son of the Wind God (Hanuman), who crossed the ocean as if it were a puddle in the hoof-marks of a calf, who squashed the Rakshasas as if they were mosquitoes, and who by his deeds shines like the central gem in the necklace of the Ramayana.
Anjanai nandanam viram janaki-soka naashanam
kapisha maksahan taaram vande lanka-bhayankaram
I salute the heroic Hanuman, the leader of the monkeys and the son of Anjanai, who is the slayer of (Ravan’s son) Akshkumara, who was a terror to the inhabitants of Lanka, and who assuaged the grief of Sita.
ullanghya sindhoh salilam salilam
yaah shoka vahanim janakat majayah
adayaa tenaiva dadahaa lankam
namaami tam pranjalir-anjaneyam
With palms joined in reverence, I prostrate to the son of Anjanai who leaped across the sea as in sport, removing the fire from Sita’s mind and burning Lanka with that very fire.
manojavam maruta tulyavegam
jitendriyam budhimaatam varishitam
vaatmajam vanaraayutha mukhyam
srirama dhuutam sharanam prapadhye
I bow my head to hanuman, the Wind God’s Son, Messenger of Rama, Leader of the Monkey Army, who is fast as the wind and quick as the mind, who is the master of his senses and most distinguished and wise.
anjaneya mati patalaananam
I meditate on the son of the Wind God and Anjanai, whose face is deep red in complexion, whose body is as fascinating as a mountain of gold, and whose favorite resort is the base of the Parijata tree.
yatra yatra raghunaatha-kirtanam
tatra tatra krta masta kaanjalim
baspa vaari paripurna-locanam
maarutim naamata rakshas-antakam
GUIDELINES FOR HANUMAN DEVOTEE
Being part of the online group of Jaishrihanuman.org, we should strive to live in a way that reflects our devotion to Lord Hanuman.
Following are a few suggestions you can follow.
• Remember Him always
• Read Hanuman Chalisa Everyday. Suggested times: As soon as you wake up, during prayer time, before going to sleep
• Visit Hanuman Temple at least once a week. Suggested days: Tuesday, Saturday or any other day as per your convenience
• Pray to Lord Sriram. Nothing pleases Lord Hanuman more than a prayer to Lord Sriram.
• Offer Bananas after prayer as Prasad.
• Offer Tulasi leaves while doing Archana
• Offer a garland made out of Betel leaves to Lord Hanuman
• Offer Vadas once in a while
• Read Hanuman Chalisa 100 times as suggested by Saint Tulsidas when you want your desires to be fulfilled.
• Understand meaning of Hanuman Chalisa word for word and remember it while chanting
• Teach Hanuman Chalisa to children
• Make donations to Hanuman temples so that they can be maintained well and more devotees can find solace.
• Form a group of devotees if possible and chant Hanuman Chalisa in a house or at temple
• Focus on one form of God till your faith becomes ripe. Do not waver from one form of God to another. Pray to Lord Hanuman till He blesses you with His Grace.
• Fast on Tuesdays or eat less on Tuesdays
• Practice “Silence”: Suggested frequency: Once a month
• Print or Distribute booklets of Hanuman Chalisa
• Donate audio or video material of Hanuman to others when opportunity comes
• Make donations to needy and thank God for giving an opportunity to serve the needy.
• Read Sundarakanda
• Read Ramayana
• Wear a ring or necklace of Lord Hanuman.
• Be a devoted devotee of Lord Hanuman
• Be good and do well. Aim to practice values embodied by Lord Hanuman. When in doubt pray to Him for guidance.
• Develop mutual respect for others. Show tolerance to people who pray to other forms of God or practice other religions.
• Keep cleanliness
• Be Thankful for what you have and try to be content with what you possess.
• Remember He is always protecting you.
People should rejoice being in your company. That is a reflection of your spiritual progress and that you are devoted to Lord Hanuman.
Above all Lord Hanuman will be there in close proximity once we chant HIS beloved hymn: Sri Ramajeyam ;
Jai Sri Ram.........