Saturday, November 15, 2014
Students modeled exemplary teamwork as they worked in teams of eight to construct a mini model of the city of Mecca--the origins of the religion of Islam--with the mosque as its focal point. Each team of eight or nine was responsible for a different aspect of Islam including the mosque (Kabah, minaret, muezzin), trade (bazaar), spread of Islam (Muhammad, caliphs, conquest), and geography (Bedouin campsites). Students began the activity with in-depth research and note-taking using Edmodo, where Miss Lukins had posted a variety of pictures, photos, web site links, a flythrough 3D video of the Kabah, a video of Muslims praying, and even MP3 music of a muezzin singing the call to prayer! Then, students sketched a "blueprint" of their piece of the model in preparation for building. Finally, students used their creativity to construct their piece of Mecca using art supplies, paper, paper plates/cups, and more! Students worked together to make their pieces come together to recreate their version of this important city to Muslims. Students then shared their creations at a class "Mecca Museum" in which students became "curators" and taught each other, while taking notes on "Unpacking Cultures" (systems, honor and beliefs, geography, and tools & technology). Below you will see pictures of the process and finished products and reflections! Enjoy!
Posted by Monique at 2:01 PM
Wednesday, November 5, 2014
In the spirit of Halloween, students researched a "legendary creature" and wrote a report in an online presentation format of their choice (Prezi, ThingLink, MovieMaker, Weebly website, etc.). Students were challenged to explain and include citations for these 5 categories: Description/Symbolism of creature, Origins, Comparison to other legendary creatures, Connections to the culture/country from which it came, and Modern Use of that creature today. Then, students shared their creature reports online through Edmodo and read at least 5 other students' reports. From each creature report, they gleaned one creature feature to create their own "supercreature," which they explained the "discovery" of in an informative news article. Enjoy the creepy and creative creature presentations below (click on images)!
Posted by Monique at 7:28 PM