The first week of this course introduces the students into multiple techniques
for jewelry design, jewelry making and repairing.
During the weeks that follow, you will complete tasks that will allow you to
repair and restore the pieces that you create. From
repairing chains, making rings, ring sizing, soldering settings, setting stones,
replacing prongs, installing clasps, plating as well as basic jewelry
assembly and designing. This class was designed with the hobbyist in mind
and for those who are already in the business and want to obtain education to
prepare for the Jewelers of America 1st level of certification.
precious metals: Platinum, Gold, and Silver.
Learn how to obtain the different Karats and Colors of
FTC rules and
regulations, Trading of precious metals. Units of weight.
Testing of metals:
hands-on. Learn how to use acid testing techniques for separating the different
karats of metal. Metals and oxidation.
Handling of shop
sweeps, fillings and scraps for maximum recovery.
Preparation and cleaning of metals for soldering. Soldering is immediately
introduced into the program. Students practice a wide variety of exercises
and filing: explanation and practice for the making of nameplates. Hand made
letters, piercing. Designing theory. Layout. Completion and finishing
of bails and jump rings. Using round nose pliers and dowels. Single production
and mass production. Methods explained and practiced.
and assemble a solitaire ring. Making of a shank. Preparation of a finding.
Attachment of setting.
Practice of single and multiple ring sizing. Hardening and annealing techniques
explained and applied. Rings sizing of rings with stones, channel set and with
low tolerance heat.
multiple stones: Multiple exercises in rings: sizing rings up, down and
re-shank of finished jewelry. Setting and tightening stones
replacement: Replacement of shanks in single rings. Shank replacement in
wedding engagement rings.
Gold melting and
milling: explanation and adjustment of the torch. Use of mold for making
ingots. Use of the rolling mill for producing metal wires and plates.
Chains: Learn to make bracelets and chains starting from an idea. Replacing
end caps. Installation and replacement of spring rings and lobster claws.
Practice on fixing different types of chains. Curb link, box link, rope, figaro,
anchor, s link.
bezel project: students make a bezel by utilizing the sweat soldering
technique. This bezel is worked into a custom made pendant in which the student
has to hand fabricate the décor and bail. The bezel setting technique is also
taught and practiced.
plates, initials: learn the proper techniques to apply designs to plates.
You will create a project in which you will learn to plan, make, properly
prepare and solder identification initials.
Techniques for setting stones in different setting styles. Replacement of
existing stones. Learn to provide a seat for round stones. Prong setting.
procedures: Working with hollow jewelry, general explanation of jewelry
repairs. Findings, tools and other supplies and suppliers. Repair friendly and
Castings: Introduction and explanation of castings and the most common tools
used for finishing the pieces.
Rough castings will
be cleaned, sanded, pre finished and polished ready for final delivery.
and hinges: Explanation of inner workings of clasps.
Making of hinges for
bracelets. Mechanics and placement of a figure 8. Final assembly and high luster
polishing for final presentation and delivery to the customer.
Practice for fixing, soldering and placing posts, creating a pair of earrings.
Hollow bangle, different repairs to be performed: Fixing dents, installing a
safety chain. The student will learn how to solder a jump ring unto a hollow
ball. Different ways of fixing a hollow bracelet or necklace will be practiced
and a box clasp will be installed
This bracelet will be constructed by making a plate, attaching it to a chain
using tubing and installing a hidden clasp and figure 8. The student will then
learn the best way to solder initials on top of an identification plate.
Use of forming and shaping dies. Die cutting. Hollow earring project.
Installation of posts.
on watchbands and batteries replacement.
Cleaning, electro stripping and plating with rhodium, copper, nickel and/or
gold, will be explained. Plating demonstrated.
stone ring: Practical demonstration to size rings with semi precious stones
without removal of the stones.
T-bar CZ studs:
T-bars. Assembly and replacement of posts. Stone setting with stud vise.
Solder bail onto a setting and set stone. Repair bail with stone in place.
Exercises for prong replacement and re-tipping.
Polishing: Finishing and marking jewelry in preparation for polishing.
Polishing techniques, common tools, tumblers, chemicals and general use of
equipment. Polishing with tripoli and rouge. Finishes and Textures.
Ultrasonic and steam