Almost everything around the world can be eaten. Everything is fast food due to busy schedules and rush deadlines. People now can’t afford to prepare well the food that is why they are contented to what is just served for them in all the fast food chains. It is very convenient that is why people are keeping on buying those instant food.
For the benefit of all people to know, not all food are healthy. We have eaten almost everyday food that should not be eaten. Food that are junk and waste are we put inside our body. What health benefit can we get from that? Certainly none. What we can get from those junk food is disease or even cancer.
In order to be healthy and live longer, we should be careful in what we are eating. We should always eat those healthy food – those without preservatives and additives. Those food that were prepared well.
There are five foods that we should not eat. First, we should not eat processed meat like hotdogs, bacon, meat loaf, and other canned meat. These food have so much preservatives in it that if taken always will surely affect your health. Just like for example, the hotdog has toxins that when eaten for even just one piece will take the body seven days to wash it away. Imagine how hard it is for the body to take it? How much more if you are eating it every day.
Another food that we should not eat as much as possible are sweeteners. These are artificial and is very harmful to the body. It destroys our taste buds and we could have diabetes in the future. These sweeteners are much sweeter and has much more sugar than the real one. So, let us never use sweeteners.
The third food that we should not eat is Soda. This kind of food can be detrimental to a life of a person. It contains chemicals and so many sugar that can kill anyone. One can of Soda is like a can of water with 10 packs of sugar in it. The recommended amount of daily sugar for women is about 24 grams and soda has way more than that. It is always better to drink water. No preservatives, very safe.
Another one, is those food with “low-fat” or “diet”. It doesn’t really mean that they have low calories. It actually has more sugar, salts, preservatives and unhealthy fillers just to make it taste okay. Diet food like yogurts are not good for the health.
The last one is Margarine. This food is rich in trans-fat that is not very good for the health. It increases bad cholesterol and decreases good cholesterol. As a result, you will have a high risk for heart problems and diabetes. Most people think that margarine is far better than butter. They are all wrong. It is the other way around. So never use margarine.
All these five food should be avoided as much as possible. It will bring no good to your body. It will only bring death to you. For more information on food that should not be eaten, check this website, http://enjoydistrict.com.