Knee Instability Exercises
Knee instability is most often caused by an injury, such as a tear or sprain, to your leg muscles and tendons. The knee uses the muscles in your thighs and calves to provide stability, so strengthening those muscles is key to stabilizing your knees. Use a combination of strength training and cardiovascular workouts to keep your knees stable and help prevent injuries.
Dynamic stretching before your workout is key to getting the large muscles in your legs ready to stabilize your knee as it flexes. Use leg swings to warm up the front and back of your thighs -- your quadriceps and hamstrings -- by swinging one leg at a time forward and backward in a full range of motion. Hold on to a chair for stability. Change the motion to work your inner and outer thighs by swinging your leg side to side in front of your other leg. Stretch your calf by putting your hands and toes on the floor with your hips in the air, forming an upside-down "V" with your body. Cross one foot behind the other with both legs straight, then lower and lift the heel of your foot that's touching the floor. Repeat with the other foot. Perform each stretch for 30 seconds per leg.
A knee injury doesn't mean you must cease your cardiovascular workouts, but it could mean a change in your exercise choices. High-impact options such as running and jumping rope aren't a good idea when your knee is unstable. Instead, choose low-impact exercises such as swimming, walking or cycling. An elliptical is another option that gives you full range of motion forward and backward without high impact. Do at least 30 minutes of cardio work three to five times per week.
Building strength in the muscles that support your knees is critical to increasing knee stability. Start out without weights, then add weight slowly to build strength. Stick to two sets of 10 repetitions. Use single-leg raises, where you're seated with your feet down and you lift one leg at a time parallel to the floor. Lie on your stomach and pull your feet in toward your buttocks for hamstring curls, or perform low-impact butt kicks where you stand with your feet hip-width apart and lift one leg at a time backward toward your buttocks. Don't jump as part of the exercise; keep one foot planted on the floor at all times. Use proper form with side lunges, as improper form can do more harm than good to your knees. Step to the side with your extended leg straight and your other knee bent to 90 degrees. Make sure the knee stays above the toe to prevent injury.
Although knee braces are often used to provide stability during exercise, the National Institutes of Health says braces are controversial. Designed to increase stability, they often create a false sense of security that the knee injury is repaired. Braces should not be used as a substitute for building strong leg muscles to support knee flexion.
- Creatas Images/Creatas/Getty Images