Send the link below via email or IMCopy
Present to your audienceStart remote presentation
- Invited audience members will follow you as you navigate and present
- People invited to a presentation do not need a Prezi account
- This link expires 10 minutes after you close the presentation
- A maximum of 30 users can follow your presentation
- Learn more about this feature in our knowledge base article
Do you really want to delete this prezi?
Neither you, nor the coeditors you shared it with will be able to recover it again.
Make your likes visible on Facebook?
You can change this under Settings & Account at any time.
Transcript of Untitled Prezi
Media Literacy is being involved in educational programs for school children and college students.
Studies show media literacy lessons incorporated with standard curriculum can help reduce potentially harmful effects of T.V. violence on young viewers.
studies have also concluded that media literacy
interventions can help high risk youth develop
more responsible decision making skills in their
Evidence shows the power of student conversation as a stimulus that supports both reading and writing competencies. Sharing ideas helps young people develop a sense of social responsibility. It’s a creative way to engage and promote real world digital media skills.
People who are media literate can:
Think critically about what they hear, see, and read in social media and advertising. They can also reduce issues like eating disorders, aggressions, drug use, and antisocial behaviors.
The Ability to access, evaluate, analyze, and communicate in variety of forms.
Credible score: 75 average
The information on the topic was thorough.
The information will be useful for our curriculum/student interest.
Information was accurate and obvious.
Author was identified.
Correct use of grammar and spelling.
The page fulfilled its intended purpose.
Contact information: Phone and address
Link 2: http://kaiserfamilyfoundation.files.wordpress.com/2013/01/key-facts-media-literacy.pdf
Credible score: 85
Information is useful to our curriculum/student interest.
Information was thorough, obvious, and accurate.
Good grammar and spelling
Author is clearly identified
Published by known and trustworthy source.
There is contact information: phone, fax, address, and site.