BC: WWII Ends the Great Depression | American factories were producing so many materials for war that it resulted in an economic boom. The unemployment percentage fell from 14.6% in 1940 to 1.2% in 1944. In this way, World War II effectively put an end to the Great Depression.
FC: World War II
1: Countries The following are the countries that were involved in WWII | Axis Nations: Germany Japan Italy By the end of the war, there were very few countries that were not tied in to one side in some way. | Allied Nations: Britain China France The United States Soviet Union Canada Australia
2: Despite FDR's determination to stay out of the war, the United States eventually was forced to enter World War II when Japan led an air assault on Pearl Harbor, Hawaii on the morning of December 7, 1941. Nearly 2,500 servicemen were killed and the whole US Pacific fleet was decimated. On December 8, 1941, the US officially joined in the conflict. It was not until August 14, 1945 when the US Force finalized actions in the war. | Why the US Entered the War
3: The spread of militarism and nationalism across Europe after World War I was the beginning of how World War II began. There were poor economic conditions in these nations after the Great Depression. These intense situations contributed to the start of WWII. | The first battle of WWII is generally thought to be the German invasion of Poland. This led to Britain and France going to war. Other countries then followed. | How the War Started
4: Although many weapons used in WWII were some of the same as in WWI, there were many advances in technology that allowed countries to develop new weapons that had never been used in battle before. | Among the weapons used were ships, rockets, aircraft, vehicles, artillery and new expansions in chemical, atomic, and biological weapons. In just six years, there had been new developments in jet aircraft and ballistic missiles. | During the war, the US undertook the Manhattan Project, which was the effort to quickly produce the first atomic bomb. With the help of European scientists, the US did create the bomb, and eventually dropped two on the Japanese cities of Hiroshima and Nagasaki. | Weaponry
5: Rosie the Riveter | Rosie the Riveter was a famous symbol of patriotic female defense workers. It was intended to inspire women to take the jobs normally held by men who were now fighting in the war. Many women left their homes to join the workforce and provided the necessary materials for the US to progress in the war. | In four years, the amount of working women rose by about six million.