friend in Blue
Posted in the Los Angeles Forum
#1 Jul 21, 2013
Dear Friends in Law Enforcement,
What exactly do the words “Racial Pride” mean to the men and women of law enforcement? The term “Racial Pride” can be referred to as being proud of one’s own heritage, customs, and ancestry. Or it could be taken out of context and can be portrayed as a “blemish or dark spot” to one’s own ethnic background, customs and or beliefs, because of their heritage. Today, we see the term used by many minority groups in our country as describing their own cultural achievements and the hardships that were endured by their race so that they could enjoy the freedoms that our country has given every immigrant that came to the United States in search of a better way of life. It can also be used as a word known as “tradition” in which a race of people continue to practice the beliefs and customs of their ancestors such as the Native Americans, in which Indian Reservations have their own tribal law, sovereignty from the government,(To a certain extent) and the freedom to conduct themselves in the way that their fore-fathers once did.
Today, we have minority groups that promote their own race and fight for equality in work environments, government, and sports. African Americans in sports, have their own Black Coaches Association. In law enforcement, they have the Black Police Officers Association, in government and politics; they have the NAACP,(National Association for the Advancement of Colored People) etc. We see Latino groups, Asian groups, Arab groups, etc. with similar organizations, but what about a White organization? That today, is a blasphemous word because it’s usually considered prejudice against all minorities in this country. But considering the above statements, why is it a “Dirty Word” to say that you’re proud to be White and that you would like to have your own organization that celebrates the achievements of the White race?
If the above organizations are considered acceptable to the general public, then why not have a White Entertainment Television Network, a White Coaches Association, etc.? I believe that the sum of the problem can be associated with one word …History. The White person has been stereotyped as being prejudiced, uncaring, and even barbaric in some cases. So why do minorities continue to blame the White race for the majority of the injustices that were done in our country? We could all speculate on the answer, but I believe that its pretty clear…we’re still the majority in America, but maybe not for long.
Today, White law enforcement officers unfortunately, are between a rock and a hard spot. Black officers can freely join the Black Police Officers Association without being called prejudiced, but White officers cannot join an organization devoted entirely to White Race without being called racist. Is it a crime to be proud of your heritage? Contrary to what many minority groups say about the Ku Klux Klan, I can tell you from first hand experience that these accusations are false when referring to The Knights.
Having been a police officer for the past 13 years, I have seen the injustices that officers face on an everyday basis. I have been on the call where I was called a “racist” because I was doing my duty while arresting a member of the minority community for selling drugs. I’ve been spit on and called the lowest form of life because I wear a badge and have taken an oath to uphold the law without bias, to the best of my ability. Like you, I’ve encountered the problems on the street and have enforced the laws that have been twisted by the judicial interpretation of our judges and legislature, in order to meet the rights and needs of criminals instead of the law abiding citizens in our country.
I like many other white Americans, are being made to feel guilty everyday because we are white. This is why The Knights Party is fighting for the rights of white Americans and would like to see Christian values brought back to our country. The Knight’s are not racists or out to
#2 Jul 21, 2013
Knights of the Ku Klux Klan Party? Go back to Europe if you can't handle murica cracker.
#3 Jul 21, 2013
Blow it out your ass, Boy.
#4 Jul 21, 2013
If there really is a larger amount of whites on welfare than blacks ( And I Doubt It) It's because blacks make up 13% of the American population. That means there is by far more white people than blacks. But still blacks are the majority in our prisons and jails, and the majority sucking off the government tit. So you can go spill your BS to someone that is dumb enough to believe it.
#5 Jul 21, 2013
As I see it, the leadership problem is hampering our movement!
By using the phrase “leadership problem” I do not mean to infer that we have a problem with our leaders. Far from it. I firmly believe that we have the finest leadership possible.
The leadership problem that I speak of is that our leaders are being worked to death. Instead of being left alone to do their job, which is to act as public spokesmen and women, and to formulate plans of resistance, they are expected to act as recruiting agents, fund raisers, writers, office staff and in short are being bogged down by having to attend to every tiny detail concerned with every action we take.
What ever happened to the private soldier? It is the private soldier who should be distributing literature, writing letters to the editor of daily newspapers, making contacts with other patriots, working to set up units, preparing rally sites, setting up meetings, etc.
While it must be admitted that we need a constant program of leadership training to insure that someone is always ready to assume command when needed, our primary problem is that the movement has only a tiny faction of private soldiers who have no desire for public recognition or command, and who will dedicate their lives to the loyal support of those who have been called to lead.
While every army must have its Generals, the Generals can do nothing without the private soldier, for the General can only initiate the action. But it is the private soldier who has the responsibility of making sure the action is a success.
While the movement is putting 20 leaders on the street with 10 private soldiers marching behind them, it will never accomplish much of anything. When the day comes that the public can see 10 leaders marching down the street with a thousand private soldiers marching behind them, the whole world will take notice and follow.
The secret of the success of Nathan Bedford Forrest and other great leaders of history is this. True they were great leaders, BUT they had thousands of great followers. The smaller and less successful organizations will merge with the larger and more successful one. The Knights represent just such an organization and that is why we never have to resort to attacking other groups or leaders. We are the best and our standards and professionalism speaks for itself.
It is not my intention to suggest that everyone give up their organization and flock to another. I merely suggest that the leaders of all groups look about them and honestly determine if they could be more successful by channeling their time and finances into one. There are many soldiers who are trying to be leaders and as a result the over all White resistance movement is fragmented and is less effective. The excellent leaders we have could be more effective if the soldiers would recognize they are soldiers and get behind those who have proven leadership ability.
Actually, I have discovered that being a private soldier or klansman/klanswoman gives me a lot of benefits. The satisfaction of knowing that someone is out there doing the unglamorous, time consuming and boring work which keeps our movement going is one of them. In addition, not being in the limelight gives me job security. Therefore my tithes to our cause can continue uninterrupted, and our tithes are almost as important as our work.
So in my opinion, the foot soldier is the one who will ultimately win this war. So a foot soldier I have chosen to be and a foot soldier I will remain.
#6 Jul 21, 2013
We be outbreeding you. That is how we gots Obama elected twice. Crackers thinks they knows everything.
#7 Jul 21, 2013
Most importantly we be getting the Hispandex to vote our way. Even George Zimmerman was a registered Democrat and local minority leader.
#8 Jul 22, 2013
Tray-tray, I'm banging your opportunistic mama up her butt now!!
#9 Jul 25, 2013
As long as she is tripping on cough syrup and Skittles pretty much anybody can get in her shit chute.
#10 Jul 25, 2013
Stupid white trash.
Add your comments below
|One of the LAPD cruisers allegedly stolen by ca...||2 hr||Bad Boy||2|
|6-21-17 Murders hit record high in Mexico||3 hr||America||3|
|Hundreds of Thousands Attend in Women's March i...||7 hr||god ofuranus||76|
|The 25 Most Dangerous Cities in the U.S. Are Mo... (Nov '10)||Jun 19||Fitus T Bluster||20,945|
|Sweet Cat Welcomes His Soldier Dad Home||Jun 18||Ann||1|
|Marilyn Monroe's estate stolen from her Sun ger...||Jun 18||Lawyer||1|
|Beyond Oscars' glare, a glimpse of women on the...||Jun 17||AmPieJam UncleSam||6|
Find what you want!
Search Los Angeles Forum Now
Copyright © 2017 Topix LLC