The newly released Majestic-12 briefing document (“Assessment of the Situation”) contains much information about the beginning of diplomatic relations between the US government and human looking extraterrestrial visitors that began after the famed 1948 Aztec flying saucer incident. Part one of this series discussed the document’s content explaining how a surviving adult alien from the Aztec landing began the diplomatic process, and left behind three extraterrestrial infants brought to our world to stay as a goodwill gesture.
The information revealed in the leaked briefing document can be compared to what is publicly known about the Aztec landing. If a high degree of consistency is found in the comparison, it will help build confidence that the briefing document is based on factual information, which was part of a 1989 classified briefing prepared by the Defense Intelligence Agency for the Office of the President.
The first to write about the Aztec case was the author Frank Scully, a highly respected journalist, who wrote a book in 1950 based on what he had been told by two sources, an alleged scientist Dr. Gee (a pseudonym used by a local radio and television parts owner later revealed to be Leo A. GeBauer) and Newton Silas (a well-known oil prospector). Scully’s book,Behind the Flying Saucers, quickly became a national best seller with his account of the “first landing” of a flying saucer in 1948.
[Dr Gee] was the man who told us the whole story of the first flying saucer that had landed in the United States… Two telescopes caught this unidentified ship as it came into our atmosphere. They watched its position and estimated where it would land. Within a few hours after it landed, Air Force officers reached the flying field at Durango, Colorado, and took off in their search for the object. When they found it, it was in a very rocky, high plateau territory, east of Aztec, New Mexico. … (Behind the Flying Saucers, pp. 138-39)
Note that Scully was talking about a “controlled landing”, not a flying saucer crash as reported for the Roswell incident which had received world-wide media coverage after the initial U.S. Army Air Force Press Release on July 8, 1947.
The Majestic-12 briefing document similarly refers to a “controlled landing” in the vicinity of Aztec that occurred on March 25, 1948:
The controlled landing occurred in a small desert canyon on the private grazing land of a local farmer and rancher… about 12.2 miles northeast of Aztec New Mexico. The ship was determined to be 99.983 feet in diameter. (“Assessment of the Situation“, p. C-1-of-10)
Regarding the diameter of the flying saucer, Scully gave the following information:
The overall dimensions of the ship were found to be a faction short of 100 feet in diameter. To be exact it measured 99.99/100 feet wide. [Behind the Flying Saucers, p. 138-39]
Remarkably, Scully’s precise measurement of the diameter of the flying saucer craft that had landed matches the 1989 briefing document’s report on the size and nature of the landing.
Scully revealed important details about the scientific team sent to investigate the flying saucer:
Dr. Gee and seven of his group of magnetic scientists were called in to examine this strange ship. When they arrived on the ground they decided that the best thing to do was not to touch it or try to get into it. They studied the ship from a distance for a matter of two days, bombing it with Geiger counters, cosmic rays, and other protective devices. [Behind the Flying Saucers,, p. 138-39]..Read More at Exopolitics