The first stage of a tadpole's life is within a tiny egg. Depending on how you are raising your tadpoles, you may or may not see this stage. Many people purchase their tadpoles on the internet or collect them as tadpoles from a local pond. In both of these cases they are already past the egg stage and into the free-swimming tadpole stage.
Still, it's good to know where these tadpoles first began. The mom frog laid out eggs, and then the father fertilized them. Just like human being eggs, the frog eggs start as one, single cell. That cell then divides into two. Soon the two cells divide into four. The four cells divide into eight. The little tadpole gets larger and larger. Still, all of this is very tiny and not something that a normal person can see with their eyes. You'd need a microscope to make out what is going on at this point.
The important parts here, if you are indeed raising tadpoles from the egg stage, is to make sure the temperature, pH, and light are all at good levels. Give a normal day-night light cycle. Keep the temperature around 71F and stable. Keep the pH around 7. You want the environment of the egg to be as calm, quiet, and stress-free as possible. Tadpole eggs are incredibly sensitive to vibration. They often think vibration means a predator is attacking, and will hatch prematurely to free it. So avoid any shocks or bumps.
You might see a little wriggling inside the egg as the tadpole develops muscles, but the real fun begins when the tadpole finally bursts its way free from the egg and begins swimming around its environment. It is at this point that the tadpole parent - you! - begins to interact with and care for your tadpole in a meaningful fashion.
Tadpole Care Feeding and Raising - What do Tadpoles Eat and Need to Thrive?
Frogs and Toads in Sutton Massachusetts
|Tadpole Care and Feeding|
This step by step manual helps ensure that your little tadpoles grow up to be happy, healthy frogs. From choosing the tank to designing the menu, from checking the pH to adjusting the temperature, I'll ensure your cute, tiny balls of energy grow up into a joyful friend.
Animals and Birds in Sutton Massachusetts
Sutton Massachusetts Photo Collection
|Tweets by @suttonmass||SuttonMass|