It looks like you're using an Ad Blocker.
Please white-list or disable AboveTopSecret.com in your ad-blocking tool.
Some features of ATS will be disabled while you continue to use an ad-blocker.
So Perseus went to the cave of the Graeae. The Graeae were strange women, there were three of them having only one eye for all three of them which they constantly fought over. Perseus hid behind some bushes and watched them.
When one took out the eye to give to another Perseus sprang from his hiding place and snatched the eye from them. Then he said, "I have your eye and if you don't tell me how to find the Nymphs of the North you shall never have it back!" So they reluctantly told them how to find the Nymphs of the North. He gave them back their eye and flew off on his winged sandals.
Thy crown does sear mine eye-balls. And thy hair,
Thou other gold-bound brow, is like the first.
A third is like the former. Filthy hags!
Why do you show me this? A fourth! Start, eyes!
What, will the line stretch out to the crack of doom?
Actually this is the way to read a soul,or better said the devil is reading your soul and of course in this way he can take it.
Originally posted by windword
reply to post by piequal3because14
And you shouldn't preach that inner blindness is a virtue.
edit on 31-10-2012 by windword because: (no reason given)
Matt 6:22 The light of the body is the eye: if therefore thine eye be single, thy whole body shall be full of light. (King James Version)
To modern day translators, the single eye makes no sense unless you are a yogi and practice meditation.
I once asked a Greek scholar about the verse and he said it was a figurative expression like "knee-high to a grasshopper". He said the expression means "to be without folds." In other words, "If thine eye be without folds,…"
In Mejda, p.283, Paramahansa Yogananda’s brother, Sananda Lal Ghosh, writes of a discourse Yogananda made on the Kutastha, the Spiritual Eye:
"It is surrounded by luminous rays, and protected by two powerful forces, avarana (a veil-like power) and vikshepa (a scattering power). As the devotee tries to concentrate on this manifestation, it vanishes: vikshepa deflects his gaze and scatters his attention; and avarana casts a veil of delusion over his perception."
So when we "penetrate the darkness of closed eyes" by the practice of Kriya Yoga, the veil and the scattering powers are diminished and our spiritual vision is "without folds" or "folded together" as the Greek text of Jesus’ saying records.
For a more extensive commentary on the Spiritual Eye by Paramahansa Yogananda see: The Bhagavad Gita: God Talks With Arjuna, Chapter VI: Verse 13, p. 610-612
Originally posted by piequal3because14
reply to post by windword
I don't preach anything.
And you shouldn't preach that inner blindness is a virtue
"virtues are for those who consider faith a virtue"
"If you see through the eyes of a child you might see those mistakes because a child can see 'the unreal and the unseen' the real one as he is like an Angel here on Earth".
Faith is "confusing reality with the unreal and the unseen".
"Seeing" is believing.
Not as I had ever seen her before, but dressed in her new school uniform, with her hair in neat bunches.
She opened the gates, and for a few seconds I hesitated, wondering if I should continue. Ruby stepped through the gates and waited for me. 'Mummy, come to me.' With that command I stepped through, and Ruby flashed me a triumphant smile. Then she swung the iron gates violently with all her strength, and as they banged shut, I felt my whole body jump. This was the point, I am convinced, that my pulse started beating again. I left the white tunnel as quickly as I had been sucked in
Meanwhile, I was being wheeled back to the ward. A few hours later, my husband came to see me, bringing a special gift - a picture of Ruby taken earlier outside the school.
When I saw it I froze. Ruby had her hair in bunches and was dressed in her new uniform - exactly as I had seen her in the tunnel..