Basically the idea of the game is to get the little man to
safety byclicking on different parts of the picture in the
I ran the lesson.
1. All students had a computer. I directed them to the ‘Hapland’
here http://homepage.ntlworld.com/rallen/hapland.swf I
asked the students to play it for two minutes. Then I elicited
their opinions, did they think it was a good game? Would they
2. Now I handed out the instructions (below) . They had to
read carefully following these to complete the game. I
encouraged them to help each other.
a) Open all the windows and turn the red
b) Open the hatch on the right, click the
yellow arrow to get a man out.
c) Click on the man to fire one round
in the low position to drop the bridge down.
d) Click the cannon to move it up. Fire
the second round up at the bell and click the spear thing so
it goes the other way JUST after the round hits the bell
e) Fire the next two rounds at the bridge,
but click the bridge to as they hit it to knock them in the
air and explode without causing damage.
f) Click the light bulb a few
times next to the man at the bottom to get him to smash it.
g) Fire the last round in the low position,
and the bottom man will pick it up and open the door with it.
h) Now click the man by the machine so he
gets in it, and click the yellow arrow to get another guy out,
get him to fire the other man up at the bell.
i) The man by the bell will
move the tower over if you click him. Then click the spear
thing. Now keep clicking the bell till it falls. No more land
j) Click the door
in the bottom left so the man comes out and JUST as he goes
in the door on the right, click the man at the bottom. A dog
tries to chase him, but the falling concrete stops it.
k) You did it!
How was it
- students generated a lot of natural language when trying
to help each other. ‘What do I do?’ ‘You don’t do it like that’
‘How do you do that again? etc. This kind of helping language
is really useful, asking for clarification or explaining is
also vital in speaking English is a real context. Maybe I should
have made that more the focus of this lesson.
- They really had to read the instructions to be able to complete
the game. It was a good test of their comprehension skills.
- some people don’t like video games and without my help and
explanation might have confused this task with- ‘having a bit
of a laugh’.
- it was just too hard for some of the students although they
were encouraged to ask for help from other students.