Language Activities for Kindergarten – Grade 2
Activities To Do at Home
Use literature to enhance language skills.
Choose books of interest to read to your child and each page or paragraph (depending on the age of your child) ask comprehension questions, such as who, what, where, where, why, and how. If they are having problems answering the questions, model what a “where” answer sounds like; add information to your child’s answers.
Ask your child to re-tell books or chapters by saying “now you tell me the story in your own words.” If this is difficult for your child, chunk the book or chapter and every couple of pages ask them, “tell me what’s happened so I understand.” Read a variety of fiction and non-fiction books to your child. This will help in them in later grades when they read textbooks in science and social studies, when they read for factual information, and when they learn research methods.
Play categorization games with your child. For example, name as many animals, sports, colors, etc., as you can. Teach your child what to do and say if they don’t know an answer. Start by asking them what they do know if they answer, “I don’t know.”
Play same/different games with your child. State two items, for example. popsicle and ice cream cone; ask how the two items are the same and different.
If your child uses incorrect grammar structures, “I gotted a A on my project,” model the correct grammar by saying, “Oh, you got an A on your project.”
If your child uses non-specific words during stories or explanations, (for example, "We went there and got the stuff for the thing,”) you can label the non-specific words as “words that don’t tell us much," or as "garbage words." Model for them how to be more specific. Example: “Your class went to the library to get books for the read-a-thon,” now you tell me again.
You can practice sequencing with your child by cutting out newspaper funnies, or cartoons. After you read them have your child put them in the correct order and tell the story. Encourage them to use terms such as, first, second, third, and then, next, last. Practice sequencing with your child by using a real life situation such as, “tell me how to make a peanut butter and jelly sandwich.”