Pedal cars for children first appeared in the late 1880s, when Karl Benz introduced his three-wheel Patent Motorwagen for adults. By the early 1900s, pedal cars were widespread, especially in the United States, England, France, and Australia.
One of the first companies to make three-wheel velocipedes for children was Whitney Reed, whose wooden horse pulling a sulky is a classic of the early form—the horse’s jointed legs moved when the operator pushed the pedals. Because automobiles are the main type of pedal toy sought by collectors, pedal toys like the early Whitney Reeds can be surprisingly easy to acquire.
Around the same time, Butler Brothers was making “Juvenile Steel Automobiles,” which is how the company described the pedal cars in its catalog. These cars had sheet-steel bodies...
Before the war, the Bon Marché in Paris had been selling pedal cars designed after Grand Prix Peugeots. After the war, French toy maker Eureka continued this trend, making pedal cars fashioned after Peugeots, as well as Renaults and the Citroen Rosalie.
The U.K.’s Lines Bros offered its customers 30 pedal cars in its 1937/38 catalog, from the basic Prince, which was designed for 2-to-4-year olds, to the Electric Rolls, which had a wooden body and a 12-volt electric motor driving the rear axle. Naturally the car had working brakes and headlights, real Dunlop tires (including a spare), and chrome-plated rims. As for its performance, it could travel 12 to 15 miles on a single charge and had a top speed of 5 mph.
The heyday for pedal cars in the United States occurred between the World Wars. For example, pedal cars were fixtures in Sears catalogs. Unfortunately, they could only be sent to customers who lived near railroad tracks because mailing a steel car, even a small one, was simply not possible. Other companies that made pedal cars in the ’20s and ’30s included American National Automobiles of Toledo and Steelcraft of Murray, both based in Ohio.
Among other products, Steelcraft made GMC pedal trucks, as well as Mack dumptrucks, Model T Roadsters, Dodge Runabouts, and a Chrysler Roadster, which had bullet-shaped headlights and rubber tires. Steelcraft’s Chrysler was 50-inches long, and could be yours for only $31.50.
Today these prices sound cheap, but the toys were not cheaply made. In fact, they were often as lavishly detailed as the real things. The steel was typically enameled to ensure rich colors, while pedals were adjustable to give young drivers a comfortable ride. Like the cars that adults drove, models ranged from economy (Whippet) to luxury (Studebaker). On the better models, steering wheels and other solid parts were custom cast.
After World War II, the J-40 (or Junior Forty) made by Lines Bros. in Wales by retired miners and modeled after the 1949 Austin A-40 was probably the most popular pedal car in England. In the 1950s, the company offered 33 pressed-steel-body pedal cars, its heavily chromed Tri-ang Centurian being the top of the line.
By the early 1960s, the company experimented with novelty cars such as the Noddy, which was like a small go-kart, but as the decade progressed it reverted back to pedal cars based on real automobiles such as the MG Midget.
Pedal cars were also popular in Australia. In fact, they have such a rich history there that the government recently issued a series of toy-theme stamps, including one with a red Cyclops pedal car from 1953. Though based in Australia, many of Cyclops’s pedal car designs were based on U.S. models and manufacturers, from Buick and Chevrolet, to Pontiac and Packard.
Interviews & Articles
It looks like a Vespa, but... Mork is a recent visitor to Show & Tell, and this visitor's first contribution reads as follow… [more]
Everyone is always looking for the next big thing. In the 1960s, it was going into space. In the '40s and '50s, the frontier was t… [more]
I got interested in show rods as a boy in the late 1960s. We all built models back then. There was no Nintendo and only three or f… [more]
I used to have a huge collection of diecast 1/43rd-scale Dinky Toys, Corgi Toys, and things like that. I had so many that it got t… [more]
Ron Sturgeon: I had an automotive repair shop in about 1976 and spent a lot of time repairing Mercedes. About 1979 I decided to st… [more]
Best of the Web (“Hall of Fame”)
DFW Elite Toy Museum
Museum of Childhood
Race Car Toys And Automobilia
The Show Room
VW Toys and Models
Other Great Reference Sites
Top eBay Auctions
Recent News: Pedal Cars
Source: Google News
Ala man making upscale toy tractors for collectorsGadsden Times, June 18th
For example, Turner said he never saw a pedal car when he was a kid in the 1950s, and there wasn't even anywhere to buy one in Gadsden. "We were poor, but I didn't know we were poor," Turner said. "Everyone around me was in the same shape we were ...Read more
Small-town Ohio police chief's blunt Facebook style produces 57000 'likes'Syracuse.com (blog), June 18th
A photo showed an officer spraying police pedal car that a youngster had brought to the department's fund-raising car wash. Noted Oliver: Matthew, who is at the younger person speech age, wanted his car washed . . . so Officers Pettit, Diehl and...Read more
Go-Kart Porsche Pedal CarPursuitist, June 17th
Even kids have a need for speed and style. Welcome to the Go-Kart Porsche Pedal Car, designed by the Porsche Design Studio specifically for children ages 5-8 (maximum riding weight is 110 lb). The Porsche Go-Kart features a sturdy metal frame and the ...Read more
Junk car inspires pedal car grand prix dreamBournemouth Echo, June 17th
CULLED from old tables and various bicycle parts, this is Hamworthy Bike Club's entry in the New Milton Pedal Car Grand Prix. Built over the last few months by the enthusiastic Poole youngsters, helped by adult volunteers, the pedal car will be...Read more
Porsche Pedal CarEuropean Car Magazine, June 14th
This is either for the father who wants his kids to have the best or who has given up on ever owning the real thing! The latest product from the Porsche Driver's Selection is this pedal car that puts kids from five or older behind the wheel of a...Read more
Porsche Brings the Kid Out of Us with $900 Pedal Go-Kart, BMW Targets Race ...Carscoops (blog), June 14th
Lacking a driving license shouldn't be a reason not to drive a Porsche, right? This is what the German carmaker thought when it launched the newest item from the Porsche Driver's Selection, a pedal go-kart that can be driven by children from the age of...Read more
Pedal car fun in NetheravonSalisbury Journal, May 29th
Pedal car fun in Netheravon. 8:13am Wednesday 29th May 2013 in News By Morwenna Blake. Pedal car fun in Netheravon. PEDAL cars raced around Netheravon on Monday in the village's second pedal car grand prix. The event was first held last year as ...Read more
Chinese-Canadian family 'Rick Cycles' through Kincardine enroute to VancouverShoreline Beacon, May 21st
A Chinese-Canadian trio from London made their way through Kincardine en route to Vancouver on a pedal car, in a journey they expect will take months to cross Canada. Sean Ma, his daughter Sherry and wife Emily Jiang were suited up in rain jackets as ...Read more