The Timeline Of The Middle Ages By Nelly
Created by nellys on Sep 17, 2008
Last updated: 11/16/09 at 04:02 PM
Middle Ages Timeline has no followers yet. Be the first one to follow.
In Wittenberg Martin Luther posted his 95 theses on the door of the Catholic Church. Martin Luther was concerned about certain practices in the Catholic Church such as the selling of indulgences to free the soul from torture. Martin Luther wrote them because he wanted to correct what he saw in the churchs mistakes.
The Sistine Chapel was located in the Vatican City, in Rome. It took a bit over 4 years to paint. It is and was one of Romes most popular chapels maily because of its interior design.
John Calvin was born in the 16th century. He was born in Nyon, Switzerland, he studied at the University of Paris where he studied theology. He started Calvinsm which was an approach to the Christian life which drawed attention to the rule of God over all things.
Columbus departed on his first voyage from the port of Palos in southern Spain, on August 3, in command of three ships: the Niña, the Pinta and the Santa Maria.
Copernicus studying the night sky was how astronomy was invented. If he hadnt started those studies then right now people wouldnt know how to read the night sky.
Raphael was born on April 6th in Urbino, Italy.
The workshop was located in Florence, Italy. It was the centre of the intellectual currents in Florence. It was where he tought himslef and learnt the things that made him a very smart man. Like he learnt humanities, engineering and how to paint there.
The inventor of the Printing Press was Johannes Gutenberg. The Printing Press was a machine that transfers lettering or images by contact with various forms of inked surface onto paper or similar material fed into it in various ways The device is used for printing many copies of a text on paper.
Gutenberg was born in the 15 century in Mainz, Germany.
The Plague began because these fleas which had a disease clinged onto rats in the Roman Empire and then the ras carried the disease. Since back then rats were common to see on the streets people were in close contact with them so the fleas went onto them and people got the disease. This time during the Empire was called the "Black Death".
The Crusades ended because the Pope lost the support of the Lords, who had the power of the wars. Their wars were not successfull in the long run and so it ended with a Peace Declaration.
The Crusades were battles that were fought to defend religion.
That rule that the Pope can be judged by no one was apart of the Canon Law and since the Pope was the Bishop of the First See there was no one that had the authority to judge him. Therefore no one had the legal right to determine whether or not the Pope had been excluded himself from the Church.
William The Conqueror was crowned and during his reign he faught in the Battle of Hastings, he saw change in the English Laws and also he made changes to English vocabulary.
William The Conqueror led the Norman side and King Harold II ruled the English side. It took place on the 14th of October. The Battle began when King Edward III died and left no heir in charge, so the council eventually decided that and adult in the council was going to be crowned. Two adults werent happy, Harald Hardrada of Scandinavia and William The Conqueror of Normady so they joined forces,planned and attacked a battle against England to change the King. England was out numbered and weakened by Willliam.
The Church split into two when Pope Leo IX and Patriach Michael I they were excluded from the church. There were 5 leaders of the church and one of them was the Pope and he tried to control all the other Metropolitans and they didnt accept so the churchs split up.
Charlemagne did amazing things for his empire. He helped them survive through many wars. That is why when he died his empire was very sad. Everyone loved him but the relationship between him and his daughters was awful. He did not want them to marry so they had many affaires with different men. And then one of the daughters had a child even though she wasnt married so when their father died they were banished from the court by their brother.
Charlemagne led his empire through countless amount of wars during his reign. He launched a 30-year campaign that conquered and Christianized the unreligious Saxons in the north.
The Fall Of Rome happened because the Romans had trade decline, there was less loyalty to their leaders and also the wealthy and emperors were not following the rules of the taxes. The nature also brought the plague and drought to the Roman Empire.