Doctor insights on:
Causes Of Scleral Icterus
It doesn't : The yellow discoloration is just more visible against the white back drop of the sclera. ...Read more
Jaundice is the accumulation in the body of bilirubin. Normally it is excreted by the liver, via the bile. For a lot of different reasons, sometimes the bilirubin can accumulate. The most common reasons are a problem with the liver or the bile duct. This can make the skin and/or the whites of the eyes turn yellow. If this occurs, see your ...Read more
Icterus: When red blood cells break down they release bilirubin. This bilirubin is filtered out by the body's coffee filter, the liver. If the liver is not working well or too many red blood cells are breaking down (as with sickle cell), the bilirubin builds up and turns the skin and whites if the eyes yellow. This yellow discoloration is easier seen in the eyes since there is no pigment for masking, . ...Read more
I drink 10 glass water daily and have no jaundice.My skin is dry how can I get white sclera easily?
Yellow pigmentation: Some people will get increased pigmentation of the sclera and conjunctiva (white of the eyes) as they age. A yellowish benign growth called a "pinguecula" can appear at either side of the colored part of the eye. Sometimes these can be raised and inflamed as well. Usually they do not require treatment. Any new pigmented place on the eye should be checked by an eye doctor. ...Read moreSee 1 more doctor answer
Inconsistent stool looks like normal but in it contains black pebbles like. i was cured by jaundice in childhood still have my sclera yellow?
See a doctor: I am not sure of what caused your jaundice in childhood but if you still have yellow sclera that is clearly not normal. You should see a doctor and have some liver tests. The inconsistent stool may or may not be related to that. Make sure you drink lots of water, be active with exercise and eat a diet that has fruits and vegetables to provide adequate fiber to help regulate your stool ...Read more
I am a girl of 22.I have no jaundice. Idrink a lot of water of 10 glass daily and balanced diet and take exercise .My sclera are lyellowish.Whiten sc?
See doc: If the whites of your eyes are yellowish but your skin is not, and this is new, you may have a slight rise in your bilirubin. This may be due to a variety of conditions including early liver or blood disease. There are benign causes such as gilbert's disease, but the other more serious possibilities require laboratory evaluation. ...Read more
Im 20 and i got yellowish sclera and dark circle around pupil and few brown spots in my eyes. Im sure im not affected by jaundice. can u reason me??
See your doctor: Yellow sclera often means jaudice. Usually the urine would be dark. You may have hepatitis.Blood and other liver diseases can cause it also. The brown spots may be pigment in the conjunctiva of the eyes if you have dark skin. This would be normal and not related. See a doctor as soon as you can. ...Read more
I gave birth to a beautiful baby girl.She is 41 days old now.She was born cesarian surgery.Her weight at birth was 2 and half kilos. She had jaundice which was physiological jaundice and now shes fine but still her sclera is yellowish in colour.Is that so
No worries: Bring that up with your pediatrician. What is yellowish to you may not be actual yellow. To your doctor...May be a reflection of genetics or melanin content. Your pediatrician can reassure you by seeing it. Many newborns have yellowish color until about a month old..She is a bit older so it would be helpful to have her seen. It most likely just a bit prolonged in clearing. ...Read more
Breakdown of cells: Jaundice is caused by collection of bilirubin in the skin and conjunctivae. Bilirubin is the breakdown product of red blood cells. An excess of bilirubin may be caused by excessive breakdown of rbc, inability of the liver to either pick up, metabolize or appropriately excrete the bilirubin. There may also be obstruction to the flow of bile from the liver. ...Read more
Work backs up : Before delivery mom's body extracts all waste products from baby & allows babies organs to grow & function at minimal levels. At birth, the work switches to baby who must process & recycle hemoglobin from fetus blood so it can be used in regular blood.If there is extra bruising at delivery or a blood incompatibility, there is more work to do. The backup produces the jaundice. ...Read moreSee 1 more doctor answer