Send the link below via email or IMCopy
Present to your audienceStart remote presentation
- Invited audience members will follow you as you navigate and present
- People invited to a presentation do not need a Prezi account
- This link expires 10 minutes after you close the presentation
- A maximum of 30 users can follow your presentation
- Learn more about this feature in our knowledge base article
Do you really want to delete this prezi?
Neither you, nor the coeditors you shared it with will be able to recover it again.
Make your likes visible on Facebook?
You can change this under Settings & Account at any time.
The "mix" of Colors on Correlated Cardboard
Transcript of The "mix" of Colors on Correlated Cardboard
1 circle made from correlated cardboard
a piece of string
Blue, red, and yellow markers or coloring materials for coloring the layout of the color wheel
Three different sized circles to trace The "mix" of Colors on Correlated Cardboard Question Hypothesis Experiment done By Allison Inge and Alexandria Harman
Prezi By: Allison Inge #622
I.D. #622 and #619 The students think that the reason the colors "mix" is because of the speed that the circle is spinning and the order in which the colors are. Procedure Results Conclusion The two students first tried using
regular cardboard. They learned that that did not work. They then made three circles in a piece of correlated cardboard. They then drew a line through the circles They then colored the circles a specific way which is shown above. Next, they cut the larger circle out. They then poked a whole in the middle of the circle and put in the string. In the end they spun the circle and pulled it tight. Some students completed an experiment to see why colors mix on a color wheel made of correlated cardboard. The students wanted to see what makes the colors "mix". Why do the colors on the cardboard wheel seem to "mix" when it is spun? When the students began to spin the cardboard in a circular motion the noticed that the colors began to look like they were mixing. They also noticed that the colors didn't mix unless it spun at a quick speed. They figured out that the colors look like they are mixing due to the layout of the colors and the speed of the moving cardboard circle. The two students learned that you have to have the correlated cardboard. After, they fixed their mistake they learned
that this experiment DID work. It did
not work if the speed was too slow or
the colors were not in the specific order.
That proved their hypothesis. They enjoyed this experiment and encourage others to try it.