Lesson Plans and Worksheets
Browse by Subject
Alaska Teacher Resources
Find teacher approved Alaska educational resource ideas and activities
Make connections with past history and current events with this critical thinking exercise. Kids read background information relating to Alaska's statehood as well as information on oil drilling and Alaska's economy. They put it all together to answer several critical thinking and opinion-based questions.
Ask your young researchers to create a state brochure by working together to research Alaska and then use facts they have learned from the novel Woodsong to create a travel brochure about Alaska. Pupils must include a bibliography and use exciting and interesting language. Tip: This is a great intro for state reports.
In this books activity, students complete seven multiple choice questions about the book, "Alaska." These questions contain concepts such as choosing the correct author, who published the book, when it was on the New York Times best seller list, popularity of other books at the same time, and more.
Students examine the benefits and the challenges Alaska has presented to the United States. They research what the government and the people of the United States considered at the time of the purchase of Alaska in order to debate the issue. For the debate, they assume roles of actual public figures from the period.
Students explore the unique population of Alaska. In this Native people of Alaska lesson plan, students discover the three groups of people who live in Alaska. Students describe the similiarities and differences between the three groups. Students also design their own Native art.
High schoolers discover the contributions of 3 Alaskan leaders. In this Alaska history lesson, students research the leaders Nathaniel Bowditch, Ki'ianaa'ahu'ula, and Elizabeth Peratrovich. High schoolers present their findings through drama and discuss how they can apply the leadership skills each of the leaders possessed to their own lives.
Students read about the creation of a football program at a small-town school in Alaska. In this current events lesson, the teacher introduces the article with a map and vocabulary activity, then students read the news report and participate in a think-pair-share discussion. Lesson includes interdisciplinary follow-up activities.