This is an image of the Mars '98 spacecraft being prepared for launch.
Click on image for full size
An Overview of the Mars '98 mission
News story originally written on April 24, 1998
The countdown has started for the Mars '98 mission. Only 230 days until the launch of the Mars Orbiter! Here are the details!
The Mars '98 mission will study weather and the surface itself at the Martian south pole. Mars '98 is to build on the discoveries of the Mars Pathfinder and Mars Global Surveyor missions by digging into the Martian surface in search of water.
The south pole of Mars is an important region because of the unusual types of land there, including icy ground and giant sand dunes.
Mars '98 consists of two spacecraft. The first one is a lander called the Martian Polar Lander. This one will land on the surface of Mars and dig into the soil with a robot arm. The second one will remain in orbit around Mars. This one is called the Martian Climate Orbiter.
The search for water, and the findings from that search will help answer questions about climate processes in general, and the Terrestrial and Martian climates in particular.
Shop Windows to the Universe Science Store!
Our online store
includes issues of NESTA's quarterly journal, The Earth Scientist
, full of classroom activities on different topics in Earth and space science, ranging from seismology
, rocks and minerals
, and Earth system science
You might also be interested in:
The goal of the Mars Pathfinder (MPF) mission was to analyze the rocks and soil of Mars. The MPF was actually 2 parts, a lander and a rover. The lander stayed right where it landed while the rover named...more
The Mariner 7 spacecraft took the first pictures of the South Pole of Mars. The south polar region is part of the highlands of Mars. The southern highlands of Mars are mostly old, cratered terrain and...more
It was another exciting and frustrating year for the space science program. It seemed that every step forward led to one backwards. Either way, NASA led the way to a great century of discovery. Unfortunately,...more
The Space Shuttle Discovery lifted off from Kennedy Space Center on October 29th at 2:19 p.m. EST. The weather was great as Discovery took 8 1/2 minutes to reach orbit. This was the United States' 123rd...more
A moon was discovered orbiting the asteroid, Eugenia. This is only the second time in history that a satellite has been seen circling an asteroid. A special mirror allowed scientists to find the moon...more
Will Russia ever put the service module for the International Space Station in space? NASA officials want an answer from the Russian government. The necessary service module is currently waiting to be...more
A coronal mass ejection (CME) happened on the Sun early last month. The material that was thrown out from this explosion passed the ACE spacecraft. The SWICS instrument on ACE has produced a new and very...more