The Buildings Of
One of the keys to obtaining a true understanding of The Book of Mormon is to know what kind of buildings the people made and lived in.
The predominant mindset of Book of Mormon scholars is that Book of Mormon events occurred in Mesoamerica, in buildings made of stone, which remain to this day. The Book of Mormon however says that their buildings were primarily made of wood, and that they were destroyed by fire.
- Nephi Taught Wood Working
- Houses, Cities, Temples, Synagogues, & Sanctuaries Were Made of Wood
- Wicked King Noah Built With Wood
- Zarahemla Was Made of Wood and Destroyed
- Other Cities Were Burned
- No Evidence Remains
- As can be seen from the foregoing accounts, the buildings of The Book of Mormon bear no resemblance to the buildings found in Mesoamerica.
Nephi Taught Wood Working
15 And I did teach my people to build buildings, and to work in all manner of wood, and of iron, and of copper, and of brass, and of steel, and of gold, and of silver, and of precious ores, which were in great abundance. (2 Nephi 5)
Houses, Cities, Temples, Synagogues, & Sanctuaries Were Made of Wood
9 they did suffer whatsoever tree should spring up upon the face of the land that it should grow up, that in time they might have timber to build their houses, yea, their cities, and their temples, and their synagogues, and their sanctuaries, and all manner of their buildings. (Helaman 3)
As can be seen from the foregoing accounts, the buildings of The Book of Mormon bear no resemblance to the buildings of Mesoamerica.
Wicked King Noah Built With Wood
8 And it came to pass that king Noah built many elegant and spacious buildings; and he ornamented them with fine work of wood, and of all manner of precious things, of gold, and of silver, and of iron, and of brass, and of ziff, and of copper;
9 And he also built him a spacious palace, and a throne in the midst thereof, all of which was of fine wood and was ornamented with gold and silver and with precious things.
10 And he also caused that his workmen should work all manner of fine work within the walls of the temple, of fine wood, and of copper, and of brass. (Mosiah 11)
Zarahemla Was Made of Wood and Destroyed
The largest city in The Book of Mormon was made of wood and destroyed by fire:
3 Behold, that great city Zarahemla have I burned with fire, and the inhabitants thereof. (3 Nephi 9)
Other Cities Were Burned
9 And behold, that great city Jacobugath, which was inhabited by the people of king Jacob, have I caused to be burned with fire because of their sins and their wickedness…
10 And behold, the city of Laman, and the city of Josh, and the city of Gad, and the city of Kishkumen, have I caused to be burned with fire, and the inhabitants thereof, because of their wickedness. (3 Nephi 9)
No Evidence Remains
Prior to the final battle when the followers of Christ were wiped out, they were all gathered in to the Land of Cumorah. As they left their homes and cities behind, the Lamanites burned them:
5 And it came to pass that whatsoever lands we had passed by, and the inhabitants thereof were not gathered in, were destroyed by the Lamanites, and their towns, and villages, and cities were burned with fire; (Mormon 5)