What is 4G LTE Really?
What is 4G LTE really? Are the 4G and LTE synonyms? Find the answers to these questions and much more about the 4G mobile broadband. 4G, the fourth generation of cellular networks, is based on the LTE – Long Term Evolution Technology.
Billions of people, in almost every corner of the world, are using the mobile wireless technology every day. The most of them don’t know much about the 3G, 4G and LTE. In this article you can find the basics about the 4G LTE technology. If you want to learn more, you will also find the references for deeper and more detailed knowledge of the latest wireless mobile networks.
Before starting with the 4G mobile broadband and LTE technology, let’s first find out the basics about the 3G mobile internet.
What is 3G?
3G, the third generation of the mobile networks, include different mobile broadband technologies. All following technologies can be called the 3G mobile internet:
Learn more about what is 3G and different 3G technologies and 3G speed in the post What is 3G? Compare 3G Speed and 4G Speed.
After learning about the 3G, it is time to finally answer what is 4G LTE. 4G means the fourth generation of the mobile wireless networks. 4G LTE is the newest cellular network technology, which enables higher speeds of the mobile wireless internet on your cell phones.
What is 4G LTE?
You have already learned here that few different technologies are called 3G. The situation with the 4G is quite different. When we talk about the 4G, in most cases it is 4G LTE. LTE – Long Term Evolution technology is dominant 4G technology.
Both 3G and 4G have its own advantages. Is the 4G LTE always a better option than the 3G mobile internet? Read more about the differences between these two mobile wireless technologies in 3G vs 4G – What is a Better Mobile Internet Connection.
4G wireless internet, with the speeds even to 150 Mbps, is the fastest mobile internet service. There are different types of 4G devices like:
- Mobile phones,
- Machine to machine,
More about what is 4G, 4G wireless internet and 4G devices you can find in the post 4G Wireless Internet – How to get the Mobile Internet Access with 4G.
What is 4G LTE Network?
The LTE or Long Term Evolution enables you very fast mobile internet connection. The theoretical greatest speed is up to 150 Mbps. In real networks, where more users are connected to the same eNodeB, the speeds are lower. The maximum 4G speed varies from the operator to operator.
LTE, unlike 3G and 2G, is full IP technology. The 4G LTE mobile network consists of two parts:
- LTE Radio Access Network or LTE RAN
- EPC or Evolved Packet Core
Learn more about what is 4G LTE radio architecture and LTE features in the post LTE Technology – Basic Architecture of the 4G Mobile Internet Access.
The latest version of the LTE is called LTE Advanced. Find out more about the LTE advanced, the new functionalities and which mobile operators are using this new technology in the article LTE Advanced – the Latest Mobile Broadband Internet Access Technology.
What is 4G WiMAX?
To be honest, there is also one technology which can be called 4G. It is WiMAX or to be more precise WiMAX2. What is WiMAX? WiMAX – Worldwide Interoperability for Microwave Access, is Wireless MAN (Metropolitan Area Networks) technology, which supports high speeds in big geographic areas.
More about what is WiMAX, how it works, WiMAX components and different kinds of services, you can read in the post What is WiMAX and How WiMAX Works.
Comparison between different 4G technologies you can read in the WiMAX vs LTE – What is a Better 4G Technology.
What is 4G – the Conclusion
Here you find out what is 4G LTE and what are the LTE networks are. LTE, the latest mobile internet access technology, introduces a lot of new features and possibilities for the users of different cellular terminals. Beside 4G LTE networks on the market, there is also one quite different technology available. The name of this, wireless mobile technology, is a WiMAX – Worldwide Interoperability for Microwave Access.
What is 4G and much more read in the article 4G and LTE: everything you need to know.