S: The Civil Rights Movement
FC: The Civil Rights Movement | "I am - Somebody. I may be poor, but I am - Somebody! I may be on welfare, but I am - Somebody! I may be uneducated, but I am - Somebody! I must be, I’m God’s child. I must be respected and protected. I am black and I am beautiful! I am - Somebody! Soul Power!" - Jesse Jackson
1: Civil Rights Movement In My Opinion | I believe the civil rights movement didn't start with Rosa Parks and the bus boycott. I don't believe that she was the reason it started, although she did play a huge role in it. There was more to the civil rights movement than people think. This will be explained in my project.
2: Civil Rights Movement | The civil rights movement was a struggle by African Americans in the mid-1950s to late 1960s to achieve rights equal to Whites Americans, including equality in education, employment, housing, access to public places, the right to vote, and being free of all racial discrimination.
4: Thurgood Marshall | * He led a civil rights movement in the 20th century that the changed the views of American society* | * He ended legal segregation in the United States. He won the supreme court votes by getting rid of the color line in housing, transportation, and voting. All of that had changed American life in just the first half of the century* | *He succeeded in creating new laws for women, children, prisoners, and the homeless.
5: A child born to a Black mother in a state like Mississippi... has exactly the same rights as a white baby born to the wealthiest person in the United States. It's not true, but I challenge anyone to say it is not a goal worth working for. Thurgood Marshall
6: Thurgood Marshall cont. | He won the most important legal case of the century,which was the Brown vs. Board of Education. It ended legal separation of black and white children in public schools. The success of the Brown Case started the civil rights movement, and led to the increased number of black students who graduated from high school and college
7: His work has defined the movement of relationships between different races throughout the century. Blacks and Whites have interacted together ever since as well as other races.
8: She refused to give up her seat for a white man and was arrested, charged with, and convicted of civil disobedience. | Rosa Parks
9: What Rosa Parks did on the Montgomery bus made her an internationally recognized person of the civil rights movement. she started interacting with some of the other most famous civil rights activists, including Martin Luther King, Jr. Many of her actions helped him to gain a strong presence in the nation, and help keep the civil rights movement moving forward. | I believe one of the reasons we still speak of Rosa Parks besides her role in the civil rights movement is because of how well known she is for the role that she played in the civil rights movement. What she did was stronger and braver than anyone else's actions during the civil rights movement. She stood up for what she believed in and that's what had the most effect during the movement, and what everyone else remembers her as today.
10: 'The mother of the modern day civil rights movement' | Rosa Parks cont.
11: I believe Rosa Parks would not be well known today if she wouldn't have refused to give up her seat on the Montgomery bus, as well as her choice leading to consequences that affected both her and her family. Rosa was arrested, mistreated, lost her job, and became a public figure that people would look upon as a person being either looked to for inspiration, or spat on to make an example of. | Rosa Parks inspired more than just change during the civil rights movement. She also wrote an autobiography in 1992, It was focused towards the youth today. She inspired many to stand up for their beliefs, and understand the face that one person can make a difference.
12: When you look at your life, the greatest happinesses are family happinesses. ~Joyce Brothers | These 9 African American students were involved in the desegregation of Little Rock Central High School in 1957. This was a crisis in which colored students were banned from entering the secluding school.
13: The Little Rock Nine | On the first day of school, troops from the Arkansas national guard would not let the 9 students enter the school and they were forced to leave followed by mobs.
14: When you look at your life, the greatest happinesses are family happinesses. ~Joyce Brothers | On May 17th 1954, the U.S supreme court made it known that all laws involving secluding schools were to now be unconstitutional and it called for the desegregation of all schools throughout the nation.
15: The Little Rock Nine | On May 24th 1954, the Little Rock board approved to let black students attend that school. By 1957 the NAACP had registered 9 Blacks to attend Little Rock High School.
16: The Famous People Of The Little Rock Nine | Jefferson Thomas | He graduated from Little Rock High in 1960, After school he became an accountant with the U.S. Department of Defense and lived in Anaheim, Calif. | Famous People Of The Little Rock Nine
17: Dr. Terrence Roberts | Elizabeth Eckford | Elizabeth became a journalist through the U.S Army. In 1974, she returned to the home she grew up in and then became a part-time social worker and mother of two boys. | After a year at Little Rock High, his family moved to Los Angeles where he finished high school. He earned a doctor degree and taught at the University of California.
18: The Famous People Of The Little Rock Nine | Thelma Mothershed - Wair She graduated from college, then became a teacher. She moved to Belleville, Illinois, where she became a volunteer in a program for abused women.
19: Carlotta Walls Lanier She was one of only three of the nine who eventually graduated from Little Rock High. Carlotta and Jefferson Thomas returned for their senior year in 1959. She graduated from Michigan State University and moved to Englewood, Colorado where she became a real estate. | Melba Pattillo Beals She became an author and former journalist for People magazine and NBC and moved to San Francisco.
20: The Jim Crow laws were state and local laws in the United States between 1876 and 1965. They assigned racial segregation in all public places in the southern states of America, with a"separate but equal" status for African Americans. The separation led to a number of economic, educational and social disadvantages for White Americans.
21: Some examples of Jim Crow laws are the segregation of public schools, public places, and public transportation, and the segregation of restrooms, restaurants, and drinking fountains for whites and blacks. The U.S. military was also segregated. | Whites were the same as Blacks in all important ways, including intelligence, humanity, and social behavior. Although sexual relations between Blacks and Whites would produce a mixed race, that was thought to destroy America. Treating Blacks as equals would encourage interracial sexual mixes. | Jim Crow Laws
22: "One of the first things I think young people...should learn how to do is see for yourself and listen for yourself and think for yourself." | Malcolm X was a protester who argued that African Americans will never be equal in a society full of whites. He always encouraged blacks to fight back and stand up for who they are and what they believe in.
23: The Nation of Islam disagreed with Malcolm's idea that Blacks would earn their rights and that he would even consider violence as a way of getting the freedom they wanted. The nation also believed he was making Blacks too public and did not feel comfortable with the rumors surrounding his nation. | "All Over the world, it is young people who are actually involving themselves in the struggle to eliminate oppression and exploitation. They are the ones who most quickly identify with the struggle and the necessity to eliminate the conditions that exist." -Malcom X
24: A Disgrace To The Race Elizabeth Eckford and the Little Rock Nine | stories came from Eyes On The Prize by Juan Williams
25: It was the first day of school and Elizabeth was getting off the bus headed towards Central High as she saw mobs of white people as well as armed soldiers. All black students were told to come through the school by using the main entrance, and the guards would help them from there. As she made her way to the school, the mob began following her, calling her names, and spitting on her. When she got to the front of the school next to the guards, they didn't move. Moments later, that same guard let a few white students pass through. As she tried pushing through the guards, they shoved her back and called for a lynching. Instead of standing up for what Elizabeth believed in, and fighting for her rights, she ran away from her problem and never tried fixing it to gain her own rights that she deserved.
26: A Disgrace To The Race The Freedom Rides | stories came from Eyes On The Prize by Juan Williams
27: * The purpose of the Freedom Rides was to challenge the laws of division between blacks and whites through public transportation. *The Freedom Rides was a desegregation transportation system that traveled in the South for blacks. * During the first few days of the ride, riders experienced little confusion and beatings Over the next few weeks riders experienced several beatings.
28: A Disgrace To The Race Freedom Rides cont. | stories came from Eyes On The Prize by Juan Williams
29: After a bus burning in Alabama, CORE (congress of racial equality) Leaders realized that the violence and torture done to these people was sending America the wrong message. The trip continued with reinforcements. The group traveled from Birmingham to Montgomery with no 'accidents' but as they arrived in Montgomery, they were attacked by a mob of over 1000 whites. As they continued to Mississippi, they went through more jail terms and beatings. Through all of this, it encountered more publicity and inspired more Freedom Rides.
30: SO WHAT ABOUT TODAY..? | I believe we still see the civil rights movement in many ways today. Especially with same sex marriage. Back in 1996, when the Defense of Marriage Act was signed, only 25% of Americans supported gay marriage.
31: To me, same sex marriage is a civil rights, political, social, and religious issue in many nations. Conflicts started over whether same sex couples should be allowed to marry and be required to use a different status such as a civil union, I believe this is wrong to do. People are people. They should not be given another name because they are attracted to the same sex.
32: CITES | http://www.infoplease.com/spot/bhmheroes1.html http://www.centralhigh57.org/The_Little_Rock_Nine.html http://www.thurgoodmarshall.com/home.htm http://www.malcolmx.com/about/bio.html http://www.nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/peace/laureates/1964/king-bio.html http://www.jimcrowhistory.org/ http://www.biography.com/people/rosa-parks-9433715 http://faculty.smu.edu/dsimon/Change-Civ%20Rts.html
33: Eyes On The Prize by: Juan Williams The Help by: Kathryn Stockett