Are Fish Stocks Overexploited?
The EU is currently adopting measures to recover hake and Norway lobster stocks to sustainable levels within a period of ten years. Many national and international initiatives are targeting a sustainable management of fish stocks all over the world. What is the state of fish production worldwide?
The United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) has produced recently a scientific consensus report on the state of the world’s fishery resources. The report was drafted by high-level experts across the world. It analyses the use and trade of fishery products as well as the international management of fish stocks, and provides an overview of the global fishing and aquaculture production.
The report states that fish catches are indeed stagnating while aquaculture is expanding faster than any other animal-based food sector. The combined production has increased by 30% since 1995.
According to the report, the current state of fishery resources and their ecosystems requires prompt management decisions. It states that 25% of the world’s fisheries are overexploited or depleted, while an additional 50% are fully exploited, leaving little room for further increases in catches.
Furthermore, the report conveys growing concerns with regard to safeguarding the livelihoods of fishers as well as the sustainability of both commercial catches and the aquatic ecosystem from which they are extracted. It recommends assessing the interactions of fisheries with habitats, land-based activities, and climate change.
FAO report summarised by GreenFacts
GreenFacts has faithfully summarised the FAOs "State of the World Fisheries and Aquaculture" and published it in its reader-friendly Three-Level Structure of increasing detail at http://www.greenfacts.org/fisheries/.
Dr. Serge Garcia, Director of the Fishery Resources Division at FAOs Fisheries Department, reviewed the GreenFacts summaries and stated: "The GreenFacts Study on Fisheries reflects, in an accessible language, the essential findings of the FAO report. I am convinced that it will help raise awareness about the issues faced by the fisheries and aquaculture sector and wish to warmly congratulate GreenFacts for this very useful initiative."
Some of the questions answered by this GreenFacts Study include:
- What is the state of fishery resources?
- How are fishery products used?
- What contaminants are affecting fisheries?
- How are fisheries regulated?
Manuel Carmona Yebra | alfa
The most recent press releases about innovation >>>
Die letzten 5 Focus-News des innovations-reports im Überblick:
An international team of scientists has proposed a new multi-disciplinary approach in which an array of new technologies will allow us to map biodiversity and the risks that wildlife is facing at the scale of whole landscapes. The findings are published in Nature Ecology and Evolution. This international research is led by the Kunming Institute of Zoology from China, University of East Anglia, University of Leicester and the Leibniz Institute for Zoo and Wildlife Research.
Using a combination of satellite and ground data, the team proposes that it is now possible to map biodiversity with an accuracy that has not been previously...
Heatwaves in the Arctic, longer periods of vegetation in Europe, severe floods in West Africa – starting in 2021, scientists want to explore the emissions of the greenhouse gas methane with the German-French satellite MERLIN. This is made possible by a new robust laser system of the Fraunhofer Institute for Laser Technology ILT in Aachen, which achieves unprecedented measurement accuracy.
Methane is primarily the result of the decomposition of organic matter. The gas has a 25 times greater warming potential than carbon dioxide, but is not as...
Hydrogen is regarded as the energy source of the future: It is produced with solar power and can be used to generate heat and electricity in fuel cells. Empa researchers have now succeeded in decoding the movement of hydrogen ions in crystals – a key step towards more efficient energy conversion in the hydrogen industry of tomorrow.
As charge carriers, electrons and ions play the leading role in electrochemical energy storage devices and converters such as batteries and fuel cells. Proton...
Scientists from the Excellence Cluster Universe at the Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität Munich have establised "Cosmowebportal", a unique data centre for cosmological simulations located at the Leibniz Supercomputing Centre (LRZ) of the Bavarian Academy of Sciences. The complete results of a series of large hydrodynamical cosmological simulations are available, with data volumes typically exceeding several hundred terabytes. Scientists worldwide can interactively explore these complex simulations via a web interface and directly access the results.
With current telescopes, scientists can observe our Universe’s galaxies and galaxy clusters and their distribution along an invisible cosmic web. From the...
Temperature measurements possible even on the smallest scale / Molecular ruby for use in material sciences, biology, and medicine
Chemists at Johannes Gutenberg University Mainz (JGU) in cooperation with researchers of the German Federal Institute for Materials Research and Testing (BAM)...