The Age of the Entrepreneur – 13
1. Entrepreneurs build fun businesses. They love doing what has never been done before. They go against conventional wisdom and swim against the current. Their reward is the fun, the thrill of creating something new.
2. Entrepreneurs are responsibility for protecting our freedom. They don’t believe in laboring just to pay their bills. They create value and wealth; the progress in a society.
3. Entrepreneurs leave the comfort and security to find an adventure. They find their comfort in creating new businesses and create work for others. The hamster wheel is not appealing to them. They drop out of school and corporations to chase their dreams.
4. Entrepreneurs use common sense. They are malleable like water. They seek all paths at the same time so they can arrive and develop new grounds. They use common sense. Common sense is no longer common. Read this headline - “In first-of-its-kind study, MSU researchers found that workplace negativity can hurt productivity.” Wow! I wonder how much was spent to fund this one-of-its-kind study. Amazing how far we have gone. No wonder we are losing our competitive edge! Entrepreneurs will have a field day in the education field. A leadership revolution in needed in education.
5. Entrepreneurs visualize all possible solutions. They choose to believe before they see. They are masters of mental creation. They create pictures of the perfect solutions and keep chasing them until they become reality in the physical world.
6. Entrepreneurs take time to see the possibilities birthed from their beliefs. They know that in the hamster wheel there is not enough time for their brain to regenerate energy and make time for new creations.
7. Entrepreneurs know when to abandon the ship. They know when the time comes to give up the ship they are on and move onward to something new and more exciting. They realize that a ladder leaning against the wrong wall will not take them where they want to go. They know when to abandon the blind persistence of climbing the corporate ladder for creative persistence in climbing a ladder with no ceiling.
Thank you for reading and reflecting on today’s nuggets. Share them with others.
We make a living by what we get; we make a life by what we give. Be a giver in a world of takers.
Be blessed and be a blessing to others.
Carlos Fontana, President of Phalanx
Co-author of the book Follow to Lead (The 7 Principles to Being a Great Follower)
Author of the book PRICELESS (Sixty-Six Simple Stories of Reflection, Love, and Legacy