Meditation is a very ancient practice and is extremely beneficial for anyone with Mental Health issues. It helps to gain control of the mind and especially to calm the mind so anxiety attacks, bi-polar and anger issues are particularly benefited, but depression and other issues are all improved through meditation too. Most importantly, Meditation reduces stress which has harmful effects on both mind and body. Thoughts are things, have a vibrational frequency and affect the body physically.
There are a variety of practices of Meditation to train the mind or induce a mode of consciousness, either to realize some benefit, or as an end in itself. Includes techniques to promote relaxation, build internal energy or life force (qi, ki, prana, etc.) and develop compassion, love, patience, generosity and forgiveness which are essential components of all mental health recovery.
Meditation involves an internal effort to self-regulate the mind in some way. Meditation is often used to clear the mind and ease many health issues, such as high blood pressure, depression, and anxiety. Meditation may involve generating an emotional state for the purpose of analyzing that state — such as anger, hatred, etc. — or cultivating particular mental response to various phenomena, such as compassion.
Meditation has a calming effect and directs awareness inward until pure awareness is achieved, described as “being awake inside without being aware of anything except awareness itself.”
The following are a few a guided meditations to introduce you to what is possibly the easiest form of meditation: the first is for deep relaxation which is very soothing and very helpful for relieving stress, anxiety, panic, anger, fear, OCD etc.; the other merely the tones of 528 Hz which is the vibration of Love.
It has been found that Love has a frequency of 528Hz and being exposed to this frequency, which is also the frequency of the grass, is extremely healing, especially to the DNA.
This is a powerful 1 hour pure 528Hz Solfeggio frequency – DNA Healing Activation that will work on the core of your being. All layers of our aura balances to the vibration of 528hz solfeggio. Use it as pure sound or put it on while listening to something else, and have this going in the backround. According to Dr. Leonard Horowitz, “more than any sound previously discovered, the 528hz “LOVE frequency” resonates at the heart of everything. It connects your heart, your spiritual essence, to the spiraling reality of heaven and earth.”
Binaural beats – another aid to meditating ...
Yoga has been practiced for more than 5,000 years, and currently, close to 11 million Americans are enjoying its health benefits.
Yoga is an excellent form of exercise as you begin where you are physically. For the very unfit and immobile, there is chair yoga and all levels beyond that. Yoga is easy to do and has the benefit of breaking the fascia that forms between muscles and causes stiffness and immobility. You will be in the best shape you have ever been when you practice yoga regularly. The mere exercise of the body improves the quality of the mind.
Most Westernized yoga classes focus on learning physical poses, called asanas. They also usually include some form of breathing technique and possibly a meditation technique as well. Yoga has been hailed as a very effective means to de-stress, and to acquire serenity and clarity in one’s life. There are videos which incorporate the meditation element in them. Here are a few to introduce you to the concept.
Even medically prescribed drugs are not always the answer to everything, and we encourage you to seek answers.