Some people may experience teeth pain on the left side of the upper jaw, lower jaw or both. Such people may also experience pain in the back of the left jaw. Some of the symptoms of teeth pain on the left side of the mouth can range from simple discomfort to high intensity pain. Proper diagnosis can help determine the possible cause of the pain and appropriate course of treatment. The different treatment methods of teeth pain can include filing, root canal, antibiotics, painkillers, desensitizing and using coverings such as veneers or dental crowns.
Common Causes Of Teeth Pain On The Left Side
An individual may feel pain if he or she has abscessed teeth. This is a condition where the dental pulp, also known as the nerve has become infected. This can occur when tooth decay goes untreated for long duration and spreads deep within the tooth. The painful infection can also be between the gum and the tooth. Moreover, cracked or broken teeth can lead to infection.
Common symptoms of this condition include pain when chewing, teeth pain, constant throb associated with the teeth, swelling of the neck glands and inflamed and swollen gum tissue. A small pimple may also appear filled with pus. The puss forms a barrier around the infection. If the pus is drained out, the area may become less swollen and painful.
Temporomandibular Joint Disorder can be another cause of teeth pain on the left side. The left temporomandibular joint, which is located directly in front of the left ear joint is where the upper jaw and lower jaw meet. The moving parts within the TMJ tissue allow the maxilla to close on the mandible.
The joint is used throughout the day especially when yawning, biting, talking and chewing. Individuals experiencing TMJ difficulty may suffer considerable discomfort when using the joint. Behaviors that can lead to TMJ problems include habitual gum eating, stress, teeth grinding, trauma to the jaws, misalignment of teeth or occupational tasks. Some symptoms can include ear pain, ringing in ear, dizziness and headache.
A dull and unrelenting jaw ache on the lower left side of the mouth can be a sign of heart pain from a heart attack. The pain may happen when the agitated nerves surrounding the heart send pain through the nerves in the spine to the left jaw among other parts of the body. The pain may increase or decrease over a course of a few minutes and may cause teeth pain. The sensation, also known as referred pain, moves around such that it may be difficult to pinpoint its source. Moving the jaw may increase teeth pain on the left side.
Individuals suffering from sinusitis can also experience teeth pain on the left side of the mouth because sinus pain can masquerade as dental pain. Individuals with a sinus infection may not exactly pinpoint the teeth in pain. The pain can be caused by the inflammation of the left maxillary sinus due to outside elements such as allergies, bacteria, viruses or fungi.
Healthcare professionals should conduct a thorough diagnosis to rule out the common cold because sinusitis symptoms are almost similar to those of the common cold. Sinusitis symptoms can include a running nose, pain on the side of the face and sinuses headaches. A dentist may tap on several teeth on the upper left jaw and a few teeth may respond.
Also known as prosopalgia or suicide disease, Trigeminal neuralgia is a condition characterized by episodes of intense pain, which originate from the trigeminal nerve. The trigeminal nerve provides feeling to teeth, eyes, skin of the face and lining of the mouth. The condition earned its name as “the suicide disease” because it is considered the most painful medical condition ever. A mild stimulation such as gentle breeze or touch to the face can can trigger a pain attack.
Common triggers can also include chewing, brushing, eating, talking, hair combing and water from a shower. The sudden attack of pain can be short and relatively mild or longer and more painful. Though the condition may cause teeth pain on either side of the face, the right side pain is separate and distinct from the left side pain. Multiple sclerosis, tumor, stroke, injury to nerve, or contact between trigeminal nerve and a normal vein or artery may also cause the pain.
The teeth on the left side may also hurt due to gum recession. If the gum recedes, the roots of the teeth may become exposed and cause teeth pain. The teeth may become sensitive to something sour, hot, cold or sweet. Other symptoms include change in the teeth’s color, longer teeth than normal, larger spaces between the teeth and cavities below the gum line. Gum-recession causes that can lead to teeth pain on the left side of the mouth include grinding of teeth, abnormal tooth position, improper flossing, inadequate brushing and periodontal disease.
People who have undergone dental treatment on the left side may experience some pain. Post operative teeth pain on the left side after a crown, filling or root canal treatment may cause a certain level of discomfort. Sometimes the area around the teeth may become irritated by friction, temperatures and materials used after a dental treatment. The pain may subside in a few days, weeks or not at all.
The eruption of left wisdom teeth can cause pain as well. Since they are the last molars to enter the mouth, there may not be enough space for them to fully come out. In this case, the teeth may be poorly aligned, which can damage or crowd adjacent teeth or nerves. Partial eruption can allow an opening for bacteria to enter and cause an infection, which can result in jaw stiffness, swelling and teeth pain on the left side.
Some diagnoses may demand an emergency trip to the hospital. An individual can visit the dentist if the teeth pain on the left side is persistent or if he or she cannot open or close the jaw completely among other reasons.