By Brittney Donovan
When Sally Ellis tells people she teaches an exercise class for preschoolers, a typical response is “preschoolers don’t need exercise!”
Ellis knows otherwise. With such high levels of childhood and adolescent obesity in the United States, she feels it is her mission to help children understand their bodies and why it is so important to take care of them.
She calls it health literacy.
Through her Jump ‘N Learn program, children learn how their bodies work and the importance of establishing healthy habits, exercise, nutrition and safety at an early age.
Classes are one day a week for 30 minutes at participating schools in Clay County. Each class includes 10 minutes of discussion about the body, 10 minutes of music and dance exercises led by Ellis and 10 minutes of "play with a purpose" which includes playing with balls or a parachute.
The activities improve the children’s large motor skills such as coordination, jumping, skipping and throwing. They also learn the importance of maintaining healthy eating habits and regular physical activity, two essential ingredients that help children beat the odds of obesity, according to Child Care Aware.
“You have to make it fun for them,” said Ellis. “They don’t all love sitting there for 10 minutes listening to me talk — they’re 3- to 5-year-olds — but they like the music and they love the parachute.“
She is owner and teacher of Jump ‘N Learn and teaches approximately 300 students per week. Most are preschoolers, but she also teaches some 2-year-olds and a kindergarten class.
She has been teaching the Eaglets at Fleming Island High School since the school opened and at Pinewood Christian Academy for approximately 10 years. She also teaches at Advent Lutheran Preschool and Orange Park Presbyterian Church Preschool.
During January and February, Ellis taught youngsters about the heart. Next, they will learn about nutrition, an important topic as recent studies show that eating habits formed during childhood greatly impact the likelihood of obesity.
“When I talk about nutrition I pound it into them,” said Ellis. “I tell them, ‘Even if you don’t like it you need to try the food five times.’”
Her class is part of the curriculum at each of the schools but she has developed the lessons herself during her 20 years of working with preschoolers.
She began teaching in 1994 as a franchisee of Stretch and Grow, an after-school exercise program for preschoolers.
“I thought, maybe if I started teaching them about their bodies then they would have more of an interest in taking care of themselves,” said Ellis.
She soon deviated from the strictly exercise curriculum and created Jump ‘N Learn.
At first, she taught children basic information about the heart, brain, lungs and nutrition. Each year, she has gone more in-depth because the children are so interested.
At the beginning of each school year, Ellis teaches children about the lungs. They learn about their bones during October, which they enjoy since it ties into Halloween. Children learn about the brain around Christmas and move onto the heart in January and February. Then they learn about nutrition and Ellis concludes the school year with lessons about safety.
“Jump ‘N Learn is a tremendous asset to our program,” said Julie Hasle, director of preschool at Orange Park Presbyterian Church. “The kids really look forward to coming.”
The children retain a lot of information, too.
After a doctor visit, a parent of one of Ellis’ students told the teachers at school that she and the doctor got such a kick because her 3-year-old was pointing out the location of her blood vessels.
They may not always have it right, but they know the language, said Ellis.
She recently read an article about a successful Sesame Street program focused on how the body works that is coming to the U.S. It was the first time she has read or heard about another program aimed at teaching young children how their bodies work, she said.
Ellis, a University of Florida graduate with a degree in recreation, has also been teaching swimming lessons in her backyard since 1994.
“I have a lot of experience working with preschoolers,” said Ellis. “I feel like I really have a gift for it.”
Brittney Donovan: (904) 359-4692