Excitation systems provide a powerful force on generator availability and dynamic performance. It is responsible in ensuring quality of reactive power and generator voltage, which means energy delivered to consumers are of high-quality.
The key functions of excitation systems include:
providing changeable erratic DC current with capacity for short-time overload
control of terminal voltage and appropriate accuracy
guarantee steady operation with machines and networks; involvement with transient stability succeeding a fault
correspond with the control system of the power plant
keep the machine within acceptable working range.
Advanced excitation systems involve tools for limiting or controlling mechanism terminal voltage, volts per hertz ratio, highest mechanism field current, and the reactive load soaked up by the machine. Practical evaluation of these limiters prior to placement for commercial service is highly recommended.
Hydroelectric Power Control System
A hydroelectric power control system is the system responsible for providing dependable, consistent, unattended, and regular power plant operation. It also has complete control and monitoring capabilities for newly established as well as for refurbished hydroelectric power plants.
The hydroelectric power control system provides confirmed, proven, cost-effective system controls for all aspects of switchyard and generation operation, which include VAR control, voltage control, generator start and stop options, optimized multi-generator load control, and synchronization. Pond level, minimum flow, fish ladder control, tail-race level and head gate position are under water-related system controls.
Excitation Systems and Hydroelectric Power Control System
Excitation systems are major components in hydroelectric power plants and they are suitable for examination under a condition evaluation course. Excitation system malfunction can have a considerable economic impact because of a higher equipment price and extensive lead times in procurement production, installation, and lost proceeds for the duration of an extensive forced outage.
Excitation system may be divided into two main subsystems, which include low– voltage system and the high-voltage system. Low-voltage systems can be found in the electronics and control system, while high-voltage systems can be found in rotating exciter, excitation system supply transformer, field breaker, power bridge, supply breaker, and many more.
The high-voltage section of the excitation system indicates the need for the entire system to be replaced. The low-voltage, as well as the electronic section, plays a major role for spare parts that may not be available anymore and/or the equipment has turned outmoded. Failure of one or more system components may not require entire system replacement, and only the involved components may need to be considered for replacement.
Most abnormalities in excitation system, particularly in the low-voltage control section, are automatically identified through regular system maintenance and can be easily corrected without the need for total excitation system replacement. Individual electronic circuits are easily replaced cheaply and efficiently as long as they are still sustained by the manufacturer. In case manufacturer support is no longer available, the these costs may turn out to be considerable and a fractional or total excitation system replacement may be warranted.
Establishing the current state of an excitation system is an important step in the analysis of malfunction risk. This afterthought offers a course for arriving at an Excitation System Condition Index that can be useful in the development of a business case that addresses economic events, risk of failure and other significant factors.
The excitation system of a hydroelectric plant is a significant component in ensuring that the produced power is distributed properly to the power grid. This can be effectively done by increasing network availability within the system by using redundancy.
Excitation control system offers highly advanced technology that can accurately control, secure, protect, shelter and supervise synchronous motors and generators, for new and accessible applications.