Introduction to GIMP (GNU Image Manipulation Program)
This section provides a quick introduction of GIMP (GNU Image Manipulation Program). GIMP is a freely distributed program for such tasks as photo retouching, image composition and image authoring.
The GIMP Website, www.gimp.org/about/introduction.html, has a very good introduction to GIMP:
GIMP is an acronym for GNU Image Manipulation Program. It is a freely distributed program for such tasks as photo retouching, image composition and image authoring.
It has many capabilities. It can be used as a simple paint program, an expert quality photo retouching program, an online batch processing system, a mass production image renderer, an image format converter, etc.
GIMP is expandable and extensible. It is designed to be augmented with plug-ins and extensions to do just about anything. The advanced scripting interface allows everything from the simplest task to the most complex image manipulation procedures to be easily scripted.
GIMP is written and developed under X11 on UNIX platforms. But basically the same code also runs on MS Windows and Mac OS X.
Features and Capabilities
This is only a very quickly thrown together list of GIMP features:
- Painting: Full suite of painting tools including Brush, Pencil, Airbrush, Clone, etc.; Sub-pixel sampling for all paint tools for high quality anti-aliasing; Extremely powerful gradient editor and blend tool; Supports custom brushes and patterns
- System: Tile based memory management so image size is limited only by available disk space; Virtually unlimited number of images open at one time
- Advanced Manipulation: Full alpha channel support; Layers and channels; Multiple Undo/Redo (limited only by diskspace); Editable text layers; Transformation tools including rotate, scale, shear and flip; Selection tools including rectangle, rounded rectangle, ellipse, free, fuzzy; Foreground extraction tool; Advanced path tool doing bezier and polygonal selections; Transformable paths, transformable selections; Quickmask to paint a selection.
- Extensible: A Procedural Database for calling internal GIMP functions from external programs as in Script-fu; Advanced scripting capabilities (Scheme, Python, Perl); Plug-ins which allow for the easy addition of new file formats and new effect filters; Over 100 plug-ins already available
- Animation: Load and save animations in a convenient frame-as-layer format; MNG support; Frame Navigator (in GAP, the GIMP Animation Package); Onion Skin (in GAP, the GIMP Animation Package); Bluebox (in GAP, the GIMP Animation Package)
- File Handling: File formats supported include bmp, gif, jpeg, mng, pcx, pdf, png, ps, psd, svg, tiff, tga, xpm, and many others; Load, display, convert, save to many file formats; SVG path import/export
- Much, much more!
Last update: 2008.
Table of Contents
About This Book
Introduction to Microsoft Windows
Introduction to Windows Explorer
Introduction to Internet Explorer
"Paint" Program and Computer Graphics
►GIMP - GNU Image Manipulation Program
►Introduction to GIMP (GNU Image Manipulation Program)
Downloading and Installing GIMP 2.6.3
Main Window, Toolbox, and Layers/Channels
Red Gradient Spiral - My First GIMP Image
JPEG Image File Format Quality and Size
GIF Image File Format and Transparent Background
"WinZip" - ZIP File Compression Tool
"WinRAR" - RAR and ZIP File Compression Tool
FTP Server, Client and Commands
"FileZilla" - Free FTP Client and Server
Web Server Log Files and Analysis Tool - "Analog"
Spyware Adware Detection and Removal
IE Addon Program Listing and Removal
Vundo (VirtuMonde/VirtuMundo) - vtsts.dll Removal
Trojan and Malware "Puper" Description and Removal
VSToolbar (VSAdd-in.dll) - Description and Removal
Spybot - Spyware Blocker, Detection and Removal
Setting Up and Using Crossover Cable Network
Home Network Gateway - DSL Modem/Wireless Router
Windows Task Manager - The System Performance Tool
"tasklist" Command Line Tool to List Process Information
"msconfig" - System Configuration Tool
Configuring and Managing System Services
Windows Registry Key and Value Management Tools
Startup Programs Removal for Better System Performance
Winsock - Windows Sockets API
Java on Windows
Glossary of Terms
PDF Printing Version