The colors of cream and chocolate are part of an expanded neutral palette, making up shades in the brown family. They work beautifully paired together as tile, provided that both tiles have other things in common to help unite them. Whether the two tiles are working together in the same tile field or on adjoining surfaces such as walls and floors, there are numerous ways to tie together these two tile colors.
One way to ensure the cream and chocolate tiles tie together well is to ensure they are made of the same material, and in the case of man-made materials, the same line from one manufacturer. This is because natural materials such as marble often include several shades of color within one tile; for example, emperador brown has cream in it, while crema marfil contains shades of brown, ensuring the two tiles work together. Tiles in one line from a manufacturer often are made to work together this way as well.
Neutral colors such as cream and chocolate are not true colors. They often contain shades or undertones of other colors within them. This may mean they have a yellow or red undertone. In order for the two tiles to tie together properly, they both need to have the same undertone. This may be subtle, and you usually can tell by setting the tiles next to each other, and also next to squares of solid color such as red, yellow or blue. The tiles reflect the color that is in their undertone more strongly than the other colors.
Light and dark colors, such as cream and chocolate, often work well together when mixed in a tile pattern. This may be accomplished in one of two ways: using an equal pattern that uses the same amount of both colors, like a checkerboard, or using a pattern that uses one color as an accent. This may mean using the cream tile as the field and running a border of chocolate tile around it. This also may mean scattering small chocolate tiles through a cream field, or by "wrapping" one of the colors in mosaics of the second color.
Wall and Floor
If you're planning on using cream and chocolate tiles in one room, but not on the same surface, you still need to tie the two colors together. In this case, the easiest way is to pick up the floor tile as an accent in the wall tile. If the floor tile has matching decorative tiles or mosaics, use these as a border at eye level through the wall tile. If there are no decorative tiles, the floor tile may be cut down into strips to use as the border, or a different tile of the same color may be used.