Each night is begun to be the same, you are tossing and turning constantly and you can’t fall asleep into the great nights sleep that your body needs. You try to get up and just move around, you try reading, you try going back to sleep and nothing works. You look at the clock and you just lay there. You go over everything that you have to do and what you did during the day and then finally you doze off only to have your alarm clock go off 2 hours later. You are in a daze and just go about your day.
If this sounds like your night, then you are not alone. There are a lot of common sleep issues that affect more than 120 million Americans. If you can’t figure out why you can’t sleep read on to see what other common issues are. Be sure to speak to your doctor if you believe that you are suffering from a sleep disorder.
This is a common sleep issue that most everyone has experienced at least once in their life. Insomnia is very common. Chronic insomnia can lead to a poor quality of life, depression, accidents, and even health issues. Insomnia is difficulty falling asleep, waking up too early, and trouble staying asleep.
This is something that could drive your partner to the brink of insanity, but it can also have an effect on your sleep. Over 37 million people snore and ove3r 90 million have snored at some point in their life. Snoring is classified by the hissing, raspy sound that is caused by having a partially closed upper airway. When you sleep, your throat muscles relax, and your throat becomes narrow and can be blocked. When you breathe, the throat walls vibrate which causes the snoring sound. The narrower the airway, the greater the vibration and the louder you will snore. As you get older, snoring often gets worse. It is also linked to sleep apnea.
This could be to blame for your poor sleeping habits. 25 million people have this and there are millions more that have not been diagnosed. Sleep Apnea is quite serious and it is a medical condition that causes the airway to become blocked and your breathing is strained or you could stop breathing while sleeping. It can be a fatal condition, which both long-term and short- term complications, which affect 1 in 9 people. There are 2 types of sleep apnea. You have obstructive sleep apnea where something in your body blocks the airway, and central apnea is when your brain tells your lungs to not breath. When you have sleep apnea, your brain senses that you stopped breathing and will have you wake up just long enough to gasp for air and start breathing. Then you go back to sleep and it happens again. This can happen more than 120 times every hour, although you may not know that you woke up.