The book of 2nd Peter gives us a glimpse of who Jesus is in the New Testament (N.T).
The book of 2nd Peter is supposedly said to be written in the mid 60s AD, just before Peter’s execution (1:14). The most accept view of Peter martyrdom is that he was crucified upside down in an X-shaped cross. The painting by Italian painter Annibale Carracci called Domine, Quo vadis? Translated whither goest thou, Lord? is the painting of Peter fleeing the persecution of Rome, when He is said to have encountered Jesus Christ, walking toward the city, and Peter asks Christ, Quo vadis, Domine, to which Christ responds, Eo Romam iterum crucifigi, (I am going to Rome to be crucified again.”), Peter got the message, and returns to Rome where he is martyred.
1st Peter dealt with problems from the outside (spots)
2nd Peter deals with problems from the inside (wrinkles)
The internal problems were in the form of false teachers within the Church; those who ignorantly or willfully distort the infallible Holy Scripture with damnable heresies, damaging doctrines, and those who deny the Lord and His Word.
The main issue addressed here in this book is that When Jesus ascended into heaven, there was an announcement, that this same Jesus will return in like manner (Acts 1:11). Jesus Himself said that He was going to prepare a place for us and will come back again to receive us, so that we may be where He is (John 14:3), but some false teachers were denying the imminent return of the Lord and the impending judgment that He will righteously execute.
Peter calls these backsliders who are not true to the faith as disgusting dogs returning to vomit and dirty pigs that return to wallow in the gutters of life that this world offers.
In contrast to a true teacher, Peter describes a false teacher as follows:
True teachers – live life as if the future life is the model of the present (selfless)
False teachers – live life as if the present life is the model of the future (selfish and sensual)
Furthermore, 2nd Peter warns the apostles, pastors, preachers, evangelists or teachers, to be very careful with their words and not privately interpret the Scripture but seek divine revelations of the hidden treasures in it. It also warns the listeners and hearers of the word, to be very careful and strong against wolves in sheep’s clothing that beguile us and blind our minds from the glorious truth of the gospel of Jesus Christ.
Now, let us look at Jesus Christ in the Scripture as expressed in 2nd Peter in the three chapters it has.
In Chapter 1, we see that Jesus Christ is the Giver of POWER, PROVISIONS and PROMISES (2 Peter 1:3-4). 2 Peter 1:3-4 reads According as his divine power hath given unto us all things that pertain unto life and godliness, through the knowledge of him that hath called us to glory and virtue: Whereby are given unto us exceeding great and precious promises: that by these ye might be partakers of the divine nature, having escaped the corruption that is in the world through lust.
In Chapter 2, we see that Jesus Christ is the DELIVERER and DAMNER (2 Peter 2:9). 2 Peter 2:9 reads The Lord knoweth how to deliver the godly out of temptations, and to reserve the unjust unto the day of judgment to be punished:
God did not spare the
- Proud angels that sinned
- Unbelieving world in the time of Noah
- Evil world in the time of Lot
And He is the same yesterday, today and forever (Hebrews 13:8)
Though this may seem hard and harsh to accept, Jesus Christ is the DELIVERER of the Godly (Noah/Lot) (2:9) but He is also the DAMNER of the Ungodly (rebellious angels, pre-flood world, Sodom and Gomorrah)
In Chapter 3, Jesus Christ is the PARDONER and PUNISHER (2 Peter 3:9,15). 2 Peter 3:9,15 reads The Lord is not slack concerning his promise, as some men count slackness; but is longsuffering to us-ward, not willing that any should perish, but that all should come to repentance. __ And account that the longsuffering of our Lord is salvation;
1 Corinthians 13:8-13 states that there are three things that remain – faith, hope and love.
Someone eloquently said:
Faith in essence is patience with God;
Hope in essence is patience with self; and
Love in essence is patience with others.
The Lord has not returned yet because he does not want anyone to perish (3:9) but those who do not believe in the Lord Jesus Christ are reserved for judgment and perdition of ungodly men (3:7).
The Longsuffering of the Lord Jesus is
- Pardon for the believer
- Punishment for those who refuse to believe
Jesus Christ is both PARDONER and PUNISHER.
In 2nd Peter, Jesus Christ is the Ultimate Giver (of Power, Provisions and Promises), the DELIVERER of the godly and DAMNER of the ungodly, the PARDONING and PATIENT Longsuffering Lord and the PUNISHER of the ungodly.