Vanity Top Finishes
Vanity Top Composition
Geologically speaking, rocks are classified into 3 main categories: igneous, sedimentary, and metamorphic. Our sinks are made of all natural stones including granite, travertine, and cream marfil. Granite is a type of igneous rock, travertine is sedimentary while cream marfil is metamorphic.
Cream Marfil is a type of marble, which is a metamorphic rock resulting from the metamorphism of limestone. Limestone is a sedimentary rock, formed mainly from the accumulation of organic remains (bones and shells of marine microorganisms and coral) from millions of years ago. The calcium in the marine remains combined with carbon dioxide in the water in turn forms calcium carbonate, which is the basic mineral structure of all limestone. When subjected to heat and pressure, the original limestone experiences a process of complete recrystallization (metamorphism), forming what we know as marble. The characteristic swirls and veins of many colored marble varieties, for example, cream marfil, are usually due to various mineral impurities. Cream marfil is formed with a medium density with pores.
Travertine is a variety of limestone, a kind of sedimentary rock, formed of massive calcium carbonate from deposition by rivers and springs, especially hot bubbly mineral rich springs. When hot water passes through limestone beds in springs or rivers, it dissolves the limestone, taking the calcium carbonate from the limestone to suspension as well as taking that solution to the surface. If enough time comes about, water evaporates and calcium carbonate is crystallized, forming what we know as travertine stone. Travertine is characterized by pores and pitted holes in the surface and takes a good polish. It is usually hard and semicrystalline. It is often beautifully colored (from ivory to golden brown) and banded as a result of the presence of iron compounds or other (e.g., organic) impurities.
Travertine is mined extensively in Italy; in the U.S., Yellowstone Mammoth Hot Springs are actively depositing travertine. It also occurs in limestone caves.
Granite is a very common type of intrusive igneous rock, mainly composed of three minerals: feldspar, quartz, and mica, with the first being the major ingredient. Granite is formed when liquid magma?molten rock material?cools beneath the earth?s crust. Due to the extreme pressure within the center of the earth and the absence of atmosphere, granite is formed very densely with no pores and has a coarse-grained structure. It is hard, firm and durable.