Researchers have developed a new fingerprinting technique that can be used to track the online behaviour of individuals across multiple browsers, it has been revealed.
According to reports, researchers Lehigh University and Washington University have developed a new method that can be used to track what individuals do online even if the individuals change their web browsers.
The findings of the research have been published in a research paper.
According to the scientists, the new method differs from the previous methods that have been used to monitor what individuals do when they are online because of the manner in which it operates.
‘This new method is not only lightweight, compared to the many others that have been developed before it, but is also more effective in terms of tracking the activities of individuals who switch browsers,’ the scientists state.
Current methods of tracking the online behaviour of individuals remain limited to single browsers. It has been easy for individuals to overcome the effect of such monitors by changing the browsers that they use on their devices.
However, it appears that this new technique has been developed for the sole purpose of tracking the activities of individuals even if the individuals change their web browsers.
Interestingly, it has been reported that the new digital fingerprinting technique will be invaluable to advertisers.
Advertisers rely on such fingerprinting techniques to collect valuable information about individuals. The advertisers then use the information to deliver highly targeted advertisements to individuals.
In the past, advertisers have had to grapple with the problem of having to collect data about individuals afresh when the individuals change their web browsers.
However, this new technique solves the problem by letting advertisers secretly monitor what individuals are doing when they are online.
Hence, when people change their web browsers, the new system can detect the change and sync the data about the online behaviour of the individuals across multiple platforms and browsers.
Interestingly, it has been reported that advertisers will find it easy to track even the type of devices that individuals are using, thanks to the amount of data about the online behaviour of individuals that this new technique can be used to collect.
It remains to be seen how advertisers and other interested parties will use the new method to collect and keep vital information about the online behaviour of individuals over the course of time.