Henry A Bent was well-known as a chemistry lecturer at the Department of Chemistry, North Caroline State University in the 1960-70s. So famous in these quarters, that he is known for Bent’s Rule
In 1969 he published a paper, which is available online, entitled Why Lecture?
The paper begins with the statement:
For students who can read and for teachers who can write, a formal lecture is often an inconvenient, financially costly and unreliable device for transferring information from a lecturer to student.
Bent undertook a study on the purpose and benefit of the lecture, considering the perspective of the students and the teachers. In the era before the digital age he makes some insightful comments, that reinforce the benefits of the printed word as place for deep learning, and draws the conclusion that it is both the inspiration for further learning and the gathering together that make the lecture relevant.
The printed word “is superior to the spoken word” in a number of ways:
Availability to students
Convenience as to time and location
Value, as a permanent reference
Ease of scanning
Bent argues that despite the reasons listed above, teachers continue to lecture. So he asked students Why lecture? They replied:
There is the ease of learning and enjoyment of lectures. Some find it more interesting to listen than to read.
Lectures can arouse curiosity. When presented with a new topic or information for the first time the lecture can spark interest in the subject.
Break from monotony of solid reading. Students expressed that it provided an alternative means to just reading and note-taking. It also enabled the teacher to cover material at a slower pace and allow for questions.
He asked the teachers, master teachers at colleges and universities, Why lecture?
Inspiration: “It provides a means for personal stimulation and excitement which is not present on the printed page”. To be effective the lecture needs to be characterised by:
Bringing some personality and life to the delivery,
Conveying excitement about the discipline,
…and being, yes, that’s right,
Relationship: “I can find no suggestion that there is any substitute for the personal interaction between the student and teacher in learning really challenging material” The students get to know and respect the ‘person’ of lecturer, then effective learning occurs.
Connection: “Polyani speaks of ‘the primitive sentiment of fellowship’ and ‘the emotional comfort of the flock’” The effectiveness of the lecture as a learning environment is directly related to the relationship with the lecturer, but also the connections that build amongst the group members “Many are the instances in which the improvement of conviviality is deliberately advanced for the sake of such advantageous results.
Professional role-modelling: “I think at best a lecture can be a demonstration of how a professional thinks about a problem, can be an interesting and enjoyable experience, it can be inspirational to students to go and do likewise.”
Beyond the topic at-hand: “there is more to learning than the content of a series of course.” The lecture is an opportunity to provide information and insight that cannot be accessed from printed material. Speaking one-to-many is a responsibility that should not be taken lightly.
The conclusions are interesting, as the lecturers and Bent state:
“Basically, listening to a lecture is a passive experience; whereas real learning requires an aggressive, affirmative posture and attitude”
“Ideally, lectures are a prelude to, not a substitute for, the hard work of independent study.”
“Lectures have a vital but limited role to play.”
“Broadly speaking, it would appear that the chief function of a lecturer…is to inspire students”
There is one last point the Bent makes.
“Could we not take fuller advantage of the fact that students have a greater educational impact on students than do their teachers?” He argues that the best way to learn a subject is to teach it. Henry A Bent would fit right into the 21stC classroom.
So if you engage in teacher-talk here are the rules:
20 minutes maximum
Make it interesting, inspiring and engaging and even entertaining
Help students get to know you as a real person
Encourage a sense of connection and community