What location does the right subclavian artery supply?
left side of head
What location does the left common carotid supply?
left upper limb and brain
What location does the left subclavian artery supply?
What organ does the common hepatic artery supply?
supply arteries to the pancreas, small intestine, and most of large intestine
What organ does the superior mesenteric artery supply?
What organ does the renal arteries supply?
second half of colon, rectum
What organ does the inferior mesenteric artery supply?
Muscles of the right pectoral region and axilla
What location does the axillary artery supply?
Structures of the arm
What location does the brachial artery supply?
Forearm, radial side
What location does the radial artery supply?
Forearm, ulnar side
What location does the ulnar artery supply?
Hands and fingers
What location does the palmar arch artery supply?
Pelvis and lower limbs
What location does the common iliac artery supply?
urinary bladder, internal and external walls of pelvis, external genatilia and medial side of thigh
What location does internal iliac artery supply?
What location does the external iliac artery supply?
anteromedial surface of the thigh
What location does the femoral artery supply?
ventral and lateral regions of the skin and deep muscles of the thigh
What location does the deep femoral artery supply?
knee and leg
What location does the popliteal artery supply?
skin and muscles of anterior portion of the leg
What location does the anterior tibial artery supply?
Ankle and dorsal portion of foot
What location does the dorsalis pedis artery supply?
posterior portion of leg
What location does the posterior tibial artery supply?
What location do the common carotid arteries supply?
Right Subclavian Right Carotid
Two arteries formed by the division of the brachiocephalic trunk.
First branches off the ascending aorta: serve the heart.
Inernal Carotid and Vertebral Arteries
Two paired arteries, serving the brain.
Largest artery of the human body.
Artery that serves the posterior thigh
Artery that supplies the diaphragm.
Artery that splits to form the radial and ulnar arteries.
Artery that supplies the last half of the large intestine.
Artery generally auscultated to determine blood pressure in the arm.
Artery that serves the pelvis.
External iliac becomes this artery on entering the thigh.
Major artery serving the arm.
Artery that supplies most of the small intestine.
Common Illiac Arteries
Terminal branches of the descending aorta divides into
Arterial trunk that has 3 major branches serving the liver, stomach, spleen.
Major artery, serving the tissues external to the skull.
Posterior Tibial, Anterior Tibial, Fibular
Three arteries, serving the leg inferior to the knee.
Artery generally used to feel the pulse at the wrist.
Damage to the left semilunar valve would interfere with blood flow in this artery.
Brachiocephalic Trunk, left Common Carotid, left Subclavian
First, second and third branches off the aortic arch.
Major artery supplying the lower limb.
An intermediary between the subclavian and brachial arteries.
Brings deoxygenated blood to the lungs.
Ascending, Aortic Arch, Descending
Parts of the aorta.
Branches off the brachial artery.
Compressing this artery next to the mandible can cause loss of consciousness.
Which common carotid artery arises directly from the aortic arch?
Travels through the transverse foramina of the cervical vertebrae.
Divides into external and internal branches at the level of Adam's apple.
An artery getting its name from the popliteal fossa at the rear of the knee.
A branch of the subclavian artery that issues finer branches to the pericardium
Anterior and posterior _______________supply the muscles between the ribs.
Elastic arteries (conducting arteries)
--Large vessels (e.g., pulmonary trunk and aorta) --Tunica media has many elastic fibers and few muscle cells --Elasticity evens out pulse force --transport large volumes of blood away from the heart.
Muscular arteries (distribution arteries)
--Are medium-sized (most arteries) --Tunica media has many muscle cells --Transport blood to the body's skeletal muscle and internal organs. --Greater density of smooth muscle within the media than elastic arteries.
--Are small --Have little or no tunica externa --Have thin or incomplete tunica media --they control the blood flow between arteries and capillaries. --is poorly defined and the media consists of scattered smooth muscle fibers that may not form a complete layer.
1. venules (smallest) 2. medium-sized veins 3. large veins
What are three types of veins?
the smallest venules lack a media. However, in the largest venules you will find scattered smooth muscle cells
contain a thin media and the thickest layer is the adventitia which contains longitudinal bundles of elastic and collagen fibers
*Ex. superior and inferior venae cavae* all of the layers are thickest in large veins. Still a slender media which is surrounded by a thick adventitia, mix of elastic and collagenous fibers
Know all the major arteries in the body
Right Internal Carotid Artery
Identify O: _______ artery
Identify R:_______ artery
Left common carotid
Right common carotid
Right external carotid artery
Systemic Venous System
Be able to identify the major veins in the body.
Palmar venous arches
Identify N: _______ vein
Identify R: _______ vein
Dorsal venous arch
Plantar venous arch
Left and right common iliac
Identify BB: _______ vein
Inferior vena cava
Superior vena cava
temple and scalp
What location does the temporal artery supply?
head, neck, shoulder and upper limbs
What location does brachicoephalic trunk (artery) supply?
connects ascending and descending aorta
What location does aortic arch supply?
left and right coronary arteries originate at the base of ascending aorta and branch off to the supply the heart with blood
What location does ascending aorta supply?
What location does abdominal aorta supply?
each suprarenal artery supplies a suprarenal gland
What location does suprarenal artery supply?
distal portions of foot and toes
What location does plantar arch supply?
males= testes females= ovaries
What location does gonadal artery supply?
takes blood from the heart to the lungs
What location does pulmonary trunk supply?
the diaphragm divides the descending aorta into a superior thoracic aorta and an inferior abdominal aorta
What location does descending aorta supply?
What location is drained by the dural sinuses?
cervical spinal cord and posterior surface of the skull
What location is drained by the vertebral vein?
exterior portion of cranium
What location is drained by the external jugular vein?
receives blood from basilic vein
What location is drained by the brachial vein?
drains parts of veins in the forearm
What location is drained by the basilic vein?
interconnects the cephalic and basilic veins
What location is drained by the median cubital vein?
What location is drained by the median antibrachial vein?
digital veins empty into the superficial and deep palmar veins of the hand
What location is drained by the palmar venous arches?
dorsal venous arch
What location is drained by the great saphenous vein?
carries blood from the knee to the thigh
What location is drained by the popliteal vein?
dorsal venous arch
What location is drained by the small saphenous vein?
blood leaving capillaries in the sole of each foot collects into a network of plantar veins
What location is drained by plantar venous arch?
collects blood from the capillaries on the dorsal surface of the foot and digital veins of the toes
What location is drained by dorsal venous arch?
anterior portion of lower leg
What location is drained by anterior tibial vein?
collects blood from deeper structures of the thigh
What location is drained by deep femoral vein?
recevies blood from deep femoral vein, great saphenous vein, femoral circumflex vein
What location is drained by the femoral vein?
drains pelvic organs
What location is drained by the internal iliac vein?
receives blood from the lower limbs, pelvis, and lower abdomen
What location is drained by the external iliac vein?
drains blood from external iliacs
What location is drained by left and right common iliac veins?
collects blood from vertebrae and body wall
What location is drained by intercostal veins?
receives blood from the head and arms and chest and empties into the right atrium of the heart