I am so excited to share “What’s New” within the technology world here at The Midland School. Over the past couple of weeks, Midland has been working hard in providing the students and teachers with the latest technology that can be used in the classroom in order to provide them with access to various types of software and interactive activities on the internet. Below are a few of the new items/ software that are accessible to our students and teachers. If you click on each banner, it will take you to that website for further information for you to check out.
Reading A-Z’s leveled books are carefully written to ensure each student has access to an abundance of engaging, developmentally appropriate text that supports comprehension, vocabulary, close reading of text, and more. With a variety of fiction and nonfiction genres within each level, Reading A-Z’s leveled books strengthen connections in literacy and content-area instruction.
BrainPop is a group of educational Websites with over 1,000 short animated movies for students in grades K-12, along with quizzes and related materials covering various subjects. The videos and materials are designed to engage students and assist teachers and home schoolers. They are aligned to state education standardsDiscovery Education Streaming Plus is a comprehensive digital service that motivates students to learn and helps teachers in every content area to transform their instruction. Containing thousands of standards-aligned resources, Streaming Plus provides you with the tools to teach your students to think critically about the content they use, see, and experience in their daily lives and to ask questions about the world around them.
This site contains fun, accessible games, activities, and tools designed for young children and those with learning difficulties. Games are animated cause and effect programs designed for both touch screens and early switch users. Stories and songs will engage your learners and be lots of fun. Activities such as Counting Songs encourage learners to count from 1 to 5 with a catchy song. The Find out section is an exploratory section for games and activities. Explore expressions, the keyboard, numbers, time and other concepts.
Stay tuned to for more excitement to come!!
If you have any questions on various types of educational technology, feel free to contact Sherri Ann Ouimette at firstname.lastname@example.org and I will be glad to assist you.