Denise was working late, as usual. The expense reports had to be done and Catherine was out of the office for a week on vacation. She reached for her coffee and brought the cup to her lips before she remembered that it had gone cold hours ago. She put the cup down and refreshed her screen. The numbers were starting to blur. After typing in one last figure and hitting 'enter' she was finished. Denise rubbed her eyes, stretched, and powered down her computer. One look out the window told her that the wind outside had picked up since lunchtime. So, she put on her coat before grabbing her purse and heading for the door.

She pushed the metal handle inward, but instead of swinging wide like it usually did, the door didn't budge. Denise was so used to having it fly open that she almost ran right into it when it didn't budge. She tried pushing it in again. The bolt didn't slide away from the frame. Remembering that it was after hours, she decided to try another door, hoping she hadn't been locked in. That door was locked too. And then, the lights went out. Denise called out to see if there was a custodian or a security guard nearby, but there was no response. She rummaged in her purse for her cell phone. It wasn't there. 

Denise began to panic. Her phone must still be plugged in at her desk, but it was pitch black in the office now. She stepped cautiously forward, trying to remember how to navigate her way back. Her shin collided painfully with a metal shelf. After catching her breath, she took another tentative step forward, hunched so she could keep her hands in front of her legs. Then, she heard a bang further down the hall. It sounded like someone else was there with her, stumbling in the dark. She called out again. No response came. Denise continued to try and make her way back to the desk. She could smell the cheap cologne still lingering at Dave's desk, so she knew she wasn't far away. What happened next froze the blood in her veins. It was just a whisper, but the warm breath on her neck told her whoever had just whispered her name was right behind her in the dark.
