PEOPLE with a rare super-powered immune system could help cure deadly pancreatic cancer, scientists believe.
Experts want to find human equivalents of a mutant lab mouse found to have an amazing ability to fight off the disease.
White blood cells from the super-immune — which in tests have killed tumours in mice — could be injected into patients in trials starting as early as next year.
Currently, 97 per cent of pancreatic cancer patients die within five years.
Alex Blyth, chief executive of LIfT BioSciences, the British biotech company pioneering the treatment in partnership with King’s College London, said: “This could be game-changing.
“It’s a cell therapy, essentially taking cells from people who have a high-functioning innate immune system and transferring them to people with a lower level of cancer-killing activity.”
Early research indicates that the same approach could work for other solid cancers, such as those affecting the prostate, breast and bladder.
The project developed from the discovery in 1999 of a mutant mouse with an almost miraculous ability to ward off aggressive cancers.
MOST READ IN TECH AND SCIENCE
ARMAGEDDONMassive asteroid strike that could wipe out humanity is 'only a matter of time' warns top scientist
ROCK AND A HARD PLACEEarth set for an 'asteroid encounter' THIS WEEK and 750ft space rock could be 'potentially hazardous'
OPTICAL ILLUSIONGoogle Glass making a surprise return after three years of silence - but would you wear one?
NAME YOUR PRICEFrom medical details to Spotify passwords, how much YOUR hacked data is worth on the dark web
THE GAME IS ONThe Steam Summer Sale starts TONIGHT - here's how to bag the best bargains with 90% off some games
The “supermouse” passed on its cancer-beating powers to 40% of its offspring.
When white blood cells from these mice were injected to normal mice, they too became cancer-resistant.
Later this year the LIfT (leukocyte infusion therapy) team plans to begin the hunt for people with cancer-killing cells and test them using techniques which are still being developed.
The starting point will be to seek young individuals with no history of cancer in their immediate family.
Around 20 trial patients will be recruited to receive weekly injections of cells for around five or six weeks while they are carefully monitored.
The goal is to create a cell bank that can be used to treat or even cure cancer. Another part of the project aims to produce “immortalised” cell lines that can be grown continuously in the laboratory.