A new study online, in the Journal of Pediatrics, says kids may be at a higher risk for serious illness, specifically whooping cough (also known as pertussis), if not vaccinated.
According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), in 2012, there were more than 41,000 whooping cough cases and 18 deaths, mostly in infants, were reported in the U.S.
Last year saw a marked increase across Illinois, with more than 1,500 cases, and the Illinois Department Public Health reports that the state is on pace to exceed that total this year, with about 1,200 cases reported already. Health officials warn that cases typically increase late in the year after kids go back to school.
The other cause for the increase in cases is that scientists believe the vaccine is wearing off, prompting the need for booster shots. The original vaccine was weakened in 1997 in order to reduce the number of side effects. This can also be the culprit for shortened time of protection offered by the vaccine.
“I urge people to contact their doctor to discuss this vaccine,” said Dr. Bharti Amin, M.D., a pediatrician on staff at Advocate South Suburban Hospital. “I recommend everyone talk to their physician about a “Tdap” booster injection that includes tetanus, diphtheria, and pertussis.”Dr. Amin stresses the importance of children receiving their vaccines and boosters on schedule to avoid the potential for serious consequences of this disease.
“It is as important for adults to be vaccinated, as it is for children,” said Dr. Amin. “Infants are not able to be fully vaccinated against whopping cough so it is important that parents get vaccinated in order to protect their infant.” Whooping cough may at first appear as a mild cold but can quickly turn to a more serious situation. According to the CDC, it starts with a runny or stuffed up nose, sneezing and mild cough. After one to two weeks, the cough becomes severe and repetitive, making it hard to breath.
“The whooping sound that children make when gasping for breath is what gives whooping cough its name,” said Dr. Amin.
“Contact your doctor if your child develops a cold that includes a severe or prolonged cough, and that whooping sound should be a parents’ trigger to seek medical attention.”
If you need to consult a physician about whooping cough or the vaccination, call 1.800.3.ADVOCATE (1.800.323.8622) or visit www.advocatehealth.com/ssub to find a physician.