The shutdown of America’s government by the Republican party was dangerous to the US and potentially the world economy for more than just economic reasons. It was a showing by Tea Party activists who “have been called neo-Klansmen and knuckle-dragging hillbillies” and their billionaire backers, that they were willing to destroy the global economic system to keep a Black President from succeeding. Even after he had gone threw the procedures (set up by the US government) to pass a law that provides healthcare to every American citizen, the Affordable Care Act or Obamacare.
Chidanand Rajghatta, a reporter for the Times of India writes in an article: In many ways, the current shutdown is part of a proxy fight between deeply conservative white lawmakers who see the Obama administration’s agenda as favoring blacks and minorities versus liberal legislators trying to set right historical and contemporary imbalances, the small cabal of Tea Party lawmakers represent a mostly-white constituency in Middle America that resents against any government role — such as the mandatory enforcement of health insurance through Obamacare — in their life.
The Affordable Care Act, or Obamacare, is an achievement that has never been done before in American history and a major accomplishment for America’s first recognized Black President. I say recognized because the ascendancy of Senator Barack Obama to become the first Black President has been debated. There have been various rumors floating around that the United States had black presidents. Several have written on this subject, including: Joel Augustus Rogers, The Five Negro Presidents; Auset Bakhufu, The Six Black Presidents – Black Blood: White Masks; and Leroy Vaughn, Black People and Their Place in History. Although most writers talk about five presidents, Bakhufu adds Dwight D. Eisenhower as the sixth.
Having said that, the Republican shutdown was more than an economic threat. It was a threat that the Tea Party, Republican, regressive, confederates in America were and are willing to terrorize America and the world, in order to prevent a Black Man from succeeding. Because President Obama’s success sends a message to Black People and people of color everywhere that they can rise to the top of any government or industry. A belief that threatens the end of American Europeans domination over the world. Something that those in charge are grasping to maintain: the continued exploitation by the 1% who control the worlds economy.
But the shutdown seems to have had the opposite effect on the worlds opinion of American power.
Nicholas Kitchen, a political scientist at the London School of Economics, said the shutdown had tarnished the reputation of the U.S.
“In showing itself to be unable to even run its own affairs competently the U.S. in some sense surrenders claims to global leadership,” he said. “It’s difficult to tell other people how to run their affairs when you can’t keep your own house in order.”
Chinese State-run news agency Xinhua published an English-language commentary calling for “a de-Americanised world”.
It called for “the introduction of a new international reserve currency” to replace the US dollar, “so that the international community could permanently stay away from the spillover of the intensifying domestic political turmoil in the United States”.
Developing and emerging economies should have a greater say in financial institutions such as the IMF and World Bank, it added.
A newspaper in Africa, The South African News said: You can say what you like about our government – and please do – but they would never, ever turn off the lights on themselves and deliver 50 million South Africans into the world without a national tier of representation for the entirely avoidable reason of their own failure to agree on a budget.
The overriding attempt by the Koch Brother backed Americans for Prosperity, (an organization founded by David H. Koch) and the Tea Party to do what the Klan was created to do, keep Black People in our place, must not be allowed to damage our thrust as a people to become successful like President Obama and others from our community who have become leaders on the worlds stage. Our community in general and our children in particular must continue to follow the lead of our President and get a good education and use that knowledge to build businesses and lead institutions that will uplift our people and the world. We can not let anyone bring closure to our struggle that has taken us from the bottom of slave ships to the White House. Our faith in the Creator has brought us this far and we will not let our struggle to become prosperous as a people be shutdown by anyone.
Administrator of the African Market Mall Online on Facebook.
Sponsored by http://www.ArdyssLife.com/EmmasPlace
Check us out at https://www.facebook.com/AfricanMarketOnline?ref=hl