Conservation With Immediate Effect
Reduce water use from 20% to 40% in the shower.
A huge return on investment -
© 2013 Water Select® All Rights Reserved.
Our unique valve allows you to keep your existing showerhead and still save massive amounts of water. Using the valve while showering will also lower gas / electricity bills, and sewage costs.
Water Footprint is often used to refer to the amount of water used by an individual, community, business, or nation; whereas, Water Use means the amount of water used by a household or a country; or the amount used for a given task.
In 2008 it was estimated that, in the U.S., the typical single-
By ignoring the need to reduce our Water Footprint and conserve fresh water, by 2030, in some developing regions of the world, water demand will exceed supply by 50%. Water is a critical issue for the survival of all living organisms.
Hot water use alone can be lowered by approximately 20% by retrofitting water using fixtures and appliances. Hot water use in residential homes could be lowered by billions of gallons per year if every home installed appliances and fixtures that were more efficient.
By utilizing the patented Water Select® valve you can reduce your Water Footprint
by using less water in the shower. Taking advantage of the valve’s ability to stop
a shower that leaks, drips, or will not totally shut-
It is easy to see how Water Select® is Conservation With Immediate Effect.
There is a long cycle and process, involved with providing fresh water to populated cities, that most people are not aware of. It is not cheap to bring that water into your home or to recycle and clean it up at the water processing plant.
The United States uses much more water per capita than developing countries, which equates to an extremely high Water Footprint. For example, the average American’s daily shower uses more water than a person in a developing country would use for an entire day.
Many areas of the world are already experiencing stress on water availability. Due to the accelerated pace of population growth and an increase in the amount of water a single person uses, it is expected that this situation will continue to get worse. A shortage of water in the future would be detrimental to the human population, as it would affect everything from sanitation, to overall health, as well as the production of grain.
The overall objective of Water Select® is to raise the industry standards regarding conservation of fresh water that is used for personal showers. These conservation efforts will pass along savings to the proprietor, while contributing to the overall reduction of our Water Footprint.
So Don’t Delay, buy a Water Select® valve today for every shower and join the Movement to Conserve both Water and Energy. Thank YOU! Water is the Quiet Emergency that will benefit greatly by reducing our Water Footprint!