When thinking of scenarios, here are some of the questions you should ask: What are the current pain-points felt by the learner? What is the use case to illustrate these pain points? What are the good behaviors / bad behaviors to cover? What are the lessons your audience should remember after viewing the eLearning video?
Articulating the pain points is usually a good starting point. In the early stage, it is very helpful to brainstorm on the topic. Put down on a sheet of paper the few main things going through your mind. This will give you the confidence that you will not forget something important. With your mind at ease, you can then easily brainstorm and further develop your ideas. As new ideas emerge put down on the sheet of paper. At this time, do not make any distinction between the ideas. You may have very high-level ideas as well as points of details or flashes of cool things to show. Give everything a few days to settle down. Read some external articles on the topic – it will help you feed your thinking.
Once done, it will be time for you to put some order. Try to imagine one scenario covering the pain points to illustrate. There are several tricks you could use to make the scenarios more appealing, more realistic. One such trick is the change of point of view. Showing a scene from the eyes of your video’s hero is often a good way to get the audience to identify with him/her. Then showing his/her actions from a neutral point of view like a surveillance camera or showing a stranger watching the scene from afar, places the focus on the perceptions others can have of the same situation.
In one of our videos we used the point of view of a security camera to get this effect.
In most videos defining a single scenario will not be enough. It would not be realistic to fit every single pain point in it. In those cases break the situation into separate stories and if needed make separate videos.
Sometimes you may need to show different things happening simultaneously to different groups of people in a single video. Jumping from one set of people to the other can help keep the tension.
In one of our videos, one part of the story was about a person accidentallystarting a fire. Another part was on the person discovering the accidentand the last part was with a different set of actors in different location where they had to evacuate the building. We demonstrated the external point of view by showing views of the fire from outside the building.
To conclude – reflect deeply on the scenario(s) in your video, make sure they cover all the pain points you want to target and show them from different points of view to add some muscle to your eLearning video.