Large metallic balls dropping across the U.S. (and Africa). NASA and the U.N. confirmed the alien balls are from Planet Zeeba.
The hollow balls with a circumference of between 4 an 10 feet have been found all across the U.S. in the last forty-eight hours, according to authorities with NASA and the United Nations Panel on Extraterrestrials.
With a diameter of 3 to 6 feet, the balls have a rough surface and appear to consist of “two halves welded together”.
Forensic scientists from the FBI said that the alien balls are made of a “metal alloy unknown to man.” The balls weight between 10 and 20 pounds. Curiously many of the alien balls land softly on earth, though a few of them have made holes about two feet deep.
The FBI and NASA estimate that over 10,000 alien balls have dropped in the United States, with an additional 5,000 balls dropping in Africa, Australia and Latin America. There are more alien balls spottings reported each and every hour across the United States.
The alien orbs, however, do not pose any danger. “They are not explosive devices, they seem harmless,” said FBI agent, Lloyd Mowra.
Dr. Susan Begley and Dr. Banesh Bannerjee of the U.N. Panel on Extraterrestrials have been working with NASA scientists over the last two days, examining the balls. Dr. Begley told WWN that the balls are “clearly from spaceships from Planet Zeeba. We recognize the markings on the balls, and they are clearly Zeeban.”
This was good news to Dr. Bannerjee. “The Zeebans are part of an ongoing peaceful alien invasion that began in October of 2010 and they we estimate will continue until December of 2015.”
Some on the U.N . Panel, however, say that the Zeebans may be sending a message to the aliens from Planet Gootan, who landed on Earth (in China and the Indonesian Sea) on November 27th of this year. “The Gootan are hostile and are here to attack humans. The Zeebans may be coming here to defend us against the Gootan attack.”
Could Earth be a battleground between the Gootans and the Zeebans.
“We think so. We are predicting an alien conflict on earth between the Gootans and the Zeebans throughout 2012. In fact, we think it’s already begun.”
What should citizens do if they see the alien balls falling?
“There’s no reason for alarm. The balls seem to be designed to avoid striking any humans. They are friendly balls.”
Good to know… WWN will keep readers updated on the falling balls.