Researchers at Cornell University have been hard at work using Microsoft’s Kinect to help robots predict human behavior. Thanks to the Kinect’s ability to track human motion and identify objects in three-dimensional space, these robots can now react to human movement, and anticipate the results. Better yet, the underlying code and dataset is available for free from the research team.
The researchers placed four participants in five common environments (bathroom, bedroom, kitchen, living room, and office). Then, the participants were asked to perform a variety of different activities like rinsing their mouth, brushing their teeth, putting in contact lenses, talking on the phone, drinking, opening pill containers, chopping, stirring, talking on a couch, relaxing on a couch, writing on a whiteboard, and working on a computer. 45 seconds of Kinect footage was recorded per activity per participant, and then the data was compiled to help the robot “understand” the motions associated with each activity.
The video above clearly illustrates how the data is being used by the robot. Since it already has information about possible actions, it can predict what moves the human is most likely going to make next. The robot can then take preemptive steps to assist the human or prevent an accident. While opening doors and pouring beer without spilling are impressive feats, this is just the beginning for intuitive robotics. A near-instinctual understanding of the surrounding environment is a vital step forward in the progression of artificial intelligence, and the fact that this robot can understand so much from such little data is quite promising.
In this video, the robot correctly identifies that the human is making a bowl of cereal, finds the jug of milk, picks it up, and replaces it in the refrigerator. This kind of assistive behavior obviously has huge potential for children, the elderly, and especially the disabled. Truly, the fact that the complex identification being performed here is being accomplished with cheap off-the-shelf technology makes this project all the more impressive.
If you’d like to explore this project yourself, the researchers have graciously made the code and data freely available. While this is compelling for tinkerers and robotics enthusiasts, it’s even more useful for other researchers. Considering we’re only a few months away from the next version of Kinect launching with HD cameras and the ability to track upwards of six people at a time, this publicly available code is ripe for improvement and expansion.