Could you imagine life as a coalminer, railway worker or housekeeper?
These are just some of the professions you would have been likely to land if you had grown up in the late 1930s.
Some very interesting data has revealed the most popular occupations and first names for people living in Bristol and the surrounding areas on the eve of World War Two.
According to the 1939 Register, the top three most popular girls names in England and Wales were Mary, Margaret and Elizabeth and William, John and George were the most popular boys names.
When it came to the most common jobs during that time, an unpaid domestic servant (i.e. a housewife) came top of the list while the second most popular was being retired.
Being a clerk was the next most common job followed by motor vehicle driver and farm worker.
The data comes courtesy of the 1939 Register which has been digitised by Find My Past in partnership with the National Archives, as reported by Getbucks.
Dubbed The Wartime Domesday Book, The 1939 Register is the most comprehensive survey of the population of England and Wales ever taken.
The register was taken on September 29, a few weeks after Britain declared war on Germany.
In just one day 65,000 enumerators were employed to visit every house in England and Wales to take stock of the 41 million-strong civil population.
The information they recorded was used to issue Identity Cards, plan mass evacuations, establish rationing and co-ordinate other wartime provisions.
In the longer term, the 1939 Register would go on to play a central role in the establishment of post-war services like the NHS.
As well as being a vital document at the time, the register is also set to be a resource of huge historic importance. Due to the 1921 census not being publicly available, the 1931 census having been destroyed during the war and the 1941 census not being taken because of the war, the 1939 Register bridges a hitherto vacant period between 1911 and 1951.
From a total of 19 million most men were employed in work that involved physical labour such as construction, building and farming.
The top 10 occupations recorded for men were:
2) Clerk (from railway to civil service)
3) Motor vehicle driver (from lorry driver to chauffeur)
4) Farm worker
5) General labourer
6) Fitter (from gas to machine)
7) Engineer (from radio service to aircraft engineer)
9) Shop owner/worker
10) Railway worker
Almost half of the 22 million women were performing domestic work, with the majority of those unpaid.
The top 10 occupations recorded for women were:
1) Unpaid domestic duties
2) Shop owner/worker
3) Clerk /administrative duties
4) Paid domestic duties
9) Private means
Was life better in 1939?
0+ VOTES SO FAR
The 1939 Register is free to search with different pay per view packages starting at £6.95 to view individual records. Owing to data protection, there will be some closed records at the time of launch but thousands of these will be made available each week.
Poll – do you think life was better in 1939?