Fluoride has become a popular topic in the last few years. After people became aware of fact that the government puts it in our public water supplies, many wanted to know more about the full effect that it has on our health.
Experts have been arguing for years about whether or not fluoride in drinking water is toxic to humans. Recent studies have finally shown evidence that it is. Extremely high levels of fluoride have been shown to cause neurotoxicity in adults, resulting in negative impacts on memory and learning. Researchers from the Harvard School of Public Health and China Medical University in Shenyang combined 27 studies, finding strong indications that fluoride also adversely affects cognitive development in children.
It was revealed in a study published in the Journal of Epidemiological & Community Health that people who drank fluoridated water were more prone to thyroid disorders that lead to obesity and depression.
The study stated that hypothyroidism is a big health issue and along with iodine deficiency fluoride exposure should be regarded as a contributing factor to this condition and putting question marks on the validity for fluoridation of the public water system.
In the United States, about 70% of public water supplies are fluoridated. Intake cannot be controlled, it’s available to everyone regardless of age or health, and it accumulates in the body. While fluoride is often associated with preventing tooth decay, research has found no significant relationship between tooth decay and fluoride intake among children. Many children are instead being overexposed to fluoride, leading to dental fluorosis, a discoloring of tooth enamel caused by too much fluoride.
There are so many health issue resulted from drinking fluoridated water. It can cause interference in brain function, damage to the pineal gland and bone, affect thyroid function and bad for overall health. With this being said, it is important to know which bottled water brand you have to avoid to protect yourself and your family from the deteriorating effect of consuming too much fluoride.
Here are the list of high risk bottled water that contain too much fluoride that you need to avoid:
In this list you can find some of the fluoride-safe water bottle brands:
Black Berry Farms-Aqua Pure
Blue Ice Natural Mineral Water
Clear Mountain Spring Water
Crystal Spring Natural Spring Water
Hidden Valley Natural Mineral Water
Mountain Valley Spring Water
Oasis Pure Drinking Water
Whole Foods 365
Other Concern of drinking bottled water
Now that you know which water bottle to avoid, you also need to about other concern surrounding bottled water. Every single day the amount of water bottles waste is about 67 millions. Beside, drinking from water bottles also have some other serious health risk, including early puberty in girls and fertility problems, learning and behavioral problems, altered immune system function, diabetes, obesity, decreased sperm count, prostate cancer, and breast cancer. All that is much attributed to BPA which may cause your health at risk if you drink water bottles regularly.