The Design and Technology Department is housed in a striking building featuring a series of large open-plan workshops with panoramic views over the South Downs and the sea.
These surroundings establish a relaxing yet inspiring space in which to face design challenges. The subject focuses on the created environment around us, how it came to be, how it changes, and what issues humanity will face in the future.
The specific area studied is Resistant Materials. At the heart of studies is the process of making, and for a great many pupils this is the most enjoyable aspect of the subject. Throughout the course, at all levels, practical work is embraced and reinforced with theory lessons. One of the central philosophies is that pupils should create useful and enduring contributions to the made world. Projects are designed to be lasting and quality is a core value.
In the Third Form all pupils have one double lesson (75 minutes) of D&T per week. Pupils arrive at the school from vastly different backgrounds and experiences, so the year is split into a number of modules all designed to build basic skills and improve core knowledge of the subject.
Pupils can choose to continue the subject at GCSE (Years 10 and 11). Typically 30 to 40 carry on, and are split into three or four sets. Quickly the skill levels rise as pupils embark on making a useful table and producing an in-depth product analysis of Alessi kitchen goods. This builds the knowledge needed to embark on the major project, a year-long design and make task in which the pupils must identify a design need and create a solution. Pupils follow independent paths, and are welcome to choose sizeable and ambitious challenges. Again quality and durability are core values and the final outcome is impressive.
The GCSE course also includes a theory exam which the pupils prepare for through focused theory weeks during the first year of study, and weekly theory lessons during their second.
The subject has a body of keen pupils who continue through to A Level. In the first year the course is split into three modules: a product analysis, a designing module, and a making module. A variety of focus directions are possible in this year. In the second year pupils again undertake a design and make task in which they identify a design need and create a solution. There are theory exams at both AS and A2 Levels. These are prepared for through weekly theory sessions comprising of a double lesson. Topics include all aspects of materials, manufacturing issues and processes, as well as social issues related to manufacturing and working conditions, the history of design and engineering, and future energy and resources issues.
Some pupils arrive at Lancing for the Sixth Form not having studied the subject previously, or studied under a very different system. The department is accustomed to this situation, and works with each individual pupil to meet their specific learning needs.
There are a number of visits each year, which vary due to differing situations. Recent trips have included the BMW/MINI factory, the Brunel degree show in London, and other local manufacturing facilities.
A number of activities take place in the D&T Centre. There are links with Young Enterprise students, who can use the College workshops for manufacturing. The CCF engineering activity has been the construction of a motorcycle engine-powered buggy, while a joint project with the Science Department sees the construction of an electric race car for the annual Greenpower races.
A number of students pursue careers related to designing. Pupils may go on to study architecture, engineering, product design, graphic design or urban planning. For many others their experience adds to a rounded education and a better understanding of the world around them.
|Mr Tim J Meierdirk (BFA Illinois)
||Head of Department
|Mr Alistair R Coakes (BA Nottingham, MSc Brighton)
|Mrs Sue E Lawrence (BA Brighton)
|Mr Mark Taylor
||Advanced Skills Technician