Chemical dependency usually starts with an individual having a taste of a certain chemical. Most of the time, this chemical has addictive properties which causes an individual to crave for it. This set-up usually places to constant craving forming dependency on the process. This is where the problem starts. This is the point that chemical dependency has lead to chemical addiction.
The physical and psychological aspects of the person are what concerns chemical dependency. The threat with chemical dependency is that not only does it greatly harm the body; it also allots the person to do such ridiculous and dangerous behaviors, such as committing crimes, hurting loved ones, and even trying to fly from on top of a 23-storey building. As long as the person is beneath the ecstatic influence of certain chemicals, he or she would not be aware and be conscious of his or her actions. Chemical dependency destroys the body system as well. The overdose of chemicals has reported to be the main cause of heart attacks. All over the world, the problem of chemical dependency is quite raging. However, responses to chemical dependency is very varied since across the world people have very different set of attitudes.
An individual has chemical dependency when he or she shows tolerance and/or withdrawal symptoms from a certain chemical. The existence of tolerance is when an individual feels a lesser effect from the same dose of that chemical due to regular use. The individual needs an increasing amount of the chemical to achieve the desired effect usually gotten from the same dosage. For different type of chemicals, there is a variation of tolerance risks. Withdrawal symptoms happen when one stops the use of the chemical. These withdrawal symptoms can be quite severe that the chemical must be withdrawn to prevent symptoms from becoming extremely dangerous.
There are many factors that explain the development of chemical dependency. One of these is the genetic factor which give details the vulnerability for chemical dependency as being transported about by the genes. When one has relatives that were afflicted of chemical dependence, one is eight times more likely to be chemical dependent. Environment is also another factor. When someone lives in an environment where people use chemicals in their lives, the individual might think that this kind of behavior is alright. This setting usually refers to teenagers. The factor of cognition also comes in. This is when the individual thinks that it is acceptable to use certain chemicals to relive stress and as a way to adapt the problems they are facing at the present.
It is important for anybody associating his or her self to chemical dependency to recover. How can this be possible? There are many available treatments for recovery. One of them is the use of medications. It can alleviate the symptoms of withdrawal from many chemicals. It also cuts the desire for the chemical. An added help in treating chemical dependency is the use of self-help groups. Behavioral therapies can also be used which are dependent upon why are you getting yourself into chemical dependency. If the chemical dependency came up to for the reason of false beliefs such as the idea of using chemicals as acceptable to reduce certain problems, then it is right to use cognitive therapies. Cognitive therapies work by way of approaching and changing the maladaptive thinking pattern of the individual.
It is important to quickly solve the problem of chemical dependency because if left untreated would lead to addiction. Addiction is a bigger and complicated problem as compared to chemical dependency.
Chemical dependency is a very serious problem because it can always lead to chemical addiction.