Interesting facts about dinosaurs.
Dinosaurs are fascinating creatures, which, although extinct a long time ago, but still continue to haunt the minds of people. Scientists got quite a lot of information on the basis of fossils, but many questions still remain unanswered. Here are 13 great mysteries of dinosaurs that we would like to solve.
1. Which of the dinosaurs was the first?
It is assumed that this niassar, which was about the size of a dog and first appeared about 245 million years ago.
2. What color were the dinosaurs?
Somehow, it is believed that they were green or brown, but the truth is that dinosaurs could be any colour. Especially those that had feathers.
3. They were warm-blooded or cold-blooded?
Judging from the bones found, most of the dinosaurs were warm-blooded animals. But the final answer to this question is not yet found.
4. Were they good parents?
Many modern reptiles, such as turtles, lay eggs and leave them in the lurch, but on the other hand birds and alligators quite a long time care for their children. How did the dinosaurs do not know exactly, although some fossils can be seen that certain species, such as maiasaura at least some time spent near nests.
5. Could the dinosaurs be cute?
As strange as it sounds, but Yes, it is quite possible. Despite the fact that the very name dinosaur means “terrible lizard,” some could look very nice. Don’t believe? Then look at the skeleton of a cat — looks very cute and kind of creepy, right? But we now have only the remains of dinosaurs and no one knows how they actually looked.
6. How fast were dinosaurs?
Scientists are trying to estimate the movement speed of dinosaurs on the basis of the extant traces. They estimate the dinosaur was moving relatively slowly, much slower than we show in the movie. But all this is only speculation.
7. As they learned to fly?
We know that some dinosaurs were feathered, but where they got the feathers? For modern scientists is a mystery that they are not yet able to master.
8, is it Possible to clone dinosaurs?
Cloning technology shown in “Jurassic Park”, is true, but the problem is that the half-life of DNA is about 520 years. So even if scientists have found the remnants of blood and tissue of a dinosaur preserved in amber to create this clone still wouldn’t work.
9. Could dinosaurs survive in the modern world?
Given that they existed millions of years ago, there is a high probability that they would have been just unsuitable to modern bacteria, and herbivorous dinosaurs would have died even faster from our plants.
10. Dinosaurs eating people?
First, dinosaurs and humans lived in absolutely different periods of earth’s history, separated by more than 65 million years. Second, we know that modern predators such as lions and sharks rarely attack people. It is therefore possible that dinosaurs could coexist relatively peacefully with people, preferring food that does not throw them with stones and spears.
11. What are they extinct?
In this respect there are many theories. Some scientists argue that the reason a huge asteroid that fell to Earth, others are saying about gradual climate change to which dinosaurs were not ready. There is also a theory that because of the long growth process of the baby dinosaurs are often themselves become the victims of other predators.
12. What kinds of dinosaurs were the largest?
Recently was discovered the remains of a dinosaur called Puertasaurus, which presumably reached weighed from 35 to 40 meters in length and weighed 80 to 100 tons.
13. Whether all dinosaurs were hatched from eggs?
Analyzing the found fossils, the researchers came to the conclusion that some of the dinosaurs, in particular the plesiosaurs, probably might be viviparous.
© 2017, z-news.link. All rights reserved.