|Home > World News > Article|
"He would typically sit for one to two hours, and not infrequently as many as six, without standing up from his work station," say the authors, led by Richard Beasley of the Medical Research Institute of New Zealand, based in Wellington.
"This is the first reported case of an association between repeated prolonged immobility sitting at a computer and life-threatening (lung embolism)," they write.
They suggest the condition be called "e-thrombosis".
DVT as a result of prolonged sitting was first recognised during the Blitz in World War II, when cases of fatal embolisms emerged among Londoners who sat for long periods in deckchairs in air-raid shelters.
More recently, DVT has emerged as a potential, though very remote, risk for travellers on long, intercontinental flights.
It has been dubbed "economy class syndrome" because the phenomenon occurs more frequently among passengers in cramped seating, although researchers say it can occur in any seating where passengers are immobile.
The British high court last month blocked a bid by 55 victims of deep-vein thrombosis who had filed suit against 27 airlines, alleging that the carriers had breached their duty of care because of their cramped seating.
It ruled that the plaintiffs had no case under the 1929 Warsaw Convention on air travel as DVT was unexpected and could not be considered an accident in the normal operating of an aircraft.
DVT occurs when the flow of blood is restricted in a vein and a clot forms. It can also be caused by poor circulation because of problems such as heart disease, a recent heart attack or stroke, varicose veins, or from inactivity or prolonged bed rest.
Pregnant women, people who are overweight, the elderly, smokers and people with coronary heart disease and certain blood conditions are considered to be most at risk.
To prevent it, doctors suggest flexing one's toes and ankles, drinking water and avoiding alcohol, and getting up to stretch one's legs at least once an hour. An aspirin, which helps to thin the blood, can also help.
Printer friendly version Email to a friend
Also in World
Bush hits phones in final war push
Bush works hard to be word perfect
Sons murdered mother Sopranos-style
UN fails to agree on date to tackle North Korea
Sharon the favourite as jaded Israelis vote
US and coalition forces fight battle in Afghanistan
EU states at odds over Mugabe ban
Yugoslavia consigned to history
Indonesian rights group to study Soeharto atrocities
Cherie Blair flats-row man to be deported from Ireland
Vietnam, US veterans organisation agree on landmines survey
Two cyclones continue to batter South Pacific
|text | handheld (how to)||
Copyright © 2003. The Sydney Morning Herald.
|advertise | contact us|