Recent medical reports suggest that ingested aluminum has a direct link to Alzheimer's, attention deficit disorder, bone degeneration, kidney dysfunction, and even Parkinson's disease. Studies have also shown that aluminum salts can be absorbed from the intestines and concentrated in various human tissues. Most baking powder products, a staple in some households, contain toxic levels of aluminum.
With all this known, you probably would wonder why aluminum is allowed in baking powder and why anyone would use it. The baking powders that contain aluminum are ‘double-acting’ indicating that although some of the leavening power is released when the mix is prepared, the greater leavening takes place when the item is baked. This produces a very fine, light texture, and is appreciated particularly in commercial baking, where mixes often sit for long periods before they go into the oven. But it isn’t necessary for your baking. For a lighter texture, just bake the mix immediately.
Also, if you've ever experienced a bitter, "tinny" flavor when biting into a muffin, that's because of the baking powder used—and often the overuse of it. Using aluminum free baking powder not only will keep you from ingesting aluminum, but will also take away that bitter flavor.
April 10, 2011 at 9:41 pm
My son is allergic to corn. There is only one brand of baking powder (that I know of) that does not have cornstarch in it. Does this have cornstarch?
January 24, 2012 at 10:35 pm
Try the Arrowroot powder. xx
April 1, 2012 at 2:33 pm
RE: Baking Powder - Make your own. It's easier to find aluminum-free baking soda than baking powder:
1 teaspoon baking soda
2 teaspoons cream of tartar
1 teaspoon corn starch (optional - can use arrowroot instead of corn starch)
Mix the baking soda and cream of tartar together until well combined. Use immediately.
Yield: One tablespoon of baking powder.
To store baking powder: Add a teaspoon of corn starch to the mixture, and stir. This will absorb any moisture from the air, and prevent the baking powder from reacting before you need it. Store in an air-tight container.