What is Metabolism (Converting food into energy)
Metabolism is a process that occurs constantly in the body while we go about our daily business. In simple terms metabolism is the process which creates cells and then breaks down the cells to use them for energy. Every dieter is familiar with calories. Calories are actually units of energy. The body handles calories in two ways. The body either converts the calorie into energy or it uses the energy to break down cells.
Now, it is a bit easier to understand the link between calories, energy, metabolism. When the body finds excess energy or too many calories, it is forced to do something about this problem. The body turns all that excess energy into a bunch of new cells and tissue. And this is what leads to weight gain. In other words when the body is faced with too much energy it turns it into fat. That is of course, unless you are a professional athlete with strong powerful muscles whose metabolism burns up all the excess energy.
Boosting the Metabolism
There are many theories about metabolism and the best method to boost the metabolism. Experts agree that the key to boosting the metabolism is:
Starting an Exercise Program
Exercise-We all understand that exercise burns calories and plays an important part in boosting metabolism. Experts suggest starting an Aerobics program after your doctor confirms it is OK. Aerobics is great at increasing the heart rate, blood circulation, body temperature, and oxygen intake which leads to the body burning up more energy.
Lifestyle Change - A few lifestyle changes certainly help boost the metabolism. Start by choosing a low calorie meal choice over a high calorie meal. Reduce the amount of sugary drinks and alcohol drinks. Drinking alcohol and sugary sweet drinks forces your body to deal with all that excess energy that eventually turns to fat. Try to get the required amount of sleep nightly. People who do not get enough sleep usually lack the energy to digest their food properly. This leads to excess fat and weight gain.
Diets -Never go on a very restrictive low calorie diet. Restrictive calorie diets simply place the body in a protection mode. The body senses that you are eating fewer calories, perhaps facing a famine. The body slows down its metabolism to protect you from starvation. You probably notice that very low calorie diets make you feel tired and easily agitated because the body is holding on to every one of those calories for energy. Instead, consult with a nutrition specialist to determine the number of calories your body requires to function properly. Build your weight loss or maintenance plan around those findings.
Use the information included here to help boost the metabolism and control weight.