Preschool Program A Productive Early Education Grounded In God's Love.
Our preschoolers will gain the skills needed to acquire higher order and critical thinking skills through brain-based strategies, the use of multiple intelligences, and integrated thematic instruction. The following describes each of the skill areas in our Preschool Program.
In the pre-kindergarten years, children begin to develop a sense of self, of their special and separate identities. Our program is designed to help each child become independent and to gain an understanding of themselves, especially their emotions.
The language arts curriculum is based around a weekly unit theme, such as The Five Senses. Both whole-group and individual activities are centered around this theme. Our students develop beginning reading skills through the research-based Imagine It curriculum. Through award-winning literature, they develop auditory and visual skills for pre-reading, pre-writing, listening, and speaking.
All math concepts are introduced through the use of math manipulative materials in theme-related centers. Teachers provide the necessary materials for math exploration. Individualized lessons are taught, all developmentally appropriate for each child.
Our students learn science by doing—manipulating, inquiring, and experimenting. In classroom science centers, the students explore using the five senses with hands-on materials. Group experiments are teacher-directed and involve student participation.
Day-to-day activities help our students develop the responsibilities of community awareness. These activities increase our students’ awareness of the multicultural world by providing opportunities, understanding, and appreciation for cultural, ethnic, and religious differences.
Art & Music
Art provides an opportunity for our students to not only develop fine motor skills but also to experiment with a variety of materials and techniques to express their creativity. Our students are encouraged to freely express opinions and ideas. Through singing and playing instruments, along with participating in rhythm and movement activities, our students develop skills in listening and music appreciation.
Physical & Health Education
Students develop their gross motor skills by participating in activities such as climbing, swinging, sliding, running, skipping, and kicking, to name a few. Activities are also provided to gain an understanding of body awareness and control of movement. The concepts of health and nutrition are introduced so that our students develop beneficial lifelong habits of how to take care of their bodies.
We absolutely love St. Barnabas School! The opportunities for my children are so much more than we expected. Staff are amazing and we feel truly blessed to have found this school.
Faith can be defined best in Hebrews 11:1, "Now faith is confidence in what we hope for and assurance in what we do not see." We must remember that faith is not hoping for the things of this world but trusting that God saved us through His Son, Jesus Christ, and has an eternal joy planned for us . It is our greatest privilege to educate, share and nurture each student's faith relationship with God through sound doctrine and learning within an environment that encourages students to explore true biblical faith.
"Behavior that fits with what is right or moral." While there are many virtues, the highest virtue is love. Jesus said, "love one another as I have loved you." Educating, modeling, and guiding students to learn and display virtuous behavior towards all people is our moral and biblical responsibility at St. Barnabas Episcopal School.
Colossians 3:23 states, "Whatever you do, work at it with all your heart, as working for the Lord, not for man..." A powerful message often forgotten within the context of God's word. Children can never reach their "full potential" unless they are working for something far greater than themselves. But wanting this for our child is not nearly enough. As parents and teachers, we have to be the role models they look to mirror. This type of excellence is an integral part of the way we teach and present ourselves in every situation. However, the embodiment of this core value can only be effectively displayed within a framework of God's love.