In welcoming applications on behalf of boys with special educational needs, the school will use the resources, both financial and personnel, provided by the Department of Education & Science, to make reasonable provision and accommodation for all such students and will ensure that these students are free to participate in the life of the school in so far as is reasonably practicable. While recognising and fully supporting parents’ rights to have a school of their choice for their children, the school’s ability to accept boys with particular needs is dependent on the resources, suitable to the needs of the individual students, being supplied by the Department of Education & Science.
School management and parents must cooperate, from the earliest possible time, to establish the special educational needs of the student and the resources required to meet those needs and the submission of a well-researched request to the Department of Education & Science’s Special Education Needs Organiser (SENO) seeking the allocation of appropriate resources. Parents are encouraged to contact the school well in advance of the admissions process should they feel that their son has special education needs as considerable delays have been experienced by schools in receiving a response from the Department of Education & Science to a request for special resources.
In making provision for special educational need students the following information is required.
Has the student had access to any of the following resources? :
1. Special needs assistant or classroom assistant.
2. Special class
3. Help, for specific needs, from any resource teacher
4. Assistance with behavioural modification.
5. Psychological assessment. Report to be provided.
6. Any additional resources to help with their special needs
7. Help in areas including, visual impairment, hearing impairment, general learning disability or emotional disturbance.
8. Any resource in relation to travel or mobility etc.
If an expert report is provided, it should include a workable strategy for addressing the needs, allowing for the resources available.
The Board of Management, having gathered all relevant information and professional documentation, assesses how the needs of the special needs students can be met.
Final confirmation of a place may, in exceptional cases, have to be withheld until the Department of Education and Science confirms that the necessary resources are to be allocated.
In exceptional cases, even with additional resources provided by the Department of Education & Science, the school may not be able to provide an appropriate education due to the nature of a particular student’s special educational needs.