Cloud computing adoption is one of the best ways to maximize the benefits of a data center. The cloud is a valuable resource for maintaining a data center and consolidating its initiatives. This, along with its financial benefits, is why many organizations are incorporating cloud computing in the management of their data centers.
Cloud Computing and Data Center Efficiency
Cloud computing makes it easier to simplify and streamline operations. Mergers and acquisitions can, for instance, fragment IT systems, causing inefficiency. This makes it difficult for a data center to function optimally. Virtual computing consolidates operations at the data center, thus improving efficiency and cost-effectiveness.
Cloud computing does not require a large number of servers and other hardware. Incorporating it in a data center setup takes a load off the data center. Further, IT agility will be improved since employees can have access to company data and applications from any location, making a company more responsive to the needs of its clients.
When integrating virtual computing systems into a data center’s operations, it is advisable to ensure that cloud-based solutions are managed by a reputable service provider. According to Dataversity, this guarantees both efficiency and maximum effectiveness in the long run. Active monitoring of both systems is equally important.
What Distinguishes Cloud from the Data Center Itself
Some people use the terms "cloud" and "data center" interchangeably, since both denote the storage of data. The main difference lies in the fact that cloud is a virtual form of computing which typically stores data online. On the other hand, data centers have in-house hardware and store data within a company’s local network. Cloud-based computing services are often provided by third parties whose role is to regularly update and maintain the system; data centers are often maintained by in-house IT experts.
Even though data can be stored as a physical unit by both computing systems, only data centers can be used to store servers, hardware, and other equipment. This means that web computing service providers mainly use data centers to accommodate cloud-based services and resources. In most cases, these vendors have several data centers that are meant to safeguard the availability of data during outages.
Data centers have a limited capacity, which means that having one is ideal if a company has a dedicated and customized computing system that allows total control over equipment and data. If you're looking for more information on cloud computing, contact Emcon IT today.