a domain that seems to be specially reserved for someone
"medicine is no longer a male preserve"
a reservation where animals are protected
conserve, preserve, conserves, preserves(verb)
fruit preserved by cooking with sugar
continue, uphold, carry on, bear on, preserve(verb)
keep or maintain in unaltered condition; cause to remain or last
"preserve the peace in the family"; "continue the family tradition"; "Carry on the old traditions"
conserve, preserve, maintain, keep up(verb)
keep in safety and protect from harm, decay, loss, or destruction
"We preserve these archeological findings"; "The old lady could not keep up the building"; "children must be taught to conserve our national heritage"; "The museum curator conserved the ancient manuscripts"
to keep up and reserve for personal or special use
"She saved the old family photographs in a drawer"
prevent (food) from rotting
"preserved meats"; "keep potatoes fresh"
maintain in safety from injury, harm, or danger
"May God keep you"
keep undisturbed for personal or private use for hunting, shooting, or fishing
"preserve the forest and the lakes"
a sweet spread made of any of a variety of berries
a nature preserve
To protect; to keep; to maintain the condition of.
Orbiting Earth in the spaceship, I saw how beautiful our planet is. People, let us preserve and increase this beauty, not destroy it - Yuri Gagarin (the first man in space)
to keep or save from injury or destruction; to guard or defend from evil, harm, danger, etc.; to protect
to save from decay by the use of some preservative substance, as sugar, salt, etc.; to season and prepare for remaining in a good state, as fruits, meat, etc.; as, to preserve peaches or grapes
to maintain throughout; to keep intact; as, to preserve appearances; to preserve silence
to make preserves
to protect game for purposes of sport
that which is preserved; fruit, etc., seasoned and kept by suitable preparation; esp., fruit cooked with sugar; -- commonly in the plural
a place in which game, fish, etc., are preserved for purposes of sport, or for food
Chambers 20th Century Dictionary
prē-zėrv′, v.t. to keep safe from harm or injury: to defend: to keep in a sound state: to season for preservation: to make lasting: to keep up, as appearances.—n. that which is preserved, as fruit, &c.: that which preserves: a place for the protection of animals, as game: (pl.) spectacles to protect the eyes from strong light, &c.—n. Prēservabil′ity.—adj. Prēser′vable.—n. Prēservā′tion, act of preserving or keeping safe: state of being preserved: safety.—adjs. Prēser′vative, Prēser′vatory, tending to preserve: having the quality of preserving.—n. that which preserves: a preventive of injury or decay.—n. Prēserv′er. [Fr. préserver—L. præ, beforehand, servāre, to preserve.]
To keep in the original form.
Food is preserved in various ways e.g. curing, salting and with the use of a preservative.
British National Corpus
Rank popularity for the word 'Preserve' in Verbs Frequency: #498
The numerical value of Preserve in Chaldean Numerology is: 9
The numerical value of Preserve in Pythagorean Numerology is: 9
Sample Sentences & Example Usage
Mr. Abe says he will preserve our 'beautiful Japan,' and I expect him to do it.
The art of progress is to preserve order amid change and to preserve change amid order.
Our parks are falling apart. There's $12 billion backlog on our most pristine, greatest national monuments and parks, we should preserve what we've already invested in.
This story about what Clarke did is a very moving one, It was like a prophesy of what we are trying to do now. We too are trying to preserve works of art for future generations.
Only those books come down which deserve to last . All the gilt edges, vellum and morocco, all the presentation copies to all the libraries will not preserve a book in circulation beyond its intrinsic date.
Images & Illustrations of Preserve
Translations for Preserve
From our Multilingual Translation Dictionary
- الحفاظ علىArabic
- preservarCatalan, Valencian
- chránit, uchovat, uchovávatCzech
- erhalten, bewahren, aufrechterhaltenGerman
- säilyttää, säilöä, taltioida, marmeladiFinnish
- dìon, saillScottish Gaelic
- की रक्षाHindi
- konsèveHaitian Creole
- រក្សា, គាំពារ, អភិរក្សKhmer
- beschermen, in stand houden, bewarenDutch
- întreține, protejaRomanian
- защити́ть, сохрани́ть, оберега́ть, сохраня́ть, запове́дник, обере́чь, варе́нье, охрани́ть, защища́ть, охраня́тьRussian
- branjevina, slatko, zabran, zagradSerbo-Croatian
Get even more translations for Preserve »
Find a translation for the Preserve definition in other languages:
Select another language: