Welcome to 2077, America!

We've got VR capabilities better than ever before. Your wildest dreams await you. Discomfort? Pain? Sadness? Loneliness? Just wanting a little boost? We've got all the things you need to turn your life around today.

Very Real Technologies, LLC, has provided entertainment, education, and connection to the masses for more than 24 years. As the largest company in the world, VR Tech is proud to announce that we've officially expanded to every country in the world--excluding North Korea, of course. Our 5-billion regular consumer base is extremely satisfied with the lives that they get to live in VR. In VR, we get to be our best selves. We get to explore the world. We get to dream. And at the end of the day, does it matter if it's simulated? All emotions felt are real, whether simulated or not, the body and brain do not feel a difference.

There's no need for headsets either! The full VR Supreme package comes with a hair-thin contact lens casing module, which is worn 24/7 and never needs to be taken out. No surgery or scalps are required! Everything you see is right in front of you at all times.

The world today looks much different than it did, for example, in the 2020s. Automation has taken over most things. Only the fully creative and expressive have jobs. The rest are living their glory days in a fully personalizable and customizable VR Tech reality as they want it. Forget your standard office job! Machine learning, specifically from the ML branch of VR Tech, takes care of it! Forget having to drive a car! Any experience you need can be encapsulated in full, 32K, 300fps glory. Forget having to keep up with relationships! The connections you make with our hybrid (human + synth) models will prove to make you happy every day. No more fights, no more sadness, and a whole lot more of the good stuff!

Want to live in a castle? That can be arranged. Want to visit Peru? Done. Want to re-experience your favorite memories? We've got them all in our DNA-cloud-based personalized memory access library.

Experience a better reality. Purchase your VR Tech monthly subscription today.
