9th Grade Math: Distance
Distance is a numerical description of how far apart objects are.
Many 9th grade math students find distance difficult. They feel overwhelmed with distance homework, tests and projects. And it is not always easy to find distance tutor who is both good and affordable. Now finding distance help
is easy. For your distance homework, distance tests, distance projects, and distance tutoring needs, TuLyn is a one-stop solution. You can master hundreds of math topics by using TuLyn.
At TuLyn, we have over 2000 math video tutorial clips including distance videos
, distance practice word problems
, distance questions and answers
, and distance worksheets
Our distance videos
replace text-based tutorials in 9th grade math books and give you better, step-by-step explanations of distance. Watch each video repeatedly until you understand how to approach distance problems and how to solve them.
- Tons of video tutorials on distance make it easy for you to better understand the concept.
- Tons of word problems on distance give you all the practice you need.
- Tons of printable worksheets on distance let you practice what you have learned in your 9th grade math class by watching the video tutorials.
How to do better on distance: TuLyn makes distance easy for 9th grade math students.
9th Grade: Distance Videos
distance video clips for 9th grade math students.
9th Grade: Distance Word Problems
A cabin cruiser left a harbor and traveled
A cabin cruiser left a harbor and traveled to a small island at an average speed of 24 mph. On the return trip, the cabin cruiser traveled at an average speed of 16 mph. The total time of the trip 5 ...
Two cars leave from the same place
Two cars leave from the same place at the same time and travel in opposite directions. One car travels at 55 mph and the other at 75 ...
Gordon rode his bike
Gordon rode his bike at 15 mph to go get his car. He then drove back at 45 mph. If the entire trip took him 8 ...
distance homework help word problems for 9th grade math students.
How Others Use Our Site
I Would like to re-learn all the math lessons I\`ve had since the 6th grade, Mostly because i slept throughout the 6th grade to 9th grade. I\`ll be stuck in 9th grade again next year, and i don\`t want it to happen again..
(And i was watching Clannad and i suddenly got jealous of Kotomi Ichinose) yes, nerdy, i know. And i don`t care.
To prepare for the 9th grade.
I am hoping I will learn how to do word problems related to Solving Systems of Linear Equations in Two Variables. It is an area I am having the most trouble.. especially related to distance (2 autos traveling at different speeds, etc.) problems where speed is unknown.
I ned to take some test ,so i ned to learn more about 9th grade math.
Because i am in 9th grade n im supposed 2 be in the 11th grade and i was told this could catch me up.
It will help me with my son who`s entering 9th grade but struggles to understand teacher`s explanations and this will allow for him to practice at home.
I am a resource math teacher to 8th and 9th graders and I need more resources.
My daughter is in 9th grade and I don`t know how to do her math homework.
Algebra - 9th grader - deciding which method to use when problem types are in random order.
I am teaching special ed students algebra and geometry on grade level. I have no materials for bringing them up from 5th grade - 7th grade level to 9th grade -10th grade level.
Tutoring my 9th grade son.
I teach math to 9th grade -12th grade at a small city school in North Carolina. Knowing that each student in NC has to score levels 3 or 4 on the EOC Algebra 1 test to graduate, any real-life application type problems would be beneficial to the success of my students. Knowing also that matrces are heavily tested on the NC EOC test, this website appears that it would be helpful. Our textbooks do not offer many examples of matrices . Thank you.
I am a mathematics teacher and your web site can help me making my assessments and worksheets for the pupils of my class of 8th and 9th grades.