Rate of return and standard deviation are two of the most useful statistical concepts in business. These two figures will tell you whether a business project is worth the investment and trouble, given the profit potential versus the risks involved. Using these measures to evaluate the financial performance of your business as whole tells you whether you should be in that line of business in the first place.
Rate of Return
In business, the term "rate of return" refers to the percentage profit of an investment. The rate of return equals profit divided by the original investment, multiplied by 100. If you have invested $200,000 into a restaurant and earn $40,000 in net profits after one year, your rate of return equals $40,000 divided by $200,000 times 100, or 20 percent. The rate of return can refer to either the actual profit you have earned or the profit you expect to earn on a future project. To arrive at an accurate return number, look at the broad picture and include all relevant gains and losses, including depreciation of assets, administrative and legal costs and forgone income, such as the retirement package you had to give up when you left your previous job to open the restaurant.
Standard deviation is a measure of how much a variable tends to swing. Variables that are stable have lower standard deviations than those that swing wildly. A stock whose price has varied between $8 and $10 all year will have a lower standard deviation than one that has touched $4 several times over the last 12 monthswhile also going as high as $12 on multiple occasions. To calculate standard deviation, you need to find the average value of the variable and compare how each value differs from the average. In case of a stock, this entails comparing the daily closing price from the average price over the course of the year.
Using Past Data
The rate of return and standard deviation of a business are easier to calculate if you have past data to work with. If your restaurant has been active for the last 10 years, for example, all you need is the profit you have made for each of the last 10 years. Averaging the 10 annual rates of return will give you the average rate of return. Next, plug the annual figures into the formulation for standard deviation. Armed with these figures, you can compare the financial performance of your business to that of others. An alternative line of business promising the same rate of return with a lower standard deviation is preferable, as it offers the same gain with less variation or risk.
Calculating rate of return and standard deviation is more challenging if you have no past data to rely on. If you are planning to open a restaurant, you cannot use past data. Instead, you must predict various potential profit figures. Most business owners start by estimating what they will earn in the most probable case, worst case and best case. This results in three rate of return figures. You can add a "disaster scenario" and a "miracle scenario," as there is no hard rule about the number of scenarios needed to calculate a standard deviation for a prospective investment. The availability of data, number of factors that influence the profit potential and your experience in working with financial figures will determine how many scenarios you should draft before starting your calculations.
- Creatas/Creatas/Getty Images