Meropenem is an antibiotic that fights bacteria.
Meropenem is used to treat severe infections of the skin or stomach. Meropenem is also used to treat bacterial meningitis (infection of brain or spinal cord).
Meropenem may also be used for purposes not listed in this medication guide.
You should not use this medicine if you have a history of allergies to certain antibiotic medications, such as penicillin.
You should not use meropenem if you are allergic to it, or if you have a history of allergy to certain antibiotics, such as:
To make sure meropenem is safe for you, tell your doctor if you have:
This medicine is not expected to harm an unborn baby. Tell your doctor if you are pregnant or plan to become pregnant.
Meropenem can pass into breast milk and may harm a nursing baby. Tell your doctor if you are breast-feeding a baby.
Get emergency medical help if you have any of these signs of an allergic reaction: hives; difficult breathing; swelling of your face, lips, tongue, or throat.
Call your doctor at once if you have:
Common side effects may include:
This is not a complete list of side effects and others may occur. Call your doctor for medical advice about side effects. You may report side effects to FDA at 1-800-FDA-1088.
This medication may impair your thinking or reactions. Be careful if you drive or do anything that requires you to be alert.
Antibiotic medicines can cause diarrhea, which may be a sign of a new infection. If you have diarrhea that is watery or bloody, stop using meropenem and call your doctor. Do not use anti-diarrhea medicine unless your doctor tells you to.
Tell your doctor about all your current medicines and any you start or stop using, especially:
This list is not complete. Other drugs may interact with meropenem, including prescription and over-the-counter medicines, vitamins, and herbal products. Not all possible interactions are listed in this medication guide.
Meropenem is injected into a vein through an IV. You may be shown how to use an IV at home. Do not self-inject this medicine if you do not understand how to give the injection and properly dispose of used needles, IV tubing, and other items used to inject the medicine.
Meropenem is usually given every 8 hours. Follow all directions on your prescription label. Do not use this medicine in larger or smaller amounts or for longer than recommended.
Meropenem must be mixed with a liquid (diluent) before using it. If you are using the injections at home, be sure you understand how to properly mix and store the medicine.
Do not mix other injectable medications in the same IV bag or tubing used to given your meropenem injection.
Use a disposable needle and syringe only once. Follow any state or local laws about throwing away used needles and syringes. Use a puncture-proof "sharps" disposal container (ask your pharmacist where to get one and how to throw it away). Keep this container out of the reach of children and pets.
Use this medicine for the full prescribed length of time. Your symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cleared. Skipping doses may also increase your risk of further infection that is resistant to antibiotics. Meropenem will not treat a viral infection such as the common cold or flu.
If you use meropenem long-term, you may need frequent medical tests at your doctor's office.
Store unopened vials at cool room temperature away from moisture and heat.
After mixing your medicine, you will need to use it within a certain number of hours. This will depend on the diluent and how you store the mixture (at cool room temperature, or in a refrigerator). Carefully follow the mixing and storage instructions provided with your medicine. Ask your pharmacist if you have questions.
Seek emergency medical attention or call the Poison Help line at 1-800-222-1222.
Use the missed dose as soon as you remember. Skip the missed dose if it is almost time for your next scheduled dose. Do not use extra medicine to make up the missed dose.
Copyright 1996-2017 Cerner Multum, Inc.
Latest Update: 6/22/2017, Version: 3.03