Wednesday, November 30, 2011
The following chart represents the comparative sizes of giants throughout history.
Text courtesy of Proving The Bible
Present day modern man which averages about 6-feet tall + or - several inches or more.
15-foot human skeleton found in southeast Turkey in late 1950's in the Euphrates valley during road construction. Many tombs containing giants were uncovered here. This pertains to the picture of the giant human femur and myself above.
Maximinus Thrax Ceaser of Rome 235-238 A.D. This was an 8' 6" skeleton.
D. Goliath was about 9 feet + or - a few inches. I Samuel 17:4 late 11th century.
E. King Og spoken of in Deuteronomy 3:11 whose iron bedstead was approximately 14-feet by 6-feet wide. King Og was at least 12-feet tall, yet some claim up to 18.
F. A 19'6" human skeleton found in 1577 A.D. under an overturned oak tree in the Canton of Lucerne.
G. 23-foot tall skeleton found in 1456 A.D. beside a river in Valence, France.
H. A 25' 6 " skeleton found in 1613 A.D. near the castle of Chaumont in France. This was claimed to be a nearly complete find.
I. Almost beyond comprehension or believability was the find of the two separate 36-foot human remains uncovered by Carthaginians somewhere between 200-600 B.C.
Source for the above information:
Joe Taylor, Mt. Blanco Fossil Museum
124 West Main St., P.O. Box 550, Crosbyton, TX 79322
(805) 675-7777 (office) and (806) 675-2421 (fax)
Chemtrails to Kill Population
Killer Chemtrails and Poison Rains to thin Population
It is important to distinguish between contrails and chemtrails. Contrails are streaks of condensed water vapor created in the air by jet airplanes at high altitudes. Contrails can exist in two forms: water droplet and ice crystal. Contrails typically become visible about a wingspans distance behind an aircraft flying at high altitude. The trail dissipates quite quickly, usually within a minute or so.
Chemtrails, on the other hand, are visible directly behind an aircraft, with little or no gap between the aircraft and the start of the trail. Chemtrails are said to vary from contrails in their length of persistence. Chemtrails do not dissipate quickly; they tend to form into mushy clouds which can block sunlight. Some people are reporting what they describe to be unusual activity in the sky, including jets leaving trails at low altitudes, spray lines creating X’s, S’s and parallel lines, lines that slowly spread to create a canopy of haze, and reports of unusual smells, tastes, and even illness related to the trails.
Also, a reddish-brown gel, dropped from low-flying aircraft, has been observed by people in the past and was even documented on Unsolved Mysteries. Samples of this substance have been alledgedly analyzed by Margareta-Erminia Cassani and found to be teaming with biological organisms. Other tests have shown that chemtrails contain more than 3 times the legal level of the toxic substance, barium. Chemtrails may also be one of the primary contributory factors in the collapse of honey bee colonies worldwide. Albert Einstein clearly knew the importance of the honey bee when he said: “If the bee disappears from the surface of the earth, man would have no more than four years to live.”
There are currently three main hypothesis for the purpose of chemical spraying in the skies: weather modification, population control, and testing of biological agents on the general population.
The following video contains more information about these “chemtrails”.
Even if we assume that these trails have nothing to do with eugenics or weather modification, we cannot ignore the fact that our skies are being heavily polluted with aviation fuel emissions that contribute towards a host of different health problems
Their impact on the environment, and the history of aerial spraying that has taken place in many countries.
Chemtrail spraying seems to be heaviest and most constant over North America, Solid proof that Weather Modification projects are being conducted all over the United States , Canada and most countries of western Europe. Some countries in Asia are being sprayed (Japan and Korea), but the greatest exception to any chemtrail activity whatsover is China. The Chinese are being spared completely because China is being groomed by the NWO to replace the United States as the leading nation of the world, both economically and militarily.
In 2008, a KSLA news investigation found that a substance that fell to earth from a high altitude chemtrail contained high levels of Barium (6.8 ppm) and Lead (8.2 ppm) as well as trace amounts of other chemicals including arsenic, chromium, cadmium, selenium and silver. Of these, all but one are metals, some are toxic while several are rarely or never found in nature
The health effects of bombarding the skies with sulphur dioxide alone are enough to raise serious questions about whether such programs should even be allowed to proceed… Read full in depth report Geoengineering: Our Environment Under Attack
The following health effects are linked with exposure to sulphur.
- Neurological effects and behavioral changes
- Disturbance of blood circulation
- Heart damage
- Effects on eyes and eyesight
- Reproductive failure
- Damage to immune systems
- Stomach and gastrointestinal disorder
- Damage to liver and kidney functions
- Hearing defects
- Disturbance of the hormonal metabolism
- Dermatological effects
- Suffocation and lung embolism
Just yesterday, a ‘Chemical’ snow blanket hits Residents of Dilovasi, an industrial suburb just outside of Istanbul, Turkey.
A mysterious substance that, on numerous occasions, has been found covering cars, trees, clotheslines, and vegetable gardens throughout the city.
Milliyet, a Turkish newspaper, reports that government officials are currently trying to identify the source of this sticky goo, which has reportedly made a number of people ill and ruined local crops… full articles Here and Here
In 1997, in an episode of U.S. television Unsolved Mysteries: Residents of Oakville in Washington state became ill from a mysterious white substance..
Other secret operations to thin population
A remarkable statement was made by Laura Eisenhower, the great-granddaughter of former United States president Dwight Eisenhower.
Laura Eisenhower was speaking on the sidelines of a UFO, science and consciousness conference in Johannesburg.
She said natural faults in the earth were being manipulated to produce catastrophes like tsunamis and earthquakes using Haarp technology or bio-weapons. Eisenhower said this was part of a secret agenda by a number of governments to decrease the earth’s human population in favour of colonies on mars and the moon… full article Alien tech used to thin population
After 16 years of denial, the White House Science Czar John P Holdren now admits that they have been “testing” the manipulation of Earth’s atmosphere with Barium salts, Aluminum Dioxide and other toxic compounds.
Bottom line: Time to wake up to the fact that we are all being sprayed. There is a world-wide secret program to manipulate the atmosphere. They admit it’s happening, but they won’t tell us why.
7 Responses to Killer Chemtrails and Poison Rains to thin Population
- Stella H Howell
Friends, Chemtrails have deadly poisons including parasites. Shortly (if not already) your bodies will be riddled with various new species deliberately ‘manufactured’. I mention this to create awareness NOT to create a scare, but for you to now understand how you can also CURE yourselves.
Kindly bear with me. I will create a website or update http://www.ecotrace.co.uk /org with the solutions. Don’t worry, I do not sell anything & it will not be too late. I expect to launch this at the end of December.
Peace. Do not be afraid.
God alone i.e. YAHWAH ALONE can save us!.
If you disagree,I pray that you are enlightened.
A very fine and always welcome story… Chemtrails are THE proof that your Governments HATE you and wish for you and your family to get sick and develop numerous illnesses/diseases/cancers and ultimately die, BUT not before you go to your Doctor and give your slave-wages to them and the filthy pharmaceutical corporations to try to remedy your illness by supporting the same scumbags Satanists who spray you and yours every day… its a vicious circle… they spray you with toxic chemicals and you go and buy (from the same freaks) more toxic chemicals to try to get your health back… and you CANNOT get airtime on the issue of chemtrails if you try, its a blacklisted subject across the media… they are even now putting images of chemtrails in TV shows, music video clips, movies etc etc simply to condition people into accepting it as “normal”… Chemtrails support the secret Govt agenda to damage organic farming by killing crops, interefering with natures balance and by proxy provides support to evil Illuminati corporations like Monsanto who are into genetic engineering of foods which are anything but natural and healthy. Governments spraying noxious and poisonous chemicals over populations and farming areas is not normal or justified behaviour… it is crimes against humanity…
For those interested check the ‘chemtrail’ Illuminati card… also of interest Chemtrails have a by-advantage for the HAARP facility, the aluminium and barium in the chemtrail toxic mix provides apparent support for HAARP projection and effect, whether it be in environmental destruction, earthquakes etc, holographic projection or mind control programs…
Hopefully others wise to chemtrails will have their say here as I have…
So if ‘they’ are killing us with these chemtrails it must effect ‘them selfs’ also or not?
They’d likely have an antdote for themselves if that were the case.
this is pure truth. for more, go here: strangedaysstrangeskies, whatdoesitmean.com and pray for ron paul, stevequayle.com, standeyo.com, activist post, ronald weinlands free books, infowars and willthomas. let’s join together to expose what they have hidden from us and figured that we are too asleep and stupid to figure out. love, ann
Dont forget all the Nano particles which are around us…in the Diesel for Cars…in the Colours of Clothes, in the Ink of your Printer, in Shoesprays and many more…maybe the Nanotech and the Chemtrails are like a 2 component thing….together it will start to work very bad agaist us…(maybe the morgellons illness)?????
PS:i think also that there is a connection between the beedying and nanotech-products…..
PS2: I read some month ago an article how to bring the morgelloms out of the body….it has something to do with the PH-scale…when i remember right the woman had used some washpowder as a bath and they leave her body….but i cannot guarantee for that…maybe you can find the article yourself and post the link here.
More information here:
Message from SaLuSa for 30 November 2011
As the saying goes, keep on keeping on, and let nothing distract you from your chosen path. Only you alone truly know what is needed to propel you forward, and exactly where you have set your goals. Normally you would be quite happy to progress at your own speed, and certainly no pressure is exerted upon to do otherwise. However, it must be understood that Ascension is so near that if you desire to seize this opportunity to get out of the 3rd. dimension, you do need to ensure you know what is needed of you. As we have so often mentioned it is your intent that is so important, because as soon as you send out that energy it attracts similar energy, and strengthens yours that opens up the pathway to Ascension. It is about raising your vibration by bringing more Light into your life, and sharing it through positive thoughts and actions.
Do not concern yourself if your path is different to others, as there is more than one way to reach Ascension. Indeed there are time lines that cover every possible combination of possibilities. If you have exercised your choice there can be no wrong way, otherwise freedom of choice would be pointless. You are the creators of your own future whether you realise it or not, which is why you are told that you have created your present reality. That does not mean it cannot be changed, because you have done just that by standing on your own two feet and refusing to bow down any longer to the dark Ones. It is true that we and many other Beings of Light are helping you, but we only do so when you have taken the first steps yourselves. You point the way, and we will place more signposts along it so that you do not loose your sense of direction.
The times you are in are wonderful, because you have made it quite clear that you want nothing more to do with the mentality that focuses on war and confrontation. You are quite positive in demanding world peace and if your present leaders are unable to respond, you are not prepared to see them just step down but insist that new leaders that can do so are appointed in their place. Dear Ones, such leaders are amongst you and when we have removed the obstacles and opposition to them, they will lead you to the peaceful and happy era that you not only seek but deserve. There are now a great majority of people in the world that pray for peace, but not at any cost but through peaceful negotiation. Such prayers are being answered by Beings of Light from the highest realms, and they support us in our work by empowering us to help you to achieve lasting peace on Earth.
There is much that needs achieving before you reach the end of 2012, and this is where we will play a major part. You have to move quickly from the set up that has been maintained by the Illuminati, one that has kept you under their control. They have sought to create situations that make you more and more reliant on them. In so doing they have done everything in their power to stop you advancing into the New Age, as that would have made you more independent of them. However, their power has now been greatly reduced and will continue to do so until we can remove them from positions of authority and influence. Already many of their secret bases have been dismantled and disabled so that they are permanently out of use.
Matters are progressing well although by your perception may not see it that way. It is a mammoth task to reach the point where we can allow our allies to step into power. Fear not, as we are so near to putting an end to the interference in your lives. Duality was of course giving equal opportunity to either the Light or dark to take charge, and until recently the dark Ones were the dominant force. That is no longer the case and through our allies we seek to use the power of the Light to remove the negative energies that remain on Earth. The Light can be subdued but never defeated by the dark Ones, and the truth is that the Light will always be victorious. Do not confuse the coming activities of Mother Earth with negative events, as the cleansing she is involved in is a series of positive actions that shall lead to the Earth being restored. When there are physical eruptions or movements of the Earth, some souls will leave but that is by choice.
Your world affairs are dominated by the financial crisis, but we see the outcome as helping remove members of the Illuminati who have not only monopolised monetary policies, but manipulated them to their advantage. Some of the biggest crimes against humanity are in this connection. Your money has been stolen either directly or indirectly, and lined the pockets of those who have set themselves at the top of the pyramid. The wealth of the world will be taken back and fairly distributed, and all shall enjoy a satisfactory life where you no longer have poverty or slavery.
You may have noticed an ever increasing number of sources putting out messages about the coming period. Be selective and allow your intuition to work for you, and hold onto your beliefs until you have good cause to change them. As we have said there are many paths to Ascension, but also some that simply take souls on a continuing journey in this present dimension as they have no desire to do otherwise. Leave them to follow their chosen path, as it will provide exactly what they need to progress. It is no one else’s place to convince them otherwise, but be assured that they cannot have been on Earth without learning many useful lessons. These will serve them well at some future time, and if they are souls that you relate to now, you may wish to stay linked with them as a Guide.
You sometimes talk of thanking your lucky stars for the good things in life, and you may not realise how near to the truth you are. When you look up into the night sky you are looking at the suns of many solar systems. Each sun is the abode of extremely high Beings of Light, and they stream the Light into your Universe. You can think of them as Gods that in turn link with the Great Central Sun, and act as conduits to spread the energies everywhere, thus lifting up the lower vibrations. It is an ongoing process that is gradually enabling all life to return to the Source. Remember, that All Is One and everything has its being in the energy of the whole.
I am SaLuSa from Sirius, and wish to convey blessings and love from the member civilisations of the Galactic Federation.
Thank you SaLuSa
Monday, November 28, 2011
Message from SaLuSa for 28 November 2011
The amount of love being sent to your beautiful planet is ever increasing and will continue to do so, as it helps you reach a higher level of consciousness. Many great Beings of pure Light are involved and their power is beyond your imagination. They are able to control the flow of Light so that you are not overpowered, and in fact the whole process of Ascension is very carefully arranged to ensure maximum success. Because in general terms you have been able to bring the energy to Earth, the grids have been empowered and are helping you raise your levels of consciousness. We cannot sufficiently stress how important these times are for you all, and we urge you to take advantage of the wonderful opportunity to ascend that is being offered to you. Not for a long time will there be such a focussed energy centred upon Earth, that will offer every single soul the means of upliftment. All it requires initially is the intent to change your life to one where you see all souls as One with you, and treat them accordingly with love and caring as you would wish for yourself.
Nothing else in your life is as important as your spiritual evolution, and unless you desire to remain within the lower vibrations you must look forward to finding out how to raise your consciousness to a higher level. Whatever you may feel, you have within a natural urge to seek the purpose of life and it will propel you ever onwards. Set aside the comments from people who are unable to comprehend the idea that you are more than your body, and know that there is part of you that is indestructible and is the real you. Experiencing as physical Human Being in the 3rd. dimension is just part of a great adventure, that is now ending with completion of the cycle of duality. From thereon for those who ascend, it will move to a new experience in a body of crystalline based cells that will carry a greater degree of consciousness. All of the previous drawbacks that were affecting you such as aging, will no longer occur and life will be much more pleasant and rewarding.
You cannot really stand still where your evolution is concerned even although you do not perceive change within you. Everything around you is evolving and you cannot help but be influenced by what is happening. In the long run you will want to move beyond your present level, having learnt from experience and seeking a new one. The changes ahead of you will leave you in no doubt that the old paradigm has ceased to be of value, and that the new one offers you so much more opportunity to evolve. It is not a random occurrence but part of the Creator’s plan for you, carried out by Beings that have returned to the Source. When we of the Galactic Federation finally appear and can converse with you, it will give you the opportunity to have your questions answered. We are your mentors for this period of time, and have already opened your hearts and minds to a more expansive understanding through our earlier contacts with you.
There has been a need for you to take more responsibility for your own spiritual development, and gain more knowledge from within. Hitherto you have been largely dependant on others for it, and in many instances been directed along the wrong track which has severely retarded your ability to progress towards the truth. We find that where beliefs are very strong, it is difficult to break down the resistance to change but there are times coming when the truth will be hard to reject. We shall put over the truth about your history in such a way it will be very difficult to deny, as it will be accompanied with irrefutable evidence. This will not affect your freewill as it is a God given gift that no one can take away.
What is going to be convincing for everyone will be the ability to show you past events as they actually happened. In this way there can be no denial of the truth, and your history can be rewritten according to how it actually took place. This is important so that you fully understand the way in which your lives were controlled, by the negative influences that occur in your Universe. However, when you ascend they will no longer have such power over you, as their vibrations are too low to exist at such a level.
Bit by bit you are beginning to see a far larger picture of where you fit in, and in spite of attempts of the dark Ones to prevent it you are destined to be successful where Ascension is concerned. In fact it is a natural part of your experiences without which you cannot proceed to the higher dimensions. We have attended a number of Ascension processes previously, and yours is by far the most unique one by allowing you to ascend in a physical body. It probably sounds beyond your imagination, yet somewhere in your sub consciousness you have deep memories of earlier times like it. Always remember that you were all once much Higher Beings, and only left such realms to gain experience of a more physical existence.
Dear Ones, the jump from where you are now, to a higher dimension will be quite remarkable because of the speed with which it will take place. We are responsible for much of the progress that will be made, and it stands to reason that we must get started very soon. The timing is flexible, and we do not have the same response as you do to delay. We know exactly when certain events need to commence, so we have the advantage of being able to patiently bide our time until we are allowed to go into action.
The world is in need of a final infusion of Light that will cause the levels of consciousness to increase exponentially, and take you forward to a level that puts you beyond the influence of the dark Ones. To put you in such a position that you can fully concentrate on the final steps that will lead you to Ascension. Already you are on that path and we shall give you whatever help you need to continue going forward. It will be the glorious victory that you have worked for over eons of time, and always knew was going to be yours.
I am SaLuSa from Sirius, and will tell you that we are keeping our promise to make you more aware of our presence in your skies. It is our intention to make more contact with you, and greater displays pf our craft. It should bring disclosure much nearer, which we will welcome as the first step towards further revelations.
Thank you SaLuSa.
Friday, November 25, 2011
Message from SaLuSa for 25 November 2011
For those of you who follow what is happening in the world, you cannot have failed to notice that our predictions as to the outcome are becoming your reality. The massive banking and financial problems are clearly heading for a crash, and there is no way to prevent it. You are living in a world that is in a state of chaos and steadily heading for an implosion. People now see what has been wrong with the old set up, but up to now have no real answers that will completely deal with the problems. A number of governments have collectively agreed to support a new approach to banking, but it remains to be seen who can galvanize them into action. This situation presents us with an opportunity push our allies forward, who with our help can outline what is necessary to move onto a new path that will solve your problems. There is also consideration to be given to the Abundance program that will follow such changes, so we are working hard to bring some semblance of order into being. Much of what is waiting to come out is tied in with the announcement of Disclosure, and that is ready and simply waiting for a firm date to be agreed.
As each week passes the need to get started with the changes becomes more pressing, but we do not want jump the gun after patiently waiting for so long. There would not in fact be any gain by commencing too soon, as our action must be co-ordinated with you to ensure a path to smooth success. The Galactic Federation continues to closely monitor the activities of the dark Ones, as although their set-up is in disarray, they can still be a threat. However, we have taken away from them the ability to cause a major disaster and prevented them from interfering in the Middle East. Countries there have to sort out their own problems, and as far as possible act on the demands from their people. In the past the West has deliberately set their sights on the oil fields, and often instigated trouble and wars to weaken them and take over. Colonialism took away countries and their wealth from the natural inhabitants, and that will be addressed when peace is restored.
There has been so much that has happened to leave you in a state of imprisonment, yet pretence that you are free which is far from the truth. True freedom will be restored once we have removed the dark Ones, and new governments observe the Constitution. Many laws made in recent times that were illegal will be made void and restitution made where people have been penalised or imprisoned. These changes will occur with our assistance to ensure that you are re-instated as Sovereign Beings. All of these actions will prepare the way for greater things that will come with and after Ascension. So you can see that a busy time lies ahead, and one that is very fulfilling.
By now most of you who follow the various sources of reliable information, will have grasped what a wonderful time approaches. That should make your journey more bearable during the changes, which with our technologies will run smoothly and quite quickly. Our plans are updated immediately changes become necessary, and we are ready to go into action once the necessary preliminaries are in place. Everything is that close to completion that we know very little time is required before we can actually get going.
Be brave and stand your ground when faced with attacks on your beliefs, as when some people realise that the world is changing permanently they will be reluctant to give up what they have. They will know in their hearts that they cannot stop evolution, but try to argue against change because of the fear they feel. If invited to help them understand, then go ahead without overpowering them with your knowledge – simply give as much as is required to get them over the block on their road to understanding. Some souls are here to experience Ascension at a distance, having no desire to actually be involved. However, all experience helps move you along, and often as a result seeds are set that will grow into an opportunity to acquire great knowledge.
Freewill operates whatever choices a soul makes, because it is known that if there is a negative situation involved you will always bounce back. After all, your life is infinite and you are immortal, and the Creator places no demands upon you having accepted you as one who desires to experience outside of the Source. Every soul grows from the collective experience and consciousness levels rapidly increase. As above so below, and on Earth you are all lifted up by each others increasing levels of consciousness. You are as One Great Soul and with your present awakening you are able to “feel” the Oneness that you exist within. It is true that what you do to one, you do to all others. When you reach this level of understanding you accept more responsibility for your thoughts and deeds, realizing that you are creating energy that affects others.
With many of you preparing for the end of the year festivities, it is a welcome distraction from the daily gloom that the media focuses upon. Take the opportunity to enjoy a coming together, when families unite and renew the love that exits between them. Giving is good for the soul when carried out without the expectation of receiving something in return. It is a great pleasure particularly where children are concerned, and you see their expressions of joy and happiness. Normally they do not weigh up the cost involved, and often get great satisfaction from presents that are of a simple nature. Adults sometimes take a different view, but as ever it is thought that counts and it should be appreciated.
Depending on your degree of awareness, this year you will have more to celebrate than usual as 2012 is almost upon you and will be quite extraordinary. It will be most unlike any other year but all for the best of reasons, and we give thanks to those of you who have come to Earth to spread the Light. It will be one that is remembered for a long, long time to come and spoken about throughout the Universe. The fact that you have overcome the dark Ones, and Ascension is assured is the upliftment that ensures the Universe is safe and that Ascension will be completed throughout.
I am SaLuSa from Sirius, and feel most privileged to work with such beautiful souls. I bless you all and send out my love to you.
Thank you SaLuSa
Sunday, November 20, 2011
Film: Thrive: What On Earth Will It Take - 2011
Allow the grace of the Angels to work in everyday functions
The Angels are always available. Their presence is blessing all that you do and say. Their intention is toward Peace, Harmony and Divine Order. When you call upon the grace of the Angels, all situations are blessed with their intentional energy. This is a very powerful tool to use in daily life.
Do you want order in your work place so that all your work is done quickly and easily, so that all you need is available, and all your words and actions are guided? If so, call the Angels into your work place. Ask for their blessings and know divine order will be the result. Allow the Angels to intervene on your behalf even with the smallest details that you feel you should take care of by yourself. You will find your work flowing more easily and smoothly. Even more, Creative Solutions will abound.
Do you want peace and harmony in your relationships? Ask the Angels to assist in your family and in all interactions with others. More harmony and a new level of grace will be the result.
The Angels are here to bring more love, harmony and order into daily life. They are here to demonstrate how much easier life can be when you allow a greater level of energy to work through you. But they will not intervene unless they are asked, so there must be a willingness on your part to bring peace-filled energy into your life.
The Angels are messengers of God. They are not here to be worshiped or to gain power over you. They are here to assist you. They are a part of the Divine Spirit just as humans are, so there is no need to fear when your intention is to have more miracles in your life. Your willingness to have more love, joy and harmony will bring to you those very qualities you seek. You can bring the Angels into your life to assist you in enhancing the energy you work with every day.
It is a great gift to have the Angels offer their energy for planetary good, as well as for the good of your personal life. Allow yourself to receive this blessing. Ask for assistance in all the mundane things that bring you stress. Ask for angelic intervention in all overwhelming situations. Allow yourself to feel this incredible level of support. Be willing to have yourself surrounded in wings of pure love and see how much easier your life will feel to you. Receive the love, light and wisdom of the Angels now. And remember your message today: Allow the grace of the Angels to work in every day functions.
For Archangel Gabriel
Hilarion’s Weekly Message 20 November 2011
This week will see you integrating and assimilating all the downloads you have received, and still are receiving. It is a time for quiet reflection and contemplation and is the time to be good to yourselves in simple ways. Contemplate the beauty around you and glory in each new day. You are alive, experiencing being in a beautiful human body which is a wonder of biological functionality. Through this wondrous vehicle, you can use your senses — the breath through smell, the touch through the sensory experience of your fingers, the sight through the most magical lenses of your eyes, the taste of the food that you partake and the sound of the voice of your Beloved or the birds in the trees.
You are now coming into a time of becoming more aware of other senses that were previously not as obvious to you. Although the majority of you have been experiencing many of these other senses such as precognition, telepathy, clairaudience, clairvoyance, and clairsentience, these have been sporadic and in the realm of a miraculous occurrence for most of you that came as a flash and then was gone. These have served as an interior warning system to keep you safe as you walked upon this World. These senses and many more will now become a more common occurrence than ever before within each human and as this begins to take place within Humanity as a whole, it will create a totally new way of doing and being in your World.
When one person can easily discern and see the aura, for example, of his neighbor, there is no room in any interactions between them for dishonest motivations, thoughts or intentions. All becomes transparent and obvious to those who have this ability, so relations between humans will of necessity become more honest and truthful and based on integrity of Being. As these senses come online within you, it will become challenging to you if you have not yet become proficient in the art of detachment, for as humans, you tend to take things personally and so there might be some amusing incidences of a person’s reactions to knowing the inner thoughts about them that another person feels within them. There will be an adjustment period that will take place as these abilities become more apparent within each person on Earth.
These newly re-discovered abilities will have a far reaching effect on the behavior patterns of Humanity and each person will just naturally begin to cultivate qualities of Love, compassion, honesty, integrity, generosity and helpfulness. This will come about in a surprisingly natural way as more humans are Awakened to their higher potential. As the new crystalline grids are brought into full power, Humanity will have a connection to it that will create positive changes by the power of focused intention and in this way, there is created unity and cooperation between Humanity and the Creator that will lead to great peace and harmony on your World.
As we enter into ever greater frequencies, life will become filled with greater ease and the expressions of joy, gratitude, laughter, humor, and enthusiasm will manifest in Humanity’s interactions with each other and life will then be lived on Earth with joy, peace and harmony as the constant in daily existence. These times are coming, Dear Ones, and a new way is being created by each choice that is being made in this moment of Now.
Until next week….
I AM Hilarion
Friday, November 18, 2011
Message from SaLuSa for 18 November 2011
When your focus is on the future can you feel the uplifting energy around you, if not make time for yourself to relax in quiet surroundings and you surely will. There is no need to carry the burden of the world upon your shoulders, just allow it to find its own path to completion, because that is a feature of the times you are in. You should be sufficiently confident about your destiny to believe that you are on the verge of great changes, that will put you on another path leaving the old paradigm behind. Ascension is your future should you desire to take it, and much effort goes into ensuring that all souls are in contact with the truth. Whether it becomes part of your beliefs by replacing false teachings is everyone’s personal choice.
It is time to take responsibility for your future, and not rely on other people unless you can be sure that they speak the truth. That is where your intuition comes into play, and it will be reliable unless you allow your ego to dictate otherwise. Sometimes people are reluctant to give up their pet theories, and would rather live with uncertainty as their travel companion. We understand how difficult it is to admit to having been misled by those very people that you placed your trust in. However, when you decide to be your own person you will find that there is no lack of information and guidance, that will put you on the right track.
Simply put, when you look for the purpose of life, commence from the fact that there is only the One God that all life exists within. That will so to say, clear the decks where the different religions are concerned as no particular one as opposed to another, can correctly claim to be the only one holding the truth. That having been said, you have infinite life and are not your body but change your form each time you incarnate. However, your soul which is your godspark is indestructible and grows through evolutionary experience, and is forever reaching out to the higher dimensions and eventually the Source of All That Is. If you can accept that these are truthful statements, it will give you the basis to expand upon and become more enlightened.
Most people have heard of the Masters, and when they walk the Earth their teachings will enable you to check how far you have advanced in your beliefs. There will be some who will be at a point where they have no particular beliefs, and feel unready to make decisions that would change the course of their lives. They will not be coerced into anything different, but are clearly unready to move out of the 3rd. dimension. They will therefore continue to experience in that same dimension, until they choose to awaken. They must not be considered failures in anyway, as it is your choice as to how long you spend in any one particular dimension. The truth is that once you become Beings of Light, you will have a strong desire to progress to the higher dimensions.
In your ancient history you have many references to the gods that came to Earth, more often than not as “those who came from the skies”. There could hardly be a more descriptive observation, and it means exactly what is says. Now that you have long been familiar with seeing our craft in your skies, you realize that it a clear reference to Space Beings. To Man some thousands of years ago we would have seemed to be gods, and that explains much that has remained a mystery for such a long time. However, not all contacts have been made out of a desire to help you, and some have taken advantage of your beliefs that they were gods. This has caused a misrepresentation of what our purpose is in contacting you, but we are pleased to say that with time the majority of you accept us Beings Of Light. With the coming high vibrations that will exist on Earth, it will be no longer be possible for entities of a lower vibration to penetrate Earth.
In the latter part of next year, the Lemurians who are your ancient Brothers and Sisters will join you from the Inner Earth, and along with other visitors you will have much to learn. Many other souls have eagerly put themselves forward, to be part of the final stages of your preparations for Ascension. There will be more than ample help for the various projects you will be called upon to assist in. Naturally it does not end with Ascension, as it is the beginning of a new era of co-operation to bring you up to the level of Galactic Beings. So the next few years will be really exciting and you will also have reached a state of being, where the changes in your physical body will have overcome the conditions that have previously led to aging.
We have told you so much about the changes for the future, but we hasten to add that not everything is going to happen in the space of the next 12 months. However, the speed at which they will come will keep you well occupied. Your consciousness levels will have been lifted by 11.11.11. and continue to rise well into the future. In that respect you will become all-knowing, and have earnt the right to be called Masters. Remember that you were once previously at those higher levels of consciousness, and lost much of it as you dropped down into duality.
Dear Ones, we of the Galactic Federation are gathered for the final days of the last cabal, who can only offer token resistance now that their power has been seriously weakened. We have always been able to traverse your skies quite safely, and the occasions that you learn of crashed craft are invariably intruders such as the Greys and their Reptilian friends. Shortly we shall feel freer to be more open in out travels around Earth, and intend that more of you should see our craft. You are entering a period of high activity both on and off Earth, The Divine date for Disclosure rapidly approaches, and the necessary arrangements for the announcement that will precede it have been drawn up.
I am SaLuSa from Sirius, and like the idea of seeing your delight and excitement when the first of you are invited upon our ships. We can tell you all we like about ourselves and craft, but there is nothing like first hand experience to really take in the true impressions that you will be left with. Also meeting us will dispel any last doubts you might have had about us. When we talk about sending out our love, it is something you will clearly feel when you are in our presence.
Thank you SaLuSa
Wednesday, November 16, 2011
Message from SaLuSa for 16 November 2011
Expect a lot to happen but allow for intent to ensure that the flow is orderly, so that each event compliments the last one. As many will know our allies are more active now than ever before, and having considerably weakened the Illuminati we have been able to remove many of those who stand in the way of progress. At all different levels there are people who have been used without their knowledge, but with the awakening are beginning to see how they have been manipulated. That alone is often sufficient to get them to resign, and as talk travels fast others get to learn about it. There is also a matter of rising consciousness levels, that bring some people to question the ethics of those they work for. You will begin to see more of this happening, as the thrust for more transparency and truthfulness grows.
As a result of 11.11.11. changes can also be expected in the emotional responses that you may sometimes in the past have found hard to control, as the higher consciousness levels will bring you the ability to remain calmer. It will help eliminate rash and uncontrollable reactions that often cause serious trouble. Such things will be a feature of the changes within people, and become more noticeable as time goes by. It is to be welcomed and a sign of an individuals success at integrating the higher vibrations. Most humans seem to act first and think later, when clearly the opposite is more desirable. The same thinking can also be applied to groups who act with the herd instinct, without any thought as to what they are doing.
The problems in Europe are the top of our agenda, and the outcome will result in the first major change that has been predicted. It will clear the way for others that are almost ready to go ahead, and relies on our allies completing their groundwork. Believe us Dear Ones these will be no mean achievements when they are finally completed, and show the Illuminati whose is in command. They already know that we have the ability and the divine authority to remove them, and there is no escape from the responsibility for the crimes they have committed. When they accept their situation we expect them to capitulate and stand down. However, we feel that they are sufficiently naive to believe they can fool us, but there is no hiding place as we will always know exactly where they are to be found.
So there is in reality nothing to fear or worry about as we have control over all matters, and at present simply wait for our opportunity to register our first success. We expect that to be in the area of financial changes and that would not in the least be unexpected, given the state that most countries are in. We must however first allow certain events to play themselves out, as the people must see how the last cabal has created an impossible situation for themselves. It is also necessary for them to understand that it was staged and meant to have a different outcome that benefitted them.
There is not much more to say about the present events, and like you we await the commencement of changes that are obviously signs that the end times are really underway. To the uninformed it would appear that chaos reigns, and it is unfortunate that it brings with a degree of fear. That is what we wish to avoid if possible, as that energy feeds the dark Ones and they will play upon it. However, as we have often pointed out recently, the Light is now the supreme force and it will continue transmuting the lower energies. Even those of military thinking are beginning to feel different about the war games that have all but destroyed your Earth. Some of them are siding with us now and we can tell whether their change of heart is genuine or not. We cannot be fooled or lied to as we absolutely know what a person is thinking regardless of what they say.
Speaking the truth is something you will have to get used to, and you will find that once in the higher vibrations there is no point in hiding your true thoughts or feelings. You often do so for fear of being ridiculed or harshly judged, and you feel uncomfortable. That will not happen, and indeed why should it once you are bonded together in Love and Light. Criticism is rife upon Earth, and we note that some people delight in pulling others down. That Dear Ones is usually due to egotism where one desires to be seen as better than another. Competition is something you enjoy and it has its benefit in character building, but not at the expense of others. In time competition will not take place in the way you understand it and will be unnecessary, but games will be played for pure entertainment and relaxation only. Some sports you play would be described as barbaric by us, and those of a physical nature that could lead to harm not encouraged. You will find that with time, you too will be less inclined to participate in physical sports.
In the higher dimensions there are unlimited opportunities for exciting adventures, and no limit to self expression in your chosen pastimes. As one who has ascended your interests in life will change anyway, and be more inclined towards those subjects that further your evolution. Just imagine the variety of interests in just one Universe, let alone parallel Universes or Omni -verses, with their multitude of civilizations and Beings that you have yet to learn about. For the immediate future you will meet the more human Beings from your Universe, but once you get used to the idea that all forms of intelligent life exist, you will also meet them. Remember at all times that all life comes from the Source of All That Is.
Now you know why we tell you that you have so much to look forward to, as you will be like excited young children in a toyshop running first one way and then the other. By then you will have achieved a higher level of spiritual understanding, and be set free from the constraints of being a human upon Earth. When you feel down, just think about the time ahead which will only take you one way, and that is forward and upwards.
I am SaLuSa from Sirius, and once again pleased to keep you informed as to what is happening around you. The Galactic Federation is focused upon you and your beautiful Earth to ensure your dreams come true.
Thank you SaLuSa.
Tuesday, November 15, 2011
Message from SaLuSa for 14 November 2011
The big Love Wave has peaked and that is not the end as it continues to lift the vibrations upon Earth. From hereon the levels of consciousness will noticeably rise, with individuals experiencing it in there own way. The whole affect is to bring more harmony and balance into being, thus lessening the need for changes of a catastrophic nature. You cannot help but have noticed that in spite of dire predictions of a physical nature, they have not been as far reaching or serious as you have been led to believe. We are responsible for keeping the outcome to a level that does not have serious results.
Our activities never cease, and we are involved in a constant monitoring of many occurrences whether natural or man-made. Mother Earth will however need to push on with her own cleansing, but again we are involved to ensure that all goes as smoothly as possible. We would stress that the souls who find themselves in what prove to be dangerous areas, are where they planned to be as part of their life contract. Often these situations are a means to an end, so that they may exit the Earth before the end time comes. We know it is hard to understand the thinking in such circumstances, but moving out of your body and passing on from Earth is little more than falling asleep. Clearly we know that where illness or accidental death are concerned, there can be pain before the end. However. immediately you are out of the body you are released from it, and any emotional affect is quickly overcome. You will feel free and elated as you will have thrown off the yoke of the physical body, and the burden of carrying it around with you.
When you reach our stage as you eventually will, the body is much less physical and not subject to the ills and other problems you experience that you have now. It does not age or need the degree of attention that your present one demands, even to the point that it absorbs energy rather than your need to feed it. However, we do enjoy what you would call delicacies and juices that are extremely tasty and satisfying. Your path will soon take you towards natural foods, and chemical additives will be a thing of the past. In fact they will be unnecessary, as when foods are grown in the correct environment you will find that they are far more tasty and nutritious. Yes, you have heard of food replicators and you could view them as an interim measure, until your needs are properly provided for.
We find you are slowly getting used to the idea of change, and ready to set your life on a higher level. Much of what you enjoy now is in many ways harmful, and why you suffer so much illness and discomfort. Strictly speaking, even now you should be able to go through life and maintain a healthy body at all times. It has been entirely your choice but you also have to experience the consequences of them. We must however admit that your dark Ones have followed a plan to keep you in an unhealthy state, through adulterated food and waters. Plus the immense degree of drug use, with the attempted elimination of natural healing methods. You have in fact coped quite well in the circumstances, and proved that you have immense willpower and wonderfully adaptable bodies. Much valuable information has been obtained this way, so your experiences are not wasted.
As you are beginning to realize, the changes ahead are numerous but all to your advantage by taking you into a new level of existence. But for the fact your progress has been held back, you would by now already be enjoying many of the benefits and life would be so much easier to deal with. The dark Ones have effectively kept you in a 3D time warp, whilst secretly using and enjoying them for their own advancement and military purposes. By doing so they have made you continue to toil and work hard for what is often a meager existence. Now you know why it is so necessary to rid the Earth of the dark Ones power and influence. Their day is all but finished, and you will not have much longer to wait before you see proof of what we tell you.
Knowing what awaits you should enable you to handle the present period of chaos, by seeing it as a necessary and unavoidable time of discomfort that must precede the New Age. Fear is as ever the biggest stumbling block to a smooth transition, and this is where those of you who are informed and aware of what is happening can be of great help. There are bound to be questions asked and few in authority will have the right answers, but you will. Without imposing your knowledge on other people, try to guide them onto the right path of understanding. A few words here and there can set off a line of thought that will lead people on to the right track. Understand that most souls already hold the answers within their subconsciousness, and just need waking up to it.
In the seeming turmoil around the world people recognize the urgent need for change, and when the right leadership emerges they will have no difficulty getting support. Our input should ensure that all proceeds well as at some stage disclosure will have been made, enabling us to help and advise the newly emerging government personnel. We oversee such appointments, as we obviously have the means to know all that needs to be known about any individual. Most importantly, we know the spiritual level at which people operate and their true intent in what they are engaged in. In doing so we observe the privacy necessary to avoid delving into your private life.
Dear Ones, you are wonderfully loyal to those you respect and we are pleased that many still hold President Obama in high regard. That is in spite of continual attempts by the dark Ones or those who do not understand his position, to show him in a bad light. Be aware that he is a great Being of Light, who is having to play a role that requires him to “play” along with the dictates of those who advise him. He has achieved a degree of success even although he has faced opposition all along. He needs your continued support and love, and you will see him blossom and take charge once he can fully implement his own policies without interference.
I am SaLuSa from Sirius and bless you again for standing solidly against the attempts to divert your attention away from your path to Ascension.
Thank you SaLuSa
Monday, November 14, 2011
Galactic Federation Update for 8 November 2011 by Sheldan Nidle
Our Earth allies are fully aware of Heaven’s wishes regarding the basic rules for implementing the reform movement. It is to be, as much as possible, a peaceful revolution of consciousness as it reflects the awakening of Spirit in all of you. This Spirit needs to be free, sovereign, and abundant. It needs a new atmosphere, born of Love not fear. In this new climate-of-the-possible, you will sail beyond apathy and xenophobia and reach out jubilantly to the living universe that surrounds you. Indeed, you are now ready to graduate from a planetary Being to a galactic one, in effect, a galactic Human. We see our roles as being mentors to you, and as overseers of the edicts entrusted to us by Heaven. We are above all your space family, and as your elder sisters and brothers, we come on a mission to reunite with you, to link you back up with your majestic past and to be the conduits for your magnificent future! You have a most honored position to take up and you need to be prepared to fulfill it with the dignity and joie de vivre that you were formerly noted for!
Blessings! We are your Ascended Masters! The new energies pouring through Gaia’s new grids are giving you all a chance to use Heaven’s Law of divine grace to enhance your life. This act of sacred compassion and karmic repeal has the ability to release you from the bonds of your dark-controlled lives and to place you directly into the flow of the manifesting new Earth. A most important act of co-creation for you here is to visualize who you would love to be. Draw upon your deepest longings to pull together an idyllic concept of yourself with all the detail possible. As you do this, ask your Higher Self (your I Am Presence) if what you are envisioning is true. Listen carefully and make any adjustments that may be suggested. Once this image feels right, begin viewing your world through the eyes of this likeness, and imagine ways to adapt the world to the needs and desires of the new You.
As you work through this process, note that it requires moving your ego a bit into the background and your truer identity into the fore. It is important at all times to work within the sanction of divine grace as the purpose is to align your desires with the flow of the Divine. In this linking you become a Being of Light who can perceive how grace operates in physicality. It is through the Light of divine grace that your true desires can be realized. Mostly, ego is experienced as an obstacle to your true desires, and many learn to go within to use their intuitive powers to loosen ego’s pull on them. When you are in the flow of the new energy, you feel a sense of joy and fulfillment and this is a sign that you are on the right track. We advise you to try this and to become familiar with talking and listening to your I Am Presence.
As these new energies pour into your world, our joint efforts to remove the dark cabal progress well: our associates have completed the legalities required to declare many major regimes illegal. We are also firming up alliances with major contingents inside the military of these same nations, and this activity has now formed a consensus among the world’s military leadership who agree that full cooperation with and support of the global governance transition is a vital task for them to undertake. The final phase of this legal change of governance is rapidly taking shape. All the elements are in place and what remains is the right time to act. We have conferred with our Agarthan advisors and have come up with a way to unfold these most unprecedented actions. Be prepared for a very welcome cavalcade of events!
Today, we talked about what is happening to transform your reality. We are ready to push forward with activities to bring disclosure forward and have also prepared our fleet for contact. The Ascended masters have embarked on a plan to bring your new reality into being. These are exciting times indeed! Know, dear Ones, that the countless Supply and never-ending Prosperity of Heaven are Yours! So Be It! Selamat Gajun! Selamat Ja! (Sirian for Be One and Be in Joy!)
Labels: Sheldan Nidle
Saturday, November 12, 2011
Lead Poisoning Alert: This Widely Used Drink is Dangerous
Posted By Dr. Mercola | November 12 2011 | 32,367 views
By Dr. Mercola
Jeff Green has been an activist in the movement to eliminate a toxic fluoride from your water supply for the past 15 years.
The practice of adding fluoride to municipal tap water across the U.S. began in 1945.
With more than 60 percent of U.S. water supplies currently fluoridated, chances are you're one of the 170 million Americans who drink fluoride on a daily basis.
Chances are also high that you're unaware of the sordid history that made water fluoridation a reality in the first place, because contrary to popular belief, its origins actually had nothing to do with protecting your dental health.
Secondly, and perhaps more importantly, you might be unaware that the fluoride added to your water is far from pharmaceutical grade…
The Manhattan Project Gave Birth to More than the Atomic Bomb…
"If you go back, especially if you read some of the books and the information that came from the declassified documents from the Manhattan Project, you see that the primary motivation from the very beginning was liability protection," Green says, referring to the fact that massive amounts of fluoride was manufactured and used for the bomb-making process, which created huge liability once they realized just how toxic it was.
"… [M]ost people don't realize that the magical element [used] to make the bomb was uranium hexafluoride. It was actually this special aspect that allowed them to separate the uranium isotopes to make the bomb."
The fluoride from this bomb-making process was initially released into the environment—as was fluoride waste products from the aluminum industry—where it ended up killing herds of cattle and wiping out entire orchards. Both the aluminum industry and the Manhattan Project realized they had a major toxic waste problem on their hands that would cost a lot of money to dispose of properly.
"Part of the protection for the liability was to basically put it everywhere and tell everybody it was great," Green says.
But just how do you do that?
Very shrewdly… Water fluoridation could easily qualify as one of the grandest public health frauds and toxic cover-ups in U.S. history. The deceit has been so effective, you're hard-pressed to find anyone who doesn't automatically say, "But everyone knows fluoride is good for you!"
Why Fluoride HAD to be Declared Safe
Now declassified files of the Manhattan Project and the Atomic Energy Commission shows that the toxicology department at the University of Rochester -- which was under the direction of Harold Hodge -- was asked to produce medical information about fluoride that could help defend the government against lawsuits where they were charged with fluoride pollution.
It is now clear that if water fluoridation were declared harmful to human health, the U.S. nuclear bomb program, as well as many other fluoride-polluting industries such as aluminum plants and fertilizer manufacturers, would have been left open to massive litigation.
Declare fluoride not only safe, but beneficial, and sell the troublesome waste to municipalities across the US…
How the Idea for Water Fluoridation Came about
The brainchild of water fluoridation was Gerald Cox, a researcher with the Mellon Institute in Pittsburg. He received the suggestion to look at fluoride's dental effects from Francis C. Frary, then director of the aluminum laboratory for the Aluminum Company of America. Frary had reasons for the suggestion other than the possibility of protecting tooth enamel, however. He was very concerned about the fluoride pollution being generated by the aluminum plant, as lawsuits from surrounding farmers increased.
Another major player in the creation of this scheme was Harold Hodge, the chief toxicologist of the Manhattan Project. As part of a group of scientists and engineers who helped develop the atomic bomb in World War II, Hodge was responsible for evaluating the toxicity of the chemicals used in the production of the bomb. One of the chemicals, as mentioned, was fluoride. Due to the massive amounts of fluoride required to produce bomb-grade uranium and plutonium for these nuclear weapons, the Manhattan Project also needed some way to avoid potentially crippling lawsuits.
Last but not least, there was Robert Kehoe with the Kettering Laboratory, a private toxicology lab that ended up producing a massive bibliography of abstracts on the soundness of communal water fluoridation, and fluoride's (beneficial) role in public health.
However, this research was not particularly independent or unbiased. Not only was Robert Kehoe working for the Fluorine Lawyers Committee, preparing defenses in fluoride litigation cases, the Kettering report on the health benefits of fluoride was also funded by the National Institute of Dental Research and fluoride-polluting industry-heavyweights like:
The Aluminum company of America (ALCOA) DuPont Reynolds Metals The Aluminum company of Canada Kaiser Aluminum U.S. Steel
What's Really Being Added to Your Water Supply?
Originally, the fluoride used to fluoridate water supplies came from the aluminum and atomic bomb industries. A couple of years later, however, they realized there was another fluoride product that was much more readily available. The reason it was so readily accessible was because it was a truly hazardous waste that was very hard to get rid of, namely hydrogen fluoride from the phosphate fertilizer industry.
This fluoride gas is captured in the scrubber system and turned into hydrofluorosilicic acid—which is the primary source of fluoride used for water fluoridation. This phosphate fertilizer byproduct also typically contains arsenic, lead, cadmium, and mercury, plus a variety of other contaminants that are part of the phosphate ore.
"And so now you have a product, or a hazardous material, that you can't put in an ocean, you can't put in a river or lake or stream, you can't bury it, and you can't even give it away," says Green. But you can sell it and put it in the commercial water supplies!
"… [T]his is why we hear all of these constant claims of how great it is without any treatment," Green says. "Meaning, it doesn't have to be filtered. It doesn't have to be refined or anything. It can be taken directly all across the United States and dumped in the water—the very place they couldn't put it directly [if it was still considered hazardous waste]."
Fluoride Proponents Never Actually Tested "the Real Thing"
Part of the difficulty when discussing water fluoridation is that many do not realize that the fluoride you find in drugs, for example, while harmful, is not quite as bad as what's being used for water fluoridation. The fluoride added to your drinking water is not pharmaceutical grade.
It's a toxic industrial waste product.
Deepening the deception is the fact that none of the studies on fluoride actually used the far more toxic hydrofluorosilicic acid that is added to the water supply. Rather they use pharmaceutical grade fluoride, so the health hazards are likely FAR worse than any study has so far discerned.
"So when someone uses the word fluoride, I believe we start with a deception from the very beginning," Green says. "… [T]here is almost a bragging by the promoters of fluoridation that you don't have to study it because they have studied fluoride over and over again, yet they have never looked at the actual product itself until just recently!
In 1998 to 2000, I was able to get a congressional investigation on fluoride. At that particular time, the House Committee on Science allowed us to write some questions that would be sent out to various entities. Originally it was to the EPA… We asked them to send the scientific data they had on the silicofluorides. They wrote back [saying they] couldn't find any [data] for chronic effects of the use of hydrofluorosilicic acid or the silicofluorides.
They didn't have any at all.
Up until 2010, and now 2011, there have only been two studies that have dealt with the continued use of hydrofluorosilicic acid.
… [T]hey were able to finally confirm, through these toxicological studies, the very thing they had found through large epidemiological study—that there is a higher amount of lead that shows up in blood. In the epidemiological study it was 400,000 children. It showed that there was a tremendous increase... four times as much for Latinos, seven times as much for blacks, and a[n on average] doubling of the danger level of lead in children's blood, when hydrofluorosilicic acid was present in the water."
The importance of that was that it was also compared to having no fluoride added into the water and [pharmaceutical grade] sodium fluoride added into the water. So there was really a difference between the specific products being placed in there."
Fluoride Increases Heavy Metal Accumulation in Your Body
These studies also showed that hydrofluorosilicic acid increases lead accumulation in bone, teeth, and other calcium-rich tissues. According to Green, the free fluoride ion actually acts as a transport of heavy metals, allowing them to enter into areas of your body they normally would not be able to go, such as into your brain.
"Industry prizes what we call fluoride compounds," Green says. "What's amazing is there is so much [information] out there that's never explained to the general public. But [fluoride] is… the most aggressive seeker of another electron. It's the most electromagnetically negatively charged element in the entire world. It basically is the most interactive of all the elements… It will give up whatever it's with to be with something else…
So it's prized by industry because it actually disrupts molecular bonds… Industry also wants it because it creates tighter molecular bonds. So Scotchgard, Stain Master, Gore-Tex, ski gear… These are all fluoride-type compounds as well because they actually make it a tighter molecular bond that is more impervious to penetration.
… By the time you get to the enzyme activity, and knowing what it can do to disrupt enzyme activity, the effects are so widespread, it's just amazing... Once [people] learn the nature of fluoride, they would never want to put it in their water."
How to Eliminate Water Fluoridation—An Alternative Strategy
Green suggests an alternative strategy for ending water fluoridation. Rather than being "anti" fluoridation, he prefers reframing the issue from a more positive perspective.
"First of all, we always have to determine what our audience is," Green says. "There are certain audiences that you could talk about science to because they are scientists… but for the general public, [you need to] start talking about the nature of fluoride, and broaden the base of their understanding so it isn't just a single-purpose agent that is being placed in the water…
So as an example, fluoride is used in the ceramics business to make ceramics more porous. Well, it does exactly the same thing to your bones. Once they have learned all the other uses for fluoride, it becomes very easy to see how it does the same thing to your own calcium-rich tissues."
Join the Fight to Get Fluoride Out of Drinking Water
Earlier this year I joined forces with Dr. Paul Connett to help put an END to water fluoridation in the U.S and Canada. The Fluoride Action Network has a game plan to do just that. Our fluoride initiative will primarily focus on Canada since 60 percent of Canada is already non-fluoridated. If we can get Calgary and the rest of Canada to stop fluoridating their water, we believe the U.S. will be forced to follow.
I urge you to join the anti-fluoride movement in Canada and United States by contacting the representative for your area below.
Contact Information for Canadian Communities:
- If you live in Ontario, Canada, please join the ongoing effort by contacting Diane Sprules at firstname.lastname@example.org.
- The point-of-contact for Toronto, Canada is Aliss Terpstra. You may email her at email@example.com.
Contact Information for American Communities:
We're also going to address three US communities: New York City, Austin, and San Diego:
- New York City, NY: The anti-fluoridation movement has a great champion in New York City councilor Peter Vallone, Jr. who introduced legislation on January 18 "prohibiting the addition of fluoride to the water supply."
A victory there could signal the beginning of the end of fluoridation in the U.S. If you live in the New York area I beg you to participate in this effort as your contribution could have a MAJOR difference. Remember that one person can make a difference.
The point person for this area is Carol Kopf, at the New York Coalition Opposed to Fluoridation (NYSCOF). Email her at NYSCOF@aol.com . Please contact her if you're interested in helping with this effort.
- Austin, Texas: Join the effort by contacting Rae Nadler-Olenick at either: firstname.lastname@example.org or email@example.com, or by regular mail or telephone:
Austin, Texas 78713
Phone: (512) 371-3786
San Diego, California: Contact Patty Ducey-Brooks, publisher of the Presidio Sentinel at firstname.lastname@example.org.
Related Links:One of the Biggest Health Frauds EVER Perpetrated on the American People...
- Now declassified files of the Manhattan Project and the Atomic Energy Commission shows that the original motivation for promoting fluoride and water fluoridation in the U.S. was to protect the bomb- and aluminum industries from liability
- Originally, the fluoride used to fluoridate water supplies came from the aluminum and atomic bomb industries. A couple of years later, they switched to an even more hazardous waste product: hydrofluorosilicic acid from the phosphate fertilizer industry
- This hydrofluorosilicic acid also typically contains arsenic, lead, cadmium, and mercury, plus a variety of other contaminants that are part of the phosphate ore, and, shockingly, it does not have to be refined or filtered prior to being shipped and dumped into municipal water supplies
- Studies on the health effects and safety of fluoride have always used pharmaceutical grade fluoride—not the far more toxic hydrofluorosilicic acid from the phosphate fertilizer industry. In the last two years, only TWO studies have finally dealt with the continued use of hydrofluorosilicic acid, and found it increases lead accumulation in blood up to seven times. It also increases lead absorption in bone, teeth and other calcium-rich tissues