Bachelor in Medical Assisting
Medical Assisting is a field within the healthcare sector that involves assisting medical staff and doing a number of other operational tasks. Both regular and online schools offer programs in Medical Assisting and equip students with the essential knowledge and skills that allows them to care for patients and support the medical staff.
Bachelors in Medical Assisting
Bachelors in Medical Assisting is a 4 year degree program that prepares students to pursue entry level jobs within this field. In this program, students learn about laboratory procedures, medical business operations as well as patient care. Also, they come to know about bookkeeping and charting in addition to radiology and pharmacology.
Students who cannot attend regular classes due to any personal or professional commitment can go for online programs and obtain a degree in a convenient manner. The classes in these programs are managed online and provide students with the flexibility that enables them to keep up with their other commitment.
Various learning tools are used in the online programs that allow students to understand different concepts, participate in group discussions, communicate with instructors and submit assignments in a convenient manner. Compared to regular programs, online degrees in Medical Assisting may also be more cost effective that makes them a suitable option for those with limited financial resources.
To get into a bachelor’s program in Medical Assisting, students must have a high school diploma or GED. Other requirements for admission may vary by school.
Just as all jobs within the healthcare industry, career opportunities for Medical Assisting professionals are very bright. Students who earn a bachelor’s degree in this field can find rewarding jobs in a number of settings such as clinics, hospitals, doctors’ offices and more. These professionals can earn about $27,000 to $37,000 on an annual basis.
After completing a bachelor’s degree, students must also obtain a licensure in the state in which they wish to practice. Most states require these medical professionals to have national certification by passing the Physician Assistant National Certifying Examination. Other requirements may vary with respect to the state.
Q:What can i do with a bachelor in medical assisting?
A:With a bachelors degree in medical assisting, you can work as a medical assistant in different healthcare settings. Your job duties will mainly include the following: completing administrative tasks, providing assistance to physicians, scheduling patient appointments, measuring vital signs, and more. According to the US Bureau of Labor Statistics, in 2014, medical assistants made a median annual income of $29,960.
Ask your Question
* All Fields are Required