One of the best historical sights in Myanmar is Bagan, formerly known as Pagan, offering the stunning picture of sunrise or sunset. Over 13,000 pagodas once sprawled
over this dry land during the golden age of the 11 great kings
(approximately 1044-1287); this ended with the threat of attacks
by Kublai Khan from China, and this particular region was
deserted. Today there are less than 3,000 pagodas.
The existing village of Bagan boasts a museum, market, restaurants
ware workshops and an impressive temple are within easy access. The Bagan area is approximately 40
sq kilometres or 15 sq miles, housing dozens of open temples. Tourist attractions are the Shwegugyi Temple (constructed in 1311 and
known for its intricate stucco carvings), the Gawdawpalin Temple (severely damaged by an
earthquake in the 1975, but remains one of the
most attractive of the Pagan temples) and the Thatbyinnyu Temple (the highest temple in Bagan).
This ancient royal city is teeming with palaces, temples, pagodas and
stupas and is the principal centre of Buddhism
and Burmese arts, even though Mandalay has experienced many bad fires which
have destroyed several buildings. Visitors can find
some gold-leaf industries, stone-carving
workshops and various great craft markets in Mandalay.
Taking its name from Mandalay Hill (ascending about 240 metres or 787 feet to the northeast of the palace), the city was established in 1857 by
King Mindon. The old wooden palace buildings at Amarapura
have been relocated and rebuilt.
Sites of importance include the massive Shweyattaw Buddha
(located near the hill, with its finger pointing towards the city), the Eindawya
Pagoda (constructed in 1847 and protected in gold leaf), the Shwekyimyint
Pagoda (housing the original Buddha image sanctified during
the Bagan period by Prince Minshinzaw) and the Mahumuni Pagoda
or ‘Great Pagoda’ (containing the
revered Mahumuni image). Cased in gold leaf over the years
Buddhists, this image was delivered from Arakan
in 1784, though it is believed to be much older.
foundation, moat and large walls are entirely all that is left of
the once marvellous Mandalay Palace, at one time an enormous
walled city (mostly of timber
structure) rather than a palace.
It was burnt down in 1942. A large-scale model depicts what it must
have been like. The Shwenandaw Kyaung Monastery was once
part of the palace complex which King Mindon and his chief queen
used as an apartment. Similar to the palace, the wooden building
was at one time attractively gilded. There are some intricately carved
panels inside and also a photograph of the Atumashi Kyaung Monastery,
destroyed in 1890 by fire. The remains can be seen in the south of
the Kuthodaw Pagoda, called ‘the world’s biggest
book’ because of the 729 marble slabs that encircle the
central pagoda – they are engraved with the whole Buddhist
Mandalay houses many older, deserted capital
cities. Sagaing is
reached and has attractive
pagodas at Aungmyelawka, Kaunghmudaw and Tupayon. Sagaing was once the capital of a
Shan Kingdom. In
the 15th century, Ava became the kingdom’s new capital
and it was so until well into the 19th century, when the kingdom
disappeared; the old city walls can still be traced.
river trip from Mandalay, has the
Bell, believed to be the largest uncracked, hung bell in the
world. It was cast in 1790 by King Bodawpaya, meant to be
hung in his huge pagoda, which was never completed because of the king’s
death in 1819. The foundation of the pagoda alone is approximately 50 metres or 165 feet
high. In 1783, Bodawpaya founded Amarapura, south
of Mandalay. The city is well-known for its silk weaving and cotton.