Kochi (Cochin), the Queen of the Arabian Sea, is situated on the west coast of India in the beautiful state of Kerala.
Exploring the Area
Kochi can be regarded as the commercial and industrial capital of Kerala. Kerala is one of the most prosperous states of India, flanked by the Arabian Sea on the western side and the Western Ghats on the eastern side. Roughly speaking Kochi is 10 º North and 76 º East.
Kochi is the most important city in Kerala. It is the second most important city (after Mumbai) on the western coast of India.
Climate: Being situated very close to the sea, Kochi has a moderate climate. Heavy showers are experienced during the months June, July and August due to the South-West Monsoon. The North-East Monsoon brings light rainfall during the months September, October, November and December. December to February is pretty cool. The annual rainfall is about 310 cm. In summer the temperature rises to a maximum of 35 ºC while in winter it is around 25 ºC.
Kochi is known as the Queen of the Arabian Sea and the Queen of the Adriatic. It is also referred to as the Gateway of South India.
The story behind the name...
It is not known exactly how the name Kochi originated. But many theories exist. Some historians believe that Cochin is a modified form of the word 'Cochazhi' which in Malayalam means 'small sea' others are of the opinion that 'Kochi' was named so by the Chinese. According to them, traders from the court of the Chinese ruler Kublai Khan gave Kochi the name of their homeland. Believe it or not, the Chinese fishing nets, found here (outside China) and nowhere else may be sufficient proof to support their belief. Still another theory is that Kochi is derived from the word 'Kaci' meaning 'harbour'. The Cochin harbour Kochi earned a significant position on the world trading routes after the world famous port at Kodugallur (Cranganore) was destroyed by massive flooding of the river Periyar in 1340 AD. Records show that Kodugallur/Cranganore was known to the Arabs and Chinese traders for centuries.