BERNOULLI COMPATIBILITY TRUSS MODEL
Bernoulli’s compatibility model is rigorous and rational because it satisfies the Navier’s three principles of the mechanics of deformable bodies.
i. The stresses in the concrete and the reinforcement satisfy the equilibrium condition.
ii. The linear strain distribution satisfies Bernoulli’s compatibility hypothesis, which assumes a plane-cross section to remain plane after the bending deformation.
iii. Hooke’s linear law is applicable to both concrete and reinforcing bar.
As a result, rigorous solutions can be obtained not only up to the yield strength of a flexural member, but also the flexural deformations. The constitutive laws of concrete and reinforcement are definitely nonlinear at the ultimate load stage.
Hooke’s constitutive law is generally assumed to be applicable to both concrete and re-bars up to the yielding of steel and, therefore, up to the service load stage. Bending theory based on Hooke’s law is called the linear bending theory.
Linear bending theory
A reinforced concrete member subjected to bending will crack before the service load stage. The stresses and strains in the re-bars at the cracked sections should be greater than those between the cracked sections. Therefore, the application of Bernoulli’s compatibility hypothesis to cracked reinforced concrete members should theoretically be based on the smeared stresses and smeared strains of mild steel bars embedded in concrete.
In the linear bending theory of reinforced concrete, two assumptions are made in the bending analysis and design.
- The stress–strain relationship of steel bars is based on the bare bars, not on the steel bars embedded in concrete.
- The tensile stress of concrete is neglected in the bending analysis.
Since these two assumptions are correct at the cracks, the linear bending theory is accurate in the prediction of yield moment.
Non- Linear bending theory
Bending theory based on a nonlinear stress–strain relationship of concrete will be called the nonlinear bending theory. In this case, nonlinear constitutive laws of concrete and steel will be used, in addition to equilibrium and Bernoulli’s compatibility.
The stress–strain relationship of mild steel is assumed to be linear up to yielding. This elastic–perfectly plastic type of stress–strain relationship imparts a distinct method of analysis and design for concrete members reinforced with mild steel. The nonlinear bending theory is applicable only to mild steel reinforced concrete members at ultimateload stage.
A singly reinforced rectangular beam is subjected to a nominal bending momentat ultimate load stage. The moment will induce an ultimate curvature, which is defined as the bending rotation per unit length of the member. The fundamental assumption is that the section remains plane before and after bending which is known as Bernoulli compatibility hypothesis.
Our team of experts provides different services for the students
· Email based assignment help- for those heavy and cumbersome assignments.
· Homework based assignment help- to provide homework to the generation of today’s busy world.
· Project help- Design the project given to the students.
Online tutoring sessions- To provide complete and vast knowledge regarding the topic without taking any tensions of going through various books.