Doctor insights on:
Copd Chat Room
Shortness of breath: Typically, patients with COPD have shortness of breath, wheezing, and coughing. Fatigue, decreased energy, and decreased ability to do normal activities are also quite common. Sometimes, patients can get dizziness related to the shortness of breath. If you have these symptoms, definitely see a doctor. ...Read moreSee 2 more doctor answers
Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (Copd) (Definition)
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, otherwise known as COPD, may include chronic bronchitis, emphysema, or both. Chronic bronchitis is the production of increased mucus caused by inflammation. Bronchitis is considered chronic if you cough and produce excess mucus for most days three months out of the year, two years in a row. Emphysema is a disease that damages the air sacs or the smallest breathing tubes in the lungs. COPD is commonly associated with smoking. ...Read more
I watched my gma pass in hospice on Friday my fam & friends think I should talk to pro cause of it. I'm sad but @ peace. ShecPassed from copd?
Dr. Kubler-Ross: Sorry to hear about your grandma, our condolences go out to you. I recommend you look into a book called "Death and Dying" by Dr. Elisabeth Kugler-Ross. The book will help you understand the stages of grieving you will go through. It is a normal and natural process, and it is good that you are focused on dealing with your grief in a healthy way. MDs in psychiatry help. http://www.ekrfoundation.org ...Read moreSee 1 more doctor answer
How effective is wearing a medical protective mask in a room that may have sick people. I am worried as I have COPD with other lung issues.
Would be reasonable: to do especially if you are concerned they have the flu as the flu is spread by droplet as well as fomites. Most respiratory viruses are spread this way so a mask will offer some protection by not allowing you to inhale the droplets. There are various types of masks available. Make sure you use good hand hygiene practices. ...Read more
Stop smoking...: COPD needs to be treated by a physician as there are meds available like bronchodilators and steroid inhalers to control symptoms. If the oxygen level is low, oxygen therapy may be needed. The best thing you can do for yourself is to quit smoking if you are a smoker. Your doctor can help with this as well. ...Read moreSee 2 more doctor answers
Labored breathing: Many patients with COPD will have some difficulty breathing, particularly during exertion- this is part of the disease and to be expected. If breathing becomes labored, especially at rest, the patient should be evaluated quickly by a doctor as they may not be able to maintain the level of effort required to continue breathing at this level for long. ...Read moreSee 1 more doctor answer
COPD may include chronic bronchitis, emphysema, or both. Chronic bronchitis is the production of increased mucus caused by inflammation. Bronchitis is considered chronic if you cough and produce excess mucus most days for three months in a year, two years in a row. Emphysema is a disease that damages the air sacs and/or the smallest breathing tubes in the lungs. ...Read more