The excitement in a baseball game begins with the home plate. It is a pentagon-shaped irregular white rubber. This rubber measures 17 x 8.5 x 12 x 12 x 8.5 inches. The batter’s box is adjacent to the two parallel 8.5-inch sides of the pentagon. One corner of the 90-foot square is the point at which the two 12-inch sides meet at right angles. The other three corners are the three bases when counted counter-clockwise from the home plate. They are the first, second, and third base. Four bases at the corners of the infield are formed by these three bases and the home plate.
For the batting team to score a run, this is the first base that must be touched. A batter can reach the first base by walking, hitting by pitch, error, dropped third strike, catcher’s interference, umpire’s interference, etc.
Commonly called 2B, this is the base which has to be touched by the batting team to score a run. It is touched in succession to the first base by the base runner. It is also known as the keystone sack. A runner on the second base is supposed be in a scoring position, as the chances of the runner reaching the home plate is high.
The next in line for the batting team to reach for scoring a run is the third base. The runner on the third base is very important in case 2 batsmen are out.
Reaching this point completes a run. It is designated as the home base. The shape of the home plate is facilitated in such a way that it helps the umpire judge the balls and strikes.
Batter’s Box and Catcher’s Box
The batter’s box is where the batter stands, to receive the pitch from the pitcher. There are two batter’s boxes―for the right handers and the left handers. The catcher is the person standing behind the batter. The place where the catcher stands is the catcher’s plate. He receives the balls from the pitcher in case the ball is left alone by the batter. The catcher sits crouching behind the batter, and wears gloves and a helmet.
These are the poles which help the umpire determine if a ball which is hit above the fence line is a foul or a home run.
This is a low, artificial hill situated roughly in the middle of the main square of the baseball field. The square is on an equal distance to the first and third base. There is a rubber plate on the mound, called the pitcher’s plate. The pitcher stands on the mound while pitching to the batter.
It is the straight line between two adjacent bases. However, it is not marked or drawn with chalk or paint.
This is the area where the fielders, apart from the basemen, are positioned. It is either made of thick grass or artificial turf. There are right, center, and left field positions for the fielders in the outfield.
For the baseball enthusiasts, this diamond, in all plausibility, is worth more than the actual stone!