Yes all this can be had for free if one can harness or cultivate biogas! You can create it all in your house!
Biogas is a renewable energy source, like solar and wind energy. Production of biogas can happen naturally (where waste or garbage is decomposing) or it can be engineered by putting decomposable organic matter in controlled oxygen-less environment.
In its raw stage biogas has only 60 to 72% methane (plus carbon dioxide 15%, Nitrogen 10% & Hydrogen Sulphide (H2S) 3%), unlike crude oil it can still be used by the layman. The raw biogas can also be made more pure by water washing. Biogas can be cleaned and upgraded to (98% pure Methane) natural gas standards when it becomes bio methane.
The water washing method is where high pressure gas flows into a column where the carbon dioxide and other trace elements are scrubbed by cascading water running counter-flow to the gas. This arrangement could deliver 98% methane with manufacturers guaranteeing maximum 2% methane loss in the system. It takes roughly between 3% and 6% of the total energy output in gas to run a biogas upgrading system.
Methan gases are formed naturally near the petrol wells try to move up and escape into the atmosphere from under the earth mostly in areas near Petrol Wells and in huge quantities around the North and South Poles. These gases are artifically trapped and bottled under pressure. Thus such compressed bottling of natural Methane gases is called CNG. Methane can be piped from Petrol wells or cultivated locally by using the Biogas method. Today most of the CNG available all over the world is entirely CNG that is sourced from Petrol Wells.
Methane produced from the oil-wells, compressed and bottled under pressure are called CNG while Methane extracted artificially by decaying matter in oxygen free environment is called Biogas (Gobar Gas in Hindi).
So in effect Methane is today's popularly used as CNG-fuel for Auto rickshaw, Car, Bus, Trucks. CNG fuel can also be used as fuel to run Generator-sets to create electricity. The only problem with the use of CNG is it is not produced locally but availed from an oil well somewhere across the world. Thus the cost of CNG is prone to fluctuations in price (price mostly goes up but rarely down). This kind of CNG is also limited by the amount of gas available in and the oil well and over the years it keeps dropping till finally no more gas is produced from that particular well.
Sewage management (read collection and disposal of sewage Toilet Water either by trucks or by pipeline) is the biggest problem of any community anywhere in the world. Sewage is a mixture of domestic and industrial wastes. But the biggest bio-hazard is “black water” sewage – to put it in simple words - human shit and urine. This when disposed in improper way can contaminate surrounding water and even create diseases.
Release of treated and untreated Sewage water into Sea:
All countries in the world release this water into the sea, making it a biological hazard just like its reported here:http://gobiidae.com/PN/dumpingsewage.html . The only difference is:
- some countries do it after filtering and treating the black water both the solid and the liquid,
- some countries treat only the solid while the liquid is piped as it is into the sea at various point
- while some countries dump everything directly into the Sea.
Unlike Air pollution where the particles disperse into the air and with wind, breeze or rain, the sea water pollution move towards the shore due to the Tidal and wave action and comes in contact with sea swimmers. The quantity of contamination is very small but the contamination cycle is repeated continuously.
This is the biggest environment hazard that Human beings can commit on the Earth EVER! Read my lips EVER!
Environment pollution from vehicle exhaust doesn’t even come close... I repeat again… doesn’t even come close… Pollution of environment via petrol fumes maybe around 5% but Pollution of the ecosystem due to dumping sewage into the sea and contamination of the Sea water and proliferation of diseases is a colossal… maybe around 65%. This is so because it damages the entire ecosystem and fishes living in the sea. It is very easy for e-coli infection to happen via such seawater. But it is not visible as the damage happens away from human eyes. So next time you go to jump into the sea be reminded that, a kilometer away, your municipal pipeline is dumping tons of shit into the very same water!!!
http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/health/430289.stm test on water samples proved it wrong, but isn’t seawater a continuously and heavily moving body of water and the rate of dumping of municipal sewage depend on timing and tidal movement? Thus the water sample test is ineffective.
Google search “e-coli infection via seawater” and you will get tons of articles covering the subject.
This kind of Hazard is almost on par with the nuclear hazard, but not much is done to stop this draining of sewage water into the sea.
But this very sewage water can solve a lot of problems by creating
2) Fuel and
3) Highest quality organic fertilizer all at the same time!!!
So isn't the energy scarcity artificially created?
Once the black water is completely treated and clean the water since not potable should not be dumped into the sea, as it could contain bacteria. But this bacteria is very beneficial for plants and can be used for agriculture or gardening purpose where the water is worth its weight in gold. If used on a pan nation level it could even double or triple any country's food output.
The process generates enough green electricity to make the entire Davyhulme treatment works, one of the largest in the country, completely self-sufficient – the equivalent of powering 9,000 homes.
(Fortune Magazine) – “Sintex Industries, a plastics and textiles manufacturer in Gujarat, India, is betting it can find profit in human waste. Its new biogas digester turns human excrement, cow dung, or kitchen garbage into fuel that can be used for cooking or generating electricity, simultaneously addressing two of India's major needs: energy and sanitation”.
Sintex's digester uses bacteria to break down waste into sludge, much like a septic tank. In the process, the bacteria emit gases, mostly methane. But instead of being vented into the air, they are piped into a storage canister.
Sintex Company is hoping cities, real estate developers, building managers, and hospitals will jump at a ready-made way to harness the same energy.
Those who have installed Biogas digester at their house can sell the excess biogas to the guy next door or in the neighborhood with CNG car as both are methane. With Petrol prices rising and CNG prices also following it he will be happy to oblige.
You could sell it at Rs 20/Ltr and he would need atleast 20 Ltr. That would make it Rs 20x20 Ltr = Rs400 per person. If you can sell it to 10 people every day that would make it Rs 4,000 per day. That would make it Rs 4,000x30days =Rs 120,000 Per month. To earn this much you would need a CNG-car owning database of 1,200 people.
With biogas methane he would get 20% lower mileage on his car but if the Methane is water washed (a simple process) the mileage would be as good as the one he gets at the Petrol Pump/Station.
Although not included in any building code, any house can be easily retrofitted. Take out your old toilet, construct a platform, top it with a toilet seat, install digester underneath in basement. Building a new house? Need to install an expensive septic system? Do what they do in Earth-ship communities. Install “fake” septic system. Have it inspected. You now have a conforming home. Then you sell the septic system to the next “biogas” house. Repeat indefinitely. Nobody is the wiser, building inspectors satisfied, bank satisfied, insurance satisfied. You the customer, satisfied. It’s a win-win situation all around.
Collect kitchen scraps, go down to the basement, feed scraps into hatch in bio digester. Feed pipe from bio digester up to propane/natural gas cook stove. With simple adapter cook stove will burn digester gas. Waste=fuel. Disconnect your utility supply (gas or electric) to your cooker, and now you have free fuel, coming directly from your bottom. One more step closer to being off the grid. For $1000, (Rs 60,000) you have an incredible environmental solution. Install this, and the savings start immediately. Also it’s about 1/3 to 1/10 the price of a similar composting toilet.
India could harvest Rs 13,000,000,000 worth of Gas annually!!!!
Government officials plan to end open defecation (hundreds of millions of Indians use railroad tracks or other outdoor locales instead of toilets) and say biogas plants are part of the solution. Imagine if India can create a million such (Rs 26,000) digesters then India could harvest Rs 13,000,000,000 worth of Gas annually!!!! And produce almost same amount of Organic Fertilizer. Now multiply this by 100, this is totally possible! . This would also increase manifold the agriculture output of the country.
This brings us to another very important issue which the ancient Hindu practiced and the reason for which the looked upon the cow as their own mother. The Gir cow (hump cattle) was considered as a source of great wealth as it gives us :
1. The best Oil (Ghee) to cook our food in.
2. Milk - the most nutritious drink.
3. Manure for farming. Chemical pesticides kill the earthworms while manure does not.
4. Its urine is the best pesticide.
5. And above all ... cow-dung... dried or otherwise as fuel to cook our food.
Name any other animal that is as useful?
And India being an agriculture based economy the cow & oxen are the two pillars of the economy. If we keep killing them then... more we will depend upon imported fuels and our profits decrease and we will keep sliding under debts. Just imagine... Cows provide approx 100 million tonnes of dry dung a year... and if 100 million tonnes of Petrol would have been used it would have cost 100 million tonnes x Rs 80 = Rs 8 billion!
An estimated 1.5 million cows are smuggled out of India annually. Imagine the amount of Milk, Ghee, Methane and Pesticide that are lost to us annually. This directly affect not only our agriculture but also our foreign exchange reserves as we end up buying more petrol/diesel fuels. This is huge loss to our Country.
Diary farming is one of the best and easiest way to become a Millionaire!
1 cow can pay you Rs 10,000 per month
10 cow can pay you Rs 100,000 per month
100 cow can pay you Rs 1,000,000 per month
Yet we have the audacity to say we feed the cow. Nopes its the other way around... the Cow feeds us and grows our business and gets you money to feed your family. If you kill it then you are cutting the very branch you are sitting on.
The future can be glimpsed on a dusty, rutted road in a poor South Delhi neighborhood. Here 1,000 people use an immaculately clean public toilet constructed by a nonprofit foundation, the Sulabh Sanitation Movement. The biogas digester attached to toilets provides cooking gas for a 600-student school and vocational-training program the foundation runs. In the past, non-governmental organizations like Sulabh were the only ones offering biogas digesters. Many more digersters are being built across the country and in households.
And Sinxtex?... Sintex could well emerge as an Energy producer... Sintex Energy! Its right time to invest in Sintex Stocks which is currently trading at around Rs 30.