The idea of games has existed since the dawn of the human race. However, video games are a relatively new concept. So much so that, we as a culture are still trying to create the “rules” of video games. This is placing us in a cultural lag; where we want and need to further games in how they play into our everyday lives. But also, to restrict the content or story of the games themselves; which is placing video game developers in a tough position.
When we look back at the history of video games, it is shocking that it can be dated as far back as the 1940s, when in 1947 Tomas T. Goldsmith and Estle Ray Mann filed a United States patent request for an invention they described as a "cathode ray tube amusement device." However, video gaming would not reach mainstream popularity until the 1970s, when arcade video games began with such titles like “Pong” and “Space Invaders”. Soon after the release of the arcade machines. Gaming consoles were released with games like the “Odysseys”. Then home computers were introduced to the general public. Since then, video gaming has become a popular form of entertainment and a large part of modern culture. There are currently considered to be eight generations of video game consoles, with the sixth, seventh and eighth concurrently ongoing, and the ninth just around the corner. (History of Video Games)
Gaming has come a long way from its humble beginnings. The industry has changed from producing games for the “hardcore” gamer; the stereotypical thirty year old man who lives with his mom and paints models. To producing games for the “casual’ gamer and this ranges from three year olds to ninety year olds. This change has created a massive change in the gaming community. Gaming had come from a select few, to everyone. Anyone can play a video game; it’s no longer the guy who cant get a girl, playing video games. It’s girls and guys playing together. This has taken the gaming community from a very negative perception of being seen as “losers in their mom’s basement.” To a very positive perception “that everyone games in some way.”
Almost all gamers own one of the following: Xbox, Playstation, Wii, smart phone, computer, and/or a tablet device such as the Ipad. Each of these devices offer a different experience of gameplay. They also indicate where the individual is on the scale of hardcore to casual gamer. Most hardcore gamers own either the Xbox or Playstation or both. Where as the more casual gamers may own anything from a smart phone to the Wii. However, this in no way limits what “level of gamer” an individual may be.
The gaming community has created many slang terms. Most are used primarily while playing video games. Such as; “N00b” a derogatory term for a "beginner” or “pwn” meaning to ‘own’, ‘shut down’ or ‘destroy’. An example of these words in action would be; “I totally just pwned that n00b!”
Many gamers usually participate in regular “video game nights”. Where a group of anywhere from two to ten gamers come together under the same roof to have a good time. Each bringing different snack foods, sodas, or games to the table. In contrast to the friendly group activities. It is not hard to find a gamer playing online with others, screaming, swearing, and threatening his or her competition. This has caused many problems in the video game community, with some “threats” actually made real. Incidents such as this are often widely publicized. This media attention often leads many people to believe that video games are bad for the youth of the nation.
When we look at the gaming culture it is easy to see that it is not without it’s flaws. However, no culture can say its perfect. The gaming community is always trying to innovate and change for the better, wether it is safer online play for a child or better graphics for the new game. However the gaming culture very rarely changes.