More young people than ever want the first car they buy to be electric
The views of 800 young people aged between 14 and 17 were sought by the joint industry and government-funded Go Ultra Low campaign, which is seeking to increase the number of car buyers considering ultra-low-emission vehicles by helping them understand their benefits, cost savings and capabilities.
The study found that 81% of 14-year-olds plan to make the first car they buy an EV, as prospective drivers are more focused on a low emission future and look to benefit from the increased availability of used electric cars.
Slumping petrols prices have kept demand for hybrid cars down recently
The young people interviewed also said that their generation tends to associate electric cars with lower carbon dioxide emissions (56%), cleaner air (48%), and ‘the types of cars that everyone will be driving one day’ (34%).
Today’s learner drivers also said that they want to driver a cleaner, greener car when they pass their test, while 88% of all the young people surveyed felt that more motorists, regardless of their age, should be driving a plug-in car in 2015.
Of the benefits that EVs offer that tomorrow’s drivers considered, top of the list was running costs of as little as 2p per mile to drive (53%), followed by the cars’ contemporary technology (29%) and the ability to travel distances of up to 700 miles (32%) also ranking highly.
More than a quarter of young people also felt that a car that ‘feels good to drive in’ was a key consideration.
Tesla was founded in Silicon Valley in 2003 and have been making electric cars ever since
Dr Pearson commented: “Young people are very aware of environmental issues and it is great that they also notice that electric cars will be cheaper to run, so it is a clear win-win.
Battery technology continues to improve, and the amount of resources needed to make an electric car will continue to fall.
These technology developments will all add up, greatly reducing the environmental impact of cars while making them safer and cheaper.
If current trends towards electric cars continue this means that, by 2026, demand for electric cars will almost certainly outweigh demand for 'traditionally fuelled' cars.”
Electric/hybrid 4x4s are becoming more popular
Poppy Welch, head of Go Ultra Low, added: “It’s really encouraging to see how popular electric cars have become among British teenagers, the next generation of first-car buyers.
"Our research shows that younger consumers are more drawn towards environmentally friendly purchases, including when planning which car they’ll drive when they get their licence.
"Plus, their rationale makes sense: electric cars can travel long distances and are consistently cheaper to run, so as a first car they are the logical choice.
"What’s more, there is an electric vehicle to suit every lifestyle, from city run-arounds and family hatchbacks to 4x4s and sports cars.”