Monday, April 13, 2009
schematic design is the fundamental part of design. after discussing the strategy of the middle school design and creating space within the circulation spaces it only made sense to combine the wayfinding and "stitching" element together for the classrooms. this will allow the students to experience the connection of the hallways to the classrooms. good design is really about what you want the inhabitant to experience.
Monday, April 6, 2009
purple, green, and orange. the secondary colors make sense, because the students are in middle school. the three colors can provide a stimulating educational environment that promotes, balance, creativity, and renewal. while also connecting to nature and the life cycle of a tree during the four seasons. i am interested with introducing a dominate analogous color scheme in each hallway [6, 7, 8, grade] while using the other colors as an accent. this will create an identity for each grade, but will relate back to the middle school as a whole. this will also minimize the segregation between each grade and promote a smoother transition as the student ages in the middle school.
finally! a system. leaves, roots, and branches--the forest. the circulation spaces are not a seperate entity of the outdoor spaces or even the classrooms. so angela and worked on creating a system--a section of a leaf|veins--leaves|veins that folds around the circulation spaces and stitches all of it's adjacencies. the "u" element acts as an architectural element for ceiling, flooring, and wall planes [macro] as well as highlights spatial relationships to other circulation spaces as well as the courtyards and classrooms [micro]. the idea is to change the orientation of the "u" to celebrate a certain space as well as introduce a wayfinding technique and the metaphor of the forest.
this schematic is about "making space" which allows the student to inhabit a welcoming environment and encourages them to interact and become a part of their educational environment. removing the florescent lighting overhead minimizes the elongated hallway effect. while the pendent lighting of the seating area is purposeful and welcoming. from my precedent study at the beginning of the semester, the Thurston elementary school resembled a residence because the administration felt that it would promote a smoother transition from home to school for the students. this precedent inspired me to create personalized areas for the students, just as if they were at home.