Mangoes have been one of the most popular fruits all across the world. They have earned their reputation to be the king of fruits and rightfully so. Whether used in raw and unripe from for making pickles, and a part of your curry or to the ripe and juicy ones that simply melt in your mouth; mangoes have made their mark.
Mangoes are also considered to be a powerhouse of energy and nutrients and the health benefits of mangoes includes improved digestion and cardiovascular health. There are many more health benefits of mangoes which you can read in the complete article below.
Known as the “king of fruits,” mango is one of the most popular, nutritious and flavourful fruits in the world, which is loved by people of all age groups. The rich fruit has a unique flavour, fragrance and taste. The fruit comes in different shapes and sizes. The outer skin of the fruit is smooth and thick. It is green in case of un-ripe mangoes but turns into golden yellow, red and orange in the ripe fruits. The flesh of the fruit is juicy, flavourful, orange-yellow in colour. In the middle of the fruit, there is a large seed or stone which is not consumed.
Talking about the health benefits of mangoes, you will be surprised to know that your favourite, juicy mangoes are power-packed with nutrition and health benefits. The fruit contains several antioxidants that protect your body against life-terminating cancers. Being a fibrous fruit, mangoes help in digestion and controls diabetes. There are several other health benefits of mangoes listed in this article that you will be surprised to find out!
Going back to the yummy taste of the fruit, there are several ways in which you can enjoy mangoes:
- Eat the fruit as it is without any additions or seasonings.
- Cut the fruit into small cubes and add to fruit salads.
- Blend mangoes with ice to make mango juice, which is a popular drink.
- Blend mangoes with milk and sugar to make thick and creamy mango milk shake.
- Make delicious candies, jams, jellies and ice creams using the fruit.
- Use unripe, raw, green mangoes to prepare pickles, marmalade, and sauces.
We have discussed so much about the unique taste and flavour of this beloved fruit. Read on to discover the numerous nutritional and health benefits of Mango, as well as some storage tips and our favourite recipes.
Interested in reading more about health benefits of mangoes? Here are some links
Mangoes are seasonal fruits; fresh mango fruit season begins by March end when its rich fragrance heralds its arrival in the markets.
Storage: Unripe mangoes can be kept at room temperature for few days, and to ripen, keep them in paper covers. Ripe fruits should be stored in the refrigerator but never below 10° F (50°C). Bring back to normal temperature when the fruit is to be eaten to get the natural taste and flavour.
Cleaning & Cutting: Wash mangoes in cold running water in order to remove dust/dirt and any surface chemical residue. Mop dry its outer skin using a soft cloth. Mango fruit should be eaten all alone without any seasonings/additions to experience its rich flavor.
Cut the fruit lengthwise into three pieces in such a way that the middle portion consists of husky seed. Then, slice through the skin to separate the skin from the pulp. Chop pulp into desired sections.
How to Buy: In the store, mangoes come in various sizes and colors; therefore, select the one based on the serving size and variety of fruit you love to devour. Alphonso, Sindhuri and Totapuri varieties are extremely popular.
Irrespective of varieties, choose the ones with intact skin without any bruises or cuts.
Mango fruit is rich in pre-biotic dietary fiber, vitamins, minerals, and poly-phenolic flavonoid antioxidant compounds.
Mineral Content: Mangoes are a rich source of many minerals such as calcium, iron, copper, zinc, magnesium and manganese.
Vitamin & Compounds: Mango fruit is an excellent source of Vitamin-A and flavonoids like beta-carotene, alpha-carotene, and beta-cryptoxanthin. It is also a very good source of vitamin-B6 (pyridoxine), vitamin-C and vitamin-E.
Water Content: Mangoes are 84 percent water by weight.
Carbohydrate Content: Mangoes provide 70 calories per 100 g.
Many studies have suggested that increasing consumption of mangoes decreases the risk of obesity and overall mortality, diabetes, heart disease and promotes a healthy complexion and hair, increased energy, overall lower weight.
Age-related macular degeneration: The antioxidant zeaxanthin, found in mangoes, filters out harmful blue light rays and is thought to play a protective role in eye health and possibly ward off damage from macular degeneration.3
Asthma prevention: The risks for developing asthma are lower in people who consume a high amount of certain nutrients. One of these nutrients is beta-carotene which is found in mangoes.
Cancer: Antioxidants like quercetin, isoquercitrin, astragalin, fisetin, gallic acid and methylgallat present in mango protect the body against colon, breast, leukemia and prostate cancers.
Bone health: Regular intake of mangoes provide the required amounts of vitamin K in our bodies which improves our bone health and reduces risk for bone fracture.
Diabetes: Studies have shown that type 1 diabetics who consume high-fiber diets have lower blood glucose levels and type 2 diabetics may have improved blood sugar, lipids and insulin levels. One cup of mango provides about 3 grams of fiber.
Digestion: Mangoes, because of their fiber and water content, help to prevent constipation and promote regularity and a healthy digestive tract.
Heart disease: The fiber, potassium and vitamin content in mangoes all help to ward off heart disease. An increase in potassium intake along with a decrease in sodium intake is the most important dietary change that a person can make to reduce their risk of cardiovascular disease.
Skin and Hair: Mangoes also great for your hair because they contain vitamin A, a nutrient required for sebum production that keeps hair moisturized. Vitamin A is also necessary for the growth of all bodily tissues, including skin and hair. Adequate intake of vitamin C, which 1-cup of mango per day can provide, is needed for the building and maintenance of collagen, which provides structure to skin and hair.
Keeps cholesterol in check: Mango has high level of vitamin C, pectin and fibres that help to lower serum cholesterol levels. Fresh mango is a rich source of potassium, which is an important component of cell and body fluids that helps to control heart rate and blood pressure.
Weight loss: Mango has a lot of vitamins and nutrients that help the body feel fuller. Also, the fibrous fruit boosts the digestive function of the body by burning additional calories, helping in weight loss.
Mango latex allergy: This is especially common with raw, unripe mangoes. Immediate reactions may include itchiness at the angle of the mouth, lips, and tip of the tongue. In some people, the reactions can be severe, with manifestations like swelling of the lips, ulceration at the mouth angles, respiratory difficulty, vomiting, and diarrhea.
Increase the blood glucose level: Ripe mangos are a rich source of sugar, which often tend to grow blood sugar levels. Therefore, people with diabetes are suggested not to eat too many mangoes.
Weight Gain: Mango is laden with calories though they are not bad in nature. But excessive eating of mango, often results in weight gain. Being a rich source of sugar, it is considered bad for people on weight loss.
Contact Dermatitis: Mango sap is known to contain a chemical called urushiol. Many people are found sensitive to this substance which results into contact dermatitis. In this case, the skin becomes inflamed, itchy, flaky and blistery.
Here are some recipes of Mangoes that you can easily try at home.
1) Mango Ginger Sorbet. An icy cold, refreshing sorbet ideal for a hot summer’s day!
2) Mango Ice Cream: Who would not love this?
3) Chicken and Mango Salad: A delicious combination of two different tastes.
4) Mango Passionfruit Smoothie: Beat the summer heat with this cool drink.