There was once a jungle where no animal dared to venture out alone. They knew if they did they might have to deal with the king, a powerful lion who commanded a fearsome pride. So the animals stayed in packs, but there was no strength in numbers. They all knew one of them would be taken each time they went out, and they hoped it wouldn't be them. There was only one animal who wasn't scared at all. His name was Boldy, a young monkey.

Boldy asked the chief of his troop, "Why should we be scared? We live in the trees, and we are nimble and clever." The other monkeys told Boldy to quiet down. The chief said there were times that they did leave the trees, and if they didn't take care, the lions would get them then. Besides, this was his decision, and if Boldy didn't like it then he could become chief of his own troop. Boldy replied, "I will do you one better. I will become chief of the jungle!" 

Boldy swung from vine to vine until he reached the clearing where the lions lived. Boldy began to hurl fruit from the trees at them. The lions roared. Their king bellowed "How dare you! When you come down from that tree, we will eat you immediately!" Boldy continued to throw fruit. "I bet I can make you run from me!" The lions were too proud to run. "These fruits barely hurt us! We will prove it by staying here and taking all that you can dish out!", the king said. And so the lions stayed. They even missed their own hunting time. Soon, they began to feel weak from hunger. "We can't go and hunt. Let us eat the fruit that the monkey has brought to us." The lions ate the fallen fruits. Little did they know that fruit makes lions sick.

Soon the lions began to vomit. They were weak and sick. The fruits being thrown by Boldy began to hurt. "Please, leave us! I will do anything", the king begged. "Then make me king!", Boldy shouted. The king scoffed, but his pride began to growl. They had grown tired of the king who had misled them. The king admitted defeat. "Fine. You now rule this land." Boldy celebrated. The young monkey had become king of the jungle.
