24/7 EMERGENCY SERVICES
Mold Damage Remediation & Repair
Our Certified Technicians will evaluate the structure and guide you through the process of discovery and elimination.
Mold is a type of fungus that grows on plants and fibers and is most often associated with damp, musty locations such as bathrooms, basements and attics. Mold travels through the air as tiny spores which like to make their home in wet areas, where they will breed. If mold is spotted, it’s best to nip it in the bud immediately lest it spread to other areas. It’s also a good indication of a moisture problem, which should be dealt with as soon as possible. In addition to its unsightly appearance, mold can present a hazard to one’s health. It’s an allergen and an irritant. Someone who suffers from household allergies or asthma will no doubt have trouble breathing in homes with mold infestations.
Molds produce tiny spores to reproduce. Mold spores waft through the indoor and outdoor air continually. When mold spores land on a damp spot indoors, they may begin growing and digesting whatever they are growing on in order to survive. There are molds that can grow on wood, paper, carpet, and foods. When excessive moisture or water accumulates indoors, mold growth will often occur, particularly if the moisture problem remains undiscovered or un-addressed. There is no practical way to eliminate all molds and mold spores in the indoor environment; the way to control indoor mold growth is to control moisture.
What is black mold? It is a term commonly used to describe a slimy, greenish-black substance which can result in serious health risk. It has been closely linked to the death of babies from respiratory bleeding, and as a contributing factor to illnesses such as asthma and bronchitis. According to the CDC (Center of Disease Control), this mold is responsible for over “100 cases of lung disorders”.
At VOGE, Inc. we follow a strict process enforced by various organizations that enforce health and air quality. Upon completion of the mold abatement process, we will bring in a third party environmental testing company to conduct final testing for any spores or mold left behind. Not until we past this are we done. Call VOGE, Inc. Emergency & Restoration today for you’re in home mold consultation and have the best team in L.A. for Mold Remediation.
30 Minutes Response Time
Free Damage Assessment
WE WORK WITH YOUR INSURANCE
WE BILL THEM DIRECTLY
LIC # 837775 Serving Los Angeles, Orange & Ventura County Areas