Send the link below via email or IMCopy
Present to your audienceStart remote presentation
- Invited audience members will follow you as you navigate and present
- People invited to a presentation do not need a Prezi account
- This link expires 10 minutes after you close the presentation
- A maximum of 30 users can follow your presentation
- Learn more about this feature in our knowledge base article
Do you really want to delete this prezi?
Neither you, nor the coeditors you shared it with will be able to recover it again.
Make your likes visible on Facebook?
You can change this under Settings & Account at any time.
Should Boys and Girls Play on the Same Sports Team?
Transcript of Should Boys and Girls Play on the Same Sports Team?
In history, women have not been as important as men. Huge advancements have been made for women's rights.
People have tried to prohibit girls from playing with boys in sports, but the public opposes those people because women deserve equality.
What would sports be like with opposite genders on the same team?
Boys playing with girls push girls, making them better and more competitive athletes and vice versa.
A girl playing sports with boys will help the girl improve. She will become a stronger, tougher, faster, and more powerful athlete than she would playing with girls.Many professional women athletes played with boys to get better.
Also, boys can pick up on skills from girls, they can become more agile and flexible.
Overall, boys and girls playing against each other will increase competitiveness, making the sport better and more interesting.
Having both genders on a team can benefit the team.
Having both genders on a team will build friendships within the team, helping the team bond and work better together.
Plus, a guy on a girls’ team will help by providing a strong player. Also, girls can help guys’ teams. Over 1,500 girls played boys football in 2013 (Reason, 1) and some were the best on their team.
Boys are physically stronger than girls.
It is a well known fact that boys are built to be stronger and bigger than girls. However, that does not mean girls are too fragile to play sports with guys.
Should Boys and Girls be Allowed to Play on the Same Sports Team?
Without a doubt, girls and boys should be able to play on the same sports team because boys and girls should have equal rights, the two genders provide challenge and competition for each other, and multi-gender sports teams can benefit the team.
Undoubtedly, girls and boys should have the choice to participate in sports with each other because they deserve equal rights, it may help the teams, and it’ll provide challenge and competition.
Girls should be able to be equal to boys after all these years, especially in sports. Also, having both genders on a team will benefit the team. Additionally, both genders will be challenged by each other, and competitiveness will increase. In conclusion, boys and girls should be able to play sports on the same team.
By: Alana Cotter and Madeline Rehm