Growing herbs indoors is as easy and enjoyable as growing them outdoors and has some advantages over growing them outdoors as well. Indoor container herb gardens are all but immune to attack by diseases and pests and allow you complete control of watering, light, and fertilization.
When growing herbs indoors, the same as growing any plant in a container, the most important thing to remember is to provide a growing environment of nutrient rich soil that has good drainage yet holds moisture.
Most annual herbs and some perennials adapt well to indoor growing. Dwarf varieties and those that reach only a foot in height may be grown in pots as small as six inches in diameter. When given adequate light and proper care, they'll provide you with fresh sprigs year round.
If you are really interested in growing great herbs indoors, we found some lovely sets at Direct Gardening
In fact, growing some herbs in containers is preferable to planting them in your garden. For instance, many members of the mint family are invasive and quickly become a nuisance in the garden, but you can keep their wandering ways in check when you plant them in a pot. To be successful when growing herbs in a container, choose a pot that is at least six inches in diameter with an eight-inch soil depth.
Most potted herbs thrive in any good potting mixture in a container that provides good drainage. Plant herbs for indoor growing in two parts potting soil with one part perlite or coarse sand. An inch of small gravel in the pot bottom ensures adequate drainage.
Your indoor herbs will like the same temperatures you do, as long as you keep your home at about 70 degrees Fahrenheit during the day and not lower than 60 degrees at night. Many herbs are drought tolerant, naturally resistant to insects, disease, and need little fertilization, which makes growing herbs indoors a very easy-care activity.
Although herbs do love the sunshine, growing herbs indoors doesn't mean you have to give them a western or southern exposure. Your container-grown herbs will do best with 14 to 16 hours of light a day, but even a minimum of four hours light per day is enough to keep them alive. If you don't have a kitchen window that allows for at least four hours of sunlight each day, simulate sunlight for indoor-growing herbs with either a grow light or fluorescent fixture. In fact, an inexpensive fluorescent shop light shines with the full spectrum of light, which is what most plants need to thrive. If your herbs begin to look leggy or spindly, they're telling you that they need more light.
Periodic fertilization, yearly repotting, regular watering (according to the requirements of the plant) and occasional pruning is all you need do to maintain your indoor herb garden indefinitely.
One easy solution for growing herbs indoors is the strawberry pot, an urn with a top opening and several holes along the sides. Although not really an herb, the leaves of the alpine strawberry are used frequently to flavor herbal teas. When planted in the top opening of your strawberry pot, the alpine strawberry will be a continuing source of enjoyment with delightful blossoms, aromatic leaves, and of course, the very delicious berries!
Another consideration for the top opening of a strawberry pot is a flowering herb like the scented geranium. Some good indoor choices for the side openings include thyme, oregano, chives, and rosemary.
Hydroponic and aquaponic herb growing are two of the soil-less methods many environmentally conscious herb gardeners are substituting for traditional soil-based herb cultivation.
Hydroponic herbs grow up to 50% faster than soil-based plants. Aquaponics is the combination of aquaculture and hydroponics where nutrient-rich fish water is pumped from fish tank into herb garden bed. Plants growing in gravel extract the nutrients and the water drains back into the fish tank clean and freshly oxygenated. Growing herbs using aquaponics can be as simple as pumping water between a small goldfish aquarium and some gravel filled herb pots.