Wheat, the “Staff of Life,” is the top cereal crop in the world – followed by corn and rice. It is the staple grain for at least a third of the world’s population. Wheat is ubiquitous in the American diet – in breads, pasta, crackers, breakfast cereals, baked goods and pastries. Unfortunately, most of these products are made from refined flour, which is missing the most nutritious parts of the wheat kernel – the germ and bran. “Enriching” refined flour only adds a fraction of the nutrients that have been removed.
Wheat is classified according to planting season (winter or spring), hardness of the kernel (hard or soft) and color of the kernel (red or white). Winter wheat is planted in the fall and harvested in early summer; spring wheat is planted in spring and harvested in late summer. Hard red winter and hard red spring wheat are higher in protein than soft wheat and are most commonly used for all-purpose flour and yeast breads. Durum wheat is the hardest variety, and is used to make pasta. Soft red winter and soft white spring wheat are milled into flour for making cakes, cookies, pastries and crackers. The color of wheat kernels is in the bran layer; white wheat lacks the genes for color that red varieties have.
Grain Place offers these Wheat products:
Hard Red Winter Wheat – Available online!
Hard White Winter Wheat – Available online!
Rolled Wheat – Available online!
Hard Red Wheat Flour – Available online!
Hard White Wheat Flour – Available online!
Favorite Five™ Mixed Grains – Available online!
Hard Red Winter Wheat, Hard White Winter Wheat
These wheats are unprocessed whole wheat kernels. Use cooked hard red or white winter wheats as you would other whole grains – grind into flour, or cook for use in casseroles, pilaf, breakfast porridge, soups and stews, and added to breads.
Our rolled wheat is made using a unique process of carefully controlled moisture and temperature that gelatinizes the starches, making the grain more digestible while retaining nutrients. This process also denatures enzymes that cause rancidity, extending shelf life of the grain. Enjoy rolled wheat with other rolled grains in breakfast porridge or granola. Give soups, stews and casseroles a protein and nutrient boost by adding rolled wheat.
Hard Red Wheat Flour
Hard Red Wheat Flour is milled from whole grain red wheat (including the bran, endosperm and germ) and retains its nutrients. Take advantage of the much greater nutrient content of whole red wheat flour by substituting it for all or most of the all purpose wheat flour called for in any recipe.
Hard White Wheat Flour
Hard White Wheat Flour is milled from whole grain white wheat (including the bran, endosperm and germ) and retains its nutrients. It can be used just as whole wheat flour. It has a slightly higher protein content than flour from red wheat, and a slightly sweeter flavor. Hard white wheat flour yields lighter-colored baked goods that many people prefer, while retaining all the whole-grain nutrients of red wheat flours.
Favorite Five™ Mixed Grains
Our own top-selling certified organic wholesome blend of rolled oats, rolled barley, rolled wheat, rolled rye and hulled sesame seeds. Favorite Five™ is a high fiber, high protein and delicious way to power your day.
For more recipe ideas check out our Pinterest board!
Back to Product List
Wheat contains gluten and is processed on the same equipment on which barley and soybeans are processed, and is handled in the same plant that handles sesame seeds and peanuts.