Today I'm going to talk about the Shimmering Shores of Vaadhoo, Maldives. Pinpricks of light on the shore seem to mirror stars. Glowing Blue Waves, the biological light, or bioluminescence (the biochemical emission of light by living organisms such as fireflies and deep-sea fishes), in the waves is the product of marine microbes called phytoplankton. Some might think it would be the perfect spot for a nice date in the beach but others might get distracted of the amazing features the these plankton produce. Although a rare sight on a shoreline, the phenomenon is more commonly seen at sea in the wake of ships the stir up the oxygen in the sea, which causes the bioluminescent bacteria to glow.
Friday, January 22, 2016
This week I am going to talk about squirrels.They are small or medium-size rodents. The family includes tree squirrels, ground squirrels, chipmunks, marmots, flying squirrels, and prairie dogs.The life span of squirrels is usually 6-10 years.There are more than 200 species of squirrels in the entire world.Like other rodents they have four front teeth that never stop growing so they don't wear down from constant gnawing. They eat nuts, leaves, seeds, roots, and other plants int the wild.Tree squirrels are commonly seen everywhere from woodlands to city parks. Though they are terrific climbers, these squirrels do come to the ground in search of fare such as nuts, acorns, berries, and flowers. They also eat bark, eggs, or baby birds. Tree sap is a delicacy to some species.
Friday, January 8, 2016
There are so many things in nature to talk about but I wanna talk about one thing today and that are trees. There are about 750 different types of trees. Some of them grow in the desert and others grow in the coldest of climates. The pine tree on average grows to about 80-110 feet and generally grow in colder climates. They have needles that are 1-11 inches long. The trunk of the tree grow to 1-3 feet in diameter and the full diameter of the tree gets to about 20-40 foot. There are 120 species of pine trees. Once the trees are planted in their last spot the don't need to be watered and they also used their needles to deter prey. The pine cones are the reproductive system of the tree and like many other plants pine trees reproduce sexually. They need a male and female pine cones to reproduce. The males create pollen and the females produce ovules.