the western lowland gorilla
By: The Kong club
Rebecca,Steven, hunter and Jakob
Did you know that the gorilla is the closest animal to a human? This article states The Western Lowland Gorilla's description, conservation or threats, their habitat and diet, explaining this very unique animal.
Gorillas look like humans but, they can weigh up to 500 pounds!!! They have black hair covering everything except for their face and chests, they can stand up to 4 1/2 feet . They also have long arms and short legs, fingers and ears but no tails. They have one baby at a time, their gestation is 8 ½ months and they rarely have two.
The Western Lowland Gorilla are omnivores, they eat plants, fruits and very few beetles. Some of the plants are leaves, shoots, roots and Ginger Tapioca Stalk. They also eat some fruit such as mango, bananas, oranges and apples. Also bugs such as ants, beetles, and termites.
conservation and threats
The Western Lowland gorilla is critically endangered because of habitat loss and climate change. People are cutting down trees in the jungle also known as habitat loss which is harming the wild life in the jungle. Climate change happens when we litter and it ends up moving to other places like Africa and some to the North Pole making their wild life to move because of their surroundings.
Gorillas are kind and patience with one another also, they are very shy. The Silver back is the leader of the group and will take care of the other gorillas, they will take care of each other like family if you try to scare them they could step up for each other or try to run away and hide because of their shyness.
The Western Lowland gorilla lives in Central Africa and the rainforests. Also there are only 150,000 to 200,000 gorillas left in the wild and only 4 in the national parks. There are also some in Cameroon.
In conclusion, the gorilla reduction of more than 80 percent over three generations. the listing is on exceptionally high levels of hunting and disease-induced mortality which combined are estimated to have caused its abundance to decline by more than 60 percent alone over the last 20 to 25 years. most protected areas have serious poaching problems and almost half of the habitat under protected status has been hard hit by Ebola. I really think that if we have the Western Lowland Gorilla at our zoo it will be happy and protected here.