WALPI, ARIZ. — The ancient village seems to float in the desert air like a cloud.
Walpi, southernmost of three villages atop the rocky ridge of First Mesa in northeastern Arizona, is one of North America`s oldest settlements. It is reserved for tribal ceremonies and the handful of Hopi who live there because they have clout in the religious hierarchy of the tribe.
The village`s residents avoid a lone tourist who walks through the dusty streets. They hope that ignoring tourists will discourage visitors. A walk among the rehabbed pueblos is like a stroll through a museum. Photography is strictly prohibited except when tribal leaders grant special permission.
Walpi dates back to 900 A.D. A private and peaceful tribe, the Hopi began to move up the mesas hundreds of years ago, seeking high, defensive ground to escape marauding Navajo bands. They moved higher and higher as the Navajo were joined by Spaniards and the Westward push of United States` expansion.
Hopi Tribal Chairman Ivan Sidney says his tribe still is fighting off Navajo encroachment. ``This is a fight for survival, for our own continued existence,`` he said.
The two tribes are locked in a century-old land dispute that began when President Chester Arthur created a 2.5 million-acre reservation for the Hopi
``and other Indians as the Secretary of the Interior may see fit to settle thereon.``
The Navajo reservation, created in 1868, expanded enormously through presidential orders during the 20th Century until it completely encircled the Hopi territory. Meanwhile, the more nomadic Navajo were encroaching on the Hopi lands.
By 1958, so many Navajo had settled on the Hopi reservation that federal judges established within the original Hopi reservation a 1.2 million-acre Joint Use Area (JUA) to be shared by the two tribes, with the remaining area to be exclusively Hopi-owned.
After years of bickering between the two tribes over use of the shared land, Congress admitted the JUA was a failure. The 1974 Hopi-Navajo Relocation Act divided the land between the tribes and set up a commission to relocate Indians, mostly Navajo, who would be living on the other tribe`s newly partitioned land. The act gave the commission until July 6 of this year to complete the task.
But the job is far from complete. The commission has spent $250 million to move some 900 families.
The Navajo government, led by Tribal Chairman Peterson Zah, is pinning its hopes on a bill introduced by Arizona Congressmen Morris Udall and John McCain, which effectively would repeal the 1974 act, returning Big Mountain to the Navajo and compensating the Hopi with other new lands.
The Navajo say there are more like 400 families living on Big Mountain, and it is too much of a burden on U.S. taxpayers to move a population with roots in the area that go back several generations. They say Big Mountain is sacred to them.