De nation a nation: une ressource sur les traites en Ontario is the French language edition of the Union of Ontario Indians' treaty guide, Nation to Nation: A Resource on Treaties in Ontario by Maurice Switzer. This 68-page French language book from the Union of Ontario Indians is designed to inform readers and students about First Nations treaties in Ontario.
Residential Schools, With the Words and Images of Survivors, A National History EPUB honours the survivors, the former students, who attended residential schools. Designed for the general reader this accessible, history offers a first-person perspective of the residential school system in Canada, as it shares the memories of more than 70 survivors from across Canada as well as 125 archival and contemporary images (65 black & white photographs, 51 colour, some never before published).
Whaikōrero: The World of Māori Oratory examines the basic understanding of traditional Māori oratory offered at significant gatherings of the people. Usually translated as art of oratory to non-Indigenous Māori, this scholar Poia Rewi writes from the Indigenous perspective after interviewing 30 elders about this speechmaking. Poia Rewi assesses the origin and history of whaikōrero; its structure, language and style of delivery; who may speak; and where speech happens.
In The Knowledge Seeker: Embracing Indigenous Spiritually, Blair Stonechild shares his sixty-year journey of learning-from residential school to PhD and beyond-while trying to find a place for Indigenous spirituality in the classroom. Encouraged by an Elder who insisted sacred information be written down, Stonechild explores the underlying philosophy of his people's teachings to demonstrate that Indigenous spirituality can speak to our urgent, contemporary concerns.
Native Athletes in Action, revised edition, is one of the titles in Seventh Generation Book's Native Trailblazer Series. This 2016 title contains brief biographical sketches of 13 outstanding male and female athletes from Canada and the United States. Each athlete has achieved success in their chosen sport. The book, authored by long-distance runner Vincent Schilling, celebrates the lives of Jordin Tootoo, Cheri Becerra-Madsen, Alwyn Morris, Stephanie Murata, Cory Witherill, Ross Anderson, Richard Dionne, Mike Edwards, Shelly Hruska, Beau Kemp, Naomi Lang, Jim Thorpe, and Delby Powless.
The Rotinonshonni: A Traditional Iroquoian History Through the Eyes of Teharonhia:wako and Sawiskera by Mohawk scholar Brian Rice offers a comprehensive history based on the oral traditions of the Rotinonshonni Longhouse People, also known as the Haudenosaunee or Iroquois. Drawing upon J. N. B. Hewitt’s translation and the oral presentations of Cayuga Elder Jacob Thomas, Rice records the Iroquois creation story, the origin of Iroquois clans, the Great Law of Peace, the European invasion, and the life of Handsome Lake.
Who Are These People Anyway? told by Chief Irving Powless Jr. of the Onondaga Nation is a valuable addition to the understanding of Haudenosaunee worldview. Edited by Lesley Forrester the volume in Syracuse University Press the Iroquois and Their Neighbors series offers readers a fine example of Iroquois oral history recorded as a collection of Haudenosaunee teachings. Irving Powless Jr. has been a chief of the Beaver Clan of the Onondaga Nation since 1964.
Sitting Bull: Lakota Warrior and Defender of His People is a well-told picture book about the outstanding Lakota Sioux leader known as Tatanka Iyotake, was probably born in 1831. He was one of the greatest Lakota Sioux warriors and chiefs who ever lived. From Sitting Bull’s childhood, killing his first buffalo at age 10, to being named war chief to leading his people against the U.S. Army. When he was a child the family called him Slow because he was a thoughtful child who took his time in deliberation before making a major decision.
Hiawatha and the Peacemaker is an outstanding picture book that explains the essential knowledge about the Haudenosaunee Great Law of Peace retold for readers in grade 4 and up. Six Nations musician Robbie Robertson (formerly of The Band) teams up with American artist David Shannon to create a richly illustrated account of the journey of Hiawatha and the Peacemaker who brought the message of peace, power, and righteousness to five warring nations (the Mohawk, Oneida, Cayuga, Seneca, and the Onondaga).