Azerbaijan marks the National Flag Day today. APA reports that the tricolor national flag of Azerbaijan was adopted by the government of the Democratic Republic of Azerbaijan on November 9, 1918.
The tricolor flag was declared the state flag of the independent republic by the decision of Azerbaijan Supreme Assembly of Azerbaijan on February 5, 1991.
Under the executive order signed by Azerbaijani President Ilham Aliyev on November 18, 2009, November 9 is marked as the National Flag Day. President also sent proposals to the parliament to make amendments to the Labor Code. The parliament assessed the proposal and made relevant amendments to the Labor Code, according to the amendment, the National Flag Day is a non-working day.
On September 1, 2010, Azerbaijan’s President Ilham Aliyev participated in the inauguration of the National Flag Square. The square has a flag pole with a mass of 220 tons and a height of 162 meters. The flag that is flown on this pole has an area of 2,450 square meters; the size of the flag itself is 35 meters wide and 70 meters long and weighs 350 kilograms. The National Flag Museum was also built at this flagpole.
The author of the formula “Turkic freedom, modernity and Islamic culture”, which was the major principle of the national independence ideology early in the 20th century, was the great Azerbaijani thinker Alibey useynzadeh.
The national flag of Azerbaijan consists of three horizontal equal strips. The upper strip is of blue color, the middle-of red, the lower is green. In the center of the flag, on the red strip, there is an eight-pointed star and crescent; both are white. The basic description of the flag, along with the ratio, can be found in Article 23.II of the Constitution of Azerbaijan that was adopted on 12 November 1995. State flag of the Azerbaijan
Republic consists of three horizontal stripes of same width. Upper stripe is blue, middle stripe is red, and the lower one is green; in the middle of red stripe on both sides of the flag white crescent with eight-pointed star are
depicted. Width of the flag constitutes half of its length.
Further specifications of the national flag were set out in the Presidential Decree “On the National Flag of the Republic of Azerbaijan” issued on February 5, 1991. The ratio was kept at 1:2, which was used in the Soviet era. Each stripe is 1/3rd of the total height of the flag and extends to the full length of the flag. The star and crescent was placed in a box that has a ratio of 3:4; the crescent is shifted 1/60th from the center of the flag. At the outside diameter of both the crescent and the red inside circle, it will intersect with the diameter of the white eight-pointed star. The diameter of the star is 1/6th of the height of the flag; the inscribed circle in this star is 1/12th of the height of the flag. The flag is also described in the technical specification “AZS 001-2006.
09 November 2011