We might know why birds fly south for the winter, but how they achieve the feat is another question – one which we are now beginning to answer.
Each year some 50 billion birds take to the skies to migrate, an often gruelling pilgrimage associated with changes in diet, physiology and behaviour.
To hunt for a genetic basis for those changes, Jakob Mueller at the Max Planck Institute for Ornithology in Starnberg, Germany, and his colleagues went bird-catching. They trapped birds from 14 populations of the European blackcap (Sylvia atricapilla), a warbler that spends summer in northern Europe but winters in warmer southern Europe or northern Africa. The birds are typically active only during the day, but they are prepared to fly at night during their migration.
The team recorded and quantified the captive birds’ night-time restlessness – a proxy for migratory behaviour in the wild – and took blood samples to look for genetic signatures that could account for variations in nocturnal activity.
They focused on four genes linked to daily rhythms, changes in which might encourage the birds to migrate at night. Nocturnal restlessness was found to be linked to the gene ADCYAP1. The longer the form of the gene, or allele, the more restless the blackcap.
The gene may do more than simply encourage night-time fidgeting: it encodes a protein called PACAP, which plays a major role in melatonin secretion, energy metabolism and feeding. These functions are crucial for preparing birds for long flights. “This is the first step to bringing research on avian migration down to the molecular level,” says Mueller.
Tip of the iceberg
“It’s a landmark paper,” says John Wingfield at the University of California, Davis. “What remains to be done is to actually silence that gene and see if it affects migratory behaviour.”
David Winkler at Cornell University in Ithaca, New York, says that the study is the “tip of the iceberg” in understanding the genetic basis for migration. “This is a very important step in a process that’s probably going to take decades to really understand,” he says.
Because the authors analysed DNA sequences that are conserved across species, they will be able to extend their work to other roaming animals. “The race is on to start looking more broadly and cast the comparative net wider,” Winkler says.
Journal reference: Proceedings of the Royal Society B, DOI: 10.1098/rspb.2010.2567
More on these topics: