The benefits of buying Organic Foods and Supplements.
When buying organic foods, you are not only investing in your health, but you are also supporting sustainable, environmentally friendly practices and animal welfare.There are a number of benefits to choosing organic: . Know that your products have been grown and handled according to strict procedures and without persistent toxic chemical inputs.
Organic products are made without the use of GMOs (Genetically Modified Organisms), artificial colours, preservatives and sweetneners.
Organic products and supplements protects and improve the environment and animal health.Organic farming helps to maintain a clean water supply, soil health and fertility.
Organic farming reduce the carbon footprint and fight climate change (organic farming can use 30-50% less energy)
A vegetarian is someone who lives on a diet of grains,beans,lentils,nuts,seeds,vegetables and fruits with or without the use of dairy products and eggs.
Simply put, a vegetarian does not eat any meat,poultry,fish, shellfish or crustacea,or slaughter by-products such as gelatin or animal fats.
There are many different types of Vegetarians.
Lacto-ovo-vegetarians-Eats both dairy products and eggs.This is the most common type of vegetarian diet.
Lacto-vegetarian-Eats dairy products,but not eggs.
Vegan-Does not eat dairy products, eggs, or any other animal product.
Demi-vegetarian or Pescetarian- is a term sometimes used to describe persons who eat no or little meat but eat fish.
Fruitarian- A type of vegan diet where very few processed or cooked foods are eaten.Consists mainly of raw fruit,grains and nuts.Fruitarians believe only plant foods that can be harvested without killing the plant should be eaten.
Macrobiotic- A diet followed for the spiritual and philosophical reasons. Aims to maintain a balance between foods seen as Yin or Yang.
Food is Uncooked and have not been heated above 115degrees F(46 C), preserving the quality and integrity of the nutrients.Raw Supplements are free of chemical additives or chemical treatments, and contain no isolated or synthetic nutrients.
Raw Supplements are unadulterated meaning they are minimally processed and free from unnecessary or undesirable ingredients added for ease of manufacturing or cost reductions.
Many supplements on the market include a high percentage of heat or alcohol-extracted ingredients. These ingredients have been subjected to heat and cannot be considered RAW.
Raw supplements emulate the attributes of Raw Food (whole foods) and preserve the live probiotics and enzymes for optimal digestion.