Hammer is a tool that delivers a sudden impact to an object the mos common uses of hammers are to drive nail, fit parts, forge metal and break apart objects. Hammers vary in size and structure depending on their purpose.
History of hammers
The use of simple hammers dates about 2600000 when various shaped stones were used to strike wood, bone or other stones to break the apart and shape them . Stone attached to sticks with strips of leather or animal sinew were being as hammers with handles by about 30,000 during the middle of the paleolithic age.
How the hammer is made
The most noticeable part of any hammer whether the claw ball-peen or sledge is the head The head is made of metal and is the primary striking surface heads are made through a process called hot forgoing where a steel bar is heated to 1300 degrees the bar is either cut into sections called blanks or is fed continuously into a forge The bar or blanks are then pressed between two dies, which are solid plates of steel that have cavities cut out of them like a mold. One die is stationary and the other die is attached to a ram to force the metal into the shape of a hammer head. This is usually done over several, differently shaped die pressed to align the metal inside the hammer head. Protruding flash (metal that was squeezed out around the edges of the die) is trimmed off, the hammer head is cooled, shot blasted with steam and then painted or covered in sealant.
Traditional hammers have wooden handles. The handles are made by cutting a length of wood to the desired dimensions and then securing it on a lathe. The wood is then cut and trimmed until it has the proper form and dimensions to fit a specified hammer head, and a slit is cut diagonally in the top of the handle. Once the carving process is finished, the handle is cleaned, sanded and, if desired, given other treatments such as staining, painting.
What material Hammer is made from and the process used.
while the common handle material for hammers is walnut he handle can be made from other woods (for example ,hickory or ash ) as well as fiberglass or steel. steel handles are stronger than wood but may transmit more of the sock of the hammer blow to the user.
sledge - driving a large spike
dead blow - seating a work piece in a vice what hammer would you choose to strike a chisel?? soft-faced - tacking brass Ball Peen
ball-peen - shaping sheet metal