Thank you for visiting IDOC's website and for taking the time to find out more about The Yellow Star Project.
The mission of The Yellow Star Project is vitally transparent: to help check the groundswell of revisionism about the Holocaust and stem the worldwide resurgence of anti-Semitism and racially motivated hate.
We are now reaching out to donors and educators to encourage their involvement in The Yellow Star Project, and we invite your support and participation. The project seeks funders and sponsors to finance the design and production of The Yellow Star Student Edition, together with a Teacher's Guide, enabling teachers and educators to put a human face on this history. Along with these publications, The Yellow Star Project will encourage students to examine and discuss materials on present-day genocidal atrocities, such as those in Iraq, the Sudan, Rwanda, Bosnia and East Timor.
We live in a world of interdependency, and it is crucial that young people understand that our fate as a human race is the sum of our actions as individuals. We are each responsible for one another.
The sickening mentality that condoned and perpetuated the Holocaust decades ago is still evident in the world today, but many of the victims have changed. However, we believe the challenges students face in the future may become easier if they understand the implications of the past.
We do not intend to turn the millions of Holocaust victims into martyrs. The Yellow Star Project aims to keep alive the memory of those who were persecuted by extreme hatred while at the same time using the lessons learned from the Holocaust to ensure that our next generation of leaders will acknowledge that hate like this existed then, as it exists now, and it must not prevail.
We realize that while Holocaust teaching supplements exist in a variety of forms, many school districts simply do not have the funds to purchase them and some educators may not know how to get the most out of such materials.
The goal of the Project is to provide educators with the tools they need to teach their students about the Holocaust free-of-charge, while at the same time, publishing additional Holocaust books and creating other media for the American public to purchase.
We hope you will look through Project information on this website and learn more about what we plan to accomplish over the next several years. If you have any questions, comments, or if you would like to get involved, please contact us: