Skateboarding is a moderate aerobic activity that is equivalent to bike riding, hiking and rollerblading, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. A skateboarder who rides at least three times a week for 45 minutes or more needs proper nutrition for his increased athletic activity. This supports healthy weight and proper muscle function, ensuring you can keep skateboarding at a top level of performance.
Drinking water is vital for normal body function and for supporting the exertion from skateboarding. Drink at least 10 eight-ounce glasses each day to keep your body hydrated. An hour before you head out to skateboard, drink two to three glasses of water. Sip on water while you are skateboarding and drink two to four glasses when you finish. This helps your body restore fluids lost from the activity.
Carbohydrates supply your muscles with energy, ensuring that you can withstand intense skateboarding sessions. Complex carbohydrates are ideal, as they supply your muscles with slow-release energy and allow your body to store these nutrients for use later. Whole-grain pasta, fruits, potatoes, vegetables and legumes are excellent sources of complex carbohydrates. Include carbohydrates in every meal and eat a serving about two hours before you skateboard for maximum energy.
Fats should comprise about 10 percent of your daily food consumption. While excess fats can hinder your skateboarding performance, eating them in moderation provides your body with fuel. If you skateboard for an hour or more each time, fats provide the source of a substantial amount of your total expended energy. Do not seek out fat, as in most cases, an individual receives adequate levels from her regular diet, but do not follow a completely fat-free diet.
While the focus on protein consumption is often high, a skateboarder does not need excess amounts of it. Protein should comprise about 12 percent of your daily food consumption. However, if you strength-train along with skateboarding, your protein needs greatly increase, up to 1 gram for every two pounds of body weight. Lean meats, fish, legumes, dairy and soy products are good sources of protein.
Vitamins and Minerals
A skateboarder should eat a variety of fresh foods for the bulk of his vitamin and mineral intake. However, to ensure you receive adequate nutrients, take a daily multivitamin specifically for your gender and age. This fills gaps missing in your diet, ensuring your body has what it needs to sustain function. If you are lacking in vitamins and minerals, your skateboarding performance suffers and your body becomes weaker.
While following a healthy, balanced diet generally suffices, consult a professional for assistance. Only a certified nutritional specialist or health care professional can accurately assess what your individual nutrition needs are. The frequency with which you engage in skateboarding, your age, weight, gender and health status all affect what you should eat. In addition, your daily food intake depends on your goals for weight loss, maintenance or gain. Before consulting your nutritional specialist or physician, record everything you eat for three to seven days to give her a better look at your health and current diet.