Jezu Ufam Tobie
The second Sunday in the Easter season is known by catholics as Divine Mercy Sunday. It is a latecomer to the calendar, the first mass celebrating Divine Mercy was in 1935. Since then devotion has grown and now there are Novenas and Chaplets based on the Divine Mercy.
The whole story starts with a Polish Nun in the early 20th century by name of Mary Faustina Kowalska, who had several visions of Christ which she wrote about in her diary. The theme of the devotion is three-fold. To ask God for mercy, to trust in Christs mercy and to extend mercy to others. Nothing very novel about any of this except that it was a new way of focusing on it in prayer, and devotion. One of the most ancient Christian prayers is the Jesus Prayer, which repeats the words of the Publican from the Gospels; “Lord Jesus, Son of God, have mercy on me.” The Divine Mercy devotion takes this a little further by emphasising our trust and response to Christs mercy.
There is also a painting of the vision St. Faustina (This is her popular name.. canonized in 2000) which is shown above. This one was painted by Adolf Hyla in 1943, the phrase at the bottom, Jesu Ufam Tobie, is Polish for Jesus, I trust in You. The image of which there are several variations, show red and white light coming from the wound in Christ’s from the roman spear, which represent the Blood and Water pouring from his side.
St. Faustina died in 1938, and what may be the most interesting part of this is that she also predicted a war. Within a year Poland was under Nazi occupation. And it is said that as many Catholics as Jews died in Poland; to be specific, about 3 million of each. It seems that in a way God was preparing the church in Poland, not only for their own trials, but for the trials of others. 6266 Polish men and women have gained the title of Righteous among the Nations by the state of Israel for rescuing Jews during the Holocaust.
Ask for God’s mercy, trust God for mercy, and allow His mercy to work through us to others.
“I have found that the greatest power is hidden patience. I see that patience always leads to victory, although not immediately; but that victory will become manifest after many years. Patience is linked to meekness.”- St. Faustina