Pollution: Different types of Environmental Pollutants!
Pollution is the introduction of contaminants into a natural environment that causes instability, disorder, harm or discomfort to the ecosystem i.e. physical systems or living organisms.
Pollutants, the elements of pollution, can be foreign substances or energies,.or naturally occurring. Basically a pollutant is a waste material that pollutes air, water or soil etc.
Three factors determine the severity of a pollutant: its chemical nature, the concentration and the persistence.
Different types of environmental pollutants:
i. Gases like NO, NO2, SO2, CO, CO2, halogens (chlorine, bromine, iodine etc.).
ii. Deposited matter like smog,dust,grit etc.
iii. Agrochemicals like pesticides, herbicides, fungicides etc.
v. Photochemical oxidants like photochemical smog, ozone, peroxyacety nitrate, nitrogen oxides etc.
vi. Organic complexes like benzene, ether, acetic acid etc.
vii. Radioactive materials like radium thorium etc. Solid wastes like industrial ash, rubbish, garbage.
Forms of pollution:
The major forms of pollution are listed below along with the particular pollutants relevant to each of them:
1. Air pollution, the release of chemicals and particulates into the atmosphere.-Common gaseous air pollutants include carbon monoxide, sulphur dioxide, chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) and nitrogen oxides produced by industry and motor vehicles. Photochemical ozone and smog are created as nitrogen oxides and hydrocarbons react to sunlight etc.
2. Light pollution, includes light trespass, over-illumination and astronomical interference.
3. Noise pollution, which encompasses roadway noise, aircraft noise, industrial noise as well as high-intensity sonar.
4. Soil contamination occurs when chemicals are released by spill or underground leakage. Among the most significant soil contaminants are hydrocarbons, heavy metals, herbicides, pesticides and chlorinated hydrocarbons.
5. Radioactive contamination, resulting from 20th century activities in atomic physics, such as nuclear power generation and nuclear weapons research, manufacture and deployment.
6. Thermal pollution is a temperature change in natural water bodies caused by human influence, such as use of water as coolant in a power plant.
7. Water pollution, by the release of waste products and contaminants into surface runoff into river drainage systems, leaching into groundwater, liquid spills, wastewater discharges, eutrophication and littering etc.