100% Made in America American Flags around Elwood NE 68937
A national icon that goes by the labels “The Stars and Stripes”, “Old Glory”, and also “The Star-Spangled Banner”, the American flag is one of the highly recognizable signs in the world today. The American Flag is the 3rd oldest of the National Standards of the globe – older compared to the Union Jack of Britain or the Tricolor of France.
Who designed the American Flag?
According to prominent stories, the very first American flag was made by Betsy Ross, a Philadelphia seamstress who was an acquaintance of George Washington. In May 1776, so the tale goes, General Washington as well as 2 people from the Continental Congress saw Ross at her upholstery shop as well as showed her a sketch layout of the flag.
In those days, the flag was not the same as we know it today. The act mentioned, “Resolved, that the flag of the United States be thirteen stripes, alternating red and also white; that the Union be thirteen stars, white in a blue field, standing for a new constellation.”
Just what does the American Flag represent?
The flag first flew over thirteen states along the Atlantic coast, with a population of some three million individuals. Today it flies over fifty states, extending across the continent, and over multiple islands of the two seas; and millions owe it obligation. It has been brought to this pleased position by love and sacrifice. People have actually advanced it and also heroes have died for it.
The flag consists of 13 alternate red as well as white horizontal stripes standing for the first thirteen British colonies that proclaimed freedom from the Kingdom of Great Britain, and also became the first states in the United States. A blue rectangle in the canton shows 50 little, white stars representing each state. The stars are arranged in 9 horizontal rows offset of each other. This blue location of the flag is called the Union.
The importance of the Flag, as quoted from Washington: “We take the stars from Heaven, the red from our mother country, dividing it by white red stripes, therefore showing that we have actually divided from her, as well as the white red stripes shall drop to posterity standing for Liberty.”
It incarnates for all humanity the spirit of liberty and also the marvelous ideal of human liberty; not the freedom of unrestraint or the liberty of license, but a unique ideal of equal opportunity permanently, freedom as well as the quest of joy, guarded by the strict and lofty concepts of responsibility, of morality and of justice, as well as obtainable by obedience to self-imposed laws.
It embodies the essence of nationalism. Its spirit is the spirit of the American country. Its background is the background of the American people. Decorated on its folds in letters of living light are the names as well as fame of our heroic dead, the Fathers of the Republic who committed after its altars their lives, their treasures as well as their spiritual honor. Twice told tales of nationwide honor and magnificence cluster heavily concerning it. Ever triumphant, it has actually arised triumphant from 8 wonderful nationwide disputes. It flew at Saratog, at Yorktown, at Palo Alto, at Gettysburg, at Manila bay, at Chateau-Thierry, at Iwo Jima. It attests to the enormous growth of our national boundaries, the growth of our natural resources, and also the splendid structure of our people. It prophesises the victory of popular federal government, of public and religious liberty and also of national morality throughout the world.
Why is the American Flag important to American community?
The American flag is essential due to the fact that it represents the independent federal government as defined under the United States Constitution. Include in that, it also represents the background, beliefs and values of its people. As a democratic nation, its people stick to critical values such as liberty, justice and also equal rights. The flag additionally symbolizes the numerous accomplishments of the nation as well as the satisfaction of its people.
This national icon reminds individuals, not just in the Nebraska state, but throughout the whole USA concerning the different vital elements of the Declaration of Independence. It is not just a simple symbol, which represents the freedom as well as legal rights of Americans. Floating from the lofty pinnacle of American idealism, it is a sign of withstanding hope.
It is the indication made visible of the solid spirit that has brought liberty as well as prosperity to the people of America. It is the flag of all us alike. Let us accord it honor as well as loyalty.
Where can I purchase American Flags?
You possibly currently observed this, but there are a great deal of locations where you could obtain American flags. Nevertheless, it is essential to keep in mind that the flag you’re wanting to acquire should be “Made in USA”.
Based on stats, Americans spend over 5.3 million US dollars on imported flags every year – the majority of which are made in China. Maybe even more perplexing is that throughout 2001, in the wave of nationalism that spread over America after 9/11, Americans acquired $52 million dollars in imported flags. The flag needs to signify the blood, sweat, and also tears of American people who brought this country into existence, not our indebtedness to China as well as the death of the American production market.
The flag signifies nationwide freedom as well as prominent sovereignty. It is not the flag of a ruling household or royal house, yet of the many free people welded right into a nation, one as well as inseparable, joined not only by community of passion, yet by vital unity of view and also purpose; a country identified for the clear specific conception of its people alike of their responsibilities as well as their opportunities, their commitments and also their legal rights.
So have a little pride, cough up a few more money, as well as get an American flag made by Americans in the USA.
Elwood ZIP codes we serve: 68937