While studying red algae in the waters off the Monterey Peninsula, Francis Haxo became hooked on photosynthesis and the study of pigments in marine plants.
He was doing postdoctoral research in the 1940s with Lawrence Blinks at Stanford University’s Hopkins Marine Station in Pacific Grove when the two men made a scientific breakthrough in developing The Haxo-Blinks oxygen electrode, which became widely used in physiology.
Dr. Haxo joined the faculty of the Scripps Institution of Oceanography in 1952 and was later chairman of the marine biology research division.
Dr. Haxo died of pneumonia June 10 at a San Diego hospital. He was 89.
Friends and colleagues said Dr. Haxo was a gentleman and a scholar who was meticulous in his research and generous with his students.
“He was very thorough, very careful,” said Maria Vernet, an oceanographer at Scripps. “He would not take anything for granted. He was very knowledgeable and very generous in sharing that knowledge. He was reserved and quiet but when he had something to say, people would listen.”
Anitra Thorhaug, a fellow scientist who interviewed Dr. Haxo for a paper she wrote, said he was well-known in scientific circles for his research on photosynthesis concepts. During World War II, Dr. Haxo worked on developing sunscreens to protect military personnel from ultraviolet rays in tropical theaters of war.
Dr. Haxo enjoyed going out on the Scripps research vessel Alpha Helix, Thorhaug said. Dr. Haxo was chief scientist on the vessel’s maiden voyage to Australia’s Great Barrier Reef in 1966, where a group of photo biologists and biochemists studied photosynthesis and pigments in corals and giant clams.
Amir Neori, a former postdoctoral student, said his former adviser was “the ultimate ethical and patient scientist” who took time in mulling over data before being convinced of its quality.
Francis Theodore Haxo was born March 9, 1921, in Grand Forks, N.D., to Henry Emile and Florence Haxo. His father, an emigrant from France, was a professor of French. Dr. Haxo earned a bachelor’s degree from the University of North Dakota and a doctorate from Stanford University in 1947. He married the former Nan Bolender in 1946. The couple had two children before divorcing in the mid-1950s. He married the former Judith McLaughlin in 1961 and the couple had three children.
After his time at the Hopkins Marine Station, Dr. Haxo was at Johns Hopkins University, where he discovered a new carotenoid, an organic pigment that was used as a colorant in the food industry.
Dr. Haxo was a consultant to several national programs, including the U.S. Committee for the International Biological Program and the President’s Science and Advisory Council. He was a fellow of the American Association for the Advancement of Science and the Research Council of the San Diego Zoological Society. After his retirement from Scripps Institution in 1988, Dr. Haxo started researching his lineage and found that one of his ancestors was a general under Napoleon, said longtime friend and colleague Andrew Benson.
Dr. Haxo is survived by his wife, Judith of La Jolla; three sons, Philip of San Diego, John of Atlanta and Francis Jr. of San Francisco; two daughters, Aileen of Berkeley and Barbara Haxo Phillips of Oakland; a sister, Ruth Schmoll of Houston; and eight grandchildren.
A memorial is planned for the fall.
The family suggests donations to support research at Scripps Institution of Oceanography.