Allergy - Immunology- Allergic disorders including hayfever, food allergies, drug allergies. Often specialize also in asthma treatment. Evaluate patients who may have immunological disorders (trouble fighting off or frequent infections. Do testing, environmental control, and treatment often with "allergy shots" or desensitization.
Ambulatory Care- Outpatient care. Usually in a "medicenter" or walk-in clinic. Great for minor ailments that come up suddenly when you can't get an appointment with your family doctor. Convenient as you usually don't require an appointment.
Anesthesiology- Hospital or surgicenter based M.D. who provides anesthesia for major and minor surgery. Many specialize in pain treatment
Cardiology- Medical Doctors who diagnose and treat diseases of the heart, lungs, and circulatory system. Interventional cardiologists do procedures such as angioplasty, pacemakers, cardioversion.
Dermatology- Medical doctors who specialize in diseases of the skin, hair, and nails. Although not formally trained in surgery, many include surgical treatment of skin cancer. Modern trained dermatologists offer non-surgical cosmetic procedures.
Emergency Medicine- Medical doctors who specialize in acute medical care. Most often work in hospital emergency rooms.
Endocrinology- Specialize in Diseases of the glandular systems including thyroid, female hormonal problems, diabetes, pituitary, and adrenal glands.
Family Practice- The primary physician for adults and children.
Gastroenterology- Diseases of the stomach, esophagus, liver, and intestines including colon.
General Surgery- The pre-operative, operative and post-operative care of surgical patients in a broad span of surgical conditions, affecting most area of the body. Also can involve comprehensive management of the trauma victim or the critically ill.
Hematology /Oncology- Hematology/Oncology Specialize in medical diagnosis and treatment of cancer. Specialists in choosing and administering chemotherapy. Also deal with diseases of the blood.
Infectious Diseases- Specialize in diagnoses and treatment of diseases spread by virus, bacteria and other organisms.
Internal Medicine- Treat mainly adults and specialize in cardiovascular, respiratory, GI diseases. Diabetes, gerentology. Some patients choose Internists as their family physician.
Maxillofacial Surgery- Oral surgery
Neonatology- Pediatricians who specialize in treatment of newborn infants.
Nephrology- Specialize in disease of the kidneys and bladder. Treat hypertension, monitor reanl transplant patients.
Neurology- Specialize in diagnosis and treatment of diseases of the brain and nervous system.
Neurosurgery- Surgeons who specialize in surgery and treat injuries to the brain, spinal cord,and other nervous structures, (carpal tunnel, etc.)
Obstetrics /Gynecology- Obstetrics deliver babies and treat the mother during and after pregnancy. Gynecologists specialize in treatment of the female reproductive system. OBGYNs can do both elements or confine their practice to one or the other.
Opthalmology- Medical Doctors specializing in surgery of the eye. (Optometrists fit glasses and treat minor eye diseases and are not medical doctors.)
Orthopedic Surgery- Surgeons specializing in the usculoskelatal system. Treat sprains, fractures and other injuries. Perform joint repair and total joint replacement.
Otolaryngology- Surgeons who specialize in surgery and diseases of the ears, nose, throat, sinuses, head and neck. Some ENT's also subspecialize in facial plastic surgery.
Pathology- A laboratory based physician specializing in interpreting disease in tissue samples sent by other physicians. Usually works within a hospital.
Pediatrics- Medical doctor specializing in the treatment of infants, children, and adolescents.
Physical Medicine - Rehab- Medical doctor specializing in the treatment of musculoskeletal problems like back and neck pain, tendinitis, pinched nerves and more.
Plastic Surgery- Surgery to correct functional and cosmetic deformiries of the face, head, body and extremities. Repairs scars or burned skin, reconstructs structures destroyed by cancer or accidents. Includes cosmetic surgery such as breast augmentation or reduction, body contouring (liposuction).
Podiatry- The diagnosis and medical and/or surgical treatment of the lower extremity below the knee. Podiatrists generally treat conditions of the foot and ankle. Common conditions treated include sprains, fractures, skin disorders, infections, chronic wounds, heel pain, ingrown toenails, warts, hammertoes and bunions. Preventive and palliative solutions such as routine care, braces, splints, orthotics (arch supports), shoes, physical therapy, injections, tapings, casts, etc.
Psychiatry- Prevention, diagnosis and treatment of mental and emotional disorders, including depression, anxiety disorders, substance abuse, developmental disabilities and sexual dysfunction. Treatment includes psychotherapy, psychoanalysis, diagnostic tests, medications and intervention with individuals and families who are coping with stress, crises and other emotional problems. Sub-speciaization exicts in child, adolescent and geriatric psychiatry.
Psychology- Treat mental, emotional, and behavioral disorders. These range from short-term crises, such as difficulties resulting from adolescent rebellion, to more severe, chronic conditions such as schizophrenia.
Pulmonary- Diagnosis and treatment of diseases of the lungs and airways, includes such conditions as pneumonia, cancer, pleurisy, asthma, bronchitis, emphysema, and other disorders of the lungs.
Radiation Oncology- Specially of Radiology. Treatment of cancers and other diseases using radiation.
Radiology- The use of various modalities such as X-ray, mamography, ultrasound, MRI, CAT and nuclear medicine to diagnose and treat disease.
Rheumatology- Diagnosis and non-surgical treatment of diseases of the joints, muscle, bones and tendons. Included are such conditions as arthritis, back pain, muscle strains and collagen diseases.
Thoracic Surgery- Heart Surgery and Lung Surgery
Urology- Treatment of diseases of the urinary tract, both male and female, and of the reproductive system of the male. Organs include the kidneys, bladder, prostate gland, adrenal gland, penis and testes.
Vascular Surgery- Vascular surgery is the branch of surgery that occupies itself with surgical interventions of arteries and veins, as well as conservative therapies for disease of the peripheral vascular system. Surgery of the heart is the specialism of the cardiothoracic surgeon.