Center on Education, Disability and Juvenile
(Scroll down for descriptions of publications)
Differential Treatment of African American Youth
Alternative Education: From a "Last Chance"
to a Proactive Model
Improving Education Services for Students in Detention
and Confinement Facilities
Collaborate to Educate: Special Education in Juvenile
School Failure, Race, and Disability: Promoting Positive
Decreasing Vulnerability for Involvement with the Juvenile Delinquency
Monograph Series on Education, Disability, and Juvenile
Summary of Class-Action Litigation Involving Special
Education Claims in
Juvenile and Adult Correctional Facilities
Promoting Family Involvement
Students with Disabilities in Correctional Facilities
Youth with Disabilities in the Juvenile Justice System
Special Education and the Juvenile Justice System
A Summary of Best Practices in School Reentry for Incarcerated
Youth Returning Home
Addressing the Needs of Youth with Disabilities in the
Juvenile Justice System:
The Current Status of Evidence Based Research
Education Reduces Crime: Three-State Recidivism Study,
Special Education in Correctional Facilities
Education and Correctional Populations
Education & Incarceration
Reclaiming Incarcerated Youth Through Education
Juvenile Justice Education: “Who is Educating the Youth?"
Educating Youth in the Juvenile Justice System: Results
National Survey on State Juvenile Justice Education Standards
||Drakeford, W. & Garfinkel, L. (2000). Differential
Treatment of African American Youth. Reclaiming Youth. 9(1),
This article examines factors within the
juvenile justice and mental health systems that contribute to
the overrepresentation of African American men and boys in correctional
facilities. The authors also discuss recent efforts by lawmakers
and academic institutions to address these inequalities.
||Leone, P. E. & Drakeford, W. (December 1999). Alternative
Education: From a "Last Chance" to a Proactive Model.
The Clearing House, 3(2).
The article examines
alternative education programs as a proactive response to the
needs of children for whom traditional school structures are not
effective, and explains the components of alternative education
programs that promote academic excellence and high expectations.
||Leone, P. E. & Meisel, S. M. (1997). Improving
Education Services for Students in Detention and Confinement Facilities.
Children's Legal Rights Journal, 17(1), (pp. 1-12).
article examines the basis for the educational entitlements of
incarcerated youth including federal constitutional equal protection
claims, compulsory attendance laws and other State requirements,
and the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA) and
Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act. The authors also discuss
litigation that has enforced the educational rights of youth with
disabilities in juvenile corrections.
||Meisel, S. M., Henderson, K., Cohen, M. & Leone, P.
E. (1998). Collaborate
to Educate: Special Education in Juvenile Correctional Facilities.
In Building Collaboration Between Education and Treatment for At-risk
and Delinquent Youth (pp. 59-72). Eastern Kentucky University, Richmond:
National Juvenile Detention Association. [Reprinted 2001 as ERIC
Document No. 453624]
Collaboration among education and treatment professionals
is fundamental to the provision of appropriate special education
services for youth at-risk for delinquency and for those in correctional
settings. This article directs attention to collaboration as a
best practice approach to improving education and special education
services for incarcerated youth, and identifies core elements
of successful education programs in detention and confinement
||Leone, P. E., et. al. (October, 2003).
School Failure, Race, and Disability:
Promoting Positive Outcomes, Decreasing Vulnerability for Involvement
with the Juvenile Delinquency System. College Park, MD: The
National Center on Education, Disability, and Juvenile Justice.
The authors present evidence to support the contention
that an underclass of children and youth is being fostered by
the failure of the educational system to give them the skills
they need to succeed in life. Specifically, the paper examines
school failure, disability, and ethnic minority status, and how
these factors place children and youth at risk for involvement
with the juvenile or adult criminal justice system. The authors
identify what works and what doesn't work with respect to improving
outcomes for these at-risk youth and those who are clients of
the justice system. The paper also discusses how policies for
addressing misbehavior and juvenile delinquency might be reframed
to focus on evidence-based practices that work. These suggestions
provide the basis for a set of recommendations for changing public
policies and professional practices.
||The National Center on Education, Disability, and Juvenile
Justice (July 2002). Monograph Series
on Education, Disability, and Juvenile Justice. College Park,
MD: The National Center on Education, Disability, and Juvenile Justice.
Developed by the Center for Effective Collaboration
and Practice (CECP) in conjunction with EDJJ, this monograph series
is a resource that is provided to increase awareness and understanding
of the key issues related to youth with disabilities in the juvenile
justice system, and youth who are at risk of court involvement.
The information in the monographs will be useful for practitioners
involved in system-level or facility-level administrative planning,
personnel recruitment and development of intervention programs
for youth requiring special education services in the justice
system, as well as researchers, advocates and family members.
National Center on Education, Disability
and Juvenile Justice. Summary
of Class-Action Litigation Involving Special Education Claims
in Juvenile and Adult Correctional Facilities.
EDJJ prepared the "Summary of Class Action Litigation
Involving Special Education Claims in Juvenile and Adult Correctional
Facilities" to disseminate information to advocates, policy
makers, and educators. The Litigation Chart includes links to
legal briefs, settlements and other court filings for a number
of the cases.
PACER Center, Inc. (1997). Promoting
Family Involvement. In Unique Challenges, Hopeful Responses:
A Handbook for Professionals Working with Youth with Disabilities
in the Juvenile Justice System (2nd Ed.). Minneapolis, MN: Author.
Most studies confirm that maintaining family ties or establishing
positive family relationships while youth are incarcerated, contributes
to successful transition to the community. This chapter, from
a handbook for professionals working in the juvenile justice system,
provides an in-depth examination of methods for parent involvement
and support for incarcerated youth.
P. (2005) "Youth with Disabilities
in the Juvenile Justice System: Prevention and Intervention Strategies,"
National Center on Secondary Education and Transition.
|Burrell, S. & Warboys,
L. (2000, July). “Special
Education and the Juvenile Justice System,” Juvenile Justice
Bulletin. Washington, DC: Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency
Prevention, U.S. Department of Justice.
proportion of youth in the juvenile justice system have education-related
disabilities and are eligible for special education and related
services under the federal Individuals with Disabilities Education
Act (IDEA). This Bulletin, directed to judges, attorneys and advocates,
probation officers, educators, institutional staff, mental health
professionals, and service providers, summarized key provisions
of federal law and seeks to heighten awareness of special education
issues in the juvenile justice system and ensure that youth with
disabilities receive the services they need.
JustChildren. (2003, November).
Summary of Best Practices in School Reentry for Incarcerated Youth
Returning Home. Charlottesville, VA: Legal Aid Justice Center.
Steurer, S. J. and Smith, L. G. Education
Reduces Crime: Three-State Recidivism Study, Executive Summary,
(February 2003), from the Correctional Education Association and
Management & Training Corporation Institute. Full
study also available.
|U. S. Department of Education,
Office of Special Education and Rehabilitative Services, "Special
Education in Correctional Facilities,” in Twenty-first Annual
Report to Congress on the Implementation of the Individuals with
Disabilities Education Act (1999).
number and characteristics of youth with disabilities in correctional
facilities and the provision of special education services to
|U. S. Department of Justice,
Bureau of Justice Statistics (2003). Education
and Correctional Populations.
attainment of State and Federal prison inmates, jail inmates,
and probationers to that of the general population. Educational
attainment is also examined for various demographic groups --
including gender, race/ethnicity, age, citizenship, and military
service -- and for other social and economic factors. Reasons
for dropping out of school are compared for jail inmates and the
general population. The report describes the availability of educational
programs to inmates in prison and jail and their participation
in educational and vocational programs since admission.
|Western, B., Schiraldi, V.,
& Zeidenberg, J. (2003, August). Education
& Incarceration, Washington, DC: Justice Policy Institute.
A policy analysis of the benefits of education
vs. the costs of incarceration.