BIO CH 8
Home > Preview
The flashcards below were created by user
on FreezingBlue Flashcards.
In general, what happens during photosynthesis?
Autorophs produce carbohydrates
How do plants get the energy they need for photosynthesis?
From the sun
What are the products of photosynthesis?
Oxygen and high-energy sugars
If a jar is placed over a lit candle, then the candle will extinguish. If a plant is next to the lit candle and
a jar is placed over them, the candle will burn longer. Why?
Oxygen produced by the plant allows the candle to burn longer
Which pathway represents the flow of electrons during photosynthesis?
H2O -> NADP+ -> Calvin Cycle
What are organisms who make their own food called?
How is a mushroom classified?
Given a graphic of a chloroplast, be able to identify a single thylakoid.
Study a chloroplast
Where is the chlorophyll found?
In the Thylakoid Membrane
Where is photosystem I and II found?
In the Thylakoid membrane
Where is the stroma?
Outside the thylakoids
Which of the following activities happens within the stroma?
The Calvin cycle produces sugar.
Why are most plants green?
Because chlorophyll does not absorb green light.
Which molecules in plants gather the sun's energy?
Where do the light dependent reactinos take place?
Within the thylakoid membranes
What happens if you increase the intensity of light on the plant?
The rate of photosynthesis increases then levels off
What is an electron carrier molecule needed for transporting electrons from one part of the chloroplast
What is the function of NADP+ in photosynthesis?
Why are electron carriers needed for transporting electrons from one part of the chloroplast to another?
High energy electrons are highly reactive (Their energy can be used to make NADPH & ATP.)
What are the key steps of the light-dependent reactions?
- High energy electrons move through the electron transport chain.
- Pigments in Photosystem II absorb light.
- ATP synthase allows H+ ions to pass through the thylakoid membrane.
What are the products of the light dependent reactions?
ATP, NADPH, and oxygen gas
Where does the Calvin Cycle take place?
What is another name for the light independent reactions?
What are vital facts regarding ATP?
- ATP consists of ribose, adenine, and three phosphate groups.
- ADP is produced when ATP releases energy.
- ATP provides energy for the mechanical functions of cells.
What are the 3 parts of the ATP molecule?
Adenine, ribose and 3 phosphate groups
Given a graphic of ATP show how you could alter the graphic to show ADP.
Study graphic of an ATP
When is energy released from ATP?
When a phosphate group is removed
What would you like to do?
Home > Flashcards > Print Preview