To register for the SAT go to: www.collegeboard.org
SAT: REASONING TEST
The SAT (Scholastic Aptitude Test) has three sections, Reading, Writing, and Mathematics each of
which are worth 800 points. The highest score possible on the test is a 2400. Students typically take
this exam in the spring of their junior year and/or the fall of their senior year. Students work with their
counselor to determine an appropriate testing time-line. Scores from any and all SAT Reasoning and
Subject tests that a student has ever taken appear on the student’s score report. This transcript of
scores is sent to colleges as part of the college application process. The College Board strongly
recommends registering for this test online at www.collegeboard.com. This site also has valuable
information on all College Board exams including practice questions and test-taking strategies.
Because Weston High School is not a designated test center, all students are encouraged to register as
early as possible to assure a spot at a nearby test center, typically found in Wayland, Wellesley and
SAT: SUBJECT TESTS (Formerly called SAT II’s and/or Achievement Tests)
One of the more confusing questions for students to answer is whether or not to take SAT: Subject
Tests in addition to the SAT I: Reasoning Test. Not every college/university requires these tests for
admission. In addition, when SAT scores of any sort are sent to colleges, all subject tests scores are
released, and students often want to be sure that they are making the right decision in electing to take a
particular subject exam. Below you will find a description of the SAT: Subject Tests; the debate
regarding the decision to take a subject test; how to prepare for an SAT II: Subject Test; and lastly,
how to register.
SAT: Subject Tests, formerly called SAT II’s and the Achievement Tests, are one-hour long exams
which measure knowledge of a particular content area. All SAT: Subject Tests taken appear on a
student’s College Board transcript, so the decision as to which tests to take, if any, should be made by
the student with input from the guidance counselor, teacher and parent. The College Board’s website
www.collegeboard.com has information on what each subject test covers as well as registration
information. Because Weston High School is not a designated test center, all students are encouraged
to register as early as possible to assure a spot at a nearby test center, such as Wayland, Wellesley and
Students and parents often wonder which, if any, Subject Tests should be taken. Some colleges require
or recommend SAT: Subject Tests be taken as part of their application process. (A list of these schools
is included below.) Since a primary change to the SAT: Reasoning Test was the creation of a writing
section, the old “SAT II: Writing” has become obsolete. Colleges and universities are still establishing
their new policies with respect to their SAT: Subject Tests requirements. For example, some colleges
which previously required three may now only be requiring two whereas some may still require three
subject tests be taken. It is important that students, even ninth and tenth graders, research the
requirements of any college or university they are considering applying to so as to be prepared.
Given these thoughts, however, it is still a somewhat strategic process to determine which subject tests
to take and when. Because SAT: Subject Tests are typically taken at the end of the school year, only
certain tests are appropriate in certain years. For example, in their freshman year, the SAT: Physics is
the only test that a ninth grader would take. Similarly, in their sophomore year, the SAT: Biology is
the only test that a tenth grader would take, but some students taking the AP World History course as
sophomores take the SAT: World History. If a student or parent feels that other tests are appropriate
due to special circumstances, they should discuss this and the possible ramifications on future testing
decisions with their guidance counselor.
Given the expansive SAT: Subject Test curriculums in most subjects, not all Weston High School
courses include all of the suggested units/topics in detail. This is why the Guidance Department
strongly recommends that students, early in the academic year, talk about taking an SAT:
Subject Test with their parents, guidance counselor, and especially their subject teacher.
We believe that following these steps will help students decide whether or not it is appropriate or
advisable to take a SAT II: Subject Test,
· Visit the College Board website to review the list of subject tests to determine the target exam.
· Consult with your guidance counselor, teacher, and parent
· Reflect and think about these questions:
1) Do the colleges I’m considering require or recommend the SAT: Subject Tests?
2) Am I a good test taker in multiple-choice formats?
3) Are there other SAT: Subject Tests in which my academic strengths might be reflected
4) In the fall, ask yourself: Do I plan to work hard and study in this course?
5) In the spring, ask yourself: Did I work hard and study in this course; and am I working
towards preparing for the SAT II: Subject Test that corresponds with this course.
6) Am I willing to spend considerable extra time in the spring using an SAT: Subject Test
prep book to become familiar with the test format and some additional subject matter
that may not be covered in my course?
7) Have I spoken to my teacher for advice on whether, in his or her opinion, I would have
a good chance of doing well on this kind of standardized test?
8) Am I willing to attend and work hard in after-school review classes that may be offered
at the discretion of the individual teacher?
9) Will I need a tutor to keep me focused and motivated during my review for the test?
· Review the College Board’s website to identify content covered by the selected subject area
· Register for the exam early.
Students register for exam by completing information on the College Board’s website. If a student
believes he/she is eligible for special testing accommodations due to an existing disability, the student
and/or parent should be in contact with the student’s guidance counselor before officially registering as
eligibility for accommodations must be approved prior to registration.
The Colleges/Universities that require or recommend SAT: SUBJECT TESTS are constantly changing or have specific requirements if the student is applying to a particular program/major or if the student is applying under an Early Decision or Early Action plan. The Guidance Department advises that students check with colleges regarding their particular requirements with respect to SAT: Subject Tests.