Alterations in microRNA expression patterns in liver diseases.
Summary of "Alterations in microRNA expression patterns in liver diseases."
In the past few years there has been growing interest for a type of short RNAs called microRNAs, which are involved in the regulation of gene expression mainly in a negative way. There are about 1000 known microRNA today. It has been demonstrated that expression level of microRNA may become altered from normal to diseased state, thus microRNAs could be employed as a reliable tool in the diagnosis of diseases. A liver-characteristic microRNA (miR-122) needed for functioning hepatocytes has been identified, which usually shows a decreased expression level upon liver injury. miR-122 has been suggested as a biomarker since it was downregulated in the liver tissue upon acetaminophen-induced toxicity and in turn elevated miR-122 level was detected in the plasma. Moreover, miR-122 level in the plasma was found to be more sensitive as compared with conventional assays based on the release of liver enzymes. Also, miR-122 expression tends to decrease as carcinogenesis progresses. In addition, miR-122 enhances the replication of hepatitis C virus and its level seems to influence the efficiency of interferon therapy. Nowadays, many microRNAs are known whose distinctive alterations in their specific patterns seem to characterize individual pathological processes. In this article, the major alterations in microRNA expression patterns in liver diseases such as drug- and alcohol-induced liver diseases, non-alcoholic fatty liver diseases, fibrosis, viral infections (hepatitis), cirrhosis and hepatocellular carcinoma are summarized. Orv. Hetil, 45, 1843-1853.
Semmelweis Egyetem, Általános Orvostudományi Kar II. Patológiai Intézet Budapest Üllői út 93. 1091.
This article was published in the following journal.
Name: Orvosi hetilap
- PubMed Source: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20980222
- DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1556/OH.2010.28985
Medical and Biotech [MESH] Definitions
Analysis of PEPTIDES that are generated from the digestion or fragmentation of a protein or mixture of PROTEINS, by ELECTROPHORESIS; CHROMATOGRAPHY; or MASS SPECTROMETRY. The resulting peptide fingerprints are analyzed for a variety of purposes including the identification of the proteins in a sample, GENETIC POLYMORPHISMS, patterns of gene expression, and patterns diagnostic for diseases.
Liver Diseases, Parasitic
Liver diseases caused by infections with PARASITES, such as tapeworms (CESTODA) and flukes (TREMATODA).
Liver Diseases, Alcoholic
Liver diseases associated with ALCOHOLISM. It usually refers to the coexistence of two or more subentities, i.e., ALCOHOLIC FATTY LIVER; ALCOHOLIC HEPATITIS; and ALCOHOLIC CIRRHOSIS.
Drug-induced Liver Injury
A spectrum of clinical liver diseases ranging from mild biochemical abnormalities to ACUTE LIVER FAILURE, caused by drugs, drug metabolites, and chemicals from the environment.
Pathological processes of the LIVER.
The details of molecular alterations occurring during hepatocarcinogenesis have not been revealed yet. Nevertheless, it is known that microRNAs (miRNA), these short RNA molecules regulating gene expre...
The discovery of microRNA, a group of regulatory short RNA fragments, has added a new dimension to the diagnosis and management of neoplastic diseases. Differential expression of microRNA in a unique...
Although microRNAs are expressed extensively in the central nervous system in physiological and pathological conditions, their expression in neurological disorder of epilepsy has not been well charact...
PURPOSE: MicroRNAs play important roles in cancer development, progression, and metastasis. The aim of this study was to determine whether altered microRNA-155 expression is asso...
MicroRNAs are approximately 22 nucleotides short, non-protein-coding RNA molecules, which bind semi-complementary to mRNA and have an inhibitory effect on protein expression. Aberrant microRNA express...
Immune dysregulations, including cytokines and chemokines secretions occurs in alcoholic liver disease. Serum levels and liver expression of CCL2 are increased in patients with alcoholic h...
The purpose of this research is to study body materials like blood proteins as well as white blood cell and liver cellular RNA in individuals with liver diseases such as chronic viral hepa...
To identify mutations, changes in DNA copy number, structural rearrangements, or altered microRNA/mRNA expression that are important for the initiation, progression, or treatment response...
The aim of this study are (1) To genome-wide profile the gene expression patterns of peripheral blood mononuclear cell (PBMC) in patients with obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) (2) To profile...
Acute cellular rejection is relatively common after liver transplantation, typically does not affect graft survival, and is not associated with the development of chronic rejection. Acute...