This article has been previously published as a part of book Gallipoli Peninsula and the Troad: TAN Travel Guide by Izabela Miszczak
The modest ruins of the ancient city of Aureliane are a serious challenge, both for travelers and for the lovers of historical puzzles. To reach Aureliane, travelers must turn off the main route that runs in an arc around the Gulf of Edremit, and find Büyükdere village near the town of Havran, concealed among a tangle of narrow rural paths.
It is very difficult to find out something specific about the history of this ancient city, while searching the literature and Internet resources. In ancient times, Aureliane was situated in the area known as Mysia, on the river Euenos (now known as Havran).
Apparently St. Paul passed through Aureliane during his second missionary journey. The name of the city reportedly comes from the name of the Roman emperor Marcus Aurelius, who reigned between 161 and 180 AD. An alternative explanation derives it from the Latin word for gold - aurum, as this resource was once mined in the area. A reminder of the existence of this ancient settlement is the name of the nearby town of Havran, which is a strong distortion of the world Aureliane.
If you manage to get to Aureliane, there is some bad news for you: there is no possibility of entry to the ruins of the city. They are located behind a solid fence, in the area of a quarry. The only remaining option is to take some photos from behind the fence. For this reason, a visit to Aureliane is the task only for the most avid history buffs and searchers of trivia. Other persons are advised to explore some sites in the Southern Troad that are better preserved and open for visitors, such as Alexandria Troas or Assos.
By car: the distance between Aureliane and the nearest significant city i.e. Edremit is 14 km. Take the E87 route from Edremit to the south-east. After 4 km turn off this road in the direction of Havran. Drive 6 km more, and turn to the right (to the south). The distance from this point to Büyükdere is 4 km. The ruins of Aureliane are situated near the village, on the left side of the road, in the area of a quarry.