- Project tools
- Nightly builds of docs
- The ArgoUML Project
- Using ArgoUML
- How do I...
|Over 500 more tools...
Dependency is a relationship between two model elements
showing that one depends on the other.
Within the UML metamodel,
is a sub-class of
Dependency is represented as a dashed line with an open
arrow head from the depending model element to that which it is
18.14.1. Dependency Details Tabs
The details tabs that are active for dependencies are
Section 18.14.2, “Dependency Property Toolbar”
and Section 18.14.3, “Property Fields For Dependency”
Standard tab. See
Section 13.4, “Documentation Tab”.
The values in the "bounds" field of the
are not editable, since they are determined
by the properties of the endpoints of the line.
Standard tab. In the UML metamodel,
Dependency has no tagged values of its own,
but through superclasses has the following standard
tagged values defined.
derived (from the
true, meaning the
dependency relationship is redundant—it can be
formally derived from other elements, or
false meaning it cannot.
Derived dependencies still have their value
in analysis to introduce useful names or
18.14.2. Dependency Property Toolbar
Navigate up through the package structure of the
model. For a dependency this will be the package
containing the dependency.
This creates a new Stereotype (see
Section 16.6, “Stereotype”) for the selected
dependency, navigating immediately to the properties
tab for that stereotype.
This deletes the selected dependency from the
This is a deletion from the model
not just the diagram. To delete
a dependency from the diagram, but keep it within the
model, use the main menu
Diagram (or press the Delete key).
18.14.3. Property Fields For Dependency
Text box. The name of the dependency.
It is quite common to leave dependencies
ArgoUML does not enforce any naming convention
There is no representation of the name of a
dependency on the diagram.
Drop down selector. Dependency has no standard
stereotypes of its own under UML 1.3. and so ArgoUML
does not provide any. The stereotype is shown between «
and » above or across the generalization.
icon. If a stereotype has been selected, this will
navigate to the stereotype property panel (see
Section 16.6, “Stereotype”).
Text box. Records the namespace for the
dependency. This is the package hierarchy.
Text area. Lists the end of the relationship that
is supplying what is needed by the other end.
Button 1 double click on a supplier will navigate
to that element.
Text area. Lists the “depending”
ends of the relationship, i.e. the end that makes use
of the other end.
Button 1 double click on a client will navigate
to that element.