Cancer is a disease characterized by uncontrolled growth of cell. There are about 100 different types of cancer and each is classified by the type of cell where it occurs and affects. Breast cancer is mostly prevalent in women, however, breast cancer in men is rare. It is frequently diagnosed in aged women and one of the leading causes of death among them. Some of the most common types of breast cancer are ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS), lobular carcinoma and invasive ductal carcinoma.
Explore Report at: https://www.psmarketresearch.com/market-analysis/-breast-cancer-market
DCIS, also known as intraductal carcinoma, begins in the lining of the milk ducts. Milk ducts are thin tubes carrying milk from lobules of the breast to the nipple. Lobule carcinoma originates in the lobules or milk glands of the breast. Invasive ductal carcinoma is the most common type of breast cancer. It starts in a milk duct of the breast, ruptures through the wall of the duct and grows into the fatty tissue of the breast. It spreads to other parts of body through bloodstream.
The global breast cancer market covers various diagnostic technologies and therapeutic drugs. Diagnostic segment is further sub-segmented into various tests which are used to diagnose breast cancer. Some of the major diagnostic tests are biopsy, mammography, MRI, etc. Therapeutic segment covers hormone therapies and chemotherapy drugs. Some of the major drugs are Trastuzumab, Bevacizumab, Anastrozole, Capecitabine, Carboplatin, Denosumab, Docetaxel, Doxorubicin, Eribulin, Exemestane, Fluorouracil, Fulvestrant, Gemcitabine, Ixabepilone, Lapatinib, Letrozole, Methotrexate, Paclitaxel and Tamoxifen.
Request for Table of Content at: https://www.psmarketresearch.com/market-analysis/-breast-cancer-market/toc-sample
North America accounts the largest global breast cancer market followed by Europe. The U.S., followed by Canada, is the largest market for breast cancer in North America. Key driving factor for this market is increasing prevalence of breast cancer in the region. Germany, France and the U.K. are some of the largest markets for breast cancer in Europe region. However, Asia-Pacific represents the fastest growing region in the global breast cancer market. This is due to improving healthcare infrastructure and increasing awareness among people about breast cancer. In developing countries, such as China and India, government has launched several programs and initiatives which increase awareness about the disease. It has led to significant rise in demand of breast cancer diagnostics and therapeutics for disease management. In addition, less stringent wages and availability of skilled labor attracts manufacturing companies to invest in developing countries.
Some of the major competitors in the market are Astrazeneca PLC, F. Hoffmann-La Roche Ltd, Eli Lilly and Company, Novartis AG, Sanofi-Aventis. Pfizer, Inc., Bristol-Myers Squibb Company, Bayer AG, GlaxoSmithKline plc and Teva Pharmaceutical Industries Ltd.
About P&S Market Research
P&S Market Research is a market research company, which offers market research and consulting services for various geographies around the globe. We provide market research reports, industry forecasting reports, business intelligence, and research based consulting services across different industry/business verticals.
As one of the top growing market research agency, we’re keen upon providing market landscape and accurate forecasting. Our analysts and consultants are proficient with business intelligence and market analysis, through their interaction with leading companies of the concerned domain. We help our clients with B2B market research and assist them in identifying various windows of opportunity, and framing informed and customized business expansion strategies in different regions.
Manager – Client Partner
347, 5th Ave. #1402
New York City, NY – 10016
Toll-free: +1-888-778-7886 (USA/Canada)