Dr. Rashid Ahmed bin Fahad, Minister of Environment and Water, has recently participated in a high-level conference, entitled ‘No More Food to Waste: Global Action to Stop Food Losses and Food Waste’, held in The Hague in the Netherlands.
The meeting was attended by Ministers representing Environment, Labour, Economy and Industry Ministries, heads of a number of international organisations and international personalities.
The UAE's participation complements its commitment to achieve the goals of sustainable development in various sectors, including contributions towards the strengthening of food security at local and international levels.
Dr. Bin Fahad said that according to the Food and Agriculture Organisation of the United Nations, FAO, about one third of global food production is lost or wasted annually, hence the urgent need to support international efforts to reduce global food loss.
He added that the UAE’s participation in the conference demonstrates its desire to enhance food security as a priority in line with UAE Vision 2021 to be one of the world’s best countries by 2021.
Dr. Bin Fahad went on to say that food waste and loss is considered a major waste of resources, including water, land, energy, labour and capital. Moreover, the resultant gases released contribute to global warming, causing a rise in temperatures and climate change.
He pointed out that the UAE operates within its national strategy to ensure the sustainable development of its environment and infrastructure.
‘No More Food to Waste’ is an international platform to discuss ways to reduce malnutrition through the exchange of best practices and experiences adopted to control food waste and reduce loss and the implementation of global laws and legislation in this area.
The conference dealt with major topics such as financing and investment in food waste along with recycling and proper disposal, which adds to the creation of partnerships and international cooperation. –End-
Image by: http://tradearabia.com/