Students will practice graphing linear equations given Standard Form, Slope-Intercept Form and Point-Slope Form Equations. There are THREE LEVELS of equations included to allow for easy differentiation of instruction.
Level 1 consists of graphing from Slope-Intercept Form and includes vertical/horizontal lines.
Level 2 consists of graphing from Standard Form, requiring students to first rewrite in Slope-Intercept Form before graphing .
*Please note that Level 1 and Level 2 are the same problems written in different forms.
Level 3 consists of graphing from Standard, Slope-Intercept or Point-Slope Form.
This set of linear equations include more challenging to graph equations with fractions and y-intercepts that do not fit on the graph provided. I had my students create a table of values and plot points when the y-intercept was not an integer or did not fit on the coordinate plane provided. Students used logic and reasoning to find strategies to graph the linear equations. For immediate feedback, students can determine when a line is graphed incorrectly as the lines will not cross through any words (colors). The final product is a "stained glass window" that makes an attractive mathematical art display. My students loved this activity!
Answer Keys provided!
to view a listing of all the LINEAR FUNCTIONS Resources in my store.
SIGN UP for my newsletter and receive a surprise freebie!
And don't forget to check out my BUNDLES
for huge savings.
ALGEBRA ACCENTS TOU:
© Copyright 2017 Marie De Los Reyes, "Algebra Accents."
All rights reserved by author. This product is to be used by the original purchaser only. Non-transferrable. Copying for more than one teacher or classroom, or for an entire department, school, or school system is prohibited. Intended for single classroom and personal use only. This product may not be distributed or displayed digitally for public view, uploaded to school or district websites, distributed via email, or submitted to any file sharing sites unless password protected for student use only. Failure to comply is a copyright infringement and a violation of the Digital Millennium Copyright Act (DMCA).