As graduation rapidly approaches for many computer science students, their minds are turning away from school projects and towards which career path to pursue once their program of study is complete. If this is the case for you, now is the time to start thinking about which job titles will be available once you complete your coursework. While there are several career options you may be interested in pursuing, the following three job titles may be of particular interest:
One career option to consider is software engineer. As noted in Study.com, software engineers are responsible for the development and evaluation of the software that makes computers function optimally. These individuals may also play a role in developing new business applications and computer games. They may also help with the design of new operating systems. Generally, software engineers work in laboratory or office environments as members of a team. Software engineers generally have a traditional work schedule. Individuals who want to have a successful career in this sector should focus on making continued education an integral aspect of their approach to vocational advancement.
Another possibility to consider is working as an information security analyst. As reported by the Bureau of Labor Statistics, information security analysts are responsible for planning and carrying out security measures for the purpose of protecting a company's computer systems and networks. According to a report from Blue Coat, workers across every generation have proven to pose a security risk to their companies when it comes to social media, and someone needs to make sure the company’s has data leak prevention software set up in spite of the fact. As the number of cyberattacks continues to increase, the responsibilities of information security analysts will expand.
One final career path that you may want to consider following graduation is computer hardware engineer. Individuals who choose this vocational sector may have a wide range of responsibilities. Some of them could include:
maintaining knowledge of new technology and computer engineering trends
oversee manufacturing processes
update existing computer machines and devices
analyze test results and modify designs when necessary
design new computer hardware
While software engineers focus on building and maintaining software systems, hardware engineers emphasize problem solving at the hardware level, working with the hardware-software interface. Computer hardware engineers work with computers at their root levels to determine how to design a more efficient machine to help with many companies digested workflow situation.
If you're serious about working in the computer science sector, it's important to know that while the industry is growing, you still want to make yourself a competitive candidate. There are several ways you can accomplish this objective. One is by obtaining an internship within the field. You can use online resources such as www.internships.com to determine whether there are any opportunities in your local area. If not, keep in mind that you may be able to complete an internship online. Visit www.looksharp.com to learn more.
In addition, no matter which direction you end up going in the computer science field, continuing education is important. Computer science is one of the most rapidly evolving industries, and in order to remain competitive, you will need to keep up to date on the newest trends in digital security, new hardware that is being developed, and new programing languages and modules, just to name a few subjects. Even though you’re graduating from college, your education is far from over.
If you're serious about working within the computer engineering sector, now is the time to determine which career path would be appropriate or advantageous for you. Figure out which field appeals to you and run with it. We can offer advice, but in the end, it’s up to you to make a decision on which field best matches your goals. Use the information found in this quick reference guide to ensure that you can make an informed decision that leads to personal growth and professional fulfillment, and then move forward with your decision.