Energy Efficiency: The Key to a Sustainable, Climate-friendly Economy?
In 25 years, global energy efficiency improvements have saved a cumulative USD 5.7 trillion in energy expenditures. Energy efficiency manages and restrains the growth in energy consumption by delivering more services for the same energy input or the same service for a lesser energy input.
For example, a compact fluorescent light bulb uses one third less energy than an incandescent bulb to produce the same amount of light.
The energy sector has been identified as the dominant contributor to climate change, as it was found to be responsible for one third of greenhouse gas emissions worldwide. As such, improving energy efficiency and using renewable energy sources together will play a critical role in abating global warming.
Given the high rates of volatility of primary energy sources, adopting energy efficient measures within the electricity, building, industrial, transportation and telecommunication sectors is a keystone for sound and sustainable economic and environmental developments.
Existing projects in Egypt seek to encourage investments from the private sector in clean and efficient technologies and to set new standards for energy efficiency to be aligned to international norms. Raking among the most energy intensive economies in the MENA region, there is still impressive room for improvements in energy efficiency in Egypt.
In Germany, energy efficiency is the second most important pillar of the energy transition 'Energiewende', besides switching to renewable energy sources. By 2020, the country’s electricity consumption shall be reduced by 10 percent. This turns out to be a challenging goal, which will require additional efforts to be undertaken in Germany.
Experts from Egypt and Germany will discuss, during a public panel, how energy efficiency levels across all sectors, from industries to end-users, can be improved in Egypt. Which strategic actions should be undertaken domestically to ensure an increasingly energy efficient future?
The discussion will be opened by Dr. Khaled Fahmy, Minister of Environment (TBC),
Dr. Mohamed Shaker, Minister of Electricity and Energy (TBC) and H.E. Julius Georg Luy, Ambassador of the Federal Republic of Germany in Cairo.
DAAD, 11 Al Saleh Ayoub Street, Zamalek, Cairo
-Dr. Ali Abo Sena, Director, Egypt National Cleaner Production Centre, Ministry of Industry and Foreign Trade
-Dr. Yasser Sherif, Managing Director, Environics
-Dr. Kurt Wiesegart, Team Leader at MED ENEC - Energy Efficiency in the Construction Sector in the Mediterranean
-Dr. Ibrahim Yassin, Energy Efficiency Project Manager at UNDP