The US housing sector might be weak but green buildings are still expected to proliferate in the US this year and it is not because of re-painting.
According to the American Institute of Architects, the number of cities with green building programs has risen by 418% since 2003. The western regions leads the way accounting for 46% of all cities with green building programs.
“Green building is flourishing now and the future looks bright for sustainable design. The ultimate goal for green building is eliminate the concept of “building green” and, instead, have green design integrated into all buildings.” – AIA
Real Estate brokers are even learning the proper green lingo and getting certified as green realtors, according to this article from Sustainable business.com. In this New York Times article, the National Association of Realtors reported demand for green housing has been growing with 46 percent of buyers looking for a green home — but supplies are limited.
Even government buildings are required to be more green as the US Department of Energy (DOE) established rules in December requiring new federal buildings to be at least 30% more energy efficient over prevailing building codes.
One of the big drivers behind the increasing interest towards green building is the growing number of federal and state government incentives, said green building consultancy Yudelson Associates.
“The most popular incentives local and state government can offer to real estate developers are faster permit processing and limited property tax abatements, followed by “density bonuses” and faster development plan review.” – YA
Government incentives usually are the fastest way to make things going, I always say. That is why the chemical industry, recognizing opportunities in this area, are offering building materials and technology to make homes and other establishments more energy-efficient, environment-friendly and still cost-effective.
Here are some examples, according to this article from ICIS Chemical Business.