Below there is the Cross carry tying method example.
More tying methods are in NATIBABY user guide.
AGE: from birth
|5 Lead both parts of the sling to the front above your shoulders. If the edges of the sling are in two different colors, the edges next to your neck should be of the same color as the upper edge of the horizontal fragment of the sling. If this is not the case, check to make sure the sling has not twisted while crossing behind your back.
||6 Crease both parts of the sling on your shoulders with your hands.
||7 Slightly loosen the sling at the front, to prepare a "pocket" for the baby. The upper edge of the sling can be rolled up or creased slightly to about 1/3 of its width
|8 Carefully put the baby over your shoulder, bending slightly backwards so as to lean the baby's head against your shoulder. Remember to provide a very stable hold for the baby. Next, slide the baby carefully into the "pocket" so that its legs stand out at the bottom and the upper edge of the sling reaches its head. The lower edge of the sling should reach the baby's knees; the upper one should cover the baby's neck. The fabric should be spread soothly on the baby's back (there should not be any folds), excess fabric should be gathered near the baby's neck.
||9 Tighten the inner (next to your neck) edge of the sling grabbing about 1/3 of the fabric's width. It is necessary to ensure the fabric is snug around your neck in order to provide support for your baby's neck. Remember that your free hand should be holding the baby securely at all times during the adjustments.
||10 Grab the already tightened fragments of the sling with the other hand and pull the remaining fabric bit by bit, to wrap it tightly around the baby. It is necessary to pull the outer part of the fabric to provide its proper tension under the baby's knees.
|14 Correct the positioning of the sling and the baby's legs, so that its knees are level with its bottom or higher and slightly apart.
||15 Make sure the baby is at the right height -check if you can kiss the baby easily on the forehead. To make sure the fabric is tightened properly, bend slightly forward. While you do this, the baby should remain completely nestled into you; there should not be any empty space between you and the baby. The vertical parts of the sling should reach up to the baby's knee pits.
16 If you want the baby to be wrapped better, you can spread the vertical straps of the sling from one knee pit to the other, first the inner (closer to the body), then the outer one.
|17 If the baby is very small and does not hold its head securely, it can be additionally supported using one of the vertical parts of the sling resembling wings. While this may not be necessary with an older child, it may help to support and infant's head, in which case the baby's head is then most often turned slightly to the sde, nestling the cheek against the carrying parent. The "wings" are also useful if you want to protect the child from overstimulation. Also, even older children benefit from head/ neck support when they fall asleep in the sling.
||18 If the baby can hold its head errect, it does not need to be supported. However, until the baby is able to sit on its own, the sling should still support its whole spine. This means, that the arms should still be tucked under the sling.
||19 When the child is older and can sit up and hold its head steadily, the upper horizontal edge of the fabric can be slightly lowered, so that the baby's hands are outside. The sling should however reach as high as possible on the baby's back, preferably to its armpits.