Breast cancer is one of the most terrible diseases a person can face. While we all generalize breast cancer as being a disease specifically for women, there are actually men who can get breast cancer. Yeah you heard us correctly, men can get breast cancer too! Actually, 1 in 1,000 men will develop breast cancer in their lifetime.
Let’s break it down!
Everyone is born with breast cells and tissue. Although men do not develop milk-producing breasts, they can still develop breast cancer. Men’s breast cancer typically is discovered due to a hard lump underneath their areola, similar to how it is found in women.
Although the specifics of the disease are the same for both men and women, men with breast cancer experience a higher mortality rate than women simply because of the lack of awareness. Women are constantly being encouraged to receive yearly mammograms, check regularly for irregular lumps, and to take the precautionary steps. Unfortunately, men are usually unaware of the threat and do not take these precautionary steps and likely do not consider a lump to be a sign of danger. There are few clinical studies available to fully understand the male breast cancer threat. Without men being aware and cautious of this threat, they are vulnerable to leaving breast cancer untreated.
How can a man develop breast cancer?
A few of the common reasons why a man may develop breast cancer are high radiation exposure, increased levels of estrogen, and/or a family history of breast cancer. Any mass, breast changes, dimpling, puckering, nipple retraction, redness, scaling, or nipple discharge is a red flag and is cause to consult your physician immediately!
Let’s spread awareness!
It’s important to detach the stigma that breast cancer is a women’s disease. Breast cancer awareness month’s signature color is pink to represent femininity. But, we need to include men in this month. Let’s start to spread the word that men are susceptible to this cancer as well. If word travels, hopefully men will become aware of the dangers and follow the necessary precautions that women are encouraged to follow.
So the bottomline is that men CAN get breast cancer, and they should pay attention to the signs and symptoms of the disease. If you think you may have the symptoms of breast cancer, make an appointment with us to find out.