Learning at Home
When the school is closed for any length of time it is important pupils continue to learn. Pupils will have materials and tasks set by staff along with notes that can be used to consolidate learning.
A number of web sites also have excellent materials – these can be browsed by pupils to find tasks, revision, extension work related to the subjects/topics they are studying in school. The following are recommended:
BBC Bite Size – Revision and learning materials for Standard Grades.
BBC/Scotland/Learning – A variety of resources at different levels and for different subjects.
My Maths – Used by the Maths Department regularly – user name is westhillac and the password is shape.
Scholar – Many qualification courses are supported by additional materials through a scheme called Scholar. Information for parents can be seen by clicking HERE , subjects supported by clicking HERE. and FAQ's HERE. Passwords can be obtained from class teachers.
SQA (Scottish Qualifications Authority) – has past papers, study guides etc. Start by clicking on the “school learner” to access materials
Learning and Teaching
GLOW - where departments have added materials.
There are other sites identified by staff for S4 revision. These listed below:
General Revision Advice/Study Skills
Subject Specific Sites
http://www.mathsrevision.com/ (And My Maths)
www.linguascope.com - Good for basic vocabulary revision.
www.klar.co.uk – German only site.
A user name and password is required for the last 4 of these sites and can be obtained from your son/daughters class teacher.
www.evans2chemweb.co.uk - username: Westhill, password: silicon)
www.msa-scotland.org.uk/sglinks.html - Modern Studies Association
www.modernstudies.org.uk/ - Modern Studies Revision Page
www.modernstudies.co.uk/Sgrade/SGRevNotes.htm - MS Revision
www.europarl.org.uk/ - European Parliament
www.hansardsociety.org.uk/ - UK Politics and Democracy
www.un.org/english/ - United Nations
www.wfp.org/ - Politics of Aid (World Food Programme)
Computing and Information Systems
Google “Higher Computing Revision” or “Higher Information Systems Revision” to find a number of good sites.
One such is www.revisecomputing.co.uk