SPACE SCIENCEAdaptive Optics System Reveals New Astroidal Satellite
Pasadena - March 7, 2001
Yet another of the rare astroidal binaries has been spotted. Caltech astronomers Mike Brown and Jean-Luc Margot found the newly discovered moon orbiting asteroid (87) Sylvia.
Groups from the University of California, Berkeley; Towson University in Maryland; and the Hubble Space Telescope have confirmed the sighting.
Sylvia and its moon join only six other known asteroids with companions. Five of the other moons were discovered within the last year.
A survey of 500 asteroids led by William Merline of the Southwest Research Institute turned up only two with moons.
"We looked at 28 asteroids," Dr. Brown stated, "and we found one [with a satellite]. This one was pretty easy to spot."
A preliminary analysis shows that the moon is about 1/20th the size of Sylvia with orbits of approximately four days.
More observations will allow the astronomers to calculate the orbit more exactly and from that derive the mass of the two-body system.
An adaptive optics system on the Keck II telescope provided the extraordinary image that revealed the moon.
Using adaptive optics, observers can correct for the turbulence in the atmosphere that causes stars to twinkle and reduces the crispness of telescope images.
Mark Perew is editor of ScienceMasters, which delivers profiles of the people behind the science headlines.
Subscribe To SpaceDaily Express
SPACE SCIENCEAsteroid Portfolio Gets A Boost With New Optics
Boulder - Oct. 26, 2000
Large telescopes with deformable optics are allowing astronomers to study distant asteroids with unprecedented clarity -- leading to the discovery of new shapes and configurations and presenting scientists with new puzzles to solve.
|The content herein, unless otherwise known to be public domain, are Copyright 1995-2016 - Space Media Network. All websites are published in Australia and are solely subject to Australian law and governed by Fair Use principals for news reporting and research purposes. AFP, UPI and IANS news wire stories are copyright Agence France-Presse, United Press International and Indo-Asia News Service. ESA news reports are copyright European Space Agency. All NASA sourced material is public domain. Additional copyrights may apply in whole or part to other bona fide parties. Advertising does not imply endorsement, agreement or approval of any opinions, statements or information provided by Space Media Network on any Web page published or hosted by Space Media Network. Privacy Statement All images and articles appearing on Space Media Network have been edited or digitally altered in some way. Any requests to remove copyright material will be acted upon in a timely and appropriate manner. Any attempt to extort money from Space Media Network will be ignored and reported to Australian Law Enforcement Agencies as a potential case of financial fraud involving the use of a telephonic carriage device or postal service.|