Today New York High Line Park gives us a feeling as one of excitement, optimism and pride that New York city was able to take something that was just a gleam in eyes a few years ago and turn it into something that everyone, and hopefully generations to come, can enjoy. While we view slick renderings of concepts for urban green spaces almost everyday, it is an entirely different thing to actually step into a completed project and see it with our own eyes.
New York High Line is a public park built on an historic freight rail line elevated above the streets on Manhattan’s West Side. It is owned by the City of New York, and maintained and operated by Friends of the High Line.
For New Yorkers the High Line Park is the beginnings of an urban space revolution, a tangible manifestation of what the future could look like.
The High Line was originally constructed in Manhattan’s Meatpacking District in the 1930s to lift dangerous freight trains off of city streets.
Abandoned in the 1980's the High Line went into decay and disrepair and was rediscovered in popular consciousness in 2000, after acclaimed photographer Joel Sternfeld captured the beauty of the industrial relic in photos: overgrown with wildflowers — an abandoned human structure essentially reclaimed by nature in a matter of 20 years.
The City of New York was originally planning to tear down the High Line, but a group formed, called ‘Friends of the High Line’, to protect, preserve, and renovate the High Line. The preservation and transformation of the High Line at the West Side Rail Yards into public open space has long been one of Friends of the High Line's top priorities - the goal of New York High Line Park.
This eventually lead to a design competition, and the commissioning of landscape architects James Corner Field Operations and architects Diller Scodifio + Renfro to rehabilitate this abandoned space into a lush, green, elevated paradise for Manhattanites.
New York High Line Park is sure going to be a starchitect-designed renovation to maintain the simple, stark beauty of the original, overgrown High Line – the one that had captured the imagination of so many Manhattanites in 2000.
Founded in 1999 by community residents, Friends of the High Line fought for the High Line’s preservation and transformation at a time when the historic structure was under the threat of demolition. It is now the non-profit conservancy working with the New York City Department of Parks & Recreation to make sure the High Line is maintained as an extraordinary public space for all visitors to enjoy.
Friends of the High Line is working with the City of New York, under the leadership of Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg and New York City Council Speaker Christine C. Quinn, to preserve the High Line at the West Side Rail Yards and transform it into an extraordinary and inspiring public space.
In addition to overseeing maintenance, operations, and public programming for the park, Friends of the High Line works to raise the essential private funds to support more than 90 percent of the park’s annual operating budget, and to advocate for the preservation and transformation of this historic structure.
New York High Line Park looked like this:
1.) The most prominent features of the long and winding park are the preserved rail tracks that poke out through the porous layer of concrete that has been cut away in strips here and there emphasizing a linear aesthetic. The High Line is a 1-mile (1.6 km) New York City linear park built on a 1.45-mile (2.33 km) section of the former elevated New York Central Railroad spur called the West Side Line, which runs along the lower west side of Manhattan; it has been redesigned and planted as an aerial greenway.
2) Lush shrubbery, reedy grasses and watercolor-hued flowers surround the rust-red tracks in a way that seems deliberate yet natural. Farther down along the meandering pathway, sunbathers relaxed on blocky wooden chaise lounges, some of which have casters that look like they can roll right along the tracks. The High Line Park will run from Gansevoort Street, one block below West 12th Street, in the Meatpacking District, up to West 34th Street, through the neighborhood of Chelsea to the West Side Yard, near the Javits Convention Center.
3) The 23rd Street Lawn is a favorite new gathering space on the High Line, offering open green space for picnicking, sunbathing, and people-watching.
4) Vistas that were unseen to most New Yorkers, like a view of the clubs in the Meatpacking district from above and peeks into the posh lofts that are at the same level as the High Line were now visible.
5) Ocassionally, there are lovely wedding couples who celebrated their special day having their photo session at the High Line make it another great landmark to be remembered at New York city - what a beautiful and symbolic way to commemorate their special day!
The High Line is located on Manhattan's West Side, it runs from Gansevoort Street in the Meatpacking District to West 34th Street between 10th & 11th Avenues. Daily opening hours for New York High Line Park is now from 7:00 AM to 7:00 PM; for more park information, please call the High Line Information Line: (212) 500-6035.
Here are the New York High Line Park rules, park rules prohibit:
New York's High Line Park:
New York High Line Park in the sky New York High Line Park gives us a feeling as one of excitement and pride that New York city was able to take something and turn it into something that everyone can enjoy.
Revival of New York's High Line Park The revival of the New York High Line and its surrounding areas in Manhattan has received a boost and set for a brighter future.
Impact of New York's High Line Park New York 's High Line Park has great impact, its makes good economic sense - add value to the site by increasing the value of the surrounding real estate and drawing tourists to the area too.