basis or source of many diseases are NOW found related
to the immune-breakdown substances of chemicals and
metals in our body! With so much emphasis on health,
I can't think of a more important issue than addressing "body
pollution", especially concerning metals and chemicals.
This is a major issue that many practitioners and the
medical field seem to overlook! According to Steven
R.Schechter, N.D. and Tom Monte, in their book Fighting
Radiation With Foods, Herbs, & Vitamins, there
are so many pollutants that we "face such overwhelming
threats to our health, it would be easy to give way
are over 75,000 toxic chemicals classified by the EPA
as potentially or definitely hazardous to human health.
And new chemicals are being tested in the U.S. at the
rate of 6,000 or more per week," he says. But the good
news is that there are solutions and I found one that
is inexpensive, fairly quick, and easy to do in the
comfort of your own home!
few years ago, I was diagnosed with HEAVY chemical/metal
poisoning. Among a major culprit along with numerous
other metals/chemicals. It was recommended that I have
all the fillings replaced, a major (and expensive)
undertaking. After undergoing live cell/dry cell analysis,
it was recommended that I needed a minimum of 20 chelation
treatments (a drip-intravenous therapy) to remove chemicals
and metals from my body. At $100 a session, that meant
an additional $2,000! To confirm the diagnosis, a frozen
sample of my blood was sent to a special laboratory
in Colorado. The lab analysis showed an alarming variety
of chemical and metal poisons in my body, including
dioxin, mercury, aluminum, cadmium, arsenic, , chlorine
and copper. On a scale of 1 to 10 (10 being most toxic),
seven elements registered seven or more. Where, you
might ask, did all those chemicals come from?
one of the deadliest substances known, is sprayed on
coffee fields in Costa Rica, where I had visited for
several months. Mercury, besides leaking from fillings,
is also found in fish, cosmetics, soil, pesticides,
film paint and plastics. Aluminum is used in soft-drink
cans, cheeses, white flour, baking powder and deodorants.
Arsenic may be present in coffee, some types of rice,
salt and smog. Cadmium is contained in cigarette smoke,
coffee, gasoline, steel cooking pans and metal pipes.
Carbon monoxide, of course, comes from auto exhaust,
cigarette smoke and smog. Lead is found in dyes, gasoline,
paint, plumbing, pottery, insecticides, tobacco smoke,
textiles and scrap metal. Many of these chemicals are
also in our water, food, and air we breathe!.In the
words of medical researcher, Alan Levine, M.D., "The
vast increase of chemicals in our environment, foods
and medicines has greatly altered the body's ability
to rid itself of toxins..."
The search for alternatives
Having neither health insurance
nor the money to pay for those expensive treatments,
I began searching for alternative ways to eliminate
these chemicals and metals in the body, A MAJOR CAUSE
of immune-system breakdown,according to new research.
(Fasting does NOT remove these toxic chemicals and
metals. They just accumulate in the body)!
I learned that certain toxic
elements could be removed be taking specific combinations
of minerals and vitamins. For example, a daily regimen
of six magnesium oxide tablets plus one teaspoon of
calcium/magnesium powder taken with fresh lemon or
grapefruit juice was said to rid one's body of arsenic
-- eventually. But at this rate, it could take years
to clear all the chemicals and metals from my body,
not to mention the huge amounts of vitamins and herbs
to take daily.
Eventually, however, my
search led me to a book, Using Energy To Heal, by Wendell
Hoffman. Through his own research, Hoffman found that
a special bentonite (a very fine volcanic clay), used
in a bath, can actually draw out toxic chemicals through
the pores of the skin. After many experiments, he concluded
that optimum results are obtained by immersing oneself
in a tub of very warm water mixed with this clay! (Not
just any clay will do. With over 200 kinds of bentonite
available on the market, most have chemical emulsifiers
in them and they can vary tremendously in their ability
to pull out toxic metals/chemicals).
After trying numerous clays,
we were able to obtain the right kind of clay required
for the bath and a head-pack.
After soaking in the tub
for the alloted time, I felt exhausted and lay down
to rest, leaving the clay "mess" to be cleaned up later.
A black substance
When I returned hours later, the clay had
settled to the bottom. Trying to avoid damaging the plumbing,
I skimmed off the clear water and poured it down the
sink, then scooped up the remaining water/clay solution
and carried it outside. I was astonished to find that
the solid clay remaining in the bottom of the tub had
turned from a light-grey color into a black substance!
Wearing rubber gloves, I wrapped the toxic clay in crumpled
newspaper into a heavy-duty garbage bag.
Amazed, I began sharing my experience with
friends. One woman, also having of mercury poisoning,
bought enough clay for her entire family. The residue
from her four teenaged boys' baths was the normal color.
Her husband's bath, however, left a dark-colored sediment.
And my friend's results were like mine -- black "stuff"!
Curious, I sent off a sample of my hair
for analysis. The results showed no chemicals or metals
present, other than a small amount of aluminum. A few
months later, I took another clay bath. The clay came
out the normal color, with only a few black flecks in
it. I knew without a doubt that the magical clay had
done its work, saving my health - and thousands of dollars!
"Clay has been used for thousands of years,
and yet no one has been able to pin down what makes it
a healer," observes Michel Abehera, author of Amazing
Cures from the Earth Itself -- the Healing Clay. "Most
users," he notes, "seem content with the amazing results."
Raymond Dextreit, the French natureopath
who popularized the clay cure in his own country, believes
bentonite's powers transcend its purely physical properties.
Most of the poisons in the body, Dextreit notes," are
positively charged, whereas clay has a negative electrical
attraction." He states that, "These toxins cannot resist
being drawn toward the clay."
So if you are really interested in REJUVENATING
and becoming a new person, consider cleansing the chemicals
and metals out of your body! Just take a remarkable,
detoxifying, natural, clay bath! See the toxins come
out of your body and into the tub. Feel better, live
longer, and be healthier!
There are special instructions that must
be followed before and after the bath. It's also crucial
to use "clean clay". Most industrial clays in the market
contain chemical emulsifiers, defeating the whole purpose
of the bath. There are over 200 different types of bentonite
clay and we found, they vary greatly in the results of
detoxifying. For more information about the clay bath,
where to purchase clay, list of symptoms of metal and
chemical toxicity, or where you can obtain a computerized
hair-sample analysis, contact the author at (800) 257-3315.
Lauana Lei is a world traveler, health researcher,
and published, free-lance writer, on health and environmental