As a parent, one of your favorite pastimes is watching your child play. Nothing beats seeing the pure joy in your kid’s eyes as he runs, jumps, socializes, and participates in his favorite sports.
While watching your child grow up and develop into a mature adult, have you noticed something unusual about his gait? Does your child seem to walk differently from other children his age? This might be a sign of a common development problem known as in-toeing or out-toeing.
What’s In-Toeing or Out-Toeing?
While your child learns how to walk, you might notice that his toes are pointed inward or outward. This is known as in-toeing or out-toeing.
Sometimes, this foot condition is referred to as walking “pigeon-toed.” In some cases, this unusual gait corrects itself on its own as your child continues to develop. However, if your child’s condition becomes more defined and there is no sign that he is correcting his gait, you might need to seek treatment from a child’s podiatrist.
Treating This Common Pediatric Foot Condition
It’s frustrating to watch your child struggle and it’s frightening to think that his struggle could last a lifetime if not treated. Treating this common foot condition is crucial. The key to an easier treatment process is catching the in-toeing or out-toeing early.
There are a few effective measures for treating in-toeing or out-toeing. The one that’s best for your child depends on when your podiatrist first diagnoses the condition. Here are some of the most common treatment options we use at our York County podiatry office.
Surgical intervention. Surgery is performed to twist the tibia back into a normal position. The older your child is, the more likely he or she will need surgery to correct in-toeing or out-toeing.
Your child’s feet are too important to neglect. Don’t ignore the problem hoping it will go away on its own. Instead, talk to a podiatrist to determine the best course of action. The sooner you speak to one of our podiatrists, the better your chances are of providing your child a more comfortable treatment option.
Do you know a parent who is worried about her child’s feet turning inward or outward? We encourage you to share this article with her.