Terrorism, internal security threats, and concerns about the civil nuclear cooperation agreement between India and the United States dominated attention in India in 2008. In late November the country was rocked by multiple terrorist attacks in Mumbai (Bombay). (See Special Report.) In political developments, India’s ruling coalition, the United Progressive Alliance (UPA), found itself in a minority with its main ally (the Left Front) withdrawing support and the main opposition, Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP), and a clutch of other regional parties taking a critical view of the civil nuclear cooperation agreement. While the Left Front allies opposed what they alleged was a “strategic alliance” with the United States, the BJP opposed the nuclear agreement on the grounds that it would restrict India’s ability to conduct nuclear tests in the future and limit India’s nuclear options in a future race with China. The UPA government was confronted with a potential defeat in the parliament when the Samajwadi Party (SP), an ally of the Left Front, broke ranks with the Left and affiliated itself with the UPA. Emboldened by SP’s changed tack, Prime Minister Manmohan Singh sought and won a vote of confidence in the lower house of parliament, the Lok Sabha, and stabilized his coalition. Another important development was the emergence of Mayawati Kumari, chief minister of Uttar Pradesh and leader of the Bahujan Samaj Party (BSP), as a key political figure likely to play a decisive role in future coalition building.
Winning the vote of confidence in the parliament boosted the sagging morale of the ruling UPA coalition, which had faced a series of defeats in elections to provincial legislatures. The Congress Party, which was defeated in India’s largest state of Uttar Pradesh, encountered another loss in elections in May in the state of Karnataka, where the BJP scored a historic win and formed its first majority government in a southern state. The Congress also lost to the Left Front in the small northeastern state of Tripura but did narrowly manage to form governments in two other small northeastern states—Meghalaya and Nagaland.
The global economic slowdown, accompanied by a spurt in energy and food prices, took a toll on the Indian economy. India’s rate of growth in 2008 was expected to drop to about 7.5%, compared with an average annual rate of growth of 8.8% in 2003–07. Nonetheless, India remained the world’s second fastest growing economy. Because the country’s tolerance to increased levels of domestic inflation was historically low, a sudden increase in the headline inflation rate from an average of 3–4% in the previous five years to more than 7% in early 2008 (with a steeper rise in consumer prices, especially energy prices) brought inflation management to the top of the government’s policy priorities. The central bank hiked interest rates, maintained a tight monetary policy, and squeezed growth to bring prices down. A normal monsoon season and improved food production softened food-price inflation. India, which did not experience the food riots that were prevalent in many other less-developed economies, used food imports to keep domestic prices in check. The headline inflation rate remained in the double-digits, however, well into the third quarter of 2008.
India’s deliberate gradual liberalization in the financial sector helped the country escape the full impact of the financial meltdown that took place in the U.S. and Europe. The global economic slowdown, however, was expected to hurt export growth and, combined with the impact of high oil prices, contribute to a higher current account deficit. The National Manufacturing Competitiveness Council formulated a National Strategy for Manufacturing, which sought to restore momentum to India’s laggard manufacturing sector. The strategy was devised to push manufacturing-sector output growth, whose share in national income had remained stuck at about 17% for more than a decade. In addition, India successfully negotiated a free-trade agreement with the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) and was engaged in discussions for a free-trade agreement with the European Union.
Securing an unconditional waiver for the resumption of commerce in civil nuclear energy from the Nuclear Suppliers’ Group (NSG) became the single-most-important foreign-policy objective for India in 2008. Indian diplomats toured the world to secure the support of the 45-nation member NSG. The final vote in favour of the measure came on September 6, shortly before Prime Minister Singh’s visit to the U.S., where he met with U.S. Pres. George W. Bush, French Pres. Nicolas Sarkozy, and other leaders. A bilateral agreement with the U.S. was signed in October, opening the doors for increased trade in nuclear and high-technology areas. India and France signed a bilateral agreement in Paris on September 30. India signed a civil nuclear cooperation agreement with Russia in early December. In October India also elevated its status as a space power by launching an unmanned spacecraft, Chandrayaan-1, that would orbit the Moon.
Test Your Knowledge
Garlic and Vinegar: Fact or Fiction?
Another foreign-policy preoccupation was with developments in the immediate neighbourhood, where democratic governments came to power in Bhutan (for the first time), Nepal (after the end of the monarchy), and Pakistan (after the stepping down of Gen. Pervez Musharraf). A terrorist attack on the Indian embassy in Kabul drew India more actively into the war on terrorism in Afghanistan. Despite growing concern in India about Pakistan’s inability to control cross-border terrorism, the democratic transition in Pakistan helped to improve the climate for more bilateral cooperation. India and Pakistan agreed to increase trade across the international border between the two countries and to begin trading across the Line of Control in Jammu and Kashmir. The latter occurred on October 21.
Two other priority areas for India in foreign policy were relations with East Asian economies and with Africa. The India-ASEAN free-trade agreement paved the way for closer interaction between India and the East Asian Community. Prime Minister Singh visited Beijing in January and participated in the Group of Eight summit in Japan in August. India hosted the India-Africa Summit in March, marking a major step forward in the country’s regional economic diplomacy with African countries. New Delhi offered duty-free access and tariff preferences to a range of African exports and extended credit and investment facilities.
|Area: ||3,166,414 sq km (1,222,559 sq mi)|
|Population ||(2008 est.): 1,147,996,000|
|Capital: ||New Delhi|
|Chief of state: ||President Pratibha Patil|
|Head of government: ||Prime Minister Manmohan Singh|