Road traffic management is such an expansive area so hopefully this page will help guide you to the relevant page on the BHI Workwear site.
Traffic management typically involves products such as road traffic cones, traffic barriers, barrier tape, trench covers and road traffic signs.
When essential work is being undertaken on the highways and byways it is essential that the agency responsible has the correct equipment dictated by legislation in their respective country to minimise the risk of injury to workers, drivers or pedestrians and inform them to take caution.
Like all risk assessment the philosophy behind traffic management is to cover the required due diligence and make sure the risks are minimised.
Road traffic management utilises retro-reflective technology to increase the visibility in poor light and night time conditions which is quite important for everyone concerned.
Over the last 30 years since the early 1980’s technology has been rapidly developed and deployed in the traffic field, in the middle of the 20th century traffic management usually consisted of orange traffic cones of varying height placed on the road side to guide the traffic away from workers or road areas about to undergo repairs or indeed from road traffic accidents/incidents.
These traffic cones were very rudimentary and unsophisticated in terms of their construction and retro-reflective technology employed this however didn’t stop students and drunken individuals “liberating” those road traffic cones and using them as hats or dorm room decorations.
The traffic cones did serve a purpose and reduced deaths and incidents greatly and even though they didn’t employ the high levels of reflective tech as today they were pretty hard to miss or ignore.
As mentioned there has been a rapid development in traffic management products through next generation thermoplastics and rubber configurations which means the road traffic cones can now be constructed to be virtually indestructible (under normal circumstances and working conditions) where before the traffic cones were made from plastics which had a tendency to decay and degrade leaving splits and essentially a reduction in performance which ultimately could place lives at risk.
Where trucks and cars would run over the cones causing the plastics to warp and indeed weaken today the road traffic cones deployed are designed to withstand higher levels of trauma.
Road traffic cones today are made from robust plastics and can take huge articulated lorries rolling over them and instantly spring back to their original shape.
Theses cones utilise the latest in retro reflective strips which conform to the D2, BS and EN standards which makes them very effective in warning motorists of their presence as well as impending caution.
Today companies like BHI Workwear even offer personalising of the road traffic cones so you can place company logo’s or messages on them.
If orders are significant we can look at different colour pantones (regulations allowing)
A large part of road traffic management is the road traffic barriers which serve both to inform motorists and pedestrians of the work underway/incident and to add a level of protection in the case of collisions.
BHI Workwear stock most of the road traffic barriers in use today from the pedestrian barriers used to control the flow of foot traffic to heavy duty water or sand filled barriers used for major works on roads and motorways.
If you know which road traffic barriers you need and you cannot find them on our site then please call
+44333 101 4030 we will try and source them for through our supplier network.
Road traffic barriers are the shifted in larger quantities and the reason we don’t have a price per traffic barriers or indeed all the road traffic management products (aside from a few) is price is always negotiable depending in numbers and repeat business.
We have a team of experts ready to take calls and advise on which products best suit your scenario.
We have delivered several lorry loads of traffic cones and barriers at a time to the Olympic Village in East London and have been thoroughly vented to be able to complete such deliveries.
If you need traffic barriers, traffic cones, road signs in deed any road traffic management systems delivered to a sensitive or secure site then please contact us we will comply with all requests for those areas.
Road traffic management also include road signs which most people typically assume is all done by the Government or large firms this is not the case BHI Workwear can supply all types of road signs which will meet the BS and EN specifications. We stock Conesign which the name suggests fits over road traffic cones and can be used as a useful add on when you only need minimal information to be disclosed.
If your outfit needs to divert traffic but does not need or have the automated/electronic traffic light system BHI Workwear stocks the Elite stop and go manual signs
For standalone road traffic signs we stock the Maverick traffic signs which are temporary in nature but have a presence which can be beneficial in dictating the message.
BHI Workwear also has the facilities to design and produce bespoke road traffic signs for your firm in various sizes. If you need metal road signs, plastic or even A5 sized internal signs such as “No Smoking” signs etc.
If you need further assistance with any road traffic management concerns please call
+44333 101 4030 and our team will help you.
Alternatively please email email@example.com and we will call you back.