1. What is a document?
Black's Law Dictionary says the term document "applies to writings; to words printed, lithographed, or photographed; to maps or plans; to seals, plates, or even stones on which inscriptions are cut or engraved. In the plural, the deeds, agreements, title-papers, letters, receipts, and other written instruments used to prove a fact."
2. What is a document examiner?
A document examiner is a person who practices a discipline that seeks to determine the history of a document by technical and scientific processes.
There are several terms used to identify document examiners. Generally speaking,
they will be called either a questioned document examiner (QDE) or a forensic document examiner or simply a document examiner. The term forensic means the examiner can present their findings and opinions in terms that are acceptable in the courts. The lack of use of the term "forensic" in the examiner's title does not mean the examiner cannot present cases in court.
3. What is a forgery?
According to Black's Law Dictionary a forgery is "The false making or material altering of a document with the intent to defraud." In most cases, forgery involves
the writing of a person's signature without that person's consent, with the intent to
unlawfully acquire some benefit, e.g., an advantage in an agreement or contract, property or land ownership, money or other wealth, or to otherwise deny these items from the person whose signature was forged.
4. What is signature verification?
Signature verification is the process by which a document examiner determines
the authenticity of a questioned signature.
5. What is a handwriting expert?
The term "handwriting expert" can be used to identify either a document examiner
or a handwriting analyst.
6. What is handwriting analysis?
Handwriting analysis is the study of handwriting strokes used in the formation of
letters, the spaces between letters, between words, along with other handwriting features observed in written communications and attempts to form a personality trait assessment of the author. The practice of matching a person's handwriting to their personality and behavior has been going on for over 2000 years, first being written about by Aristotle in 330 B.C. Handwriting analysis has been recognized as a clinical psychological
evaluation technique. It is not considered a forensic science.
7 Do I need a document examiner?
If you have reason to believe that someone has written your name on a document that you did not write, and because of that act, you have or may suffer a loss of property, money, or be charge with a crime, you may well need a document examiner. The most obvious situations where a document examiner may be useful are in cases where there is a will that leaves property ownership or financial benefits to heirs and one or more heirs may believe the will has been changed or the deceased person's signature has been forged, depriving them of their inheritance. Thefts by forged checks are often cases that document examiners consider. Lease agreements and contract disputes are
also frequent sources of the need for a document examiner.
If you believe that you may or have suffered a loss by an altered document or by a document on which you believe the signature has been forged, contact Gary
W. Fyke, QDE, at 309-274-2308 or e-mail at firstname.lastname@example.org