Going to an all-girls school, we're encouraged to believe we can do anything. But a report released on Tuesday shows that the moment we walk out of the school gates, we might not have the opportunities we've been promised.
The COAG report, Tracking equity: comparing outcomes for women and girls across Australia, is a wake-up call that there is still a lot more to do to achieve equality. The statistics show that it is likely that, when I grow up, I will be making significantly less money than I would if I were a man.
As a school student, I hear a lot about gender inequality. But I have to admit that, like others, I honestly thought that there really wasn't much of a problem any more. That, even though I appreciated the achievements of feminists before my time, there really wasn't a lot more to do. I was wrong. Sometimes you need to be confronted by the truth. This report does just that.
Some people still think that women are less capable. But this clearly isn't true. At school, girls consistently outperform boys in reading and writing, although boys still outperform girls in numeracy.
More girls complete year 12. When we do leave school, we're more likely to get higher-level qualifications. By their late 20s, 64.8 per cent of women have higher-level qualifications, compared with 62.7 per cent of men.
There shouldn't be gender differences when it comes to education. But, based on these statistics, you would think women would be paid the same amount as men, if not more. Yet, for bachelor degree graduates in their first full-time job, there's a $5000 difference in median starting salaries.
Some people say that the pay difference is because women choose low-paying jobs. This report shows that to be a lie. There are major pay differences within fields. In dentistry, there is a huge pay difference of $14,400 and male lawyers make $4300 more than female lawyers in their first year.
It's not just about the money, either. Women are massively under-represented in leadership roles. Less than 3 per cent of top companies are chaired by women and, while the majority of public servants are female, women hold just 39 per cent of senior executive roles.
If females do just as well, if not better, at school and are just as qualified, if not more, at uni, then why do they not receive the same pay as men? Why do they hold so few leadership roles?
For a nation that likes to think of itself as epitomising fairness and equality, we have a long way to go. I want to be able to grow up and know that, no matter what I do, my contribution will be recognised as much as anyone else's, regardless of my gender.
Mikaelewa Amberber is a 15-year-old year 10 student at Sydney Girls High School.