"In this wonderfully insightful book, Honi, Christine, and Karren not only describe a vast array of perfectly understandable mathematical misconceptions that students have across the elementary curriculum, they also provide numerous practical instructional strategies and activities for helping remediate and "undo" the misconceptions. The classroom vignettes they describe will ring true to everyone who has tried to teach mathematics to young, and not-so-young, children."-Steven Leinwand
Children enter school filled with all kinds of ideas about numbers, shapes, measuring tools, time, and money-ideas formed from the expressions they hear...the things they see on television...the computer screen...in children's books...all around them. It's no wonder some children develop very interesting and perhaps incorrect ideas about mathematical concepts.
Get It Together: Math Problems for Groups, Grades 4-12
You don't have to learn math by yourself! Solving problems in groups is exciting, effective, and equitableit helps all students succeed in math. Get It Together is a collection of over 100 mathematics problems for groups of 26 students. The problems cover a wide range of math topics such as logic, functions, algebra, geometry, measurement, and number patterns at various levels of difficulty. Each problem has the same format: six clue cards provide the information needed to solve a problem. Since each member of the group has a different bit of information, everyone works together to arrive at a solution. In one problem, only some people get sick after eating a potluck meal. Was it the swamp chicken, the cheesecake, or something else? The group collaborates to discover which food was the culprit. This book is an excellent resource with teacher information on cooperative groups, assessment, problem solving and the use of manipulatives.
Smarter Together! Collaboration and Equity in the Elementary Math Classroom
One of the boys in the group responded, That s so smart! That s so smart! That s what we should do! Complex Instruction (CI) is a response to the paradox that group work offers much potential but often creates circumstances where few students seem to learn. CI is a set of ideas and strategies that address the problems that confound group work, but that create powerful learning for children. This book offers guidance to readers on how to use these strategies and ideas. The authors describe the lessons they learned using group work, explain how complex instruction helps unsuccessful students, and analyze how to design assignments that support group learning using group-worthy tasks giving readers examples of good tasks and help in adapting math problems from their own curricula.
Reading And Writing The World With Mathematics: Toward a Pedagogy for Social Justice
Mathematics education in the United States can reproduce social inequalities whether schools use either "basic-skills" curricula to prepare mainly low-income students of color for low-skilled service jobs or "standards-based" curricula to ready students for knowledge-intensive positions. And working for fundamental social change and rectifying injustice are rarely included in any mathematics curriculum. Reading and Writing the World with Mathematics argues that mathematics education should prepare students to investigate and critique injustice, and to challenge, in words and actions, oppressive structures and acts. Based on teacher-research, the book provides a theoretical framework and practical examples for how mathematics educators can connect schooling to a larger sociopolitical context and concretely teach mathematics for social justice.
Rethinking Mathematics: Teaching Social Justice by the Numbers
In this new expanded and updated edition of Rethinking Mathematics, more than 50 articles show how to weave social justice issues throughout the mathematics curriculum, as well as how to integrate mathematics into other curricular areas. Rethinking Mathematics offers teaching ideas, lesson plans, and reflections by practitioners and mathematics educators. This is real-world math math that helps students analyze social problems as they gain essential academic skills. This book offers hope and guidance for teachers to enliven and strengthen their math teaching. It will deepen students understanding of society and help prepare them to be critical, active participants in a democracy. Blending theory and practice, this is the only resource of its kind.
Maneuvers with Number Patterns: Teacher Sourcebook
Why do even well-educated people understand so little about mathematics? And what are the costs of our innumeracy? John Allen Paulos, in his celebrated bestseller first published in 1988, argues that our inability to deal rationally with very large numbers and the probabilities associated with them results in misinformed governmental policies, confused personal decisions, and an increased susceptibility to pseudoscience of all kinds. Innumeracy lets us know what we're missing, and how we can do something about it. Sprinkling his discussion of numbers and probabilities with quirky stories and anecdotes, Paulos ranges freely over many aspects of modern life, from contested elections to sports stats, from stock scams and newspaper psychics to diet and medical claims, sex discrimination, insurance, lotteries, and drug testing. Readers of Innumeracy will be rewarded with scores of astonishing facts, a fistful of powerful ideas, and, most important, a clearer, more quantitative way of looking at their world.