Thousands of scientific tests have now been conducted on the Shroud and its samples (along with thousands of photographs taken in every wavelength possible). Yet, only one scientific test result is inconsistent with the cloth’s authenticity as Jesus’ burial garment.
The Shroud of Turin itself was comprehensively examined for 120 hours by a group of scientists called STURP (The Shroud of Turin Research Project), comprised of approximately 25 scientists from some of the most prestigious institutions in the world. These scientists returned with data and samples from the Shroud, and spent years researching, conducting more testing and publishing their results in peer-reviewed scientific journals and other articles following their 1978 examination. This group became the most knowledgeable scientists in the world at that time about the Shroud.
Follow-up testing in 26 scientific areas was also planned by STURP in the 1980s that included carbon or C-14 dating to be conducted by various radiocarbon laboratories. However, in an eight-year process of lobbying and deceit by Harry Gove, the head of one of the radiocarbon laboratories that sought to join STURP’s carbon dating efforts, and by letters from the directors of the three labs that carbon dated the Shroud, additional testing in 25 other areas of scientific inquiry was not conducted on this famous cloth. The carbon dating scientists insisted that only C-14 dating was to be performed on the Shroud. STURP was even eliminated from selecting the samples even though the carbon dating labs had agreed to this. STURP always advocated that carbon dating samples should be removed from two or three locations on the Shroud.
In STURP’s absence, one large sample was removed from the worst location on the cloth and divided between the three carbon dating laboratories. The C-14 dating scientists then cavalierly ascribed an erroneous date to the cloth, as they ignored significant underlying differences in the raw dating data ― which the directors had agreed to share with other analyzing agencies before the Shroud’s C-14 date was to be announced. These underlying differences indicated that a systematic problem could exist for C-14 dating any of the Shroud’s samples. The radiocarbon scientists and their coordinator also knew that if neutrons irradiated the Shroud, every location on the cloth would date to a different, yet younger C-14 or carbon date than its actual age. The directors not only ignored the underlying differences in the raw data, but they masked the worst differences and failed to report them in the official C-14 or radiocarbon dating report. Had they reported or shared them with the other analyzing institutions (as agreed), the need for more raw dating data from additional Shroud samples at other locations would have been more apparent. Another sample from another location would have confirmed that a systematic problem existed throughout the Shroud.
When a physicist from Harvard University later suggested that C-14 atoms could have been created by neutrons irradiating from the body wrapped within this burial cloth, one of the Shroud’s carbon dating scientists responded. He stated the likelihood that the suggested processes and radiation could have affected the Shroud’s date was “so exceedingly remote that it beggars scientific credulity.” The director of one of the radiocarbon dating laboratories also dismissed the Shroud during a televised interview as “a load of rubbish.”
Test the Shroud asserts with sophisticated and extensive evidence that such a radiating event not only happened, but can be proven to have occurred. This book will not only explain how the first ten items on the Home Page can be proven, but how neutron or particle radiation would create and distribute billions of new C-14 atoms throughout the entire cloth and all of its blood marks, confirming that the length, width and depth of the crucified body was the source of this radiation. This event also explains how its the Shroud’s unique body images were formed over time; how their still-red blood marks were uniquely embedded; the possible coin and flower images; the skeletal features on the body images; the excellent condition of the cloth and all of its many unique features.
The stark contrast in numerous distinct details and overall appearance can be seen in the negative and positive of the man in the Shroud.
Test the Shroud Foundation is recruiting scientists and laboratories to neutron irradiate control linen, blood, charred material and limestone from Jerusalem, all of which are associated with the Shroud of Turin. We are developing scientific techniques to capture and measure radioactive isotopes Cl-36, Ca-41 and C-14 that would be produced in these irradiated mate-rials. When these sophisticated techniques are perfected they could be applied to small strategic samples from the Shroud of Turin.
The foundation is also sponsoring further MCNP analysis of the amounts and distribution of these radioactive isotopes throughout the length and width of this burial cloth and their concentration within the linen, blood, charred material and limestone at various locations on the cloth and within a typical first century burial tomb of Jerusalem.
#1 – Copyright 1978 Barrie M. Schwortz Collection, STERA, Inc. All Rights Reserved
#2 – Copyright 1978 Barrie M. Schwortz Collection, STERA, Inc. All Rights Reserved
#3 – Copyright 1978 Barrie M. Schwortz Collection, STERA, Inc. All Rights Reserved
#4 – Courtesy Robert Rucker
#5 – Copyright 1978 Barrie M. Schwortz Collection, STERA, Inc. All Rights Reserved