By Building Transportation
THE BASIC RESPONSIBILITIES OF A STUDENT WHILE WAITING AT THE BUS STOP OR RIDING A NORWALK CITY SCHOOL BUS ARE TO:
OBEY THE BUS DRIVER RESPECTFULLY AT ALL TIMES.
Follow all Norwalk City School student conduct rules and state regulations.
Ride on their assigned buses, both to & from school, at designated bus stops. If there is an emergency and transportation needs to be changed, call 419-660-1822.
Be at the bus stop, waiting at the designated place of safety, and ready to board when the bus arrives.
Enter and exit the bus in an orderly single file line. If it is necessary to cross the road, students are to cross 10 feet in front of the bus after receiving a clear signal from the driver that it is safe to cross.
Carry on items that are required for their academic studies and can fit on their laps or under their seats.
STUDENTS RIDING THE BUS ARE NOT PERMITTED TO:
Use cell phones or play radios. (CD players, IPODs or MP3 players with headphones are permitted)
Put hands, arms, head, feet or legs, out of windows.
Throw any objects from the bus windows.
Stand, turn around in, or leave their seats, while the bus is in motion.
Eat, drink, chew gum, smoke, light matches or lighters on the bus.
Use abusive, derogatory, or profane language.
Strike, push, trip, or otherwise abuse another student while riding, or waiting at the bus stop.
Yell, whistle, stamp feet, clap hands or otherwise distract the bus driver.
Take more than 1/3 of the seat when bus is loaded to capacity.
Litter, spit on the bus, tamper with, or deface/destroy bus property or equipment.
Bring glass objects or items that have sharp points or edges.
Bring pets, animals, reptiles, or insects of any kind on the bus.
Talk at the railroad crossing.
In the interest of safety for all students riding school buses, a pupil will be reported for willful disobedience of the above regulations. A first offense of the above rules will result in a letter being sent to the parents. A second offense will result in the child being suspended for two (2) days from bus transportation, a third offense will result in a five (5) day suspension, and a fourth offense may result in the child being expelled from bus transportation. The length of the suspension may be adjusted depending on the seriousness of the offense up but not more than one hundred eighty (180) days.