Polyurethanes are a class of extremely versatile polymers that are made into flexible and rigid foams, fibres, elastomers, and surface coatings. They are formed by reacting an isocyanate (a compound having the functional group NCO) with an alcohol (having the functional group OH).
Polyurethane molecules can adopt a linear or a network architecture. Linear polyurethanes are formed by reacting a dialcohol with a diisocyanate, whereas network polyurethanes are formed from polyfunctional alcohols or isocyanates. Dialcohol monomers include ethylene glycol (HOCH2CH2OH); diethylene glycol (HOCH2CH2OCH2CH2OH); 1,4-butanediol (HOCH2CH2CH2CH2OH); 1,6-hexanediol (HO[CH2]6OH); alcohol-terminated polyethers such as polyethylene oxide and polypropylene oxide (see Aliphatic polyethers); and flexible, alcohol-terminated polyesters such as poly-1,4-butylene adipate:
The alcohol-terminated polyethers and polyesters are known as polyols.
Isocyanates commonly used to prepare polyurethanes are toluene diisocyanate (TDI), methylene-4,4′-diphenyl diisocyanate (MDI), and a polymeric isocyanate (PMDI). These isocyanates have the following structures:
During the late 1930s Otto Bayer, manager of the IG Farben laboratories in Leverkusen, Ger., prepared many polyurethanes by condensation reaction of dihydric alcohols such as 1,4-butanediol with difunctional diisocyanates. A major breakthrough in the commercial application of polyurethane did not occur until 1941, when a trace of moisture reacted with isocyanate to produce carbon dioxide. The production of this gas resulted in many small empty areas, or cells, in the product (which was subsequently called “imitation Swiss cheese”). In 1953 Bayer and the Monsanto Chemical Company (now Monsanto Company) formed the Mobay Chemical Corporation to produce polyurethane in the United States.
The largest segment of the market for polyurethanes is in rigid and flexible foams. Flexible foams are usually made with polyols and an excess of TDI. Foam is manufactured by adding water, which reacts with the terminal isocyanate groups to increase the molecular weight through urea linkages while simultaneously releasing carbon dioxide. The carbon dioxide gas, referred to as the blowing agent, is trapped as bubbles in the increasingly viscous polymer. The principal uses of flexible foam are in upholstery, bedding, automobile seats, crash panels, carpet underlays, textile laminates, and sponges.
Rigid foams are made with PMDI and polyether glycols, along with low-molecular-weight dialcohols to increase the rigidity. Use of PMDI, which contains a larger number of reactive functional groups, results in a network polyurethane. A blowing agent such as pentane is normally added to augment the foaming. (Chlorofluorocarbons such as Freon [trademark] used to be employed as blowing agents before they were declared unacceptable for depleting ozone in the stratosphere.) Rigid polyurethane foam is used in insulation, packaging, marine flotation equipment, and lightweight furnishings.
Polyurethanes are the basis of a novel type of elastomeric fibre known generically as spandex. Spandex is a segmented polyurethane—that is, a fibre composed of alternating rigid and flexible segments that display different stretch-resistance characteristics. The rigid segments are normally prepared from MDI and a low-molecular-weight dialcohol such as ethylene glycol or 1,4-butanediol, while the flexible segments are made with MDI and a polyether or polyester glycol. The rigid segments have a tendency to aggregate, and the flexible segments act as springs connecting the rigid segments. As a result, spandex fibres can be stretched to great lengths, yet they also display a greater stretch-resistance than other rubbers and do not break down on repeated stretching. They also have good strength, high uniformity, and high abrasion resistance. Spandex is well suited for garments with high stretch requirements, such as support hose, swimsuits, and sportswear.
Two types of polyurethane elastomers are marketed: thermosetting network polymers and thermoplastic elastomers. The latter are block copolymers formulated in much the same way as are polyurethane fibres. The former make use of polyfunctional monomers such as PMDI or glycerol; further cross-linking occurs via reactions involving isocyanate and urethane groups.
Test Your Knowledge
Pounds of Flesh: How Much Can They Eat?
The polymerization of monomers to form network polyurethanes is so rapid that articles may be fabricated by injecting the reacting monomers directly into a mold, rather than the more usual method of molding a preformed polymer. This technology, known as reaction injection molding, accounts for much of the production of thermosetting elastomers made from polyurethane. Polyurethane elastomers are made into automobile parts, industrial rollers, flexible molds, forklift tires, roller-skate and skateboard wheels, medical equipment, and shoe soles.
Polyurethane surface coatings
Polyurethanes form some of the highest-performance coatings available. A variety of formulations is marketed. One type is a one-component (one-pot) prepolymer containing excess isocyanate groups. Upon application of the liquid to a surface, these groups react with water from the atmosphere to form a urea, which further reacts with other isocyanate groups to provide the cross-linking necessary to cure the coating. In another one-pot formulation, the isocyanate groups of the prepolymer are blocked by a phenol. Curing is accomplished by baking the coating to about 150° C (300° F). Alkyd-type one-pot coatings, in which the polyurethane is modified with drying oils, are also available.
Polyurethanes are also made into two-component coatings, in which isocyanate-terminated prepolymers serve as one component and a polyfunctional alcohol serves as the other. When the components are mixed in the presence of a catalyst, the isocyanate and alcohol groups react rapidly to cure the coating.
Polyurethane surface coatings are applied to wood, concrete, and automobile and machine parts. They also have marine applications.