As we approach the celebration of the life of Martin Luther King on January 21st as well as Black History Month during February, it is fitting to give a shout out to the wonderful programming that continues to be provided to the public at the The Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture. This special institution at 135th and Lenox is a research unit of The New York Public Library, is generally recognized as one of the leading institutions of its kind in the world. For over 80 years the Center has collected, preserved, and provided access to materials documenting black life, and promoted the study and interpretation of the history and culture of peoples of African descent. Below is a highlight of upcoming free events. There are additional paid events highlighted on the library website at http://www.nypl.org/locations/schomburg
January 18 at 10:30 a.m. to12 noon
Shades of Truth Theatre presents The Meeting, a fictional, intimate conversation between Malcolm X and Martin Luther King Jr. who, despite their vastly different approaches in the pursuit of racial equality, propelled the civil rights movement. Presented in collaboration with Community Matters NYC, a new initiative of Community Works. Grades 5 and up. To register, email email@example.com.
February 8–12 at 10 a.m. and 12 noon
Black History Month Youth Film Series : The Schomburg Center presents a new film series to empower youth audiences with the knowledge of the global black experience. Registration is required. Contact dhollman@ nypl.org to request a film listing and a registration form.
February 13, 10 a.m.–6 p.m.
Youth & Family Day: Black History Month Film Series: This series features contemporary and historic films selected to educate and entertain. Registration is required for groups of 8 or more persons. To request a registration form, e-mail firstname.lastname@example.org.
February 18, 3–6 p.m.
African Film Festival
For more information, visit www.africanfilmny.org or call 212.352.1720.
February 21, 3–6 p.m.
Forum: the Malcolm X Museum Annual Commemoration of the 45th Anniversary of the Assassination of Malcolm X
For more information, contact The Malcolm X Museum at 212.340.9502.