Meet Inspiring Speakers and Experts at our 3000+ Global Conferenceseries Events with over 600+ Conferences, 1200+ Symposiums and 1200+ Workshops on Medical, Pharma, Engineering, Science, Technology and Business
Description of the country:
The United Kingdom, consisting of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, is twice the size of New York State. The U.K consists of England, Wales, Scotland, and the province of Northern Ireland which occupies the northeastern part of the island of Ireland. England, in the southeast part of the British Isles, is separated from Scotland on the north by the granite Cheviot Hills; from them the Pennine chain of uplands extends south through the center of England, reaching its highest point in the Lake District in the northwest.
Geography of the country:
The United Kingdom, also called the U.K., consists of a group of islands off the northwest coast of Europe. It is a unique country made up of four nations: England, Wales, Scotland, and Northern Ireland. England, Wales, and Scotland also make up Great Britain. In the south of England, the countryside is mostly rolling hills. Important rivers flowing into the North Sea are the Thames, Humber, Tees, and Tyne. In the west are the Severn and Wye, which empty into the Bristol Channel and are navigable, as are the Mersey and Ribble.
Status of economy, research and development:
According to the CIA World Fact book, U.K is among the world's developed countries. It has the world's 18th largest nominal GDP and 17th largest GDP by PPP and it is one of the world's newly industrialized countries and it is among the world's leading producers of agricultural products; textiles; motor vehicles, ships and other transportation equipment; construction materials; consumer electronics and home appliances.
The country plays a crucial role in advanced research in Reproductive toxicology.
Status about the different subjects in which extensive research is going on:
In Physiology or Medicine this island nation produced 31 Nobel laureates so far. University of Birmingham in Birmingham is the leading Institution in Toxicology research in United Kingdom. There are 28 Toxicology Master's degrees universities in United Kingdom. Some of them are University of Surrey, The University of Central Lancashire (UCLAN), Bournemouth University, University of East London and Leeds Beckett University.