Prelude to WWIII
- Soviet soldier Vladimir Soshkin narrowly avoids getting picked off by a German sniper during the Battle of Stalingrad.
- Soshkin among soldiers who raise the flag of the Soviet Union over the Reichstag in Berlin during the closing days of World War II in Europe.
- Soshkin takes part in the brutal crackdown of an East German workers' uprising.
- During the Warsaw Pact invasion of Czechoslovakia, General Vladimir Soshkin leads a particularly ruthless armored battalion onto the streets of Prague to suppress the Prague Spring.
- Defence Minister Andrei Grechko dies on April 26th. General Vladimir Soshkin is appointed to the Politburo to take his place.
- United States invades the small island nation of Grenada. - Soviet Politburo accepts Soshkin's proposal to send supplies and up-to-date weapons to Cuba.
- Konstantin Chernenko, the leader of the Soviet Union, falls into a coma and dies on March 10. - Mikhail Gorbachev succeeds Chernenko as the new General-Secretary of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union. - Gorbachev announces his intention to bring about sweeping reforms to the Soviet system; General Soshkin decides to keep a close watch over the new General-Secretary.
- During the 27th Congress of the CPSU, Gorbachev introduced a number of reforms including glasnost and perestroika. - Hardliners in the Communist Party backed by the military and KGB seizes control of the Soviet government and places Gorbachev under arrest. - General Vladimir Soshkin is installed as the new General-Secretary of the CPSU. - Soshkin declares all of Gorbachev's introductions null and void as continuation of the 27th Congress is temporarily postponed. - During the resumption of 27th Congress, Soshkin introduced a number of new reforms which would increase the power of the Party as well as tighten government control over the economy even further. - In response to the successful hardliner coup in the Soviet Union, the United States imposes a new grain embargo against the Soviet Union. - Soviet Union intervenes in Iran-Iraq War which results in an Iraqi-Soviet victory; the Soviets annex most of Iran (including Tehran) as the Persian SSR while Iraq annexes the western border portions of the country. - Afghanistan is annexed into the Soviet Union. - A West German town is annihilated when a nuclear device on a US Air Force base accidentally detonates.
- Greens Party gains control of West German parliament; the Greens Movement gains momentum in the politics of Western Europe. - West German government demands that the United States and Great Britain immediately and unconditionally remove all nuclear weapons from mainland Europe. - Soviet Union suffers the worst wheat harvest in 55 years; General Soshkin introduces a new five-year plan. - General Soshkin blames the United States and its grain embargo for being the primary cause for Soviet famine; President Reagan counters by holding General Soshkin himself and his neo-Stalinist policies to blame. - Labor and food riots in Poland. Soviet and East German troops invade. Solidarity movement is crushed.
- Cuba and Nicaragua reach troop strength goals of 500,000. El Salvador and Honduras fall. - Mexico plunged into revolution. Soviet and Cubans send "advisers" to help the rebels topple the Mexican government. Guatemala and Belize fall. - Soviet Union, Mexico, Nicaragua, Cuba and a number of other communist states in Central America sign the Veracruz Coalition, a collective defense treaty similar to the Warsaw Pact. - France, now under the Greens Party, signs non-aggression pact with the Soviet Union and ends its symbolic membership in NATO. - Having consolidated power in most of Western Europe, the Greens Movement seek a neutrality stance in the Cold War. - The Western European countries under the Greens Movement withdraw from the NATO Alliance. - The United Kingdom, under the Conservative Party, is the only European country to not withdraw from NATO. - United States Army V and VII Corps are moved to bases in Great Britain and Northern Ireland, having been expelled from West Germany.
- Tienanmen Square protests lead to uprising which topples the Chinese Communist Party. - Chinese Federation aligns with the United States. - CIA and MI6 both uncover strong evidence that the Soviets plan to invade the United Kingdom later that same year. - Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher orders the reactivation of the Civil Defense Corps in preparation for possible Soviet attack. - President Bush orders the deployment of the Army III Corps and the 2nd Marine Division to the United Kingdom. - Army I Corps to deployed to South Korea in anticipation of North Korea taking advantage of possible Soviet invasion of the British Isles. - A sizable Warsaw Pact naval task force is located in the North Sea, only a short distance from British territorial waters and slowly closing in. - While General Soshkin assures that the task force is on training maneuvers, NATO Remnant forces in the United Kingdom are ordered to go on high alert...
World War III
A peaceful September morning is suddenly shattered when the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics launches a massive surprise attack against the United States of America with conventional and nuclear forces. Soviet and East German paratroopers, under the disguise of commercial flights, invaded the United States and seized control of a number of key mountain passes in the Rockies. Cuban and Russian agents who came up illegal from Mexico infiltrated the Strategic Air Command (SAC) bases in the Midwest and Texas. Soviet nuclear strikes took out the ICBM silos in the Dakotas and Wyoming as well as key points of communication. Washington, D.C., Omaha, and Kansas City were obliterated with the death toll reaching well over ten million. The U.S. ballistic missile submarine force launched a nuclear retaliatory attack against the Soviet Union, inflicting similar damage to the country. Soviet cities destroyed included Minsk, Kazan, and Archangel; Moscow was saved from destruction by its ABM defense system. Veracruz Coalition troops poured across the US-Mexico border; the invading forces occupied Texas and pushed northward into the Great Plains. Three Soviet army groups crossed the Bering Straight into Alaska; the Russians cut the oil pipelines and moved on Anchorage.
The Chinese Federation declared war on the Soviet Union and launched an invasion of Siberia. Chinese military forces occupied a number of disputed sedimentary islands at the confluence of the Ussuri and Amur rivers, including Bolshoy Ussuriyskiy Island. The Soviets responded by launching a massive nuclear attack against the Chinese. Beijing, Tianjin, Shanghai, Chongqing, and a number of other Chinese cities were destroyed. China managed to hit the Soviets back with the few missiles which weren't destroyed on the ground. Despite this, it was clear that China suffered greater damage from the nuclear exchange then the Soviet Union. Roughly 200 million Chinese citizens had lost their lives; 200 million would perish over the following weeks. The Chinese invasion of the Soviet Union quickly ground to a halt due to tactical nuclear missile attacks. Soviet reinforcements arrived and pushed the invaders back across the border into Manchuria. The Chinese went on the defensive as Soviet, Mongolian, and Vietnamese troops invaded. India, a non-communist ally of the Soviet Union, invaded China from the south.
In response to the surprise attack on the United States, the United Kingdom and Canada declared war on the Soviet Union. The British Royal Navy and Air Force mobilized for combat operations. Moving to attack the United Kingdom was a massive Warsaw Pact naval task force which consisted of warships from the Soviet Baltic and Northern Fleets as well as the East German Navy. Several air and naval battles took place in the waters surrounding the United Kingdom. The Royal Navy put up a valiant fight and managed to sink a number of Warsaw Pact warships. However the Soviet Navy was eventually able to cut the United Kingdom off from the rest of the world. Argentina took advantage of the situation by invading and occupying the Falkland Islands once again.
America's former NATO allies declared a state of neutrality in the conflict, feeling that twice in one century was enough. In order to maintain their non-aggression pact with the Soviet Union, France prohibited any country at war with the Soviet Union from entering their airspace or territorial waters.
The surprise invasion of the United States had taken the NATO Remnant completely off guard. For months it was apparent that the Soviet Union had planned to attack the United Kingdom. The Army III Corps had been deployed to the United Kingdom in the hopes to deter the impending attack. However it was now clear that the NATO Remnant had fallen victim to an elaborate Soviet ruse. With the Warsaw Pact blockade of the United Kingdom, the US Army and Marine forces stationed in Great Britain and Northern Ireland were completely cut off from the United States. Due to the North Korean invasion of South Korea, the Army I Corps was unable to return home either.
Soviet and Veracruz Coalition forces continued their campaign in the United States. Veracruz Coalition armored units marched as far north as Cheyenne, Wyoming after which they moved on Kansas. Arizona, New Mexico, Texas, Oklahoma, Louisiana, Arkansas, Kansas, and Colorado were occupied by Veracruz Coalition forces. The US military were able to hold the line at the Rocky Mountains in the West and the Mississippi in the east. Veracruz Coalition military forces also occupied San Diego; the 1st Marine Division based in Camp Pendleton were able to halt further advances into California. To the north, the Soviets had secured control over Alaska and invaded Canada. Western Canada fell to the Soviet onslaught. The Soviets pushed into the United States from the north with the intention of linking up with Veracruz Coalition forces to the south and splitting America in two. However the US military was able to halt the Soviet advance and prevent the linkup.
Veracruz Coalition forces also had to contend with a growing number insurgents throughout the occupied territory. The most prominent guerrilla unit was the Wolverines which operated in the Arapaho National Forest outside of Calumet, Colorado.
The guerrillas primarily targeted Soviet supply convoys and lightly defended outposts. The attacks greatly impacted logistical support to the troops fighting on the front and morale among the occupying forces began to drop. This in part contributed to the inability of the Veracruz Coalition forces to make further significant advances into the country.
The Battle of the Arapaho National Forest, aka Wolverine War, ended in February when Veracruz Coalition forces had apparently wiped out the Wolverine Resistance cell; at the time it was unknown that two members were able to escape the occupied zone. Morale greatly increased among the Soviet and Veracruz Coalition ranks. Once relief reinforcements arrived, the soldiers who had taken part in the defeat of the Wolverines were flown to Moscow. General Vladimir Soshkin personally congratulated the soldiers on a job well done, declared them Heroes of the Soviet Union, and invited them to attend the ceremony in which Volgograd was renamed back to Stalingrad.
January 1991 in the Red Dawn '84 Universe.
General Vasilij Tatarin was appointed as the Supreme Commander of the Soviet Occupational Authority following the death of his predecessor General Bratchenko at the hands of the Wolverine Resistance. General Soshkin gave the new commander the task of regaining the offensive against the United States. The Soviet Pacific Fleet engaged U.S. naval forces along the U.S. West Coast. After over a month of naval combat, the Americans were eventually routed by the Soviets. On May 2, 1990, Warsaw Pact forces launched an amphibious assault on the U.S. West Coast. Roughly one week later, the Soviets had pretty much secured control over the San Francisco Bay Area. General Tatarin set up his command headquarters on Alcatraz Island in San Francisco Bay. By the start of June, the Soviets and East Germans had secured the entire Pacific Coastline. Soviet forces in Canada and the Rocky Mountains had coordinated with the attack. By August, Warsaw Pact and Veracruz Coalition forces had occupied the Pacific and Mountain states.
The Soviet Occupational Authority converted California's San Joaquin Valley into a forced labor settlement where undesirables (including teachers, politicians, historians, etc.) were sent to. Collective farms were established throughout the Valley. Camp Pendleton and other captured U.S. military installations were converted into bases for the Soviet Occupational Authority. Vietnam contributed troops for the occupation, primarily setting up their bases in communities located in close proximity to pre-war U.S. military installations. Military families were treated very harshly by the Vietnamese People's Army as retribution for the Vietnam War. Random arrests and summary executions were very common in Vietnamese-controlled communities. Thousands of Vietnam War veterans were also arrested and sent to prison camps reminiscent to those the North Vietnamese ran during the war.
Having consolidated their holding in the western United States, the Soviets turned their attention to the east. Within less then a month, the northern Great Plains states had fallen. Warsaw Pact troops pushed beyond the Mississippi River, occupying parts of Wisconsin, Illinois, and Indiana. Soviet forces also seized control over much of Canada.
The Soviets reached Chicago by mid-September. Despite the numerical superiority of the Warsaw Pact forces, the U.S. military forces in Chicago refused to back down. Soviet supply lines to Chicago were subject to numerous partisan attacks throughout the Midwest; this was due to the fact the Russians had not fully conquered the territory they passed through to reach Chicago. Due to these factors, the advance of the Warsaw Pact troops had slowed down considerably with bitter street-to-street and house-to-house fighting. Even so, the Russians and East Germans had seized control over most of the city by the end of the year. Many important landmarks were barely recognizable; the Sears Tower had been destroyed during the first weeks of the battle. Many historians even compared the Battle of Chicago to the Battle of Stalingrad during the Second World War.
By this point, North Korea had captured most of South Korea though the cities of Seoul, Pusan, and Gwangju remain under ROK control. With China's military crippled during the first week of the war thanks to the nuclear exchange, the Chinese Federation continued to lose ground to the invaders. Communist forces also gained footholds in Japan and the Philippines. India established Tibet as a client state. Iraq invaded and annexed Kuwait; by the start of 1991, Iraq was in the process of invading Saudi Arabia. Cuban troops invaded Dominican Republic and Haiti.
End of the Greens Movement and Rise of the Federated States of Europe
Since the start of the Third World War, Western Europe remained relatively quiet. Greens had taken control over the governments of Western Europe before the war and mutually agreed to assume a status of non-alignment. However a growing number of people felt that it was wrong to just sit by and do nothing while the Soviets continued their brutal campaign. The pro-war movement gained momentum as Warsaw Pact warships began violating French territorial waters in order to ambush NATO Remnant naval forces in the English Channel as well as launch a conventional bombing of Dover. The Greens made an effort to rationalize Russian actions and attempt to avoid breaking France's non-aggression pact with the Soviet Union. However when news came in that a yacht belonging to a prominent French civilian had been destroyed by a Soviet submarine, there was much public outrage in Paris. Word eventually filtered in that an Irish cargo ship was sunk by a Soviet submarine while attempting to cross the blockade without submitting to a search. Ireland responded by declaring war against the Soviet Union while many in Western Europe were clearly outraged that the Soviets would attack a neutral country, not once but twice. Demonstrations against the French government increased greatly.
A motion of no confidence was eventually made against the French leadership prompting early elections. Elections were held in Paris on May 12, 1990. The Rally for the Republic (RPR) decisively won control over both the Parliament and the Presidency. This was the beginning of the end of the Greens Movement in Western Europe. Early elections were held in West Germany the following month in which the Christian Democratic Union won control over the West German Parliament as well as the Chancellery. Over the next several months, more and more Western European countries ousted their Greens Parties from power. By September, the Greens Movement of Western Europe had completely lost their leadership role in European politics.
The new European heads of state concluded that the only way to stand against the might of the Soviet Union would be to combine all their resources--politically, militarily, and economically. Over the next few months, delegates from the member states of the Western European Union and European Economic Community met in Brussels, Belgium to discuss the formation of a new federation. A few other countries also took part in the discussion. The biggest obstacle to the talks was the Rally for the Republic (RPR), the leading political party in France. However despite being critical of the idea of a Federal Europe back in the 1970's, even the RPR saw the clear and present danger of the Soviet Union and that European unity was indeed the only way to insure the survival of France. Another obstacle regarded the United Kingdom and Ireland since both countries were in a state of war with the Soviet Union. However since the governments of all countries involved in the talks strongly believed war was inevitable anyway, they agreed to admit both countries. Another matter involved West Berlin which had evolved to de facto city-state status following the withdrawal of the British, French, and Americans from the city.
The Constitution of the Federated States of Europe was signed on November 12, 1990. The new country consisted fifteen member-states: Austria, Belgium, Denmark, France, Greece, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg, Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, United Kingdom, and West Germany. West Berlin was given member-city status which was virtually the equivalent of member-state. The new federation held its first national elections the following month. Margaret Thatcher was elected Chancellor of the Federated States of Europe, Helmut Kohl was elected Vice-Chancellor, and Jacques Chirac was elected President of the European Parliament. The armed forces of all fifteen member states were folded into the Armed Forces of the Federated States of Europe--each member still kept its own military which now operated much like the state defense forces in the United States.
Since the United Kingdom and Ireland were both members of Federated States of Europe, the new federation was obligated to take steps to protect the two member-states. The Federated States of Europe demanded that the Soviet Union immediately cease all military engagements with the British and withdraw the naval blockade of the British Isles. On January 10th, 1991, the European Federal Navy was ordered to move on the Warsaw Pact blockade and encourage the Soviets to reconsider. The Soviets responded by opening fire on the European ships; the Europeans of course were ready and quickly returned fire. In response to the attack, the Federated States of Europe declared war on the Soviet Union.
The Soviet Union had been focusing much of its attention on the war in the United States and had been barely able to keep their occupation forces supplied. However this unexpected declaration of war by the Federated States of Europe had further complicated matters. The Soviet Forces in East Germany retaliated by invading West Berlin (The Soviets had left West Berlin alone earlier in the war in order to assure that Western Europe remained neutral). While there was no general ground offensive by either side, Western European and Warsaw Pact forces launched limited ground assaults along the border.
Over the next several months, the Soviets stretched their supply lines to the breaking point in an effort to prevent an invasion by Western Europe as well as maintain a foothold in the United States. Not only were the Soviets unable to provide sufficient logistical support for their troops fighting in the Battle of Chicago, the breaking of the Soviet blockade of Great Britain allowed the US Army III Corps to be able to return to the States to enable an effective counterattack.
On March 14, 1991, the III Corps and the newly reactivated II Corps launched a successful counterattack which liberated most of Illinois, Indiana, and Wisconsin. As a result, Soviet forces fighting in Chicago had been completely cut off from friendly support. The Soviets held out in Chicago for roughly another month until finally being forced to surrender. After roughly half a year, the Battle of Chicago ended with a decisive America victory which effectively turned the tide of the Third World War.
The Third United States Army under General Norman Schwarzkopf spearheaded the rapid armored assault across the occupied Great Plains. Within a couple months, the Soviets had been pushed to the Rocky Mountains.
While the majority of the III Corps fought in the Rocky Mountains, the 1st Cavalry Division backed the II Corps in Veracruz Coalition-occupied Texas. As Veracruz Coalition forces retreated, they proceeded in setting fire to hundreds of oil wells in east Texas. As a result, thick clouds of smoke covered the skies throughout much of eastern Texas with its effects reaching Dallas in the west and Shreveport in the east. Advancing US forces were plagued with low visibility from the smoke as well as the occasional "oil rain" from being in close proximity to the burning oil wells. While the II Corps and 1st Cavalry Division continued their push, the National Guard and other volunteers helped to fight the oil fires. By the time the Dallas-Fort Worth Area was liberated, virtually the entire Veracruz Coalition force in Texas was in full retreat. They were constantly attacked by military and insurgent forces as they retreated south along Interstate 35. The amount of destruction led to I-35 being nicknamed the "Highway of Death".
The 2nd Marine Division landed along the Mexican East Coast. This was coordinated with the 82nd Airborne Division dropping into key locations of northern Mexico; such key areas included small towns, important roads, oilfields, Rio Grande border crossings, etc. In coordination with this attack, the II Corps pushed through western Texas to the Rio Grande in order to prevent the Veracruz Coalition troops in Texas from using the Rocky Mountains as an alternate retreat destination. By early June, the Veracruz Coalition retreat from Texas had been completely cutoff. On July 2, 1991, the surviving Veracruz Coalition troops in Texas surrendered.
Around the same time, the Soviets also lost control over much of the eastern Rockies including the small Colorado town of Calumet. As American military personnel liberated the town, the local population welcomed them with open arms. When a group of American soldiers arrived at Calumet Town Hall to place Mayor Bates under arrest for collaborating with the enemy during the occupation, they found him dead in his office from a self-inflicted gunshot wound. There was of course some who believed that the mayor may have been assassinated by insurgents while a few even believed the Soviets wanted to remove a potential loose end. Whatever the case, all Calumet mutually agreed that Mayor Bates had gotten what was coming to him.
During this time, ROK Armed Forces and Eighth United States Army had turned the tables against the North Koreans. Most of South Korea was liberated and the North Korean city of Kaesong was occupied. The Chinese Federation managed to liberate some of its territory though the Soviets and their allies maintain a strong foothold in the country. Iraq occupied the remainder of Saudi Arabia before moving on Jordan.
End of the Veracruz Coalition
Even as the Third United States Army continued the liberation of the western United States, the 2nd Marine Division and Army II Corps spearheaded the invasion of Mexico. Mexican military strength had been greatly diminished due to heavy losses sustained from the Second Battle of Texas. The Soviet Armed Forces were already stretched to the breaking point as a result of having to focus on fighting the Americans in the Rocky Mountains as well as having to defend their Warsaw Pact allies from the Federated States of Europe. As a result, they were only able to send minimal support. Furthermore neither the Cubans nor the Nicaraguans were able to assist due to impending American attacks on their homelands.
As the U.S. Marines closed in on Mexico City, there was growing unrest in the Mexican capital as well as other cities. The Mexican people blamed both the Soviets as well as their own government for bringing the wrath of the United States down upon them. President Valentín Campa was overthrown in a popular uprising in the capital and placed under arrest. Supporters of the coup established a new government and expelled all communist party officials. On July 22, 1991, Mexico signed an armistice with the United States. Furthermore the new Mexican government agreed to declare war on the Soviet Union. The following day, the United States Marines marched past the Halls of Montezuma for the second time in history.
Soviet reaction to the Mexican defection was swift. Soviet and East German troops already in position in northwestern Mexico moved quickly to secure the region. Mexican military and police personnel were quickly disarmed. A few put up a fight and are consequently killed. However most stand down without a fight. East German paratroopers from the Luftsturmregiment 40 raided the prison compound outside Mexico City and freed deposed President Valentín Campa from captivity. He was brought to Ensenada where he was appointed President of the newly formed Mexican People's Republic. The Mexican People's Republic was pretty much limited to the Baja California peninsula as well as the western parts of Sonara and Sinaloa; furthermore, the new country was under tight Soviet control.
U.S. Marines and Army Rangers invaded and occupied Panama to remove their pro-Soviet government and eliminate any direct land threat to U.S. control over Panama Canal.
Popular uprisings broke out in Cuba, Nicaragua, and other Latin American member-states of the Veracruz Coalition. The 2nd Marine Division invaded Cuba which further accelerated civil uprising in that country. Anti-government Cuban militia led by Ernesto Bella assaulted a government bunker outside Havana. Most of the guards as well as many government officials were killed in the attack. Cuban President Fidel Castro as well as his brother Raúl were among the dead. Ernesto Bella, formerly a colonel in the Cuban Revolutionary Armed Forces, had become the de facto leader of Cuba. On August 16, 1991, Cuba surrendered to the United States. Nicaragua followed suit the following week. Honduras, El Salvador, Dominican Republic, and Haiti regained full independence and declared war on the Soviet Union. With the last communist country in Central America beaten, the Veracruz Coalition was effectively dissolved.
With the communists defeated in Central America and the southern flank secured, the United States was now able to focus primarily on ending the Soviet occupation of American soil. By this point, the Russians and East Germans had been pushed into Arizona, Utah, Idaho, and western Montana. Soviet forces in Canada also continued to lose ground. Despite these setbacks, Warsaw Pact forces continued to fight back against the American advances in the Rocky Mountains. While they couldn't stop the Third Army altogether, they were able to slow them down considerably.
Morale was on the decline among East German forces due to the invasion of their homeland by the European Federal Army. As a result, most East Germans wanted to return home to defend their homeland. However the Soviets turned down their requests, stating that the Warsaw Pact would assume responsibility for the defense of East Germany. General Vasilij Tatarin ordered that all East German military personnel in the United States be reassigned to garrison duty in American suburban and rural communities. Even the elite East German Luftsturmregiment 40 was reassigned to police duties in northeastern California. Officially this was done to free up Soviet troops for frontline duty in the Rocky Mountains. Unofficially, General Tatarin no longer trusted the East Germans to fulfill their frontline duties given the situation in their homeland.
South Korea was fully liberated and the North Korean capital city of Pyongyang was occupied. Chinese military forces continue their gradual liberation of their country. Japan and the Philippines have driven the invaders from their homelands. India invaded Burma and Libya invaded Chad.
The American South Central states suffered considerable environmental damage due to the East Texas oil fires set by retreating Veracruz Coalition forces earlier that year. Financial devastation couldn't be denied. In order to prevent a repeat of East Texas, President Bush ordered the Joint Chiefs to make retaking the Alaskan oil wells a top priority. A vast majority of logistical support was sent to American and Canadian forces in northern Canada for the upcoming attack on Soviet-occupied Alaska. As a result the Third Army's advance had been temporarily slowed down much to General Schwarzkopf's disappointment. However despite these setbacks, the Third Army was still able to liberate a number of cities including Phoenix, Salt Lake City, etc.
Over the next couple months, American and Canadian forces advanced into Alaska. The first wave involved the U.S. XVIII Airborne Corps dropping in soldiers in key locations in northern and southern portions of Alaska. Their mission was to secure as many oil wells and fields as possible before the Soviets could destroy them. This was coordinated by a massive ground push by American and Canadian ground forces from northern Canada. The Soviets fought back fiercely and even managed to destroy a number of oil wells. However despite their efforts, the Soviets were eventually overpowered and a majority of the Alaskan oil fields were retaken intact. By late October, a large portion of Alaska had been liberated including Anchorage.
Morale among the ranks of the American Underground Resistance increased considerably as word filtered in from Radio Free America regarding the liberation of Texas, the freeing of the Great Plains, the occupation of a number of Veracruz Coalition countries, and the ongoing campaign to liberate Alaska. Membership in the Resistance grew everyday. The number of attacks against Warsaw Pact troops increased as well. On November 8, 1991, the Soviet Occupational Authority suffered a severe blow when guerrilla fighters from the San Francisco Resistance infiltrated the Soviet Command HQ on Alcatraz Island and assassinated General Vasilij Tatarin in his office.
General Mikael Bulba, who was second-in-command under General Tatarin, immediately assumed command of the Soviet Occupational Authority and vowed that the Resistance would be made to pay for the death of their leader. Under the new commander's directive, Soviet military and KGB forces launched a devastating offensive against the San Francisco Underground. Most Resistance bases in the city had fallen and several hundred rebels had been caught or killed. Thousands of ordinary civilians were also killed and tens of thousand more wounded during the Soviet crackdown. By December, the San Francisco Resistance had been apparently defeated. Soviet KGB officers managed to obtain much needed intelligence on the Resistance throughout northern California despite a last ditch effort by the rebels to destroy said intelligence. As a result, Soviet KGB and East German Stasi officers were able to crackdown on several additional Resistance groups in Eureka, Sacramento, Salinas, Modesto, Placerville, and a number of other U.S. cities and towns.
General Bulba distrusted the East Germans even more then General Tatarin had. In light of the security breach that cost the life of General Tatarin, General Bulba decided that only Soviet military personnel should be stationed on Alcatraz Island. All East German military officers working at the Soviet Command HQ were transferred to join their comrades stationed throughout northern California.
Border disputes between Argentina and Chile eventually went hot as the latter was invaded by the former. In order to gain an edge once again, Angola invaded Botswana in order to outflank the South Africans. European Federal Troops continued their advance into East Germany and had reached the outskirts of West Berlin. Chinese Federation troops had liberated much of their country and even began sending troops into Mongolia, Vietnam, and North Korea. Most of North Korea is under Allied control.
With the Resistance out of the way, the Soviets were now able to focus the majority of their attention on the front. On New Year's Day 1992, Soviet armored forces launched a massive counterattack in Utah. The majority of the attack was directed toward Salt Lake City which currently housed the Command HQ of the Third United States Army. The Soviet plan was to retake the city and crush the leadership of the Third Army. The Americans were able to inflict considerable damage on the attackers however it quickly became apparent that the Russians had the upper hand. Most of the liberated cities in Salt Lake Valley were reoccupied including well over half of Salt Lake City itself. There was even concern among the Joint Chiefs that the Soviets might be able to regain the offensive along the entire North American Front. Despite how bad things appeared to be going, General Norman Schwarzkopf refused to abandon his post despite the fact that staying could very well mean certain death.
Second American Revolution
In late January, Soviet tanks moved closer and closer to General Schwarzkopf's Third Army headquarters. However before they could reach it, the Third Army launched a counterattack against the Soviet positions in Salt Lake Valley. The III Corps spearheaded the assault. Within a week, the Soviets were driven from most of Salt Lake City as well as a number of other cities in the valley. Eventually, the Soviets were forced to retreat from Salt Lake Valley in order to save their remaining heavy units.
The San Francisco Resistance, having recovered from the previous month's defeat, had begun a renewed offensive against the Soviet Occupational Authority in late-January. The Soviet garrison in San Francisco, having believed that the Resistance had been crushed, was caught completely off-guard. More and more citizens joined the Resistance. By the start of February, the Russians found themselves dealing with a city-wide revolution. Fighting quickly spread into Oakland, San Jose, and Santa Rosa despite Soviet efforts to contain the fighting. The Soviets were eventually forced to withdraw from the San Francisco Bay Area after sustaining heavy losses. With San Francisco and most of the Bay Area liberated, the Resistance turned their attention to Alcatraz Island which housed the command hub for the Soviet Occupational Authority. Under the cover of fog, the Resistance launched a full-scale assault on Alcatraz Island and seized control of the Soviet Command HQ.
General Mikael Bulba, who had managed to escape capture, was ordered to return to Moscow to explain his failures to the Politburo. One was the major Soviet defeat in Utah. Another was allowing a "ragtag group of civilians" to take San Francisco from the Soviet Armed Forces. During the questioning, Politburo was shocked upon learning how deep General Bulba's treachery went. It was discovered that then Colonel Bulba used his KGB training to infiltrate the Resistance as "Mr. Jones" with the intention of building up said Resistance into an unwitting tool to murder General Tatarin so he could take his job. The meeting ended with General Bulba being executed personally by General Soshkin as a traitor to the Soviet Union.
General Boris Gromov was appointed to take command of the Soviet Occupational Authority. His first orders were to rally the Soviet Armed Forces to retake San Francisco and then focus their attention on halting any further advance by American military forces. Around the same time, President Bush and the Joint Chiefs knew very well that the Soviets wouldn't let the San Francisco Revolution go unpunished and that a brutal counterattack was inevitable. The Fleet Marine Force, Pacific was scheduled to launch an amphibious assault on Soviet-occupied California in the Spring. However the President and Joint Chiefs ordered that the Marines make preparations to begin the attack early.
Just one day before the Soviet military was to move into the San Francisco Bay Area to restore control, Fleet Marine Force, Pacific launched an amphibious assault on the West Coast. Within a matter of days, the Marines liberated several coastal cities including Santa Cruz, Salinas, Santa Barbara, and most of Los Angeles. Two weeks after the landings, the Marines controlled a beachhead that spanned half the coast of California. The San Francisco Resistance welcomed the Marines with open arms. The Marines helped to fortify San Francisco from further Soviet attacks as well as provide much needed supplies including food, medicine, weapons, etc. Meanwhile, the Third United States Army had liberated Arizona, Utah, Idaho, and most of Nevada. American and Canadian troops continued their liberation campaigns in Alaska and British Columbia. The Soviet Occupational Authority had found themselves fighting a losing battle on three fronts; the ground push from the east, the amphibious assault from the west, and the citizen uprisings throughout the occupied zones. By March, even General Vladimir Soshkin himself realized that there was no hope of a lasting victory in North America and reluctantly ordered a strategic retreat of all Soviet forces in the United States, Canada, and Mexico.
West Berlin was liberated though Warsaw Pact forces had begun pushing the Europeans from southern East Germany. Nearly all Albania has been occupied and European forces have begun to reverse the invasions of Greece and Norway. Nearly all North Korea is occupied and Vietnam was now facing an attack on two fronts. Argentina controlled most of Chile. South Africa and Angola remain locked in a stalemate
Soviet and East German military personnel began the process of evacuation from the U.S. West Coast. Some departed by ship from port cities still under Soviet military control. Others departed by air from cities with operational airports. While the Soviets primarily focused on withdrawal, they did launch a number of limited offensives primarily against Resistance forces contesting for control over smaller coastal cities such as Astoria, Oregon and Crescent City, California. While the Soviets managed to secure their objectives in those locations, they weren't so lucky in the south. The Marines had liberated nearly major ports along the southern Californian coast. San Diego was currently the only major port which could be used to evacuate the Soviet forces in southern California and the U.S. Navy was moving quickly to blockade the area. The American Military and Resistance continued their offensive operations against the Soviet occupation forces with the purpose of inflicting as much damage on them as possible in preparation for possible invasion of the Soviet Union. By late March, the Third United States Army was able to link up with the Fleet Marine Force, Pacific in central California, effectively cutting Soviet forces in California in two. Furthermore, San Diego was blockaded which all but cut off the Soviet withdrawal from the area. US Marines had liberated San Diego by by the start of April. To the north, the Americans and Canadians had reached the Canadian West Coast. In Alaska, the Soviet forces had been pushed into the westernmost areas of the state.
The Soviet KGB and East German Stasi worked at destroying important documents as well as eliminating certain people who they felt wouldn't be in the best interest of the Soviet Union to fall into enemy hands. General Boris Gromov had ordered an end to brutal crackdowns against the Resistance much to the dismay of the KGB and Stasi. However during the first week of April, General Boris Gromov was bitten by a rattlesnake and spent several days recovering in a field hospital in central Oregon. During this time, the commanders of the KGB and Stasi forces in the United States began a very harsh policy against the American people. In addition to shooting Resistance members on sight, the KGB and Stasi launched a brutal campaign against recently liberated American suburban and communities. The attackers made no distinction between military, partisan, and civilian personnel. A number of U.S. military and partisan POWs already in custody were summarily executed. The brief but brutal reign of terror by the KGB and Stasi came to an abrupt end with General Boris Gromov having recovered and resuming command. The KGB and Stasi officers who had taken charge were relieved of their positions for their actions.
As the Soviet hold over the United States and Canada continued to plummet, a popular uprising took place throughout the Mexican People's Republic. In the second week of April, U.S. Army and Marine forces invaded the Baja California Peninsula. In addition to a land invasion from the north, the Marines also launched numerous amphibious assaults along the entire western coast of the peninsula. Ensenada, the capital of the so-called Mexican People's Republic, was occupied just a week into the invasion. Intending to catch a ride with the last group of Soviet troops leaving the country, President Valentín Campa attempted to retreat to Punta Colonet, the only remaining port still controlled by the People's Army. However he was captured by Mexican partisans before he was able to arrive at his destination. The captured president was put to death by firing squad and his body hung from a tree. Less then a week after the execution of President Campa, the Mexican People's Republic surrendered.
In a bid to cut off the Soviet retreat, United States Marines launched a series of amphibious assaults along the West Coast. Soviet forces fought desperately to maintain control over key port cities as long as possible in order to maintain the withdrawal. American air strikes and partisan attacks were ruthlessly launched against the Soviets as they retreated. To further complicate matters for the Russians, the U.S. Pacific Fleet gradually blockaded the West Coast as the Soviet Pacific Fleet had suffered heavy losses. By the second week of May, the Soviets had lost control over nearly the entire coastal area. Seattle, Portland, and other major US cities were also freed from Soviet control. By the third week of May, the entire West Coast had been liberated by the American military. Furthermore, the Russians lost control over nearly every major urban center in the United States. As a result of losing the West Coast, the remaining Soviet forces in the United States were now unable to withdraw.
Despite the dire situation in the United States, General Vladimir Soshkin refused to grant permission from General Boris Gromov to surrender. Instead, Soshkin ordered that all surviving troops in the United States to find a way to break out or die. Despite this order, dozens of isolated Soviet units began to lay down their arms and surrender. Most Soviet troops made a point in surrendering to U.S. military personnel rather then partisans. A few weeks earlier, half a dozen soldiers that had been cut off from their unit had the misfortune to surrender to one of the few more extremist militias in the United States; the soldiers in question suffered very slow and painful executions. Passenger airliners seized by the Soviets during the start of the occupation attempted to airlift troops back to the Soviet Union however most were shot down. On June 5, 1992, Soviet General Boris Gromov defied Soshkin's orders by meeting with U.S. Army General Norman Schwarzkopf, USMC General Walter E. Boomer, and Canadian General Kent Foster to negotiate a surrender. One day after the meeting concluded, the remaining Soviet and East German forces in North America capitulated.
Australian, New Zealander, and Filipino forces continue their invasion of southern Vietnam while Chinese forces push further into northern Vietnam and Laos. The Chinese are able to liberate even more of their territory though in turn the Soviets were able to push back in some areas. Chinese troops also invaded the Indian client state of Tibet. Despite these setbacks, India was bold enough to proclaim a total annexation of occupied Pakistan. Argentina occupied all Chile and officially annexed the Falkland Islands. South Africa continues to slowly lose ground to Angolan forces. In Europe, the frontlines continue to shift, generally equally in favor for both sides. Finland officially joined the Warsaw Pact and joined the war on the side of the Soviet Union. Soviet forces seized control over much of northern Norway including Svalbard. Syria launched a full-scale invasion of Israel however Iraq choose not to take part in the attack.