Zenobius of Florence
Saint Zenobius by Monte di Giovanni
|Venerated in||Roman Catholic Church, Eastern Orthodox Church|
|Major shrine||Santa Maria del Fiore, Florence|
|Attributes||Usually shown in episcopal garb; often shown bringing a dead man or child back to life; flowering tree|
Born of a Florentine noble family, Zenobius was educated by his pagan parents. He came under the influence early of the bishop Theodore, was baptized by him, and succeeded, after much opposition, in bringing his father and mother to Christianity. He embraced the clerical state, and rapidly rose to the position of archdeacon, when his virtues and notable powers as a preacher made him known to Saint Ambrose, at whose instance Pope Damasus I (r. 366–386) called him to Rome, and employed him in various important missions, including a legation to Constantinople. On the death of Damasus he returned to his native city, where he resumed his apostolic labours, and on the death of the bishop of that see, Zenobius, to the great joy of the people, was appointed to succeed him. His deacons are venerated as Saint Eugene and Saint Crescentius. He evangelized Florence and its outskirts completely and combated Arianism.
According to his biographer and successor in the See of Florence, Antonius, he died in his ninetieth year, in 424; but, as Antonius says that Pope Innocent I (d. 417) was at the time pope, the date is uncertain.
There are grounds for believing that he actually died in 417, on 25 May, on which day the ancient tower where he is supposed to have lived, near the Ponte Vecchio, was annually decorated with flowers.
In the back of the middle of the three apses is the altar of Saint Zenobius. Its bronze shrine, designed around 1440, a masterpiece of Ghiberti, contains the urn with his relics. The central relief shows us one of his miracles, the reviving of a dead child. Above this shrine is the painting Last Supper by Giovanni Balducci. There was also a glass-paste mosaic panel The Bust of Saint Zanobius by the 16th century miniaturist Monte di Giovanni, but it is now on display in the Museo dell'Opera del Duomo.
Extraordinary miracles, including several instances of the restoration of the dead to life, are attributed to him. Zenobius is said to have resurrected several dead people. It is also said that after his death, a dead elm burst into life after his body touched it while being borne to the cathedral for burial.
A legend states that a child was once run over by a cart while playing. His mother, a widow, wailed as she brought the dead child to Zenobius' deacon. By means of a prayer, Saint Zenobius revived the child and restored him to his mother.
Zenobius is often depicted with a dead child or man in his arms, or a flowering elm, both in reference to his miracles.
Sandro Botticelli depicted the life and work of Saint Zenobius in four paintings. In the first scene, Zenobius is shown twice: he rejects the bride that his parents intended him to take in marriage and walks thoughtfully away. The other episodes show the baptism of the young Zenobius and his mother, and on the right his ordination as bishop.
Domenico Veneziano, Saint Zenobius Performs a Miracle, 1445.
Saint Zenobius seated with his deacons St. Crescentius and St. Eugenius kneeling at either side. Painting on a pillar in the Duomo Santa Maria del Fiore, Florence.
- Ferguson, George (1961). Signs and Symbols in Christian Art (New York: Oxford University Press), 147.
- This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain: Hunter-Blair, D. O. (1912). "Zenobius, Saint". In Herbermann, Charles. Catholic Encyclopedia. 15. New York: Robert Appleton. pp. 755–756.
|Wikisource has the text of the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia article Saint Zenobius.|
|Wikimedia Commons has media related to Saint Zenobius.|