Girls can make a difference!
The recent Women's March on Washington and marches throughout the nation motivated women of all ages to take action.
Enjoy these true stories about ordinary girls who made an impact and inspire young readers to take action for causes they care about.
When one thinks of girls who have made an impact, Malala Yousafzai is often the first who comes to mind. This large picture book version of the brave Pakistani girl's story and her fight against the Taliban for girls' right to education is my favorite. While nonfiction and sprinkled with direct quotes, it reads like a story, making it perfect for primary grade readers.
Got junk? Think again. This extraordinary story introduces 11-year-old Ada Rios and the orchestra that grows out of the rubbish of Cateura, a small town in Paraguay built on a landfill. The Recycled Orchestra, also known as the Landfill Harmonic, is made up of children playing instruments made from recycled trash and plays around the world, spreading its message of hope and innovation.
Landfill harmonic You can also check out this documentary in Spanish with English subtitles.
This story's main character is Big Red, a bicycle that gets recycled and travels across the globe. When Big Red is outgrown, the bicycle is sent to Burkina Faso in West Africa where it finds a home with Alisetta, who uses it to make a positive impact on her family and those around her. Over time the bicycle finds its way to a young woman named Haridata, who has a new purpose for the bicycle, renamed Le Grand Rouge: delivering medications and bringing sick people to the hospital.
There are several terrific suggestions in the back of the book for projects and a map that shows the distance the bicycle traveled across the Atlantic Ocean.
Also in eBook format.
Written in her own words, this story of how 11-year-old Olivia Bouler raised over $175,000 for the Gulf Coast oil spill recovery will inspire readers of all ages. The book is illustrated with many of the drawings she sent out to raise contributions for the recovery efforts. They are priceless. A 2012 Parents' Choice Award Winner!
This story of how a determined girl lived in an ancient California redwood for two years to save its life is a great introduction to environmental activism. Although activist Hill was in her early 20s when she started her 738-day tree sitting stint, the author purposely depicts Julia "Butterfly" Hill as a young girl to engage younger readers. The story's fascinating narrative and beautiful illustrations are enchanting!
Also in eBook format.