CHESTERFIELD, Mass. — The tender green shoots poking out of the soil of a hilly field here represent the return of a once-common crop that had almost disappeared from the Northeast -- wheat.
Having long ago ceded the title of America's breadbasket to the flat, fertile Midwest, the New England and mid-Atlantic states are witnessing a revival of a wide variety of grain farming, including wheat, rye, barley, oats, and other less common grains.
In a part of the country where dairy farming is the norm, some farmers say they are returning to the region's agricultural roots because of the growing popularity of the local-food, or locavore, movement, which seeks to preserve regional flavors and reduce the environmental impact involved in hauling food hundreds or even thousands of miles.
Contributing to the reappearance of grain farming is the rising price of flour and other food staples, which gives farmers an incentive to try their hands at growing wheat or rye in the stony soil and damp climate of the Northeast. But any hope of profit is years away, they say.
"The wheat we're growing is because we think we should be doing it, not because we're going to make money at it," said Tevis Robertson-Goldberg, 30, who planted his second crop of winter wheat a month ago on a half-acre hillside plot on the 185-acre vegetable farm that he and his wife, Rachel, run here in western Massachusetts.
In the 18th and much of the 19th Century, the Northeast supplied the expanding country with grain, but with the breaking of the rich Midwestern prairie and the introduction of such mechanical innovations as the Chicago-made McCormick reaper, the center of the country quickly became the most productive and efficient grain-growing region in America.
Now, however, the use of petrochemical fertilizers and pesticides and a reliance on just a handful of seed varieties make the Midwest dangerously dependent on an environmentally unsustainable way of farming, many local-food advocates argue. And if one type of widely grown wheat proves susceptible to a new plant disease, the country's food supply could be threatened.
"Growing different varieties in different parts of the country improves your chances of having some that are disease-resistant," said Robertson-Goldberg, who is experimenting with many varieties of "heritage" wheat that haven't been widely grown for decades, and plans to expand his acreage as he masters the intricacies of wheat farming.
With rising global demand pushing up food prices, the advantages of growing food closer to home are becoming obvious, according to Ben Lester, who owns the Wheatberry Bakery and Cafe in Amherst and works with a local farmer who is growing several acres of organic rye and wheat.
"When our first or second bill came in earlier this year with triple the wheat price, we were floored because it's one of our most important ingredients," said Lester, 27, who has started to use locally grown grain in some of his bread and has been encouraged by the enthusiastic response of customers. "We got so many thumbs up and pats on the back that it really propelled us."
The resurrection of Northeastern grain farming is modest so far but seems to be gathering momentum, according to state agricultural agencies. An estimated 1,500 acres of wheat and similar crops are being farmed in Maine and Vermont. That could be as much as triple the acreage of just a few years ago.
"In the beginning, it was just five or six farms, and now we have dozens," said Brent Beidler, a Vermont dairy farmer who added wheat to his operation four years ago and heads a newly formed association of local grain growers. "Diversifying is a good way to spread risks. And it's very empowering to know that you're in charge of a little bit of your own destiny."
Reviving a type of farming means more than simply sowing some seed. The mills that once dotted the land and made it easy for farmers to grind their grain into flour are long gone. Some farmers are setting up their own small milling operations. Lester, the Amherst baker, has a tabletop electric mill that he uses to turn locally grown rye into flour, which he mixes with Canadian wheat flour to make bread.
Other challenges include hilly fields, which make it difficult to use some mechanical equipment; stony soil; and a climate that is wetter than the Midwest, which means that moldy wheat can be a problem.
"It's great growing weather," Roberston-Goldberg said. "It's just not great harvesting weather."
Northeastern farmers and locavores say the heartland is not facing a serious threat to its agricultural dominance. They are simply trying to add an option to the region's food choices.
"One hundred years ago, every community had its own grain products, and there's no reason it shouldn't be that way now," Lester said.