At Natural Balance Foods, we believe that cutting down on fat is an important part of a healthy diet, but we’re also firm believers in the idea of everything in moderation. In fact, we know that some fats can even be good for you! Here is a quick guide to what this means when it comes to finding healthy food to snack on.
Choosing healthy snacks
Nobody wants to be overweight, which is why many of us try to cut down on fat in our diets. Being overweight can cause anything from high blood pressure to diabetes and even heart disease, all of which can be avoided by adopting healthier eating habits. This means choosing more natural foods over snacks such as sweets, crisps, and fried foods, which often contain high levels of fat.
Should all healthy snacks be fat free?
Not necessarily. Whilst it’s good to choose foods that are low in fat, cutting fat altogether is not the best idea. It may sound strange, we actually need some fats to absorb certain nutrients and provide the body with energy. In fact, up to 60% of our brains are actually made from fat! Instead of cutting out fat altogether, we should look more closely at the kind of fat we eat on a daily basis. The main fats to cut down on are saturated and trans fats, both of which can raise cholesterol and increase the risk of heart disease.
So there are good fats and bad fats?
Yes, there are essentially fats that are not so good for you (such as saturated and trans fats), and fats which come from natural foods such as nuts and seeds, which are an important part of any balanced diet (unsaturated fats). These ‘good fat’ foods contain essential fatty acids (EFAs) which you may have heard about, like Omega-3 and Omega-6. Pecans, like the ones used in our cereal bars for example, are known for their unsaturated fats and are renowned for their cholesterol-lowering properties. Great sources of unsaturated fats include:
- Nuts and seeds
- Sunflower and olive oils
What the experts say
If you’re still unsure about good and bad fats, our very own Nutrition expert, Lucy-Ann Prideaux, has a great tip:
“Here is a simple habit you can develop whilst grocery shopping - before anything goes into your trolley or basket, ask yourself, 'What kind of fat is contained in this item?' Is the fat naturally present? Or has a cheap fat been added to it? Give yourself a couple of moments to think about how the food you have chosen will affect your body and your health.”
Looking for healthy snacks?
If you’re after something healthy, low fat and natural which counts towards your 5 a day, why not try these yummy snacks from our range:
- Nākd Flavoured Raisins have 0% fat free and are made with only natural flavourings
- Trek Berry Burst is 98% fat free, packed full of protein and also counts as two of your 5 a day
- Nākd Pecan Pie is packed full of cholesterol lowering pecans and delicious almonds, counts as one of your 5 a day and is gluten, wheat and dairy free!