The ultimate measure of a man is not where he stands in moments of comfort and convenience, but where he stands at times of challenge and controversy. – Martin Luther King, Jr.
Martin Luther King, Jr. was assassinated April 4, 1968, shortly after he started speaking out
against the global elite and the injustice they inflict on all of humanity though orchestrated wars and economic oppression. He believed that “a nation that continues year after year to spend more money on military defense than on programs of social uplift is approaching spiritual death.”
While King may not physically be with us today, we are fortunate that he left us with powerful principles and tools for defeating tyranny. King, Gandhi and many others have set the precedent for our liberation, proving that courage, love, persistence, and some simple tools are ultimately victorious.
In fact, the tools and principles utilized by King are so powerful that they rocked the foundation of the global elite’s power structure. As Andrew Gavin Marshall writes:
When Martin Luther King began speaking about more than race, and openly criticized the entire social structure of empire and economic exploitation, not simply of blacks, but of all people around the world and at home, he posed too great a threat to the oligarchy to tolerate him any longer. It was at this point that the National Security State
chose to assassinate Martin Luther King, and the philanthropies greatly expanded their financing of the Civil Rights Movement to ensure that it would be led in their desired direction.
Hatred for King by the elite’s agents in government intensified after he publicly identified the U.S. government as “the greatest purveyor of violence in the world today.” The FBI and U.S military kept King under 24-hour surveillance, and agents had infiltrated the civil rights movement. Therefore, the elites were aware of King’s Poor People’s Campaign for Washington D.C., where King planned to shut down the nation’s capital in the spring of 1968 through massive civil disobedience until the government agreed to combat economic inequality in the United States rather than drop bombs on Vietnam.
On December 8, 1999, in the wrongful death lawsuit filed by the King Family, a jury composed of six white and six black people deliberated less than three hours to find that Loyd Jowers (who confessed on television in 1999) and others “including governmental agencies,” were parties to the conspiracy to assassinate Martin Luther King, Jr. During closing argument, King family attorney William Pepper stated: “When Martin King opposed the war, when he rallied people to oppose the war, he was threatening the bottom lines of some of the largest defense contractors in this country. This was about money. He was threatening the weapons industry, the hardware, the armaments industries, that would all lose as a result of the end of the war.”
All Americans would be well advised to review the evidence
that was presented at the trial.
Now we shall examine Martin Luther King, Jr.’s principles and tools for restoring freedom in greater detail, committing them to memory by applying them with action each day.
Principles to Defeat the New World Order
In his eloquent speeches, King often quoted great philosophers. It was Aristotle that said, “courage is the first of human qualities because it is the quality that guarantees the others.” Everything we do requires a particular degree of courage
, whether it be interviewing for a job, asking for a date, playing a sport, or resisting a global fascist oligarchy. Fear prevents us reaching our potential and accomplishing what is most important. “Cowards die many times before their deaths, the valiant never taste death but once.” Every time fear prevents us from doing what our conscience tells us we must, we suffer a spiritual defeat which, if not remedied, can lead to habitual cowardice and spiritual death. “A coward is incapable of exhibiting love; it is the prerogative of the brave.”
King realized that agape love is essential to bring about positive social change. Agape love is simply redemptive good will for all men and women. If you truly love your spouse, children, family friends, neighbors, and humanity itself, you will take action to reverse mankind’s incremental enslavement. An important aspect is telling others the truth, even when the truth is not pleasant to hear. Agape love also requires that you not allow yourself to hate the global elite and their agents despite their history of unspeakable crimes against humanity. “Darkness cannot drive out darkness: only light can do that. Hate cannot drive out hate: only love can do that.” Of course, agape love does not imply that the global elite should not be arrested, tried by an impartial jury, convicted, and imprisoned for their crimes.
The Civil Rights Movement would not have been successful without perseverance. Perseverance means moving steadily towards an important goal in spite of difficulties and obstacles. Martin Luther King Jr.
worked towards equality, justice and equal rights from the early 1950s until his assassination in 1968, which he foresaw. King and other activists faced being sprayed with high-power fire hoses, police dogs, arrest, prison, beatings, court injunctions, and death threats. The King family home was even bombed on January 30, 1956. When he arrived home to his bombed house, King walked onto the front porch and calmed the crowd of his angry supporters:
I did not start this boycott. I was asked by you to serve as your spokesman. I want it to be known the length and breadth of this land that if I am stopped, this movement will not stop. If I am stopped, our work will not stop. For what we are doing is right. What we are doing is just. And God is with us.
Tools That Defeat All Forms of Tyranny
The hope of a secure and livable world lies with disciplined nonconformists who are dedicated to justice, peace, and brotherhood. – Martin Luther King, Jr.
King valued education and spent much of his time teaching others in the Civil Rights Movement. As Thomas Jefferson said, “if a nation expects to be ignorant and free, in a state of civilization, it expects what never was and never will be.” Therefore, we must educate ourselves and others on the fact that wealthy individuals
and private organizations like the Council on Foreign Relations
are primarily responsible for government policy. Most importantly, we must escape the false left-right paradigm
(Democrat vs. Republican) which is nothing more than a divide-and-conquer strategy implemented by the global elite.
Martin Luther King stated that, “
one has not only a legal, but a moral responsibility to obey just laws. Conversely, one has a moral responsibility to disobey unjust laws.” Rosa Parks refused to comply with the law requiring her to give-up her seat on the bus. Sit-ins
were an integral part of the non-violent strategy of civil disobedience and mass protests that eventually led to passage of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, which ended legally-sanctioned racial segregation in the United States.
Much like past civil rights activists refused to submit to unjust and immoral laws, we must refuse to comply with laws and administrative dictates that reduce us to serfs. We must refuse to be radiated by airport naked body scanners
. We must refuse to be groped and fondled
by government agents, in violation of the 4th Amendment and natural unalienable rights, when there is no probable cause or even reasonable suspicion of criminal activity. We must refuse to allow our naïve young men and women to join the military, so that the global elite cannot use them as pawns
to conquer practically defenseless third-world countries
to steal natural resources for profit
. We must refuse to allow three-year-old children to be strip-searched in public by mindless drones
, while adult men and women stand by immobile. We must refuse to let government forcibly medicate us into submission by fluoridating the public water supply
. We must refuse to give our kids vaccines loaded with toxic levels of mercury, aluminum, and squalene
. We must refuse to allow low-level drug offenders to be incarcerated at taxpayer expense while the government traffics narcotics
. You can think of many other things that you should not tolerate as well.
On December 1, 1955, Rosa Parks was arrested for refusing to give-up her seat due to her skin color and move to the back of a public bus. The Montgomery Bus Boycott, led by Martin Luther King, Jr. and others followed, lasting 385 days. The boycott campaign ended with a U.S. District Court ruling in Browder v. Gayle that ended racial segregation on all Montgomery public buses.
Boycotts can be successful today as well. We must refuse to do business with companies that donate money to ‘think-tanks,’ tax free foundations, and false charities that strategize how to take our money while enslaving us. Furthermore, why support a bank that made huge profits making bad loans through the fractional reserve banking scam
, only to later be bailed out by taxpayers? It should be noted that by some estimates the four largest banks
make up 55 percent of U.S. banking assets.
We must boycott credit cards in favor of cash because their high interest rates are usury, and using them promotes the cashless society control grid, where a record of all of your transactions is kept so that companies and the government can monitor and predict your behavior. Make no mistake, mortgage and credit card debt is the modern form of slavery. Special laws have been passed to allow banks and credit card companies to charge absurdly high interest rates.
Protests and Marches
“He who passively accepts evil is as much involved in it as he who helps perpetrate it. He who accepts evil without protesting against it is really cooperating with it.” King led many marches and protests on his quest for equality, most notably the Albany movement (1961), Birmingham campaign (1963), and the march on Washington (1963). Today, organizing a peaceful march, protest, or meetup is easier than ever thanks to online meet-up groups and social networking.
While peaceful protests and marches are effective in attracting public attention important issues, it must be noted that there are obstacles
to organizing large demonstrations. First, similar to the FBI falsely labeling King as a communist and wire-tapping his phone, the government may label you a “domestic extremist” and put you on a watch list
. Second, the city where you want to have the protest may violate your Fist Amendment by requiring you to obtain a permit, or telling you that you may only protest in a free speech zone
. Third, as King’s movement was infiltrated
by people he trusted, your march or protest will be infiltrated by undercover law enforcement
, modern day Judas Iscariots, or, at worse, agents provocateur
and black-bloc (government sponsored) anarchists
Unfortunately, King did not have the access to the power and efficiency of email. On the other hand, we must utilize it each week by emailing our contacts the best articles for exposing the New World Order from the many great sites and blogs exposing the agenda. Our future economic health, safety, and survival depends on us educating our friends and families about the Chinese-like totalitarian policies that the globalists intend to implement. If you do not inform your friends and family, who will?
Every weekend each peace/truth activist should deliver at least 50 to 100 flyers to front doors in their neighborhood. The flyers should contain the “real news” and links to trustworthy alternative news sites. If just 10,000 people distribute 100 flyers every weekend, 49 weeks per year, we will reach 49,000,000 people each year (10,000 people x 100 flyers x 49 weeks). Distributing 100 flyers takes less than an hour and black and white copies are inexpensive.
Martin Luther King, Jr. stated that “injustice anywhere is a threat to justice everywhere.” Jury nullification occurs when a jury returns a verdict of “Not Guilty” despite its belief that the defendant is guilty of the violation charged. The jury in effect nullifies a law that it believes is either immoral or wrongly applied. In the United States, jury nullification
first appeared in the pre-Civil War era when juries sometimes refused to convict for violations of the Fugitive Slave Act. Later, during alcohol prohibition, juries often nullified alcohol control laws, possibly as often as 60% of the time. Should juries nullify laws pertaining to speeding, drug use, tax laws, refusing to be drafted during times of war?
“State nullification is the idea that the states can and must refuse to enforce unconstitutional federal laws.” This power is granted to the states by the Tenth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution. “The powers not delegated to the United States by the Constitution, nor prohibited by it to the States, are reserved to the States respectively, or to the people.” In short state and local governments should not assist the federal government in enforcing unconstitutional federal laws.
“We know through painful experience that freedom is never voluntarily given by the oppressor; it must be demanded by the oppressed.” We must demand our freedom now and use the tools listed above to peaceably bring it into existence. Martin Luther King, Jr. broke silence,
and the Civil Rights Movement set the precedent. Just as the globalists have spent many years implementing their plans to enslave mankind in debt and fear of war, our victory will not be gained overnight. Each individual that desires freedom must be the change that he or she wants to see in the world. Once our freedom is obtained, it must be vigilantly guarded, as the masters of deception always quickly regroup when defeated. But rest assured, by all of us who desire true freedom, following King’s example in our local communities, the banking and corporate sowers of inequity will lose their control over humanity.
When our days become dreary with low-hovering clouds of despair, and when our nights become darker than a thousand midnights, let us remember that there is a creative force in this universe, working to pull down the gigantic mountains of evil, a power that is able to make a way out of no way and transform dark yesterdays into bright tomorrows. Let us realize the arc of the moral universe is long but bends towards justice.
Ethan Jacobs, J.D. is a licensed California attorney with a B.A. in Political Science. His passion is researching and writing about a wide range of issues, hoping to raise public awareness.
 Martin Luther King, Jr. Wikipedia Online Encyclopedia. http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Martin_Luther_King,_Jr.
 Andrew Gavin Marshall. The American Oligarchy, Civil Rights and the Murder of Martin Luther King. Global Research.
 Jim Douglass. The Martin Luther King Conspiracy Exposed in Memphis. Probe Magazine (Spring 2000)
 Aristotle. Nicomachean Ethics. http://www.constitution.org/ari/ethic_00.htm
 William Shakespeare. Julius Ceasar. Act II, Scene ii. http://www.infoplease.com/spot/shakespearequotes3.html
 Mohandas Gandhi. BrainyQuote.com, 2010. http://www.brainyquote.com/quotes/quotes/m/mohandasga164233.html
 Martin Luther King Jr. The Power of Non-Violence. June 4, 1957. http://teachingamericanhistory.org/library/index.asp?document=1131
 Martin Luther King Jr. Strength to Love (1963). http://www.mlkonline.net/quotes.html
 January 30, 1956 – Martin Luther King Jr.’s Home was Bombed. January 1, 2009.
 Martin Luther King , Jr. Letter from a Birmingham Jail (1963)
 Martin Luther King Jr. Stride Toward Freedom. A Testament of Hope: p. 429. (1958).
 Martin Luther King, Jr. Wikipedia. Ibid.
 Martin Luther King, Jr. Letter from a Birmingham Jail (1963).
 Doug Linder. Jury Nullification (2001). http://www.law.umkc.edu/faculty/projects/ftrials/zenger/nullification.html
 Thomas E. Woods, Jr. Nullification: How to Resist Federal Tyranny in the 21st Century. Regnery Press. (June 28, 2010)
 Martin Luther King, Jr. Letter from a Birmingham Jail (1963)
 A quote attributed to Mohandas Ghandi.
 Martin Luther King Jr. Where Do We Go From Here? Address to the Southern Christian Leadership (1967).