In today’s world many fruits and vegetables that used to be hard to get are at many stores now and that’s something I’m happy about. Stores need more healthy options, not more junk food. Mother nature is the best source for what our bodies need.
So lets look at the health benefits of mangoes. Thanks to the website healthyeating.sfgate.com for the information below. It’s much appreciated.
1. Mangoes are low-fat, low-calorie and cholesterol free.
2. Mangoes are a great source of vitamin A. A single cup of sliced, raw mango provides 89 micrograms of vitamin A. This amount fulfills about 13 percent of the U.S. Department of Agriculture’s recommended daily allowance of vitamin A for an adult woman and nearly 10 percent of the RDA of vitamin A for a man. Vitamin A benefits the body by promoting the health of the skin, immune system and eyes and by supporting cell differentiation and reproduction. Adequate vitamin A intake may lower your risk of cancer, cataracts and age-related macular degeneration. Vitamin A is fat-soluble and should be eaten along with a healthy source of dietary fat.
3. Mangoes are a great source of vitamin C. Mangoes contain 60 milligrams of vitamin C per cup of slices, which supplies 80 percent of a woman’s daily vitamin C needs and 66 percent of a man’s. Consuming plenty of vitamin C-rich foods like mangoes may decrease your risk of cancer, high blood pressure, osteoarthritis and heart disease. Vitamin C is also vital for maintaining the health of the bones, skin and blood vessels. The vitamin C content in mangoes decreases when the fruit is exposed to light, heat and air.
4. Harvard University Health Services reports that half of a small, peeled mango contains nearly 3 grams of dietary fiber, or between 8 and 11 percent of the RDA of fiber for adult men and women. Mangoes are rich in both soluble and insoluble fiber. High soluble fiber intake may help prevent elevated blood cholesterol and diabetes, while eating plenty of insoluble fiber can regulate bowel movements. A 2009 “Nutrition Reviews” article adds that people who eat fiber-rich foods regularly may also be less likely to suffer from stroke, obesity, heart disease, cancer, hypertension and ulcers.
5. In 2007, a study conducted by Brazilian researchers examined the antioxidant content of four popular varieties of mangoes: Palmer, Haden, Uba and Tommy Atkins. The scientists determined that, while the different types contained slightly different concentrations of antioxidants, all were good sources of beta-carotene and polyphenols. Another study, published in “Acta Horticulturae,” confirmed that the most common varieties of mangoes in the United States are all good sources of beta-carotene. The American Dietetic Association advises that eating foods rich in antioxidants like beta-carotene and polyphenols can help prevent diabetes, heart disease, cancer and neurodegenerative disorders like Alzheimer’s disease and dementia.
As you can see mangoes are a healthy choice and should be included in your diet. I love mangoes and you should too.
Check out these recipes containing mangoes.