Australasia's most used educational website, including Kawhia School's! It is the next generation in learning, helping our students learn maths and improve their results. Mathletics covers the full Year 1-13 maths curriculum.
Tutpup's aim is to provide simple, fun, competitive games that help children learn and gain confidence with Maths, English and other key skills and knowledge.
- Ngata Maori Dictionary
Bidirectional, single-word translation between Māori and English with sentence examples.
- Te Ara - The Encyclopedia of New Zealand
The Encyclopedia of New Zealand
Librarians from all over New Zealand are available each week day between 1:00 pm and 6:00 pm to help you search online. To use AnyQuestions.co.nz you have to be attending a New Zealand primary, intermediate, secondary school or be home schooled.
E wātea ana he kaitiaki pukapuka puta noa i Aotearoa ia rā i waenganui i te 2:00 pm me te 3:00 pm ki te awhi i ōu rapunga ā-ipurangi. Kia āhei tō whakamahi i UiaNgāPātai.co.nz ko tōna tikanga kei te kuraina tonu koe i tētahi kura tuatahi o Aotearoa, kura takawaenga, kura tuarua, kei te kāinga rānei koe e kuraina ana.
Providing educators and students access to the highest quality practices and resources in literacy.
- Dance Mat Typing
Welcome to Dance Mat Typing, an introduction to touch typing for children aged 7 - 11 years.
Each of the 4 levels are divided into 3 stages. Begin at Level 1 and build up your skills gradually through to Level 4.
- Kēmū Pāngarau
Tākarohia ēnei kēmū pāngarau tino mīharo rawa atu, hei whakapakari ake i tō maumaharatanga ki ngā meka matua.
- Maths Games
Play these exciting mathematic games to improve your basic fact recall.
- Te Kete Ipurangi (TKI) – The Online Learning Centre
Kia ora, welcome to Te Kete Ipurangi (TKI) – The Online Learning Centre. TKI is a bilingual portal and web community which provides quality-assured educational material for teachers, school managers, and the wider education community. It is an initiative of the Ministry of Education.
- Te Kete Ipurangi
Kia ora, nau mai ki Te Kete Ipurangi The Online Learning Centre. Ko TKI he pae tukutuku reorua he hapori hoki e whakarato ana i ngā rauemi mātauranga, me te painga kua kīia taurangihia, ki te hunga kaiako, ngā kaiwhakahaere kura me te hapori mātauranga whānui hoki. He kaupapa tēnei nā te Tāhuhu o te Mātauranga i tīmata.
directory has been created with Kiwi children in mind and is safe,
manageable, educational, high-interest, has visual appeal and showcases
NZ. It can be used to research class & homework curriculum topics as
well as children's hobbies and interests. There is a special link for
Teachers and one for Librarians.
- Write like Leonardo da Vinci
Type in a word or phrase (without punctuation) and we will make it look like it might have, if Leonardo had written it....