The Chhattisgarh State was formed as per the Madhya
Pradesh Reorganization Act 2000. The President of India
gave his consent to this Act on the 25th August 2000.
The Government of India subsequently set the first day of
November 2000 as the day on which the State of Madhya
Pradesh would be bifurcated into State of Chhattisgarh and
State of Madhya Pradesh.
Chhattisgarh State Electricity Board was formed in
accordance with the Section 5 of the Electricity Supply Act
1948 as per the Notification published in the gazette of the
Government of Chhattisgarh dated 15th November 2000.
Chhattisgarh State Electricity Board (CSEB) became
functional w.e.f. 01.12.2000.
Chhattisgarh State Electricity Board (CSEB) has been
reorganized into following five companies by the Govt. of
Chhattisgarh vide Notification dated 19.12.2008 in accordance
with the provisions contained in the Electricity Act 2003:
1. The Chhattisgarh State Power Holding Company
Limited 2. The Chhattisgarh
State Power Generation Company Limited
3. The Chhattisgarh State Power Transmission Company
4. The Chhattisgarh State Power Distribution
5. The Chhattisgarh State Power Trading
Prime mover coupled
Prime mover is driven
such asburning of
fuel , pressure
of water, force of wind
gain. The steamturb
l energy of theturbin
gain. The steamturb
l energy of theturbinA generating station which converts heat energy of coal
combustioninto electrical energy is known as a steam power
Steam is produced in the boiler by utilizing the heat of
coalcombustion. The steam is then expanded in the steam
turbine and iscondensed in a condenser to be fed into the boiler
again. The steamturbine drives the alternator which converts
mechanical energy of theturbine into electrical energy.
COAL HANDLING PLANT
CHP follows three coal paths:
1.PathA-from track hopper to bunkers
2.PathB-from track hopper to stockyard.
3.Path C-from stockyard to bunker .
Source of coal = Dipka Mines (Chhatisgarh)
Location of source= Korba (Chhatisgarh)
Distance of source from plant= 15kms
Type of coal= B grade
Coal requirement= 25,000 MT/Day
A boiler is closed vessel in which water is converted into steam by
utilisingtheheat of coal combustion.
Steam boilers are broadly classified into following two types:(a) Water
(b) Fire tube boilersIn a water tube boiler, water flows through the tubes
and the hot gases of combustion flow over these tubes. Water-tube
boilers are used for high-pressure boilers.
Figure-water tube boiler
Superheater is a component of a steam-generating unit in
which steam, after it has left the boiler drum, is heat
above its saturation temperature.
The amount of superheat added to the steam is influenced
by the location, arrangement, and amount of superheater
surface installed, as well as the rating of the boiler
Superheaters are classified as convection , radiant or
combination of these.
Reheater is also steam boiler component in which heat is
added to this intermediate-pressure steam, which has given up
some of its energy in expansion through the high-pressure
turbine. The steam after reheating is used to rotate the second
steam turbine where the heat is converted to mechanical energy.
Steam after rotating steam turbine comes to condenserSteam after rotating steam turbine comes to condenser
which condenses the steam at the exhaust of turbine.
It creates a very low pressure at the exhaust of turbine, this
helps in converting heat energy of steam into mechanical
energy in the prime mover.
The condensed steam can be used as feed water to the
In so doing, the latent heat of steam is given out inside theIn so doing, the latent heat of steam is given out inside the
condenser .condenser .
The condensate water after condensation is initially at high
temperature. This hot water is passed to cooling towers. It is
a tower in which atmospheric air circulates in direct or indirect
contact with warmer water and the water is thereby cooled.
Water, acting as the heat-transfer fluid, gives up heat to
atmospheric air, and thus cooled, is recirculated through the
A chimney is a system for venting hot flue
gases or smoke from a boiler, stove, furnace or fireplace to
the outside atmosphere. They are typically almost vertical to
ensure that the hot gases flow smoothly, drawing air into
the combustion through the chimney effect.
It is a device which removes dust or other finely divided
particles from flue gases by charging the particles inductively
with an electric field, then attracting them to highly charged
An alternator is an electromechanical device that converts
mechanical energy to alternating current electrical energy.
Most alternators use a rotating magnetic field. Any AC
generator can be called an alternator, but usually the word
refers to small rotating machines driven by automotive and
other internal combustion engines.
An turbo generator is coupled to a steam turbine and
convertsmechanical energy of the turbine into electrical
Switchyard is considered as theHEART of power plant.
It is a junction , which carries the generated power to its
It is basically an open area where many differentkind of outdoor
equipments are located. eg: busbars ,transformers , circuit
Switch yards can be of 400KV, 132KV.