Is it the end of the world as we know it? Not yet, but we are two minutes closer.
The Bulletin of Atomic Scientists reset the hands of the "Doomsday Clock" on Thursday, ticking two minutes closer to the ultimate demise of the human race.
As of Thursday, the clock was set at three minutes to midnight. Since January 2012, the hands of the clock had been set at five minutes to midnight. The minute hand moved forward, for the first time in three years, due to rising nuclear concerns and increasingly dire climate science findings.
"The possibility of global catastrophe is really very high," said Kennette Benedict of the Bulletin of Atomic Sciences. "The choice is ours and the clock is ticking."
— BulletinOfTheAtomic (@BulletinAtomic) January 22, 2015
The clock is set at the further level since 1984, the height of the Cold War, making the current status the second closest the world has been to midnight in the 68 years of the clock. The only time it was moved closer was when the Soviet Union began work on a hydrogen bomb in 1953.
The lack of progress in nuclear disarmament and U.S. and Russian in modern nuclear weaponry makes nuclear disaster an ongoing threat, according to Benedict.
Now nuclear war is not the only concern on the minds of the scientists behind the clock. Climate change threats are playing an increasing role in how the clock is set.
"Human influence on the climate system is clear," said Richard Somerville of Bulletin of Atomic Scientists, speaking during the briefing, "Each of the last three decades has been successively warmer than any preceding on record."
The warmest year on record globally was 2014, and 14 of the 15 warmest years on record have all occurred since the year 2000.
A poll taken before the clock was set on Thursday revealed that 73 percent of the public believed the hands should be moved closer to midnight, while 27 percent felt the hands should be adjusted further from the moment of doom.
The Bulletin of Atomic Scientists was founded in 1945 by scientists who helped develop the first atomic weapons in the Manhattan Project. The group subsequently created the Doomsday Clock in 1947, using midnight to symbolize apocalypse and the countdown to zero to convey threats to humanity and the planet.
"Climate change and increasing concerns about nuclear weapons are the main factors influencing the decision about any additional adjustment that may be made to the Doomsday Clock," said the Bulletin of Atomic Scientists in a statement ahead of the announcement.
The decision to move the minute-hand of the Doomsday Clock is made by the Bulletin's Board of Directors in consultation with its Board of Sponsors, which includes 17 Nobel Laureates. The clock has become a universally recognized indicator of the world's vulnerability to catastrophe from nuclear weapons, climate change and emerging technologies in the life sciences.