The IB Middle Years Programme aims to develop internationally-minded people who are striving to become...
Their natural curiosity is nurtured. They acquire the skills necessary to conduct constructive inquiry and research, and become independent active learners. They actively enjoy learning and this love of learning will be sustained throughout their lives.
They explore concepts, ideas and issues which have global relevance and importance. In so doing, they acquire, and are able to make use of, a significant body of knowledge across a range of disciplines.
They exercise initiative in applying thinking skills critically and creatively to approach complex problems and make reasoned decisions.
They understand and express ideas and information confidently and creatively in more than one language and in a variety of modes of communication.
They approach unfamiliar situations with confidence and forethought, and have the independence of spirit to explore new roles, ideas and strategies. They are courageous and articulate in defending those things in which they believe.
They have a sound grasp of the principles of moral reasoning. They have integrity, honesty, a sense of fairness and justice and respect for the dignity of the individual.
They show empathy, compassion and respect towards the needs and feelings of others. They have a personal commitment to action and service to make a positive difference to the environment and to the lives of others.
Through an understanding and appreciation of their own culture, they are open to the perspectives, values and traditions of other individuals and cultures and are accustomed to seeking and considering a range of points of view.
They understand the importance of physical and mental balance and personal well-being for themselves and others. They demonstrate perseverance and self-discipline.
They give thoughtful consideration to their own learning and personal development. They are able to analyze their strengths and weaknesses in a constructive manner.