Learning To Learn
Introduction to the STRIPE approach
The main aim of the L2L programme in Years 7 and 8, and the Pathways options in Year 9, is to
explicitly focus on specific ‘life skills’ that will be needed when our students leave school. We have
adopted the Personal Learning and Thinking Skills (PLTS) approach to L2L and we draw everything
together using the STRIPE acronym:
Self-management (of my own learning)
Reflecting (on my own learning)
Enquiring learning (finding things out for myself)
From September 2012, Year 7 tutors will focus on developing each student’s self-awareness of
their personal aspirations, their own values as a learner and an understanding of their independent
learning ‘habits’. For example, some students aspire to be rich and famous footballers and others
have less specific aspirations; some are motivated by a love of learning and others learn in order
to please their teachers or in order to get a particular job.
Learning habits include when, where and how students choose to complete their independent learning (outside lesson time) and we will discuss specific approaches to memorising information and study skills that match each learner’s personal preferences. We also help students to identify personal barriers to their learning, such as too much time spent on computer games or staying up too late at night. There will be a large emphasis on Teamwork (learning to work with others).
Learning to Learn in Year 8 will also be delivered by tutors and we will build-upon the self-awareness
developed during Year 7.
In Year 9, students opt for a Pathway of their own choice; in essence, time spent each week in an area of particular interest to them, in order to further broaden and deepen their personal (STRIPE) skills across the year. Year 9 Pathways running in the 2012-13 academic year will be Art (two Pathways), Drama, Music, Scientific Investigations and Sports Leadership.
All staff are regularly updated with the current focus areas in L2L sessions in order to reinforce
the STRIPE approach to developing in every one of our students an understanding that we are all
individuals when it comes to learning; we all have our relative strengths and areas for development.
Understanding where our own relative weaknesses lie, we are better prepared for whatever life
throws at us – whether this is examinations, University or the world of work.