What is the 'Milwaukee protocol'?
The Milwaukee protocol is an experimental treatment that was developed in 2004 and saved the life of an unvaccinated teenager infected with rabies. The treatment involves placing the infected person u…
Are mosquito-borne illnesses contagious?
Mosquito-borne illnesses cannot pass directly from person to person; they must be transmitted by a mosquito. In rare cases, blood-to-blood contact can transmit a mosquito-borne illness from one person…
How common is traveller's diarrhoea?
Traveller's diarrhoea is very common, with an estimated 40 million cases worldwide every year.
What are the symptoms of motion sickness?
The most common symptoms of motion sickness are dizziness, sickness and nausea. However, other symptoms may include vomiting, sweating, headache, tiredness and loss of colour in the face. In most case…
What increases the chances of developing tuberculosis?
Exposure to people with tuberculosis increases the chances of developing the disease. There are certain areas in the world where tuberculosis is more common. Also, a weakened immune system puts a pers…
How is MERS diagnosed?
A doctor may give a tentative diagnosis of MERS based on the person's clinical symptoms and their history (travel, contact with infected people, etc.). A definite diagnosis relies on laboratory tests …
Is frostbite dangerous?
Frostbite causes permanent damage to the affected area or limb. For example, it can result in the loss of the use of your fingers, hands, toes, feet, or tissue loss.
What causes malaria?
Malaria is usually contracted by the bite of an infected anopheles mosquito. As malaria parasites are transmitted through the blood, infection can also occur when blood is exchanged between two people…
Who gets tuberculosis?
Anyone can catch tuberculosis. People at risk of developing active disease are people with weak immune systems, such as people infected with HIV.
Can I be reinfected with yellow fever?
If you are vaccinated against yellow fever, or have recovered from a past yellow fever infection, you are protected from being reinfected.
How is hepatitis A transmitted?
The hepatitis A virus spreads via the oral-faecal route, often through food and water that is contaminated with human bodily waste.