1. Felix Hernandez - No room to argue here - "King Felix" is the best pitcher in Mariners history. He spent 15 seasons in Seattle and was a fan favorite the entire time. He won the Cy Young Award in 2010 and was an All-Star six times. Hernandez is the Mariners' all-time leader in strikeouts, wins, and innings pitched.

2. Randy Johnson - Johnson played nine seasons at the start of his career with the Mariners, he is one of the greatest pitchers of all time. His youth and incredible size and pitching speed were combined with bouts of wildness in his first seasons. He was must-see television every start. He won the Cy Young Award in 1995 and 1997 and was an All-Star five times while a Mariner. More importantly, he was a pivotal piece of the 1995 team that was the first Mariners squad to make the postseason.

3. Jamie Moyer - Moyer spent 11 seasons with the Mariners and won 145 games. It's amazing to think that the second-most-winning pitcher in franchise history is known more for consistency and preparation than "stuff". He threw slowly and deliberately with a knack for driving opponents crazy. He had two 20-win seasons and was an All-Star in 2003. He finished top 10 in Cy Young voting three times. Moyer also pitched a no-hitter for the Mariners in 1996.

4. Mark Langston - Langston spent six seasons with the Mariners and was an All-Star in all six seasons. He had 1,074 strikeouts in 1,062 innings pitched with the team. Langston's dominance on the mound helped set the tone for the Mariners in the late 1980s and early 1990s. Plus, when he was finally traded the team received Randy Johnson as part of the package. A gift that kept on giving!

5. Hisashi Iwakuma - Iwakuma is a bit of an under-the-radar selection given that he only played six years with the team. However, he had some incredible seasons with the team, including a 2013 campaign that saw him finish 3rd in Cy Young voting. His effort and loyalty to the team are fondly remembered during what was generally a dark period for the franchise.
