Fever, also known pyrexia is a febrile response to an underlying medical condition in the body. Fever is not always bad. Many times it is the way by which the body eliminates bacteria and viruses which cause the underlying conditions.
Fever Temperature: Chart, Range
The normal body temperature is considered as 37° C (98.6° F) although it can vary due to different reasons. For instance, body temperatures taken at different locations of the body vary slightly. Oral temperature may be higher than the rectal temperature. The normal body temperature range for babies is between 96.8°F to 98.6°F (36°C to 37°C), for children is 96.8-98.24°F, which is almost the same as for adults. Keep a chart handy of these ranges so that you can refer to them when you or your child develops a fever. A baby who has a fever within the range of 100.4°F to 101.3°F is considered to have high fever and medical intervention should be sought immediately.
Rise in body temperature is the most common symptom of fever. Other symptoms of fever depend upon the underlying factors that cause fever. An oral temperature of 102 F should be considered fairly high. Hallucination, irritability and confusion may be caused due to high fever between 103 F to 106 F. Sweating, dehydration, headache, muscle aches, lack of appetite, burning eyes, general weakness and shivering are some other symptoms of fever.
Fever Symptoms: Symptoms in adults, but no fever
There are times when there are fever symptoms in adults but no fever appears. If you suffer from any of the symptoms listed above, but do not develop a fever, you should contact your doctor who will then recommend more tests to diagnose what the actual cause of the problem is. It is important to do so, even if you feel better, so as to avoid any health problems later on. It could be that you had a bacterial infection that has not yet cleared up completely. There is also a chance that you could have developed SEPSIS.
Fever in Children: When to Worry – Rheumatic Fever
Parents need not worry whenever their child’s temperature rises a little. A fever is generally due to a viral infection and is the body’s response to fighting this infection. What parents should remember that fever is a symptom of an underlying problem and not a disease itself. A low grade fever of about 99-100°F is not really a cause for alarm. If you are a parent, and wonder when to worry about your child’s fever, it should be when the fever rises above this temperature. Children can also suffer from rheumatic fever. This type of fever occurs two to four weeks after a strep throat infection. It is caused by a delayed reaction of the autoimmune system. Symptoms include inflammation of the heart, joint inflammation, a rash or bumps under the skin.
Viral Fever Symptoms: In Toddlers, Treatment
Toddlers and children are more prone to viral fever than adults. Viral fever symptoms in toddlers are difficult to understand as very often the child is unable to express himself. However, these symptoms could include fatigue, a cough, irritability, a skin rash, sore throat, loss of appetite, increased thirst, a nasal congestion, redness in the eyes, a runny nose, lethargy, sensitivity to light and so on. Treatment of viral fever in toddlers could be any one of the following home remedies:-
• Keeping the toddler in cool and comfortable clothes
• Applying an ice pack or a cold compress to the forehead
• Sponging the toddler down so as to bring the temperature down and so on.
Fever and Chills: After tooth extraction, In Adults
A tooth extraction is the removal of the tooth from its socket in the bone. Fever and chills are two symptoms that could be experienced in adults after a tooth extraction, due to complications such as bleeding, nerve damage or an infection. Call your dentist immediately if you experience these symptoms along with uncontrolled bleeding, redness and trouble swallowing. These could be signs of an infection. Your dentist will have to examine you and might prescribe antibiotics to treat the infection.
Typhoid Fever Symptoms: In Children, and Treatment
Typhoid fever symptoms in children develop gradually and often appear only 1-3 weeks after they have been exposed to the disease. Common symptoms include fever as high as 39.4 or 40 C or 03 or 104 F, abdominal pain, rash, headache, diarrhea, weakness and fatigue. Take your child to the doctor immediately if you notice any of the above symptoms and treatment should be started right away. Bed rest and careful nursing are a must for children who suffer from typhoid fever, among other treatment recommended by the doctor.
Body temperature is regulated by hypothalamus. It is located at the base of the brain. Hypothalamus sets the body temperature as per the body need. Some of the diseases that cause fever are as follows Lyme disease, Malaria, Melioidosis, Pneumonia, Infection in urinary tract, Viral Hepatitis, Whooping Cough, Cancer, Cold and flu. Sometimes fever can also be side effect of any medications you are on, especially medicines taken for hypertension or seizures.
What are the Causes of Yellow Fever?
Yellow fever is a hemorrhagic fever. The term yellow refers to the jaundice some infected persons develop when infected with this disease. In the acute phase its symptoms include muscle aches, fever, headaches, dizziness, nausea or vomiting or even both, redness in the eyes, tongue or face. These usually disappear within a few days but some people go into the toxic phase where the symptoms are liver and kidney failure, bleeding from the nose, eyes and mouth, abdominal pain, vomiting and so on. What are the causes of yellow fever? This fever is caused by a virus that is spread by the edes aegypti mosquito. Such mosquitoes can breed even in clean water.
Remedies for Reducing Body Temperature
Drink lots of water to compensate for the loss of body fluid. This will also help to reduce the body temperature. To immediately reduce high body temperature, boil powder of 2 to 3 tsp dry roasted fenugreek seeds. Strain the water and add a drop of clarified butter to it and drink. Drink juice made out of sweet basil leaves twice or thrice a day. Prepare linden tea by boiling 1 tbsp of linden flower in 1 cup of water and drink it hot. Brew willow bark tea and drink it by taking small sips. Willow bark has some aspirin related compound. If you are not comfortable with it then use black elder.
Remedy for Mild Fever
If the fever is mild, lie on a bed and completely cover yourself with a blanket for 20 minutes. Crush 10 grams of raisins and ginger. Boil them in 200 ml of water till it reduces to 50 ml. Strain and drink this solution warm.
Liquid Foods Should be Preferred
Prefer liquid food over solid food. Eat foods that are easily digestible. Eat boiled or steamed vegetables, vegetable soup, honey and yogurt. Eat fresh fruits and drink fresh fruit juices. Drink cows milk in small quantity 2 to 3 times a day. Eat rice cooked with lentils with spices like cumin seeds, ginger, turmeric, coriander, and salt added to it. Completely avoid heavy foods like fast food, chicken, fish, raw foods and fried foods.
Other Suggestions for Fever
Take complete rest. Take cool baths. Children should not be given aspirin for fever; instead they should be given cold bath. Avoid heavy exercises and sudden temperature change.
Fever Treatment for Children and Adults
Children suffer from fever more frequently than adults due to their low immune systems. While most parents panic when their children get fever, it is important to remember that fever is the body’s natural way of fighting off an infection. Fever treatment for children is not all that different from treating fever in adults. It includes keeping the children in comfortable clothes. However, children should not be wrapped up in too much warm clothing when there is fever. Overdressing prevents the body from cooling. A sponge bath in water helps to bring the fever down as well.
Natural Hay Fever Remedies when Pregnant
Hay fever occurs when the immune system over reacts to pollen, dust or other airborne allergies. Avoid any medications to treat hay fever if you develop this during your pregnancy. When pregnant, use natural hay fever remedies to deal with the problems associated with this. However, it is recommended to contact your doctor before trying out the remedy that follows. One such remedy is to mix 1-2 tablespoons of Apple cider vinegar in 250 ml of water and drink it.
Fever Blister Treatment with a home remedy or over the counter medications
Fever blisters or cold sores as they are also know, appear in the mouths of persons who are suffering from the herpes virus. Instead of reaching for over the counter remedies, try out a home remedy instead. One remedy is to apply some aloe vera gel on the blisters. This will help to soothe the blisters. Intermittent application of ice helps with the pain and itching that accompany fever blisters. Applying a tea bag on the blister when it first develops and is tingling, can prevent it from developing into a cold sore.