Stories From the Community
April 18, 2016 | John Heinz National Wildlife Refuge
Fourth graders from Patterson Elementary School went birding at the John Heinz National Wildlife Refuge. They were thrilled to see 2 ospreys, a juvenile bald eagle, and a multitude of tree swallows on this spring morning!
April 13, 2016 | John Heinz National Wildlife Refuge at Tinicum
John Heinz National Wildlife Refuge, America’s First Urban Refuge, has become one of Philadelphia 4th grader, Mouhammed’s, favorite places. “We observe animals, like here today we’re observing a bald eagle’s nest,” he said. “Sometimes we’ll look for hummingbirds, crickets.” Mouhammed was visiting with his Patterson Elementary School 4th grade class on their 2nd of 3 field trips to John Heinz NWR this year, thanks to the National Park Foundation’s Every Kid in a Park grant. On this particular trip they got to build a life size bald eagle’s nest, go birding, make bird feeders, and witness a live bald eagle presentation from the Mercer County Wildlife Center.
April 6, 2016 | Grand Mesa National Forest, Western Slope Colorado
Fourth graders were able to explore the forest on cross-country skis. This was the first time many have been on the skis. They also learned about animal adaptations to thriving in winter–fur, feathers and fat. The identified animal tracks in snow, and learned about winter safety such as how to dress in layers, what to do if you get lost and how hypothermia works. Some of the groups observed a search and rescue dog find their hiding peers through their amazing sense of smell. Colorado Avalanche Center discussed snow layers, how avalanches happen, and students simulated and avalanche rescue by quickly digging out a buried beacon using the signals to determine its location.
April 6, 2016 | Castillo San Felipe del Morro at San Juan National Historic Site
This trip was of great benefit to my fourth graders because it gave them the opportunity to acquire more knowledge about Puerto Rico´s history, culture and roots. It also gave them the opportunity to learn about the legacy and contributions of not only Spain but also of United States in Puerto Rico. With this experience my students were able to complement the knowledge acquired in our history class. It was a rich and rewarding visit through history.
Tell Us About Your Trip
Already went on your trip? We want to hear from you! Share a photo and let us know how the adventure benefited the fourth graders who went.