Home remedies for Anemia
Anemia can be caused due to decrease in hemoglobin of blood. The major cause of anemia is nutrition deficiency. The symptoms of anemia are depression, stress, memory loss, skin looks pale or white, heavy blood loss from the body due to injury, inadequate consumption of nutrients.
Anemia causes several problems like making you feel tired or dizzy.
Home remedies for anemia:
Eat 2 to 3 apples every day as apples are rich in iron. Intake of apples increases the iron in the body which ultimately prevents anemia. So, it is rightly said," An apple a day keeps anemia away!"
Lettuce and spinach are rich sources of iron. Both these green leafy vegetables are effective home remedies for anemia.
Another effective home remedy to treat anemia is to take fenugreek. Fenugreek should be taken with water daily.
Soyabeans are a good source of iron and proteins. Intake of soyabeans should be increased to prevent anemia.
Honey is an age old remedy for hemoglobin building. Honey should be taken in the morning and evening. Honey can be mixed with water.
A tincture of yellow dock root should be mixed with extract of Dandelion leaf and taken daily. This will help to maintain the amounts of iron in the body.
Increasing the amount of dairy products, cereals, eggs and nuts can also help to avoid anemia.
Restrict the amount of coffee and tea to keep away from anemia. Alcoholic beverages also must be strictly avoided as they act as antacids.
Another effective home remedy for treating anemia is to take a mixture of beetroot juice, apple juice and honey. This concoction should be consumed once daily.
Almonds help to treat anemia. Soak 10 almonds daily overnight and eat them in the morning on an empty stomach.
Banana mixed with honey is also known to be an effective natural remedy for preventing anemia.
Dried figs also help to get rid of anemia. Three to four figs should be taken by the patient daily.
Massaging the body regularly helps to improve the blood circulation and prevents anemia.
The intake of Vitamin C should be amplified. Have citrus fruits daily.