Taking Care of Your Heart
In the US, heart diseases and conditions are considered to be one of the top reasons for mortality. While it can prove to be quite a serious condition, it is actually one that can easily be prevented as well as dealt with.
Preventing Heart Problems
In majority of cases, a heart problem coexists with another medical condition. In such cases, the risk for early mortality is increased. That being the case, it can be said that preventing one could lead to the management of the other.
As clichéd as it may sound, the best way, still, to make sure your heart is healthy is to ensure that you eat right and get plenty of rest. Some of the food varieties that you might want to incorporate in your meals would include dark chocolate, berries, and red wine. If you have a high risk for heart condition, you need to make sure that you are aware of your numbers. This means that you have to make sure you regularly monitor your blood pressure as well as your pulse rate. You would also need to keep an eye out for your cholesterol level as well as your blood sugar and inflammatory markers.
Doing regular exercises can also do wonders for your heart. If you are the type who dread hitting the gym, you might want to consider hitting the pool instead. It is also a good idea to make sure that you manage your stressors well. You may not realize it but heavy stress, both physical and mental, can actually take a toll on your heart. This is very much true in the case of the broken heart syndrome.
If you are already in your 40s, you might want to watch out for snoring. In majority of the cases, people who snore in their sleep tend to have circulatory problems. Snoring is also known to lead to sleep apnea. During sleep apnea, the patient momentarily stops breathing. While breathing pattern resumes a few seconds after, the lack of oxygen for a second more can actually have a dire impact on the tissue of major organs. It could also lead to hypertension.
Individuals who are already in their 50s, on the other hand, would need to make sure that have a regular treatment and prevention plan in place. This should include regular monitoring of the heart via ECG. Individuals at this age should also be aware of the various signs of a heart attack as well as other heart conditions. Keep in mind that, as one ages, the risk for a heart problem also increases. That being the case, those who are in their 60s should definitely have ankle-brachial index test in order to ascertain the presence of peripheral artery disease.
If, at any point in time, you feel that your chances for a heart attack or cardiac arrest has increased, it would be best to have you as well as the people around you undergo a CPR training. You might also want to consider having an AED unit around.