The Middle East
Daniel Eleven & Twelve
Behold, there shall stand up yet three kings in Persia; and the fourth shall be far richer than they all: and by his strength through his riches he shall stir up all against the realm of Grecia. And a mighty king shall stand up, that shall rule with great dominion, and do according to his will. And when he shall stand up, his kingdom shall be broken, and shall be divided toward the four winds of heaven; and not to his posterity, nor according to his dominion which he ruled: for his kingdom shall be plucked up, even for others beside those. Daniel 11: 2-4
Alexander the Great: Daniel lived during the time of the Babylonian Empire and foretold of the future wars that would occur in the Middle East during the centuries following the Babylonian Empire, and the subsequent collapse of the Grecian Empire. Daniel details the rise of Alexander the Great as king of Grecia, and the expansion of his empire to include the entire known world, and following his sudden death, the division of the Grecian Empire into four kingdoms, which were the Antigonid, Seleucid, Bactrian, and Ptolemaic Empires. Daniel 11: 5, begins with a description of the wars between the Seleucid = Babylonian portion of the former Grecian Empire, centered in Syria/Iraq, which at that time were a single nation, and the Ptolemaic Empire = Egyptian portion of the former Grecian Empire, centered in Egypt. The Antigonid and Bactrian Empires at this point were already conquered by the Seleucids.
These two kingdoms are represented by the king of the north = Seleucid Empire, and king of the south = Ptolemaic Empire. The description of the ongoing wars continues until Daniel 11: 15-16, when the king of the north = Seleucid Empire, conquers the king of the south = Ptolemaic Empire, and the king of the north stands in the glorious land = Egypt. Soon after the Ptolemaic Empire was defeated by the Seleucids, the Roman Empire which had become the dominate power in the region forced the Seleucids out of Egypt, and Egypt became a province of Rome. The Seleucid Empire itself later dissolved as Syria too became a province of Rome.
Prophetic Leap: Beginning with Daniel 11: 40, below, there is a prophetic leap to the end times. We know this because it specifically states, "And at the time of the end", and also because Daniel 12, that follows further below, describes the resurrection at the end of the world. We also know that this war takes place in the Middle East because the entire preceding portion of Daniel 11, is about the Seleucid/Ptolemaic wars, and since the Seleucid Empire conquered the Ptolemaic Empire, it can be concluded that the location of this end time war, and the center of these prophecies, will also be in the area of the Seleucid Empire = Syria/Iraq, but more specifically Iraq.
And at the time of the end shall the king of the south push at him: and the king of the north shall come against him like a whirlwind, with chariots, and with horsemen, and with many ships; and he shall enter into the countries, and shall overflow and pass over. Daniel 11: 40
He shall enter also into the glorious land, and many countries shall be overthrown: but these shall escape out of his hand, even Edom, and Moab, and the chief of the children of Ammon. Daniel 11: 41
He shall stretch forth his hand
also upon the countries: and the land of Egypt shall not escape.
Daniel 11: 42
But he shall have power over the treasures of gold and of silver, and over all the precious things of Egypt: and the Libyans and the Ethiopians shall be at his steps. Daniel 11: 43
But tidings out of the east and out of the north shall trouble him: therefore he shall go forth with great fury to destroy, and utterly to make away many. Daniel 11: 44
And he shall plant the tabernacles of his palace between the seas in the glorious holy mountain; yet he shall come to his end, and none shall help him. Daniel 11: 45.
Iraq Is The Center Of A Middle East War: As the prophecy of Daniel reveals above, a war in the Middle East will develop (at the time of the end) just prior to the arrival of the Kingdom of God. It will begin in the former area of the Seleucid Empire, and the area of Syria/Iraq, but since Daniel 7: 7-8 & 23-25, also indicate that this kingdom is composed of three, this specifically points to Iraq which is composed of Basra, Baghdad, and Mosul. The war will overflow and pass over the borders of Iraq, and will result in a greater war that will sweep the entire Middle East. The king who is prophesied to bring this war to the Middle East, the eyes of the 'little horn', with a mouth speaking great things - Daniel 7: 7-8, can be none other than the ruler of Iraq, who must also be a President of the United States.
The President of the United States is now the actual ruler of Iraq by virtue of military conquest, occupation, and the subsequent establishment of a puppet regime. These prophecies of Daniel are therefore descriptive of the Beast Empire, the United States, and it's President in the final days. Note how accurate Daniel is in these prophecies as related to recent and current events. The conquest of Iraq, and it's overflowing, or the spreading of warfare to neighboring countries - Daniel 11:40. The overthrow of many other countries in the Middle East, with specific reference to Egypt and Libya, which has already come to pass - Daniel 11: 41-42. The power over treasures of silver and gold and precious things - Daniel 11: 43, referring to U.S. economic and financial control over the region in the form of economic and financial sanctions against selected nations, which is now happening exactly as foretold.
There is also a final reference to tidings from the north that shall trouble him, and bring about the potential for great destruction and fury, and the death of many - Daniel 11: 44, pointing to the build up of weapons and armies in preparation for a great war, which is happening right now even as I write. North of Iraq and Iran is the Caspian Sea, and beyond is Russia. This prophecy obviously pertains to the increasing involvement of Russia in Middle East affairs, against U.S. interests in the region, which is now becoming ever more apparent in recent news, and is no doubt a major cause of the current build up of U.S. military might in preparation for a larger conflict against Russia, and it's ally China. If there is a war against Iran and Syria, Russia will come to their aid, and has already said so as posted in previous news articles at this website. This of course will lead to WWIII, and global thermonuclear warfare.
Be all of this as it may, the closing verses of this prophecy are the most interesting because they indicate that despite the fact that the foundation, or pillars of his power will be firmly established in the Middle East - Daniel 11: 45, no doubt pointing to the continued U.S. control of Iraq, the Beast Ruler will come to a sudden end, and nobody will come to his aid. This sudden event can be non other than the return of Christ, and the arrival of the Kingdom of God, as described in the very next chapter and verse - Daniel 12: 1-4, below. We have not long to wait now my friends.
And at that time shall Michael stand up, the great prince which standeth for the children of thy people: and there shall be a time of trouble, such as never was since there was a nation even to that same time: and at that time thy people shall be delivered, every one that shall be found written in the book. And many of them that sleep in the dust of the earth shall awake, some to everlasting life, and some to shame and everlasting contempt. And they that be wise shall shine as the brightness of the firmament; and they that turn many to righteousness as the stars for ever and ever. But thou, O Daniel, shut up the words, and seal the book, even to the time of the end: many shall run to and fro, and knowledge shall be increased Daniel 12: 1-4.
Copyright © 2015
Larry A Wright