SOCIAL STUDIES 6
Grade 6 Social Studies introduces students to the dawn of civilizations through the exploration and excavation of six ancient civilizations: Ancient Mesopotamia, Ancient Egypt, Ancient India, Ancient China, Ancient Greece and Ancient Rome. Essential questions are developed to help promote students’ thinking about the features of civilization and the core components needed for a civilization to flourish. Classroom activities promote social, emotional and intellectual growth, while attempting to draw parallels between historical developments noting similarities and differences between the various civilizations studied. Additionally, classroom activities develop academic skills including writing, researching and note-taking.
Textbook: History Alive! The Ancient World, © 2017, Teachers’ Curriculum Institute, Digital edition
SOCIAL STUDIES 7
Grade 7 social studies concentrates on physical and human geography. The course focuses on the study of land and resource use, our human footprint, demography, culture and a variety of current global issues. A particular emphasis on global demographic trends is examined as students explore the changes in population, human development and interdependence. Using a variety of activities, students study the relationship between people and their environment, both natural and man-made. Consequently, students develop a sense of place and an understanding of the interactions between patterns of human activity and the earth’s surface and resources. Current events are also an integral part of our program, and the course is flexible enough to incorporate events and changes in human and physical geography, which develops the students’ awareness of our world as a set of systems undergoing constant change.
By the end of this course, students will be geographically literate. They will be able to make inferences based on comparisons of visual aids, such as maps, graphs and pictures; use literature to enrich understanding; recognize the interrelationships between the world’s cultural regions; and apply the five themes of geography. Students will also develop an awareness of current global challenges and develop problem-solving skills to tackle these challenges.
The course will utilize a variety of information sources including: Geography Alive!, online interactives, online news media, and library resources.
Textbook: Geography Alive! Regions and People, © 2011, Teachers’ Curriculum Institute, Digital edition
SOCIAL STUDIES 8
Grade 8 Social Studies is intended to familiarize students with the concepts of government, economics, and conflict and resolution within a historical framework. The examination of global issues and problems from multiple perspectives broadens the focus to include history relevant to all students and special emphasis will be placed on the role of the United States. Specifically, students explore the development of modern government with a focus on the formation of the United States' government system. Followed by an examination of how and why revolutions happen, where students research and learn about a variety of contemporary revolutions. Students also explore historical and modern immigration issues both in the United States and globally. The course concludes with a look at the World Wars in an attempt to understand the causal relationship of global conflicts and the experiences of average citizens. All instruction is aimed at teaching students to think critically in order to make informed decisions that guide social and civic action in an increasingly interdependent world. Current events are an integral part of our program; these events are incorporated into lesson plans to help develop the students’ awareness of our world and the connection between current and historical events.
The course will utilize a variety of information sources including: History Alive!, online interactives, online news media, and library resources.
Textbook: History Alive! The United States Through Modern Times, © 2014, Teachers’ Curriculum Institute, Digital edition