Slides : 21 Slides
Software: PowerPoint 2003, 2007, 2010
Page Size: 1024px X 768px
The country of Wales is a part of the United Kingdom and the island of the Great Britain. It shares its borders with England. It shares its coastline with the Irish Sea and the Atlantic Ocean.
The capital of Wales is Wales which is also the largest city of the country. The residents of the country are called the Welsh. The legislature of Wales is known as the UK Parliament and the National Assembly for Wales. The government of the country is called the Devolved Government in a Constitutional Monarchy and has Queen Elizabeth II as its Monarch.
It covers an area of 20,779 square kilometers of land and a population of 3,063,500. The national currency of the country is Pound Sterling.
Welsh and English are the official languages of the country. Christianity is the most followed religion in the country followed by Islam, Hinduism, Sikhism and Buddhism.
The Wales PowerPoint maps which are offered by us are fully editable PowerPoint maps Wales. In these Wales PPT maps, you can add graphics, audios, videos etc. to make the presentation more attractive. Also, you can add animation to the PowerPoint map background Wales in order to provide a life-like look to the presentation. These geographical layouts help its user to locate a specific region of Wales.
Tag :Wales PowerPoint maps editable PowerPoint maps Wales Wales PPT maps PowerPoint map background Wales
File Format : PowerPoint
Compatibility :MS Office 2003,2007,2010.
How it Works ?
All slides are 100% editable with separate objects.
The layers in the slides can be turned on or off as per the users requirement.
The user can add text and graphics Assures quality
Instant and easy download
All powerpoint slides are editable with seperate objects,
Layers in slide can be turned on or off
Add your own text and graphics
Rescale the map without loss of quality
For any assistance chat with us 24 x 7
Add Product to Cart.
Create a free account by adding
your email address and name.
View your cart and edit if required.
Click 'Contunue shopping' for more maps, else
Select 'Secure Payment' to
Pay and Download.
Once the payment is successful, An automated Email will be sent with Purchase details
along with TRANSACTION ID
and a link to download Your Map/Maps.
You can access 'My Account'
using your login Details.
You can view all your purchases and download the purchased Map/Maps from account itself.
You can also,
Copy and paste your Transaction Id by Clicking here and download the map
Call for support at +1-813-995-4000 or mail us at email@example.com