What is Xi3?
Xi3® is an exciting, new, patented computer architecture pioneered by Salt Lake City, Utah based Xi3 Corporation. The concept and goal of Xi3 Corporation was to re-imagine the traditional computer to a completely new, universal, energy efficient, cost-effective modular computer design. This new design works with existing industry components and software, allowing easy adoption into the all industries. The Xi3 computer architecture is a universal hardware platform, designed for any solution, from ARM- or X86- based, low-power embedded systems, to home and desktop computers, to affordable servers and supercomputers. Many other exciting Xi3 products are currently under development and will be released in the years to come.
What is the meaning of the name Xi3?
X = Variable- One of the great benefits of the Xi3 approach to computer architecture is its ability to easily configure a computer to meet any specific requirement. In this way, Xi3 technology breaks the mold by separating the traditional motherboard into three distinct boards. Xi3 variability begins with the fact that it replaces the traditional computer motherboard with three miniaturized and interconnected boards. This tri-board approach allows Xi3 and its partners to easily meet a vast array of computing needs by defining and creating miniaturized boards with varied I/O or processing capabilities, all within the same modular Xi3 computer architecture.
I = Information- The world is moving information faster than ever before. The fastest way to move information is through Information Technology. One of the biggest problems facing the Information Technology industry today is the variety and sources of information that need access to processing power. The Xi3 design allows IT engineers and developers the ability to focus their efforts on their specific requirements. The result is faster development times at a reduced cost.
3 = Cubed- Since the invention of the computer, traditional computer designs have been stuck in a 2-Dimensional world. Xi3's forward-thinking computer architecture uses the power of geometry to unlock a smaller, more compact design than traditional computer systems. After much research and development, the cube was determined to be the most effective design for a universal computing platform.
Using this patented approach, Xi3 provides the building blocks for the future of custom computer development and design, enabling people and companies to do more with technology for less.
There is a better way! Welcome to the Xi3 Revolution!
Xi3 NewsMarch 09, 2013:
GEEK: Geek @ SXSW: Xi3, Modular Computing & the PISTON Gaming System Liveblog
March 08, 2013:
NEWS RELEASE: With Demand Growing, Xi3 Corporation Opens Pre-Orders for its PISTON Console (PC)
March 04, 2013:
NEWS RELEASE: Xi3 Corporation to Showcase Modular Computers and Servers at HIMSS13
February 15, 2013:
The Guardian: The future of gaming: key contenders
February 06, 2013:
Develop: The other next generation of consoles
Xi3 EventsOctober 18, 2012:
CETPA 2012: Xi3 to Exhibit at Annual California Educational Technology Professionals Association Conference
October 17, 2012:
RETECH 2012: Xi3 to Exhibit at Leading Renewable Energy Conference
October 12, 2012:
D&H Headquarters: Xi3 Featured During Sales Floor Day
June 21, 2012:
EVENTS: Xi3 to Exhibit at the D&H Mid-Atlantic Summer Technology Show 2012
March 27, 2012:
Xi3 presenting at the Design West 2012 show March 27 - 29
Xi3 AccoladesQUOTE: In a revelation that will perhaps steal the entire (CES 2013) show -- via Gameranx
QUOTE: Xi3 products seem destined to change the way many people look at their systems -- via The Washington Times
QUOTE: The Xi3 Modular Computer has "some impressive stats for something so tiny" -- via the Los Angeles Times
QUOTE: "The Xi3 Modular Computer is one cool-looking desktop in a cube" -- via Engadget
QUOTE: "Hats off to Xi3 . . . for making a better Mac than Apple" via The Desk of DV Dude