The brief this term is to create an info-graphic video somewhere between thirty seconds and a minute thirty long for a subject that begins with 'The world of…' To kick start the idea's, a myriad of titles were tested out before a final ten were selected and ready to be pitched.
Mega-Beasts, the prehistoric kind, ranging from sabre toothed cats known as Smilodon's, to giant indricotherium (an enormous hornless Rhino essentially) Taking the information about these creatures (such as the Indricotherium pictured below) and comparing them to the size of modern day items or creatures Apparently the Indricotherium stood about 6m tall, and could peer into the upstairs of a two storey house. Facts such as this could be an interesting route and as a side mission, help to encourage conservation of current creatures that are endangered now but may well be extinct in our lifetime.
Pain, it is a subject of intense debate amongst medical experts. how to treat it, the varying types, the individual sensations experiences from person to person. With so many different types of pain such as Nociceptive- thermal, mechanical, chemical) and Neuropathic (damage to nerves) and so forth, an idea of slapstick comedy presents itself. A character subjected to all the varying types of pain and identifying those types.
Mythical Beasts, there are millions of different mythical beasts born from legends thousands of years ago, folklore, urban legends, or born of the need to explain cataclysmic events before the age of enlightenment. A taxonomy of the different mythical beasts could be created. Or even a particular creature selected and its representations throughout history depicted. Such as a vampire, Trolls or the Golem.
Hieroglyphics, this idea came from the origins of info graphics itself. the earliest information graphics being cave paintings and the pictorial representations o the egyptians, Mayan's and so forth. the images they used to communicate. Bringing the symbols and carvings to life to tell a story could prove interesting.
YouTube. Its is an online entity that has only existed for around 8 years (the first ever video being posted in 2005) but has expanded exponentially and with it created a whole new culture, business, informative resource, as well as entertainment hub. It has become a world all of its own, with particular social etiquettes. This could be explored and also categorized, or if not then there is a mass of statistics to be found about how YouTube is used.
Dreams, Sigmund freud has a lot to say about dreams, much of which is bizarre, skewed and this mix of psychology and the strange world of dreams could provide some very interesting visual aesthetics. Perhaps utilising psychological tests. The splotches of paint on pieces of card and what can be deduced from such images for example.
Signs are intrinsic to living. Roadsigns guide us across countries. They helps to find our way around an airport and much much more. Some have been skewed by urban artists and people left to notice them in their own time. Such as a London Underground sign for disabled seats being altered to read for 'fat people and snake charmers' instead of 'mothers and the elderly or disabled.' Pictograms are quite interesting in their development and the ways in which they're being used since their invention.
Glastonbury. The Glastonbury festival is an enormous event that calls together hundreds of thousands of people to experience the creative arts of music and theatre. Hundreds of acts perform across a three day weekend. It is almost a flash mob of an event with an extraordinary fluctuation of numbers of people over the farms in which it is held. There is a fair amount of statistics to be found on this event and displaying those could portray the interesting social features of events such as these.
Type. Text is a way by which we all communicate and beyond the words that are spelled out are the aesthetics with which those words are created, Typography. The works of David Carson help to show how type can be used purely aesthetically.
The Aye Aye, is a creature from Madagascar, related to primates, although it looks quite rat like. With spindly long fingers and toes, it hunts insects and bugs, tapping tree's and listening with their large sensitive ears to locate their food. These creatures are however prejudiced against by local tribes who see them as a death omen and often killed them on site. Hence they are now an endangered species and also protected. A play on the world in which they live could be quite satirical.
Having pitched these ten title suggestions, the top three ideas and how they could be approached were discussed. A breakdown of ideas and further research will be in the next post.