The IELTS test is administered by the British Council, the University of Cambridge and IELTS Australia. In other words, it is connected with the British government and was traditionally British universities, as well as New Zealand and Australian universities used to determine the ability of foreign language students. TOEFL is administered by ETS, a nonprofit U.S. goal, and is used by the American and Canadian universities. However, these days, make it easier for international students, universities around the world to both TOEFL and IELTS. Then you with the specific university you want to apply, usually every school in the United States, United Kingdom, Australia or New Zealand should check is to test results. So the sake of your mind. Select the test you think it will be easier for you to complete. To do this, you probably need to know the structure of each exam.
Structure of the TOEFL
Like last year, official TOEFL is given around the iBT (Internet Based Testing) format. It consists of four sections:
The reading section TOEFL invites you to read 4-6 passages of university level and multiple-choice questions on (ie multiple choice, choose the response provided options) to respond. Test questions on understanding the main text ideas, important details, vocabulary, rhetorical devices deduct and style.
Listening Section presents long 2-3 conversations and 4-6 lectures. The situations are always related to university life is a conversation between a student and a librarian on materials research or conference a history class. The questions are multiple choice questions and you. About important details, inferences, tone and vocabulary The conversations and lectures are very natural and informal English, interruptions, filler noises like "uh" or "Uhm."
Speaking of the game is saved. You speak into a microphone and a grader on your answers at a later date and quality at your disposal. Two questions on familiar topics and ask your opinion and / or describe something to give, you know, like your town or your favorite teacher. Two questions will be asked to summarize information from a text and a call and may also ask your opinion. Two questions will be asked to summarize information from a short conversation. Again, the topic of discussion always related to the University.
Finally, there are two short essays on the TOEFL. You will be asked to write your opinion on a subject as vast as it is better to live in the country or city. You will be asked to summarize information from a text and a conference, often the two do not match, and you need to compare and contrast is, or synthesize conflicting information.
IELTS contains the same 4 sections, reading, listening, speaking and writing, but the format is very different.
The reading section of the IELTS gives you 3 texts, all of which can be at a student textbook or a newspaper or a magazine, but. It's always a bit opinion to know. be. a text arguing for a view. The variety of questions about the IELTS is quite broad, and not every text will have every type of question. One type of question asks you to match headings of the paragraphs of text. You may be asked to complete a summary of the passage with words from the text. Or you must complete a table or chart or picture with words from the text. Either multiple choice questions that require you to be the most important details. One of the most difficult types of issues this state and whether these statements are true, false or not included in the text. You may also be asked to associate words and ideas. Finally, some questions, short answer, but the answers will be taken directly from the text itself.
Some questions come before the text and may not require a careful reading to answer. Others come after the text and may expect you to read the text carefully.
IELTS has four listening sections. The first is a "transactional conversation" in which someone can be for something (driver's license, a library card), or use of information (such as the demand for more details about an ad or a hotel) . The second part is an information conference of some sort, perhaps a dean explaining the rules of the university. Third is a conversation in an academic context and the final section will be an academic conference. For all sections you may be asked to fill out a summary, fill in a table, answer multiple choice questions, label a diagram or picture, or classify information into several categories. It is planned to complete the answers, as you will hear.
There are two writing tasks on the academic IELTS. The first asks you to summarize a table or chart in about 300 words. You need to identify important information, compare and contrast different figures or maybe describe a process. The second task asks for your opinion on a statement on a subject quite open as "women should take care of children and do not work" or "Too many people suffer in cities and rural areas to move."
Finally, Section speaking a different day of the rest of the race and in the presence of a trained interviewer will take place. The questions are the same for all examinees but some parts may be in the form of a conversation with a monologue. The first part of the test will be followed by a brief talk introducing some short questions about familiar topics. The interviewer asks your name, your job, what kind of sport you like, what is your daily routine, and so on. In the second part, you will find a card with a specific topic and a few issues to be resolved are given. You need to speak for two minutes on this topic that can be of your daily routine, the last time you went to the cinema, familiarize your favorite part of the world or a similar topic. In the last section, the interviewer will ask an abstract side of the topic in Part 2 discuss why people prefer life? Why do people like the movies? How to travel on local life?
What's best for me?
So now you have some understanding of what each test involves, but you may be wondering what is best for you. Perhaps reading the structure, you thought, "Wow TOEFL sounds so easy," or "Oh, it sounds somehow IELTS fun!" This could be a good sign that a test, it will be easier for you than the other. More specifically, there are some important differences between the tests.
British and American English
While the UK and the U.S. accept both tests, and while British English and American English are not as different as some think, the fact of the matter is the IELTS tends to British English and the TOEFL uses exclusively use American English. On the IELTS, this difference is a greater effect because many spelling, and this is an area where Britain and the United States do not always see eye to eye. Of course, if you have problems with the British accent (and the test can be a variety of accents, including Australia, New Zealand, Irish and Scottish belong to) have. On the other hand, American accents may throw you off. Some words are different, and you do not want to waste time asking in your language test, which is an apartment or a truck. If you are used to British or American English, is certainly a factor. If you are more comfortable with American English, TOEFL is a good bet, but if you are used to British English and accents, you will do better on the IELTS.
Multiple choice versus Copying Down
Read and listen to sections, TOEFL gives you multiple-choice questions, whereas IELTS generally expects to copy down words of the text or the conversation word for word. Multiple choice questions usually require a little more abstract thinking, but the IELTS favors people who have good memories and think more concretely. The good thing about multiple choice is that it is easy to get wrong answers, whereas the good thing about copying down is that the answer is sitting there in the text. You just have to find and repeat. As concrete thinkers will tend to do better is the IELTS and abstract thinkers tend to excel on the TOEFL.
Foreseeable or different each time
Of course, the TOEFL is also more predictable than the IELTS. The IELTS throws lots of different types of questions to you, and instructions are often slightly different every time. This makes it difficult to prepare. The TOEFL, on the other hand, is pretty much the same test every time, choose A, B, C, D or E. On the other hand, you might IELTS stands on your toes and keep you awake.
In a conversation with a person or a computer?
Another big difference is in the language section is performed. For some people, it's very relaxing, take your answers into a computer because it feels like no one is listening. Try it. Just your best and forget about it until you get your notes Because IELTS is present in a interview format with a native speaker, you may feel nervous or should be evaluated. And they take notes: Oh my God, he writes something good or something bad? On the other hand, you can feel relaxed in a conversation with someone to explain if you do not understand, just look at a question, or to the side, instead of a computer screen. Evaluation of a native speaker can also be useful to correct mistakes and improve during the test. So it depends what you're comfortable with. If you like talking to people, the IELTS is a better bet. If you just want to be alone and not feel judged, the TOEFL will be more comfortable for you.
Holistic against criteria
Finally, the oral and written parts of the TOEFL exam are classified holistically. The grader gives you a score on the overall quality of the test is based, including vocabulary, logic, style and grammar. IELTS contrast is marked by individual criteria and you are scored individually for grammar, word choice, fluency, logic, cohesion, and a dozen other criteria. In other words, if you write well, but have a lot of small grammar mistakes, your TOEFL score might very well because graders will ignore small mistakes if the overall essay is logical and detailed. IELTS not forget bad grammar. On the other hand, if your grammar and vocabulary are strong, but they have trouble expressing your opinion or organizing an essay, you could end up with a low TOEFL score but the IELTS will give you good ratings for the use of language. So while it looks like the IELTS is much more difficult because you notes on everything, in fact, you can get a good score if you are strong enough in a number of areas. The TOEFL emphasizes the ability to develop a logical and detailed argument (or summary) and looks at clarity, word choice and style first. If you do not feel comfortable writing essays but you think you have excellent grammar and vocabulary and overall are a decent writer, the IELTS will probably be easier for you.