In this course you will learn to create solution to real-world problems in the Java Programming Language. This course covers most essential aspects of Core Java.
Right at the beginning of the course, you will be taught how to use the Eclipse IDE for writing Java code. This will help you make very rapid progress in your endeavor to learn Java.
All tutorials are practical sessions where complete insight is provided into each topic being covered. Practical examples of how the various concepts are used to create solutions to real-world problems are included in the course.
This zip archive contains Eclipse projects that contain some of the source code that I used in the sessions. As you would appreciate, during the live sessions, I kept modifying some code to explain the concepts to you. So these Eclipse projects may not contain absolutely ALL the code that you would see during the lectures. But it does contain most of the code that existed after the end of each lecture.
Pramod has been in the IT (Software) industry since 1988.
Pramod was a co-founder of Momentum Technologies, a leading software services organization in Noida (India). After an acquisition of his business by the French IT leader, Sopra Group, Pramod decided to work towards enhancing the IT skills of software professionals world wide. He is now the C.T.O. at iCalibrator, which focuses on this objective.
Before co-founding Momentum, Pramod worked at Wipro's (a leading Software Services Company in India) Global R&D. He was involved in the development of the first Unix based multi-processor system in India. Pramod has extensive experience in a variety of technologies including Operating Systems, device drivers, Java, and Microsoft Technologies.
Pramod is very passionate about the use of Linux and other Open Source technologies in the IT sector. He also nurtures a dream of creating a large pool of very smart IT engineers.
Pramod holds a Bachelors Degree in Electronics & Communications Engineering and a Masters Degree in Computer Science, both from IIT, Chennai.