Pontius Pilate gets a lot of bad press.
Biblical and secular historians record the short-term governor of Jerusalem as the man who signed the death warrant for Jesus. That does not make him the most popular character in the annual Easter pageants that portray how Jesus died for all men on the cross and rose from the grave three days later to provide eternal life to all who will place their faith in him.
However, it was not just Pilate who sent Jesus to the cross. Led by the religious and political leaders of the day, it was the crowd that called for crucifixion.
"I find no fault in this man," the governor told the people.
Yet, Pilate made the worst ethical decision of his life when he went against what he knew to be the right choice.
It is easy to throw stones at Pilate, but the fact of the matter is that many of us are just like the governor of Jerusalem.
Knowing that Jesus was innocent of the charges brought against him, Pilate signed the death warrant because he wanted to appease the leaders, find favor with an enemy, increase his stature with higher authorities and get the issue off his desk. The rationalizations of ethical behavior he used are the same ones often used today to justify unethical and immoral behavior.
Necessity breeds propriety
Pilate believed that the ends would justify the means. He thought he had to sacrifice Jesus to gain favor with the people, a fellow politician and the authorities in Rome in whose hands his career rested.
The governor was much like politicians today who place more value on re-election than on doing what they know to be right. He wanted to keep those who lobbied for crucifixion happy. He cut a deal with Herod, a politician with whom he had not been able to reach consensus, and thought his decision would please his superiors.
Like Pilate, we often fail to see the costs of doing the wrong thing and the benefits of doing the right thing.
If it is legal, it is proper
Pilate substituted legal requirements, which established a minimum standard for his behavior, for personal moral judgment. Roman law allowed him to send Jesus to the cross, but he could have released him based on his innocence.
Although the law allowed Pilate to order Jesus to be killed, it also allowed the governor to release him. The ethical choice was to free Jesus, but that is not the choice Pilate made.
Laws on the books today allow the shedding of innocent blood, but those laws do not make those murders right. Choices are made.
It is OK, if I don't gain personally
Pilate tried to claim that Jesus' blood was not on his hands, but his argument did not wash. Finding Jesus innocent, he commissioned the crucifixion.
His actions were much like those today who attempt to justify unethical behavior by claiming their immoral actions are necessary to achieve a broader or larger goal.
I was doing it for you
Although Pilate knew Jesus was innocent, he gave in to political pressure exerted by Caiaphas, the high priest and a powerful political figure among the Jews in Jerusalem. Caiaphas had embarrassed the up-and-coming governor during the early days of his administration by orchestrating a rebellion against the placement of images of Caesar throughout the holy city and now had leverage with the young ruler.
Pilate did not sign Jesus' death warrant for the people. He signed it because he thought he could not survive the political fallout that might result from doing what he knew was right.
So often immoral decisions are rationalized with the idea that the action was taken at the request of someone else. But responsibility ends with the one who makes the decision.
History does not definitively record what became of Pilate, but what is known is that he soon disappeared from the political scene. Some historians say he was executed by Nero, while others say he was banished. Some historians say he committed suicide.
There is much to be learned from the villain in the Easter pageants this weekend. Determined to succeed, the young governor chose to do what was convenient over what he knew was right. There were consequences.
Phillip L. Hamilton writes for LubbockOnline and is a columnist for The Avalanche-Journal. He may be contacted at firstname.lastname@example.org
© 2017. All Rights Reserved. | Contact Us