Virtual Field Trip Explorations
Take Students Places the Schoolbus Can't!
Tech-Bytes #4 MCLIMS 科技小贴示
Though real-world field trips are invaluable experiences, logistics of time, cost or distance aren't always aligned in our favor. Students can make critical connections between themselves, their learning, and the wide-ranging historical, cultural, and scientific environments through inquiry-based virtual learning experiences. They can explore oceans that cover almost three quarters of the Earth’s surface without getting wet and fly through the night sky to explore the life span of a star or the terrain of Mars. The exploration of Historic Moments, Culture, Science & Technology are just a few in the an array of vast potential possiblities for exploration and discovery!
Discover artworks, collections and stories from around the the world like never before. Explore cultural treasures in extraordinary detail. The site is divided into three areas: Art Project, Historic Moments, and World Wonders.
Google World Wonders
'From the archaeological areas of Pompeii to the Hiroshima Peace Memorial, Google’s World Wonders Project aims to bring to life the wonders of the modern and ancient world. By using our Street View technology, Google has a unique opportunity to make world heritage sites available to users across the globe.'
Google Historic Moments
Google Art Project
Google Street Art
Google's Street View cameras have underwater creatures -- view sea turtles,humpback whales, great white sharks and the giant sunfish.
Google Sky gives users the ability to actually take to the stars. Switch to Sky Mode and reverse the perspective. With hi-res images from NASA, the Digital Survey Consortium and the Sloan Digital Sky Survey. Fly around, just like in Earth mode, to search the far reaches of space. Google Sky also provides two incredible tours of outer space. The User's Guide to the Galaxy takes you on a trip through a number of well-known galaxies. The Life of a Star tour shows the lifespan of a typical star, from birth to death.