Significance and Use
Vapor pressure is a fundamental thermodynamic property of a liquid. Vapor pressure and boiling temperature data are required for material safety data sheets (MSDS), the estimation of volatile organic compounds (VOC), and other needs related to product safety. Vapor pressures are important for prediction of the transport of a chemical in the environment; see Test Method E1194.
1.1 This test method describes procedures for determination of the vapor pressure of liquids by ebulliometry (boiling point measurements). It is applicable to pure liquids and azeotropes that have an atmospheric boiling point between 285 and 575 K and that can be condensed completely and returned to the ebulliometer boiler, that is, all materials must be condensable at total reflux. Liquid mixtures may be studied if they do not contain non-condensable components. Liquid mixtures that contain trace amounts of volatile but completely condensable components may also be studied, but they will produce vapor pressure data of greater uncertainty. Boiling point temperatures are measured at applied pressures of 1.0 to 100 kPa (7.5 to 760 torr).
1.2 The values stated in SI units are to be regarded as standard. No other units of measurement are included in this standard.
1.3 There is no ISO equivalent to this standard.
1.4 This standard does not purport to address all of the safety concerns, if any, associated with its use. It is the responsibility of the user of this standard to establish appropriate safety and health practices and determine the applicability of regulatory limitations prior to use. For specific hazard statements, see Section 8.
2. Referenced Documents (purchase separately) The documents listed below are referenced within the subject standard but are not provided as part of the standard.
D1193 Specification for Reagent Water
D2879 Test Method for Vapor Pressure-Temperature Relationship and Initial Decomposition Temperature of Liquids by Isoteniscope
E1 Specification for ASTM Liquid-in-Glass Thermometers
E177 Practice for Use of the Terms Precision and Bias in ASTM Test Methods
E1142 Terminology Relating to Thermophysical Properties
E1194 Test Method for Vapor Pressure
E1970 Practice for Statistical Treatment of Thermoanalytical Data
Antoine equation; boiling temperature; decomposition temperature; ebulliometer; polymerization temperature; superheating; vapor pressure ;
ICS Number Code 17.100 (Measurement of force, weight and pressure)
ASTM International is a member of CrossRef.
Citing ASTM Standards
[Back to Top]