Transcript of Aeneas's Journey
The Journey of Aeneas Troy Aeneas tells his sorrowful story to Dido. He tells of the 10 year war, how Greeks fought against the Trojans, how he and his people had to flee the city as it burned, and how his wife perished as they fled for their lives. Antander Aeneas and his people flee to and build a fleet to set out in their journey with. Thrace This is the first place that Aeneas visits to rest. He decides to make sacrifices, but when he goes to get wood, the tree bleeds dark oozing blood. The tree is in fact the spirit of Polydorus, a son of Priam, that was killed by the Thracian king. He warns them that this is not a safe place to build a home. Delos They stop here briefly. Apollo speaks to Aeneas and tells him, “to go to the place of his ancestors” Crete Apollo’s son Anchises believes that they must go to Crete, as one of their ancestors, Teucrus, came from here. However, after a plague starts to effect his people, Aeneas is visted by Trojan gods that tell him his ancestors came from Italy. Buthrotum Aeneus finds Helenus and Andromache have become leaders of a Greek city after Pyrrhus was killed. They tell him that he is on the right path, but he should avoid the narrow gap of water between Sicily and Italy because it is where Charybdis and Scylla live. Strophades Not on purpose of course, they land on this island which happens to be home of the Harpies, vicious bird creatures with feminine features that set a curse on the Trojans after they tried to eat some of the Harpies’ food. Leucata Here they offer gifts to Apollo for his help "Cyclops Harbor" Near Mount Etna, Aeneas meets one of Ulysses’s distraught crewmembers saying that he had escaped Cyclops. He said that Ulysses was brave, gouging the eyeball out of one. As they speak, they see Cyclops coming in the distance and jump back on the boat just in time. Anchises has died; Aeneas finds himself ending up in Carthage after visiting shortly here. after a storm, Aeneas redirects his ships to this port. He realizes that it has been a year since his father’s death and plans funeral games in honor. The games go on, but not without Juno inciting a riot within the Trojan women. They begin to burn the Trojan ships, but Aeneas prays to Jupiter, and the fire stops. They decide to go on with their journey. Neptune provides them safe transport to Italy with the exception of one man, Palinurus, who falls asleep at the helm and falls into the sea. Drepanum In the Aeneid, Aeneas has actually been in Carthage for a while but he has been telling the story to Dido, which at this point has love for Aeneas because of an arrow shot by Cupid, the god of lust. At this point, Aeneas starts to talk in present day, rather than recounting what has already happened. Aeneas falls for Dido, but Mercury, the messenger god, visits Aeneas and reminds him of his true destiny. He leaves Dido, not knowing that she has planned her own funeral, and soon draws a sword upon herself. Carthage Eryx Aeneas here makes a Temple for Apollo. Sibyl, a priestess, meets Aeneas here and warns him of the challenge ahead. She also helps Aeneas visit his father in the Underworld safely, without harm. Anchises tells him of the future of Rome and how he MUST accomplish his goal Cumae Aeneas has reached his final destination. However, Juno is still angry, she vows to make it as painful as possible for the Trojans to finally settle. Aeneas at this point had asked for the hand of Laninia, the kings daughter, to secure his and his people a rightful spot in the new land. But his plans a changed when Juno rouses anger against Aeneas in the Queen and Laninia former suitor, Turnus. Turnus, now with the support of the king and queen and the shepards (who were angry as Ascanius for killing a pet stag), wages all out war against the Trojans. Aeneas asks the support of the Arcadians which are also at war with the Latins. Venus pleads for his husband to build weopons for the Trojans and he does. Turnus tries to burn their ships, but, because the ships were made from a sacred forest of Cybele, they are spared. Angered by this, Turnus and his army surround the Trojan fortress and attack. Even with Ascanius leading reasonably, many men are killed from both sides. Pallas, a young and brave soldier, kills many men, but attracts the attention of Turnus himself. They fight, and although Pallas penetrates Turnus’s shield, he eventually falls. Aeneus, angry as ever, wants to fight Turnus, but settles with slaying numerous Latins and Mezentius. After this battle is over, Turnus attempts to defend his city of the kingdom, but decides that in order to spare other’s lives, he must fight Aeneas in a duel to the death. Aeneas wins. Lavanium, Latium The End Tell me, O Muse, the cause; wherein thwarted in will or wherefore angered, did the Queen of heaven drive a man, of goodness so wondrous, to traverse so many perils, to face so many toils. Can heavenly spirits cherish resentment so dire? Musa, mihi causas memora, quo numine laeso,Full transcript
quidve dolens, regina deum tot volvere casus
insignem pietate virum, tot adire labores impulerit. Tantaene animis caelestibus irae? Tell me, Muse, how it all began. Why was Juno outraged? What could wound the Queen of the Gods with all her power? Why did she force a man, so famous for his devotion, to brave such rounds of hardship, bear such trials? Can such rage inflame the immortals' hearts? Two translations: Thus they wander at large over the whole region in the wide airy plain, taking note of all. After Anchises had led his son over every scene, kindling his soul with the love of glory yet to come... sic tota passim regione uagantur
aeris in campis latis atque omnia lustrant.
quae postquam Anchises natum per singula duxit
incenditque animum famae uenientis amore tune hinc spoliis indute meorum
eripiare mihi? Pallas te hoc uulnere, Pallas
immolat et poenam scelerato ex sanguine sumit. Decked in the spoils you stripped from one I loved-escape my clutches? Never-Pallas strikes this blow, Pallas sacrifices you now, makes you pay the price with your own guilty blood Shall you be snatched from my grasp, wearing the spoils
of one who was my own? Pallas it is, Pallas, who sacrifices you
with this stroke, and exacts retribution from your guilty blood.’ Works Cited
SparkNotes Editors. “SparkNote on The Aeneid.” SparkNotes.com.
SparkNotes LLC. 2002. Web. 17 Oct. 2012.
"The Journey of Aeneas." Curriculum Online. N.p., n.d. Web. 25 Oct.
"P. VERGILIVS MARO." Vergil. The Latin Library, n.d. Web. 25 Oct. 2012.
<http://www.thelatinlibrary.com/verg.html>.Virgil. Aeneid. Trans. Robert Fagles. New York: Penguin Classics, 2010. Print.