by George Heymann | @techeadlines
Google has started a new page on Google Plus to share their vision of what its augmented reality glasses could be. They are soliciting suggestions from users on what they would like to see from Project Glass.
“We think technology should work for you—to be there when you need it and get out of your way when you don’t.
A group of us from Google[x] started Project Glass to build this kind of technology, one that helps you explore and share your world, putting you back in the moment. We’re sharing this information now because we want to start a conversation and learn from your valuable input. So we took a few design photos to show what this technology could look like and created a video to demonstrate what it might enable you to do.”
Video after the break.
Read the rest of this entry »
Filed under: Android, General technology, Google, Media, Services, Augmented reality, eyeglasses, feature, featured, glasses, Google, Google Plus, Google Project Gass, google virtual reality glasses, New York Times, Project Glass, technology, turn by turn directions, UI, User interface, video chat, Virtual reality, Virtual reality glasses
January 18, 2012 • 11:07 am
$3 million grant from the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation will fund development
by Eric Klopfer
MIT Education Arcade
With a new $3 million grant from the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, the MIT Education Arcade is about to design, build and research a massively multiplayer online game (MMOG) to help high school students learn math and biology.
In contrast to the way that Science, Technology, Engineering and Math (STEM) are currently taught in secondary schools — which often results in students becoming disengaged and disinterested in the subjects at an early age — educational games such as the one to be developed give students the chance to explore STEM topics in a way that deepens their knowledge while also developing 21st-century skills.
Read the rest of this entry »
Filed under: Gaming, Services, Software, 3 million dollar grant, Associate Professor, Augmented reality, Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, Common Core, Common Core standards, Education, education arcade, education program, Eric Klopfer, Filament Games, game to help teach math and science, High school, Math, mit, MIT education arcade, MMOG, Next generation science, StarLogo TNG, STEM, Washington, Washington D.C.
by George Heymann
Blackberry no sooner made its official Blackberry Bold 9900 announcement and then T-mobile tweeted that it would be carrying the device. The 9900 will be T-mobile’s first 4G capable Blackberry. It is rumored to be available on T-Mobile in the June/July timeframe.
The Blackberry Bold 9900/9930 will be a touch screen device with a 1.2 GHz processor, 8 GB of onboard memory, expandable to 32GB, HSPA+ 14.4 capable, 5 megapixel camera with flash, 720p HD video recording, dual-band WiFi, a built-in compass (magnetometer) and Near Field Communication (NFC) technology featuring the new Blackberry 7 OS.
Press release after the break
Filed under: Blackberry, Hardware, 4G, Augmented reality, BlackBerry, Blackberry Bold 9900, Blackberry Bold 9930, Evolution-Data Optimized, Evolved HSPA, Hertz, High-definition video, HSPA+, Research In Motion, T-Mobile, Touchscreen, Wi-Fi