Baku, Azerbaijan, April 24
By Rufiz Hafizoglu - Trend:
No "Armenian genocide" took place in Turkey in 1915, deputy head of Turkey's ruling Justice and Development Party, Mehmet Ali Shahin said on April 24 in his interview with the country's TRT Haber TV channel.
Not only Armenians, but also Arabs, Kurds, as well as Turks were killed during the events of 1915, according to the party's deputy head.
There are many facts proving that Armenians revolted in 1915 against the state and have teamed up with foreign invaders against the civilian population, Shahin said.
"The local population had to defend itself against Armenians," he added.
Turkey's Cabinet of Ministers spread a message in connection with the events of 1915 on April 23.
The message says it is important not to be a captive of historical events and there is need to create a foundation for building a common future.
The events of 1915 were a difficult time not only for the Armenians, but also for Arabs, Kurds and representatives of other nations living in the country, according to the message.
"Nevertheless, it is impossible to use the events of 1915 as a tool of political pressure on Turkey," the message of Turkish government said.
The message says Turkey supports the creation of a joint historical commission to investigate the events of 1915 and expresses condolences to the families of those killed in the events of 1915, including the Armenians.
The message highlights that the events of 1915 are common grief.
Armenia and the Armenian lobby claim that Turkey's predecessor the Ottoman Empire allegedly carried out "genocide" against the Armenians living in Anatolia in 1915. While strengthening the efforts to promote the so-called "genocide" in the world, Armenians have achieved its recognition by the parliaments of some countries.
Despite Turkey's efforts on creation of a joint commission with Armenia to investigate the events of 1915, Armenia hasn't responded to this proposal so far.
Translated by L.Z.
Edited by C.N.