The whole system and structure of a language or of languages in general, usually taken as consisting of syntax and morphology (including inflections) and sometimes also phonology and semantics
A particular analysis of the system and structure of language or of a specific language
A book on grammar
my old Latin grammar
A set of actual or presumed prescriptive notions about correct use of a language
it was not bad grammar, just dialect
The basic elements of an area of knowledge or skill
the grammar of wine
A set of rules governing what strings are valid or allowable in a language or text
the branch of linguistics that deals with syntax and morphology (and sometimes also deals with semantics)
In linguistics, grammar is the set of structural rules that govern the composition of sentences, phrases, and words in any given natural language. ...
A formal grammar (sometimes simply called a grammar) is a set of rules of a specific kind, for forming strings in a formal language. The rules describe how to form strings from the language's alphabet that are valid according to the language's syntax. ...
The articles in English include the definite article the and the indefinite articles a and an.
A system of rules and principles for speaking and writing a language; The study of the internal structure of words (morphology) and the use of words in the construction of phrases and sentences (syntax); A book describing the rules of grammar of a language; A formal system specifying the ...
(Grammars) Agora | Archives | Endangered Languages | Gameroom | Lang Guessers | Library | Research | More
(Grammars) Th. Buslaev, Historical Grammar of the R. Language (Moscow, 1875); A. Sobolevskij, Lectures on the History of the R. Language (St P., 1891); id., Attempt at R. Dialectology, pt. i. (Gt. and Wh. R.) (St P., 1897); W. R. Morfill, R. Grammar (Oxford, 1887); P. Motti, R. ...
To dream that you are studying grammar, denotes you are soon to make a wise choice in momentous opportunities.
The study of the structure and features of a language. Grammar usually consists of rules and standards that are to be followed to produce acceptable writing and speaking.
Choose to search only a particular area of grammar, such as countable nouns or transitive verbs.
searches through the italics (grammar info)
Grammar is the system of relationships between elements of the sentence that links the ‘sounds’ to the ‘meanings’. It is used to refer both to the knowledge of language in the speaker’s mind, and to the system as written down in rules, grammar-books and other descriptions. ...
The rules in a language that oversee proper word order to provide meaning to strings of words.
1) the study of sentence structure, esp. with refrence to syntax and morphology 2) systematic account of the rules governing language in general
The nature of substance as the ultimate subject of predication is expressed by common usage in its employment of the noun (or substantive) as the subject of a sentence to signify an individual thing which "is neither present in nor predicable of a subject. ...
Not to be confused with socially correct usage. In order to handle novel sentences, we not only need to access the words stored in our brains but also the patterns of sentences possible in a particular language. These patterns describe not just patterns of words but also patterns of patterns. ...
The inputs that a recognizer can match (identify) from a caller.
A set of rules defining the format of an entity to be recognized, such as a date, time, phone number, or currency value. Lexical dictionaries are composed of sets of grammars. See also lexical dictionary. Source: NPG
the system of language in general, consists of syntax, morphology, phonology and semantics.
a part of language comprised of both morphology and syntax, grammar allows an infinite expression of ideas, makes language itself possible, and may have been naturally selected for
is the set of rules that tells how words can be put into a sequence and a form that allows their meaning to become unambiguous in a sentence. ...
Traditionally, a grammar is a set of productions which taken together specify precisely a set of acceptable input sequences in terms of an abstract set of terminal tokens. The set of acceptable input sequences is often called the "language" defined by the grammar. ...
Spend one minute writing down all of the different words you associate with the word ‘grammar’. Share your words with your partner(s) and talk about them. Together, put the words into different categories.
the study of how linguistic units combine to form sentences; also, the system of rules implicit in a language.
is a system of language rules and should not be forgotten in the process of essay writing. Consult our section of grammar tips in order to see the most general grammar rules and consult grammar text-books for additional information.