[noo, nyoo] /nu, nyu/
adjective, newer, newest.
of recent origin, production, purchase, etc.; having but lately come or been brought into being:
a new book.
of a kind now existing or appearing for the first time; novel:
a new concept of the universe.
having but lately or but now come into knowledge:
a new chemical element.
unfamiliar or strange (often followed by to):
ideas new to us; to visit new lands.
having but lately come to a place, position, status, etc.:
a reception for our new minister.
unaccustomed (usually followed by to):
people new to such work.
coming or occurring afresh; further; additional:
fresh or unused:
to start a new sheet of paper.
(of physical or moral qualities) different and better:
The vacation made a new man of him.
other than the former or the old:
a new era; in the New World.
being the later or latest of two or more things of the same kind:
the New Testament; a new edition of Shakespeare.
(initial capital letter) (of a language) in its latest known period, especially as a living language at the present time:
New High German.
recently or lately (usually used in combination):
The valley was green with new-planted crops.
freshly; anew or afresh (often used in combination):
roses new washed with dew; new-mown hay.
something that is new; a new object, quality, condition, etc.:
Ring out the old, ring in the new.
of a kind never before existing; novel: a new concept in marketing
having existed before but only recently discovered: a new comet
markedly different from what was before: the new liberalism
fresh and unused; not second-hand: a new car
(prenominal) having just or recently become: a new bride
often foll by to or at. recently introduced (to); inexperienced (in) or unaccustomed (to): new to this neighbourhood
(capital in names or titles) more or most recent of two or more things with the same name: the New Testament
(prenominal) fresh; additional: I’ll send some new troops
(often foll by to) unknown; novel: this is new to me
(of a cycle) beginning or occurring again: a new year
(prenominal) (of crops) harvested early: new carrots
changed, esp for the better: she returned a new woman from her holiday
(capital when part of a name; prenominal) being the most recent, usually living, form of a language: New High German
the new, the new vogue: comedy is the new rock’n’roll
turn over a new leaf, to reform; make a fresh start
adverb (usually in combination)
recently, freshly: new-laid eggs
Old English neowe, niowe, earlier niwe “new, fresh, recent, novel, unheard-of, different from the old; untried, inexperienced,” from Proto-Germanic *newjaz (cf. Old Saxon niuwi, Old Frisian nie, Middle Dutch nieuwe, Dutch nieuw, Old High German niuwl, German neu, Danish and Swedish ny, Gothic niujis “new”), from PIE *newo- “new” (cf. Sanskrit navah, Persian nau, Hittite newash, Greek neos, Lithuanian naujas, Old Church Slavonic novu, Russian novyi, Latin novus, Old Irish nue, Welsh newydd “new”).
The adverb is Old English niwe, from the adjective. New math in reference to a system of teaching mathematics based on investigation and discovery is from 1958. New World (adj.) to designate phenomena of the Western Hemisphere first attested 1823, in Lord Byron; the noun phrase is recorded from 1550s. New Deal in the FDR sense attested by 1932. New school in reference to the more advanced or liberal faction of something is from 1806. New Left (1960) was a coinage of U.S. political sociologist C. Wright Mills (1916-1962). New light in reference to religions is from 1640s. New frontier, in U.S. politics, “reform and social betterment,” is from 1934 but associated with John F. Kennedy’s use of it in 1960.
what else is new
[noo, nyoo] /nu, nyu/ adjective, newer, newest. 1. of recent origin, production, purchase, etc.; having but lately come or been brought into being: a new book. 2. of a kind now existing or appearing for the first time; novel: a new concept of the universe. 3. having but lately or but now come into knowledge: […]
noun 1. .
[noof, nyoof] /nuf, nyuf/ noun, Chiefly Canadian Slang: Sometimes Disparaging and Offensive. 1. (def 1). 1. . Newfoundland
noun 1. a town in SW Connecticut.