By making small changes at home, you can greatly reduce your effect on global warming and help bring us to energy independence.
2,400 pounds of carbon dioxide a year can be saved simply by recycling half of the wast generated by each household.
Use Energy-Efficent Lightbulbs
The new compact flourescent lightbulbs, or CFLs, use 60% - 75% less energy than regular incandescent bulbs. By replacing just three frequently used incandescent bulbs with CFLs, you can save about 300 pounds of carbon and $60 per year. CFL bulbs last longer than incandescent bulbs, are available in a variety of colors, and some are specially designed to work with dimmers. LED lightbulbs save even more energy and are increasingly available for use around the home.
Reduce "Vampire Energy"
Turn off any devices like televisions, DVD players, stereos, and computers when they are not in use - it can save thousands of pounds of carbon dioxide each year.
Televisions, DVD players, sterios, computers, and many other devices use "vampire energy" - using electricity even when they are turned off. By unplugging electronics from the wall when you aren't using them you use even less carbon dioxide and save even more money. Consider plugging electronics into a power strip with a switch that you can turn off when you don't need them.
Check Your Tires Monthly
Properly inflated tires can improve your gas mileage by more than 3%. Check them every month.
Choose Energy Efficient Appliances
When making purchases of new appliances, look for the EPA's Energy Star label to help you find the most efficent models. If every household in the United States replaced their existing appliances with the most efficient models availible we'd eliminate 175 million tons of carbon dioxide emissions each year.
By buying minimally packaged goods and reusable products, you reduce the amount of garbage you throw away and the carbon dioxide it takes to transport the goods to your doorstep.
Buy From Your Local Farmer
Buying groceries from local farms will support local business and reduces the carbon dioxide used to transport and store food.
Time Your Showers
Taking shorter showers when possible will save water, but also saves the energy used to heat the water. If you are a homeowner, look into a tankless water heater or low-flow showerheads and toilets.
Weatherize Your Home
Properly weatherizing your home helps keep things cool in the summer and warm in the winter - and saves money in the process. Caulking and weather-stripping your house can save 1,700 pounds of carbon dioxide and $274 per year.
Energy Efficiency Check
Your utility service may offer free home energy inspections to help you find places in your home that are poorly insulated or inefficient. An inspection can lead to a savings of up to 30% off of your energy bill and 1,000 pounds of carbon dioxide a year.
Print This Page