||Job||Jesus is with us when we have good days and bad days. He is with us, no matter what comes our way.|
Prepared by: Teresa Klassen
Introducing the big idea (3 Minutes – keep it moving so kids stay tuned in)
* this idea from http://nadadventist.org/cm/SS/helps/k0626_99.txt
A JAR FULL OF TROUBLES
- Lots of small objects (Anything around ½ inch to an inch in size)
“Let’s pretend that each one of these things is some kind of trouble! What are things that cause trouble, or bring pain or sadness”
Give them some ideas like…
- When someone hurts themselves or breaks a bone
- When you get stung by a bee
- When you lose a pet
- When someone you love dies
- When you fight with your brothers/sisters
- When people move away
Every time you think of something troublesome, painful or sad or some kind of problem have the kids put an object in the jar – how many troubles can you fit into one jar??
When you have as many objects in the jar as possible, hold it up for all the children to see.
“Look at all these problems in one place. What would you like to do with all these problems? Throw them away? Hide them? Wouldn’t it be nice if all our problems or troubles would go away that easily? The thing is that we will have good days with very few problems, and we will have bad days with lots of problems, and that is just life. Today we are going to talk about a man who had more than a jarful of troubles – but he teaches us a really important lesson about how God is always with us, even when we have (hold up the jar) life full of troubles.”
Job Storybook DVD – (2 minutes)
* Suggested link: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MKiIPRcM7j0
* This video is about 6 minutes long and ends with the word “blessed” and there is a long pause. Stop the video here because it then goes into a song which is slow and unrelated to our lesson today.
Conclusion: Job had a lot of trouble in his life, but one thing he never stopped doing is believing in God and trusting God. God was with him on good days, and God was with him on bad days. Job knew this and kept trusting God.
Telling It Again – (2 minutes)
There will be poster board with squares on it, numbered.
There are pictures (from the Brick Testament – please get author’s permission at http://www.bricktestament.com) telling the story of Job, hand them all out to the kids in any order.
As you are telling the story of Job (see Job Script) when a child has a picture that goes along with what is being said, have them come and glue it onto the board.
Story of Job
Job and his wife Lived in a city called Uz. Job loved and worshipped God!
Job had seven sons and 3 daughter all grown with families of their own.
Job had much land and sheep and cattle and servants
One day, the Devil said to God, “You have blessed Job and given him everything is the only reason Job worships you. If you would take away your blessings, Job would no longer praise you.”
God said to the devil, ” Do what you want to all that Job has but do not touch him.”
The devil left God and began his evil work.
Suddenly a messenger came to Job saying that there had been a terrible disaster. All of Job’s animals were gone. A huge fire destroyed all of Job’s sheep. His camels were all stolen.
And, worst of all, when Job’s children were eating together a huge wind came along and destroyed the house and everyone in it.”
Job was so sad.
In a single day, he had lost everything.
He lost his land,
He lost his livestock.
He lost his sons and daughters.
Job cut his hair and tore his clothes, he was so terribly sad. But then he fell to the ground and began worshipping God saying, “..the LORD gave, and the LORD has taken away, blessed be the name of the LORD.” After all those bad things happened to Job, He still praised God.
The devil was upset because Job was still praising God.
So he went to God and said, “If Job were hurting in his body, he would not praise you.
God answered the devil saying, “Do what you want but do not kill him.”
The devil delighted in giving Job very painful sores all over his body from the soles of his feet to the top of his head. Job had nothing. He lost his land, He lost his sheep and cattle and camels.
Camp SunLand Continued…
He lost his Sons and daughters. Now he was in more pain with the sores all over his body. Job suffered greatly.
Everyone who saw Job had bad things to say. Even Job’s wife told him that God must have forgotten him. His friends came and said that all these horrible things happened to Job because he must have sinned. But Job insisted that he loved God and he never sinned against him.
They would not believe him.
Finally, God spoke.
God spoke to Job of all the things he created.
God created the heavens, the earth and all that is on the earth.
Job said “I know that you can do everything, and that no thought can be withheld from you.
God said to Job’s friends, “You have not spoken the truth of me as Job has. Take seven bulls and seven rams and go to Job and offer them up for yourselves. Job will pray for you and I will accept his prayer for you. ”
The men did as God had told them.
God accepted Job’s prayer and was very pleased with Job.
As Job prayed for his friends, God returned his fortune that had been taken away by the devil.
God gave Job twice as much as he had in the beginning.
God gave him twice as many sheep.
God gave him twice as many donkeys.
God gave him twice as many camels.
God gave him twice as many yoke of oxen.
God gave him 7 sons and 3 daughters.
His daughters were the most beautiful in the land.
After all of this, Job lived 140 years and he loved God and praised him every day.
* Sorry, I do not have the link for this.
Job Face Puppet
You will have
- Paper lunch bags with a happy face on one side and a sad face on the other
- Red sores (red circle stickers)
- Red hearts (either punched out to glue on, or red stickers to stick)
- Elastic bands
- Crumpled newspaper
- Chopstick or stick or toilet paper tube
Have the kids colour the faces… sad and happy…. and then on the side with sad put red spot stickers all over Jobs face. Talk about how much God loves us… When we are happy and when we are sad…just like Job… and then put the hearts all over both sides…. ( representing God’s love).
Then stuff the bag with crumples newspaper and attach it to the stick with the elastic band.
Giving Our Troubles to Jesus – (2 minutes)
Take the jar of troubles and remind them of what the Jar is.
“Instead of being worried about all of our troubles…the Bible says that we can bring our troubles to Jesus. It’s like this, I am going to need your help…”
In front of the picture of Jesus is a jar…take a trouble or two and put it in the jar in front of Jesus. Then have the children help you take troubles and put it into this other jar.
“Jesus says that we can bring all of our troubles to him. We can tell him what is wrong and pray that he will help us, and He promises he will. It doesn’t mean our troubles will be gone just like that…but Jesus promises to walk with us and help us through them. He will give us strength and peace and he will show us the way.”
God says, just keep believing in me and loving me and I will help you with everything else.
This is week two of the memory verse, so go over this in small steps, repetitively. We will do this for 3 or 4 weeks. Make up actions for the verse.
“Love the Lord your God with all your heart and with all your soul and with all your strength and with all your mind, and love your neighbor as yourself.” Luke 10:27
Teachers, at the end of every lesson have all the children sit quietly while you pray over them. You do not have to use these words below…but they are from the Bible and you could certainly add them to whatever you pray. Let us not miss the opportunity to impart a spiritual blessing on each child.
“I pray this blessing over each one of you.
Each of you is precious in God’s sight.
God sees you every minute of every day and he loves you.
I pray that you will come to know and love Jesus with all your heart for all your days.
May the Lord bless you and protect you.
May the Lord smile on you and be gracious to you.
May the Lord show you his favor and give you his peace.