Truth is universal. Perception of truth varies.
Our human nature makes us seek other people, form relationships, and communicate with each other. A fundamental aspect of our interactions with others, especially our loved ones, is the level of trust we share. Truth and lies are two different ways of communicating with others and two ways of making sense of our world.
These truth and lies quotes raise awareness about the advantages of telling the truth and living in a world where people value the truth. Learn why are lies harmful and how to avoid them.
Here are the best truth and lies quotes…
∴ A lie gets halfway around the world before the truth has a chance to get its pants on. – Winston Churchill
∴ People always find lies more exciting and thrilling that the truth. Lies are like a virus that spreads easily around and contaminates the truth, making it impossible for people to separate actual facts from malicious rumors.
∴ It is hard to believe that a man is telling the truth when you know that you would lie if you were in his place. – Henry Louis Mencken
∴ The way people communicate with each other is heavily influenced by the level of trust that they share and the situations in which they find themselves caught. We instinctively judge others according to our values. If we find lying tolerable or acceptable, we tend to mistrust people, thinking they share the same view on lies.
∴ All truth is simple… is that not doubtly a lie? – Friedrich Nietzsche
∴ The truth is rarely simple, yet this does not mean that we should give up on telling the truth. The fact that the truth is complex is not an excuse to resort to comfortable lies. Lies can disguise themselves as truth but eventually, the truth comes to light.
∴ Whenever you have truth it must be given with love, or the message and the messenger will be rejected. – Mahatma Gandhi
∴ An important aspect of communicating the truth is learning how to be sensible about it. Truths, especially controversial ones, must always be communicated with gentle respect and affection otherwise, the message will never be received with the attention it deserves.
∴ Every truth passes through three stages before it is recognized. In the first it is ridiculed, in the second it is opposed, in the third it is regarded as self evident. – Arthur Schopenhauer
∴ As a whole, humanity is very stubborn. People don’t like truths that invalidate their opinions, values, or beliefs. This makes it difficult for those who know a certain truth to convince others. They will be dismissed or mocked, yet time brings them justice.
∴ Trust, but verify. – Ronald Reagan
∴ For a healthy and stress-free life, it is best to assume that people we interact with are trustworthy and sincere. As much good faith as we would have, we should not forget to always verify facts and ask for second opinions to make sure that the truth we hear is not a prefabricated, intelligent lie.
∴ If you tell the truth, you don’t have to remember anything. – Mark Twain
∴ It is only a matter of time until lies are exposed because of their inconsistency and implausibility. When people lie often, they become unable to keep up with their story for a long time, because of the number of details they have to remember.
∴ Say not ”I have found the truth,” but rather ”I have found a truth.” – Kahlil Gibran
∴ The search for truth is an inherent part of human nature, but it is also something that causes a lot of conflict and distress. People fail to remember that there isn’t an absolute truth that is valid for everyone at all times.
∴ I don’t want someone to believe my lies, I need someone to accept my truths. – Kellie Elmore
∴ It is easier to believe a lie than to accept a truth that does not correspond to our ideas, perspectives, and values. To show people that we appreciate and respect them, we must always be willing to accept their truth, no matter if it is painful.
∴ Truth is much like fire. Hard to understand, ever-changing. – Will Bly
∴ The truth is always too complex and elusive for us to gain a sense of confidence in our beliefs and ideas. Not only that the truth is larger that our means of comprehension but it is also constantly changing. We can never find absolute truth, but we can find a truth of the “now” and “here”.
∴ A half-truth is even more dangerous than a lie. A lie, you can detect at some stage, but half a truth is sure to mislead you for long. – Anurag Shourie
∴ Half-truths are a strange mixture of true facts and lies that confuse and overwhelm us, making us incapable of actually distinguishing what is true and what is false. Lies are easier to detect because they never stand on the firm ground of reality.
∴ Truth is universal. Perception of truth varies. – Bohdi Sanders
∴ Many conflicts and disagreements between people happen because they cannot accept that, while the truth is always universal and objective, their perception of truth is subjective and always different from one person to another. Each person creates their own version of the same truth.
∴ Like yin and yang, truth and lies are inseparable, each containing a seed of the other. No words are ever entirely true or entirely untrue. – Chloe Thurlow
∴ As our perception of reality is limited by our senses, our knowledge, and our openness towards new information, we are prone to create personal and unique images of reality, where truth and lies intertwine on a subtle scale.
∴ The most lies we will ever tell in our lives will be to ourselves. – Carla H. Krueger
∴ As we mature into well-rounded individuals, we realize that many times in the past we ended up lying to ourselves, because of our fear of handling unpleasant truths. We use lies to keep ourselves afloat when the truth hurts too much. When we become aware of this tendency, we can fight it.∴ The odds of telling the truth may set you free when the odds of telling a lie are against you. – Cory Stallworth
∴ Most people rarely lie intentionally. They see lie as a necessity in circumstances when the truth would harm another person or would cause a conflict. However, lies are traps that end up making things worse while truth relieves us of the burden of our mistakes.
∴ Lies are convenient when the truth is unfathomable. – Courtney M. Privett
∴ When the truth is too difficult to understand or communicate, people often choose the easier path of lying. Lies are always more convenient than the truth. Lies are pleasant illusions that save us from having to face harsh and painful truths.
∴ For every good reason there is to lie, there is a better reason to tell the truth. – Bo Bennett
∴ When the truth is hard to swallow, we often believe that an innocent lie is a preferable way to go. It is easy to become convinced that sometimes lies are necessary, yet it is a real struggle to defend and protect the truth at all costs. At the same times, the reasons for lying are always fallacious.
∴ Everything we hear is an opinion, not a fact. Everything we see is a perspective, not the truth. Marcus Aurelius
∴ We often make the mistake of confusing opinions with facts and perspectives with truths, which unfortunately leads to false images of reality. Since reality is too complex, we tend to organize it, forgetting that what we see and know is just a small glimpse into a wider and greater image.
∴ The truth is not for all men but only for those who seek it. – Ayn Rand
∴ Because we tend to understand the world through our limited perception, those who want to discover the truth must make a conscious effort to seek it. The truth is available only to those with open minds and hearts.
∴ No matter how big the lie; repeat it often enough and the masses will regard it as the truth. – John F. Kennedy
∴ Whenever people tell a lie, they enter a vicious circle. Especially if they are influential people, their lies are always taken as truth and proliferated to larger scales. The more outrageous a lie, the easier it spreads around. Once a lie is repeated enough times, people will confound it with a solid truth.