Aristotle opens this work with the claim that “Every art and every inquiry, and similarly, every action and every intention is thought to aim at some good.” Is he right? (page 1)
There are three major streams of inquiry in western philosophy; (1) metaphysics, (2) epistemology, (3) axiology. What questions/answers do these streams represent? Which of these is illustrated in Aristotle’s Ethics? (page 1)
When Aristotle speaks of virtue, to what is he referring?
What, according to Aristotle, is “the good”? (page 1) How does his terminology relate to that of Plato? (pages 5-6) Do they both have the same definition of “The Good”?
Why does Aristotle say that a young man is not a proper student of politics? (page 3) Do you agree with Aristotle?
What does Aristotle believe to be “the highest of all goods achievable by action”? (page 3) How comfortable are you with this truth claim?
Describe Aristotle’s concept of “happiness.” (page 3, 8) Building on his definition of happiness he writes, “then the good for a man turns out to be an activity of the soul according to virtue, and if the virtues are many, then according to the best and most complete virtue. And we should add ‘in a complete life’, for one swall does not make a spring, nor does one day; and so too one day or a short time does not make a man blessed or happy.” What is his point(s)? (page 10)
We will be reading about Plato’s ethical system later in the course. For now, it is sufficient to note that while “happiness” was at the center of Aristotle’s system of ethics, “justice” was at the center of Plato’s system of ethics (and, of course “The Good”). Around what would you build your own system of ethics?
Aristotle describes “three kinds of life [people].” What are they? Can you describe them? (pages 4-5)
Why does the life of a money-maker not make a fourth category? (page 5)
When describing his disagreement with the Platonists, Aristotle says that “it is sacred to honor truth above friendship.” Have you ever been put in a position where you had to make this choice? How does this tension exist in the various elements of your life? Family? Academic? Theology?
What does Aristotle mean when he says that man is by nature political? (page 9)
Would Aristotle participate in a small-group ministry?
Aristotle notes three kinds of good? What are they? Which does he say is the most important? (page 11)
Aristotle’s ethical sytem emphasizes action. Why? (page 12) How does this compare and contrast with a New Testament ethic?
Aristotle puts forward the question as to “whether happiness is acquired by learning or by habit or by some other form of training, or wheter it comes to us by some divine providence or even by luck.” Do theologians agree on the answer to this question? What do you think?
Why do you have to wait till the end of a man’s life to determine whether or not he is happy? Who is the Solon that Aristotle is referring to? (page 14) Do we then base happiness on a man’s fortunes? (page 15) Would Aristotle approve of the premises behind the Sermon on the Mount?
When comparing justice and happiness, which does Aristotle say is more praised and which is more godlike or better?
What does Aristotle believe about the relationship between religion and politics? (page 18)