A small woman with a relentless spirit and a lifetime of sacrifice, Dolores Huerta has spent almost 60 years on the front lines of labor advocacy and civil rights. Her courage, wit and determination has not only helped improve the living and working conditions of countless families, but has inspired many others to take risks to achieve an “inheritance of justice.”
Fan Yew Teng lived a life that empowered others through knowledge, inspired them through his action, and lead them with boldness and humility when asked. His story is packed with incidents of courage, risk and compassion that were never boasted about. Here are some of his heroic actions and decisions we do know.
George Ballis powerful force for social change, characterized by his fluid and adaptive influence and his willingness to work behind the scenes. He was a champion for the environment, empowered people to stand up for their rights, and a became megaphone for the marginalized across the United States.
From a family line of KKK members, Bob Zellner became one of the first white students to engage in the early civil rights movement. He organized sit-ins, rallies, investigations and speeches from Missouri to Massachusetts. Along his journey, Zellner was insulted, violently attacked, beaten unconscious, and arrested over 18 times. Yet even now in his 70’s, Bob stands fast for democracy, equality and justice.
Lobsang Tenzin continually risked his health and safety to advocate for the needs of political prisoners in Tibet and for prison reform. The twist, Lobsang Tenzin is one of Tibet’s longest serving political prisoners and spent time on death row. His story begins as typical college student studying at the Tibet University in Lhasa, Tibet’s capital city and quickly changes to a tale of lifelong torture, endurance and heroic courage.
Malala has become a young national hero in Pakistan, known for her powerful voice and her courage to stand up for freedom and human rights. From the age of 11 she has boldly expressed her feeling about the restrictions imposed on female education and has united with other students to face an intimidating foe. This past week, the teenage Malala was shot in a failed assassination attempt, she is currently in critical condition.