Send the link below via email or IMCopy
Present to your audienceStart remote presentation
- Invited audience members will follow you as you navigate and present
- People invited to a presentation do not need a Prezi account
- This link expires 10 minutes after you close the presentation
- A maximum of 30 users can follow your presentation
- Learn more about this feature in our knowledge base article
Do you really want to delete this prezi?
Neither you, nor the coeditors you shared it with will be able to recover it again.
Make your likes visible on Facebook?
Connect your Facebook account to Prezi and let your likes appear on your timeline.
You can change this under Settings & Account at any time.
Bacteria Cell and Organelles
Transcript of Bacteria Cell and Organelles
An organelle is a specialized part of a cell having some specific function. In other words, they are a cell's organs.
Types of Bacteria
Bacteria are different from Protists and Fungi. Protists and Fungi are Eukaryotes. Bacteria are Prokaryotes. This means they are unicellular (one cell big). There are three different types, and shapes of bacteria.
Spirillum is a type of bacteria that is classified by shape as well as all other bacteria. Spirilla is a type of corkscrew, spiral, or wiggly shape.
Cocci are circular, or sphere shaped bacterium.
Colony of cocci bacterium
Bacilli are little rod, or pill shaped bacterium.
Number of Organelles in a Bacteria Cell
-8 compared to a eukaryotic cell which has about 17
The ribosomes act like a protein factory. They make proteins for the cell and it's organelles.
The flagellum is a tail-like organelle that helps in direction of swimming. This helps so the cell won't be swimming in the wrong direction.
Pilli are hair-like appendages found on the surface of a bacteria cell. They are used to stick on to each other and onto surfaces.
The nucleoid is an irregularly shaped region within prokaryotes that contain all or most of the genetic material. It's also the organelle that holds the DNA in which it floats around freely.
(Not really so important)
It is a biological membrane that separates the interior of all cells from the outside enviroment. Also called Plasma Membrane.
The cell wall holds the cell together. If it's thick or thin detirmens how strong it is.
It keeps all viruses off and away of the cell surface. It also prevents being eaten by white-blood cells.
The cytoplasm is a jelly-like substance that keeps organelles suspended and keeps them from bouncing around.
By: Marlom Juarez
Student of Annunciation Catholic School
Teacher: Mr Bernardin