BACKGROUND OF THE INVENTION
FIELD OF THE INVENTION
The invention relates to a method for fabricating a semiconductor component based on a nitride compound.
Semiconductor components of the aforementioned type have a semiconductor body containing a nitride compound semiconductor. In this case, a nitride compound semiconductor is to be understood as, in particular, a nitride compound having elements of the third and/or the fifth group of the Periodic Table of the Elements. Examples of these are compounds such as GaN, AlGaN, InGaN, AlInGaN, AlN and InN, which can be summarized by the formula AlyInxGa1-x-yN, 0≦x≦1, 0≦y≦1, 0≦x+y≦1.
The fabrication of such semiconductor components generally requires the formation of contact areas on the surface of the semiconductor body, the contact areas usually are embodied as metal layers.
In this case, the contact resistance formed between the contact layer and the semiconductor body is intended to be as low as possible since the power dropped across the contact resistance is converted into heat loss and is not available for functional operation, for example for radiation generation in the case of a radiation-emitting component. Moreover, it is necessary to provide for a sufficient dissipation of the heat loss in order to avoid an excessively great increase in temperature of the component. There is otherwise the risk of thermally induced damage to the component.
In the case of gallium-nitride-based components, comparatively high contact resistances arise primarily in the case of p-doped semiconductor regions in conjunction with a metal layer. It has furthermore been found that high contact resistances occur in particular in the case of patterned semiconductor surfaces, for example in the case of ridge waveguide structures.
Ridge waveguide structures of this type are disclosed for example in the reference titled “Properties, Processing and Applications of Gallium Nitride and Related Semiconductors”, EMIS Datareviews Series No. 23, J. H. Edgar, S. Strite (ed.), Inspec 1999, pp. 616-622, which describes a semiconductor laser having a semiconductor body with a layer sequence which contains a plurality of GaN and AlGaN layers and also an InGaN multiple quantum well structure. The layer sequence is applied to a SiC substrate. An elongate, parallelepiped-like ridge structure is shaped from the semiconductor body on the side remote from the substrate ,the ridge structure being provided with a contact metallization on the topside. The ridge structure forms a waveguide for guiding the radiation field generated in the semiconductor body.
In order to form such a ridge structure, it is usually the case that first a semiconductor body with an unpatterned surface is fabricated, from which regions which laterally adjoin the ridge to be formed are subsequently removed by an etching method. The semiconductor body may then be provided with a passivation layer, if appropriate. Finally, the contact metallization is applied.
U.S. Pat. No. 6,130,446 describes an etched nitride semiconductor structure, in the case of which, after the patterning etching of a p-GaN semiconductor layer, a p-type contact is applied to the surface thereof. On account of alignment and etching tolerances, in order to avoid a short circuit of the pn junction, the p-type contact must be smaller than the surface of the assigned p-GaN semiconductor layer. This is disadvantageous, however, with regard to a component resistance that is as low as possible.
Japanese Patent JP 2000-188440 describes a GaN semiconductor configuration which is provided for upside-down mounting and in the case of which an Ni contact layer is first masked and etched wet-chemically and the p-GaN layer is dry-etched through etched openings in the Ni contact layer for patterning purposes. This method leads to inclined etching sidewalls of the semiconductor structure.
SUMMARY OF THE INVENTION
It is accordingly an object of the invention to provide a method for fabricating a semiconductor component based on a nitride compound semiconductor which overcomes the above-mentioned disadvantages of the prior art methods of this general type, in which the semiconductor component has a contact layer with an improved, in particular lower, contact resistance.
With the foregoing and other objects in view there is provided, in accordance with the invention, a method for fabricating a semiconductor component. The method includes the steps of providing a semiconductor body containing a substrate and at least one nitride compound semiconductor disposed on the substrate, applying a metal layer to a surface of the semiconductor body, and dry-chemically removing a part of the metal layer and a part of the semiconductor body previously covered by the removed metal layer.
It is provided that, in a first step, a semiconductor body containing a nitride compound semiconductor is provided, a metal layer being applied to the surface of the semiconductor body in a second step. In a third step, the surface of the semiconductor body is patterned, a part of the metal layer and a part of the underlying semiconductor body being removed. Preferred nitride compound semiconductors are, in particular, compounds having the formula AlyInxGa1-x-yN, 0≦x≦1, 0≦y≦1, 0≦x+y≦1.
The method has the advantage that a metal layer is applied to the semiconductor body as early as before the patterning, which metal layer may subsequently serve as a contact layer or as part of a contact layer.
The method is particularly preferably used for fabricating a low-resistance p-type contact, a self-aligning bottommost p-type contact layer and, preferably at the same time, a dielectric etching auxiliary mask applied above the p-type contact being used. A p-type connection layer (e.g. connection metallization) is applied before the etching of the semiconductor material and both the underlying p-type contact layer and the p-type nitride semiconductor layer are patterned chemically, in particular dry-chemically, in one (or more) successive method steps.
In particular with the aid of a dielectric auxiliary mask (e.g. made of silicon (di)oxide), aluminum oxide and/or titanium oxide) between a photoresist layer and a metal layer, a layer arises which is highly resistant to etching from a dry-chemical standpoint and, as masking, entails the advantage of very steep ridge structures. In the case of laser ridge structures, the advantage of steep laser ridge structures is combined with ideal wave-guiding properties.
In the case of the method, the p-type metal layer and the p-type nitride semiconductor layer are patterned in one or at least in directly successive etching steps, in particular dry etching steps. This is a self-aligning process. The entire p-type nitride semiconductor structure is advantageously completely metallized.
With the method, the entire surface of a p-type nitride semiconductor structure that is available for electrical connection is completely metallized in conjunction with very steep sidewalls of the p-type nitride semiconductor structure.
The method according to the invention makes it possible, in the case of a laser ridge, to achieve at the p-type contact connection area thereof (surface of the laser ridge) virtually the same ridge widths as at the wave-guidance-determining ridge base (lower edge of the laser ridge). The method according to the invention offers, in particular on GaN and related materials, a maximum possible connection area on a p-conducting surface.
It has been found that during the patterning of the semiconductor body, impurities can penetrate into the semiconductor body or accumulate on the surface thereof. If a contact metallization is subsequently applied to the surface, then electrical properties of the contact thus formed, in particular the contact resistance, may be impaired or increased by the impurities. The invention achieves an advantageously low contact resistance since the application of the metal layer before the patterning prevents or at least reduces a penetration of impurities into the metal-semiconductor boundary region.
A mask technique is preferably used for partly removing the metal layer and the underlying semiconductor body. For this purpose, a suitable mask adapted to the later removal method is applied to the metal layer, which mask may contain a silicon oxide, for example. The mask itself is preferably formed by a conventional photolithographic method, the regions of the metal layer that are to be removed not being covered with the mask.
Afterward, first the regions of the metal layer that are not covered by the mask are removed, thereby uncovering the underlying semiconductor surface. By way of example, etching methods or sputtering-back methods are suitable for removing the metal layer.
Afterward, the semiconductor body is partly removed in regions of the uncovered semiconductor surface. An etching method, for example reactive ion etching (RIE) or a wet-chemical etching method, will likewise be used for this purpose. Finally, the mask is removed.
Both during the removal of the metal layer and during the removal of the semiconductor body, those regions of the metal layer and of the underlying semiconductor body which are covered by the mask remain essentially uninfluenced, apart from effects at the removal sidewall.
In an advantageous development of the invention, after the patterning of the semiconductor body, a passivation layer is applied to the semiconductor surface and, if appropriate, to the metal layer. The passivation layer serves as a protective layer for the underlying semiconductor surface.
Preferably, a contact metallization is subsequently formed on the metal layer, which contact metallization may also cover the passivation layer. The contact metallization serves, in particular, for improving and optimizing the connection properties (bonding properties) of the contact layer. For this purpose, the contact metallization may contain for example materials, generally metals, which enable a mechanically stable wire connection with high electrical conductivity. Furthermore, the contact metallization may have laterally larger dimensions than the metal layer, thereby facilitating the lateral positioning of a wire connection. In this case, the passivation layer is advantageously simultaneously used as electrical insulation between the contact metallization and the semiconductor surface.
In this embodiment, it is expedient to form the passivation layer in such a way that at least parts of the metal layer are not covered with the passivation layer, so that the subsequently applied contact metallization directly adjoins the metal layer in these uncovered regions and a contact having good electrical conductivity is formed between the metal layer and the contact metallization.
Preferably, a mask technique is likewise used for applying and shaping the passivation layer. In this case, first a continuous passivation layer is applied to the semiconductor surface and the metal layer. The continuous passivation layer is provided with a mask, the passivation layer remaining uncovered in regions in which it adjoins the metal layer. Afterward, the uncovered parts of the passivation layer are removed, for example by an etching method, and the mask is finally removed. The mask itself may once again be fabricated photolithographically.
In the case of semiconductor lasers based on nitride compound semiconductors, the method according to the invention may advantageously be used for fabricating ridge waveguide structures. Semiconductor lasers are operated with comparatively high currents and moreover require, with regard to their optical properties, an operating temperature that is as constant as possible or a sufficient cooling, with the result that a reduction of the contact resistance is particularly advantageous. However, the invention enables the contact resistance to be advantageously reduced also in the case of other semiconductor components with a patterned surface.
Other features which are considered as characteristic for the invention are set forth in the appended claims.
Although the invention is illustrated and described herein as embodied in a method for fabricating a semiconductor component based on a nitride compound semiconductor, it is nevertheless not intended to be limited to the details shown, since various modifications and structural changes may be made therein without departing from the spirit of the invention and within the scope and range of equivalents of the claims.
The construction and method of operation of the invention, however, together with additional objects and advantages thereof will be best understood from the following description of specific embodiments when read in connection with the accompanying drawings.