Why suffer from knee pain?
Sometimes this causes you to rest frequently. In time you lose your
strength and flexibility. Frustration and depression may develop in
some patients because of your inability to work at your job or enjoy
your daily activities.
Physicians may examine you and treat your conditions based on your
personal health history. Some conditions can be treated by
medications both non-prescription and prescription to reduce the
inflammation and swelling associated with knee pain.
Your physician may prescribe a weight loss program, some moderate
exercises, or physical therapy and a reduction in activities to
reduce your pain and swelling.
The most common condition affecting over 40 million people in the
United States is some form of arthritis. Even though there are over
100 types of arthritis, there are only 3 types that cause joint
destruction in the knee.
Osteoarthritis is the most common form of disease causing bone and
joint deterioration. After the age of 55, it is the leading cause of
disability. The cartilage, the smooth lining that covers the knee
joint, breaks down causing the underlining bones to wear against each
other which results in severe pain and stiffness. This is most
commonly known as "the wear and tear disease."
Rheumatoid arthritis is second most common form of bone and joint
disease. It is systemic and attacks any and all joints of the body.
Both young and old patients are diagnosed with this disease,
unfortunately more women than men. This disease attacks and destroys
the synovial lining of the joint capsule and the cartilage of the
joints causing major joint damage, pain, swelling, and immobility.
Trauma related arthritis is the most common form. This is a result of
an injury to a joint in the body. This causes pain, immobility, and
loss of function due to joint damage.
The knee is a very strong and stable "hinge" joint. The femoral
condyles or the end of the femur form a hinge by articulating with
the top of the tibia. The top of the tibia is known as the tibial
plateau. The tibial plateau and the femoral condyles are covered by a
protective sheath known as cartilage. In between the two knee bones
are cushions known as meniscus. These two bony areas are connected
together on the outsides by collateral ligaments. The ligament
located on the inseam is known as the medial collateral ligament.
Runners Knee Symptoms and Treatment
Easy Exercises for Knee Pain
The lateral collateral ligament is located on the outside seam. In
the middle area between the two bones, anterior and posterior
cruciate ligaments stabilized the knee joint by preventing you from
subluxing forwardly or backkneeing respectively. These ligaments
along with the associated muscles and tendons allow you to bend and
straighten your knee as well as turn and glide your knee joint.
Finally, the knee joint is encapsulated by the synovium, a lining
that lubricates and moisturizes the knee joint.
© 2014 Anjay Crossroad