Each day, dangerous germs surround us. At home, many of the products we use to keep our houses clean and our bodies healthy can also be poisonous and very dangerous. The wrong pill, medicine, or household cleaner can cause major health problems. Whether from diseases, germs, or poisons, keeping your body safe from harm means knowing the dangers that are around you.
We all need to eat! But making healthy food choices can be tough. To be healthy, we cant eat only our favorite foods. We need to eat some foods from each of the five food groups: dairy, fruits, vegetables, grains, and proteins. Learn about all five food groups and find out why each is so important to a healthy life. Discover why eating a balanced diet is one of the best ways to lose weight, stay in shape, and keep your body healthyand how you can do just that!
Whether were drinking a glass of milk, eating a grilled cheese sandwich, or enjoying a yogurt, most of us eat a lot of dairy. But why is having dairy foods every day an important part of a balanced diet? Discover the story that lies behind each glass of milk and slice of cheeseand learn how to make smarter, healthier food choices every day!
Apples, bananas, orangesthere are so many fruits to choose from! But what makes fruit such a healthy food choice? Find out more about fruit: where it comes from, how it gets to your plate, and why it is such an important part of a healthy, balanced diet. Learn how much fruit you should be eating each dayand how you can make healthy food choices a part of your life!
From bread to pasta to cereal, most of us eat a lot of grains. But why is eating food from the grain food group so important? Find out more about grains and how they keep your body healthy. Discover where grains come from and how they get from farms to factories, from stores to your plateand learn some easy ways to make grains part of your daily diet!
Meat, beans, and fish all contain protein, an important part of a balanced diet. But why is eating protein each day so important? Find out more about the protein food group and why your body needs protein to stay healthy. Learn where we get most of our protein and how it ends up on our plates. Discover how to make sure youre eating enough protein every day!
Someone, sometime, has probably told you, Eat your vegetables! But do you know why eating vegetables every day is so important? Find out how vegetables make your body healthier. Learn how vegetables like potatoes and peas, cabbage and corn, broccoli and beets get from the farm to your tableand discover why eating vegetables as part of a balanced diet is the best way to stay healthy!