Black Americans - 1,224 words
... rks, a black woman, refused to give up her seat on the bus to a white person. Her arrest resulted in a series of meetings of blacks in Montgomery and a boycott of buses on which racial segregation was practiced. The boycott, which lasted for more than a year, was almost 100 percent effective. Before the courts declared unconstitutional Montgomery's law requiring segregation on buses, Martin Luther KING, Jr., a Baptist minister, had risen to national prominence and had articulated a strategy of non-violent direct action in the movement for CIVIL RIGHTS. Blacks in the United States today are mainly an urban people. Their shift from the rural South to cities of the North and West during the ...
Free research essays on topics related to: american culture, american experience, american life, american literature, black american, black children, black church
American Women During Wwii - 1,808 words
... during the war years for many men hoped that marriage would defer conscription to the war. This alone suggests that women's roles as wives and mothers were still dominant during the war because the nation witnessed a 25 percent rise in the population aged five and under. The popularity of marriage and the traditional gender roles that marriage carried, was exploited during the war. For example, the Office of War Information, established in the summer of 1942, worked closely with the media. President Roosevelt soon denied the OWI was being used for propaganda , yet only months after the OWI was formed, wartime propaganda began to likened women's war work to domestic chores. These trends s ...
Free research essays on topics related to: american, american politicians, american society, american women, black women, employed women, most american
A Modernday Revolution American Turmoil In The 1960s - 1,547 words
Hubert Humphrey once stated, When we say, One nation under God, with liberty and justice for all, we are talking about all people. We either ought to believe it or quit saying it (Hakim 111). During the 1960s, a great number of people did, in fact, begin to believe it. These years were a time of great change for America. The country was literally redefined as people from all walks of life fought to uphold their standards on what they believed a true democracy is made of; equal rights for all races, freedom of speech, and the right to stay out of wars in which they felt they didnt belong. The music of the era did a lot of defining and upholding as well; in fact, it was a driving force, or at ...
Free research essays on topics related to: american, american youth, revolution, turmoil, sunday school
Dorothy - 593 words
Dorothy Jean Dandridge was born on November 9,1922, in Cleveland, Ohio. Her parents (Cyril and Ruby Dandridge) had a troubled marriage, which eventually lead to them going their separate ways. Ruby met the new "love" of her life, a woman, later was much despised by Dottie. She was very domineering and abusive toward Ruby's two children, especially Dottie. Early in their youth Ruby and her friend trained them for performing onstage. Between the ages 4-6 depending on who you ask, was about the time Dorothy and Vivian began performing publicly in Baptist churches, and they toured the country as the gospel singing act, the "Wonder Children "Around the 1930's Dottie &Vivian joined a third girl (E ...
Free research essays on topics related to: dorothy, academy award, benny goodman, hard times, musical
The Colour Purple - 625 words
Alice Walker, POCKET BOOKS/WASHINGTON SQUARE PRESS, 1982. The intensively descriptive novel, The Color Purple is about Celie, a woman born in the early 1900's, unselfishly surviving the social injustices of those times. As the novel unfolds, Celie experiences so much sorrow, that she is forced to grow up quickly and learn to appreciate the little that life has to offer her. As new people enter her life, she is encouraged to look at life differently and she discovers that she too can have a chance to laugh and love. The themes Alice Walker tries to convey are the reoccuring themes of learning, love and happiness. Understanding the themes allowed me to find the novel fulfilling, well thought o ...
Free research essays on topics related to: color purple, colour, purple, the color purple, alice walker
The Use Of Race In Their Eyes Were Watching God - 862 words
The Use of Race in Their Eyes Were Watching God This novel, while poetically conveying a black woman's pursuit of true love, seriously addresses society's ability to be judgmental and oppressive. Gender, race, economic security, and social stratification share equally important roles in the development of the main character, Janie. Hurston vividly describes how each qualification specifically affects the character, although the racial implications are much more subtle. This subtlety allows the reader to mistakenly perceive indifferent or positive feelings towards the novels black community. Hurston initially establishes the ideal unimportance of race by using Janie's innocent childhood memor ...
Free research essays on topics related to: gender race, their eyes were watching god, white people, black woman, interaction
Making Maya Angelou The Person She Is - 633 words
The events, encounters, and the environment that you are in are all things that shape your life in both positive and negative ways. Maya Angelou, the author of the autobiography I Know Why the Caged Bird Sings did not have a fairy tale childhood. There were valuable lessons learned by Maya from the events that she faced, from the people she met, and from the places she journeyed. Everything that happened to her made her stronger and created the person that Mrs. Angelou grew to be, and whom she became. Maya was faced with many different events, many which challenged her. When Marguerite was only a child her parents sent her and her brother, Bailey, to live with their grandparents in Stamps, A ...
Free research essays on topics related to: angelou, maya, caged bird sings, st louis, considerably
Kindred - 439 words
Kindred was the very first book by Octavia Butler that I read. Unlike many science-fiction writers, she spends no time discussing the dynamics of time travel, which for a tale of this emotional magnitude, is a good thing. Kindred is hard book to read and it leaves you with so many questions; I have never looked at history in quite the same way. That is the hallmark of good writing, when it leaves you with much to think about. Also, Octavia Butler was the only black woman writing science fiction at the time, and so she became a role model to me. I don't normally enjoy science fiction novels, but this story was a major exception due to the fact that it was so interesting and I was really intri ...
Free research essays on topics related to: kindred, good writing, black woman, twentieth century, twentieth-century
Character Analysis I Know Why The Caged Bird Sings - 1,166 words
In Maya Angelou's autobiography I Know Why the Caged Bird Sings, Maya's beautiful, vivacious biological mother, Vivian Baxter, emerges as an important character in her daughter's life. Vivian endures as a black woman in a white man's world by displaying strength, honesty, and toughness, which lead to self- preservation. Vivian lives within the St. Louis jazz society where blacks are faced with " the hostility of the powerless against the powerful, the poor against the rich, the worker against the worked for and the ragged against the well- dressed." Ms. Angelou provides her readers with a vivid description of an unwilling mother thrust in and out of maternal situations during a thirteen-year ...
Free research essays on topics related to: bird, caged bird sings, character analysis, i know why the caged bird sings, st louis
Third Time Is A Charm - 959 words
Their Eyes Were Watching God, by Zora Hurston is narrated in the eyes of a black woman named Janie. Janie was brought up in the age when blacks where free, but she was still under a social law inherited from her family which kept her bound. Janies grandmother and her first two husbands suppress her into a cocoon and it was not until she met her third husband Tea Cake, that she was able to break free and fly away like a butterfly. Janies grandmother had lived in the time of slavery, raising her under strict customs, in which men and women were not equal. Under her grandmothers guidance, Janie was required to marry solely based on a custom that is dependent on a man to provide for the woman. A ...
Free research essays on topics related to: new york, little black, black woman, intention, intend
Defining Power - 1,638 words
Subject: World History (But it applies to much more) Title: "Power Comes From the Barrel of a Gun" - took the opposing view "Would you respect me, If I didnt have this gun? Power. A word from which many meanings derive. To each individual, it means something distinct and it is how one uses their power that makes up who they are. Power does not come from the barrel of a gun. A gun can do nothing without someone there to pull the trigger. The power to take a life rests within the person, the gun simply serving as their tool. When groups protesting for a cause they believe in use violent tactics, do they ever accomplish anything? When we kill , what do we achieve? To say that power lies in the ...
Free research essays on topics related to: defining, president nixon, leadership conference, luther king, mail
Defining Power - 1,638 words
... t: World History (But it applies to much more) Title: "Power Comes From the Barrel of a Gun" - took the opposing view "Would you respect me, If I didnt have this gun? Power. A word from which many meanings derive. To each individual, it means something distinct and it is how one uses their power that makes up who they are. Power does not come from the barrel of a gun. A gun can do nothing without someone there to pull the trigger. The power to take a life rests within the person, the gun simply serving as their tool. When groups protesting for a cause they believe in use violent tactics, do they ever accomplish anything? When we kill , what do we achieve? To say that power lies in the ba ...
Free research essays on topics related to: defining, white woman, supreme court, black community, muslim
Continental Drift And Homer - 1,457 words
On the surface, Continental Drift and The Oddyssey are very different. The two protagonists, Bob Dubois and Odysseus, are as unalike as two men can be. Bob is an average man with an average life. He works for one man so that he can pay bills to others, trying to make what little money is left supply his family with the needs, both real and imagined, that every family has. Odysseus is a mythical figure, the ultimate man. He surpasses his peers in every manly endeavor, Then there was no man who wanted to be set up for cunning against great Odysseus; he far surpassed them in every kind of stratagem, whether it is with his wit, bravery, skills as a warrior, strength, or charm, (Homer, 54). Odyss ...
Free research essays on topics related to: continental, continental drift, drift, homer, life means
Toni Morrison - 1,081 words
......her perspective is rooted in her experience, and that as we immerse ourselves, as readers, in the milieu of her novels, we need insight into her culture. (Demetrakopoulos, Holloway 150). Toni Morrisons thoughts, beliefs, and morals are the basis for her many works. She writes from various topics but all of them tie back to own personal experience. Her viewpoint and outlook comes from her personal feelings and convictions. Her life growing up as an African American woman is drastically demonstrated through her novels. Morrisons main focuses range from the slavery issue and background of African Americans to Mother Love. Morrison belongs to a feminist tradition, a Black tradition, and a ...
Free research essays on topics related to: morrison, toni, toni morrison, black woman, sweet home
Slavery - 1,243 words
A former slave during the antebellum era, Lewis Clarke, said, How would you like to see your sisters, and your wives, and your daughter, completely, teetotally, and altogether, in the power of the master. You can picture to yourselves a little, how you would feel; but oh, if I could tell you! Blacks during the time of slavery saw the many different experiences women had to go through, from breeding slaves to working in the fields (Woman and the Family in a slave society, Catherine Clinton, pg.13). Many of times, masters would send for the younger female slaves around the ages of 13 and older. At this time he would then rape her. This was not uncommon to happen. Madison Jefferson, another em ...
Free research essays on topics related to: slave narratives, sexual abuse, black family, catherine, sympathy
Slavery - 1,252 words
... mes from a much smaller pool than did men, the pool of black names had a diversity to begin with only eventually matched by white families who added new names their intermarriages. That black women shared the same names more frequently than black men parallels the pattern of the white community. Slave names were more diminutive of white names, for example Betty for Elizabeth. White women also were known by diminutive names such as Sally, Patsy, and Nancy. Diminutives were share by both black and white women. Owners distinguished between black and white female names by changing the form of their names or choosing names for slaves not used by whites. Control over who would name the slave w ...
Free research essays on topics related to: university press, black family, life cycle, lying, mammy
Alice Walkers Everyday Use - 785 words
Alice Walkers life as an African-American novelist and poet has led to many award winning short-stories and books. She was raised in the southern state of Georgia and her parents were sharecroppers. This taught her that being an African-American can have its rough times. After being shot by a BB gun when she was eight, Alice remained blinded in one eye. Her ailment caused her to seclude herself from other children her age. Alices feeling of being older than she was shows in her writing of the short story Everyday Use. One of the storys main characters, Maggie, is a direct relation to the beginning of Alice Walkers life. Maggie, though we dont know her exact age, appears to be a young woman. ...
Free research essays on topics related to: alice, alice walker, everyday use, african american, african history
Black Humor - 1,842 words
Langston Hughes says, "Humor is laughing at what you haven't got when you ought to have it. Of course, you laugh by proxy. You're really laughing at the other guy lacks, not your own. That's what makes it funny-The fact that you don't know you are laughing at yourself. Humor is when the joke is on you but hits the other fellow first-Because it boomerangs. Humor is what you wish in your secret heart were not funny, but it is, and you must laugh. Humor is your unconscious therapy" Laughter for centuries has been the medicine that ensured the survival of African Americans. "Herded together with others with whom they shared only a common condition of servitude and some degree of cultural overlap ...
Free research essays on topics related to: american humor, black humor, black music, black woman, humor, most black
Unwritten Self - 1,683 words
Harriet Jacobs in Incidents in the Life of a Slave Girl uses clear detail and straightforward language, except when talking about her sexual history, to fully describe what it is like to be a slave. Jacobs says that Northerners only think of slavery as perpetual bondage; they don't know the depth of degradation there is to that word. She believes that no one could truly understand how slavery really is unless they have gone through it. Incidents in the Life of a Slave Girl do not only tell about the physical pains and hard labor that she went through. It mostly concentrates on the emotional viewpoints on it and what it did to shape who she is. When writing her story, Jacobs had a clear motiv ...
Free research essays on topics related to: sexual abuse, incidents in the life of a slave girl, black woman, engage, sexually
The Journey - 510 words
On a frozen day in December, Eudora Welty, in her story A Worn Path, introduces us to an old black woman named Phoenix Jackson. She begins a long and arduous journey through the woods and over the hills on her way into town. She talks to herself and the animals along the way. She pauses to rest on a log and imagines a little boy handing her a slice of marble cake. She encounters other obstacles along the way before reaching the clinic where the attendant thinks, A charity case, I suppose. The journey is toilsome for Phoenix but she has come for some soothing medicine for her grandsons throat. As we follow along, we witness her tremendous endurance, her persistence and belief that the human s ...
Free research essays on topics related to: eudora welty, a worn path, human spirit, commitment, persistence