Certainly! Creating a comic book can be a difficult but rewarding venture. Here are some things to consider when creating a new comic book:

1. Protagonist/Antagonist - Who is the main character/villain of the story? Your characters can be anything you want them to be; they don't necessarily have to follow the tradition of being individuals with superpowers. For instance, you could create characters who are based on people like yourself, living an ordinary life and dealing with ordinary, relatable problems. Consider the works of Harvey Pekar ("American Splendor"), which showcase stories about ordinary people. Or, if you decide to write characters who follow the fantasy superhero trope, know who they are (origin, superpowers, and how they got them, etc.). Generally, your characters should be fleshed out completely.
2. Story - A good story can be made from any situation, but generally, most stories follow a formula that has been used in storytelling for centuries (i.e., Man vs. Man, Man vs. Environment). You could also write an autobiographical story or a story about other people who have lived or are still living. Your story is as creative and compelling as you make it, and it does not have to adhere to any set rules as long as it tells a coherent story that is worth reading.
3. Illustrations - Drawing comic book characters and scenery can be done by yourself by hand or digitally using programs found online. You can also hire someone to draw the comic books for you if you have no desire or artistic skill to do it on your own. When making the illustrations for your comic book, have a clear idea of what you want the drawings to convey and consider using drawing techniques that show actions taking place (e.g., using "action lines" to illustrate a person's punch wooshing by another person's face.)
4. Format - You can decide to have either a printed comic book on paper or a digital comic book that can be distributed via email or an app. With either option, you will still adhere to the same aforementioned steps, but the approach to going through these steps may differ slightly. For instance, making a digital comic book will still require illustrations, but illustrating digital comics will require the use of programs (i.e., Adobe, Paint, et al.) whereas printed comic books require ink and paper. Also, printing a comic book will result in something you can hold with your own hands but can become torn or worn over time, whereas a digital comic book has no tactile feel to it but will never deteriorate.
