Commentary - Whooping cough prevention: Ensure the health of your familyIf you have a new child or grandchild, or come in close contact with an infant of 12 months or younger, you should know that the number of cases of whooping cough, also known as pertussis, is increasing sharply. And as grandparents, parents or as a caretaker, you should consider getting a booster vaccine.
By Kathleen Jaeger,
senior vice president, Pharmacy Care and Patient Advisory National
Association of Chain Drug Stores
If you have a new child or grandchild, or come in close contact with an infant of 12 months or younger, you should know that the number of cases of whooping cough, also known as pertussis, is increasing sharply. And as grandparents, parents or as a caretaker, you should consider getting a booster vaccine.
Today, many community pharmacists administer the recommended whooping cough vaccine right in your neighborhood store.
Whooping cough is a common disease in the United States, with periodic epidemics every three to five years and frequent outbreaks.
Unfortunately, this year, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) is reporting a major whooping cough outbreak across two-thirds of the country. In fact, the CDC has declared whooping cough epidemic in Washington, and high rates in Minnesota and Wisconsin.
Nine infant deaths have been reported this year alone, with the majority of deaths occurring among infants younger than 3 months of age. In addition to these tragic incidents, 17,000 more cases of whooping cough have been reported to CDC through mid-July of this year, with the second highest disease outbreak occurring among children 7 through 10 years old.
The good news is that the whooping cough vaccine exists to provide protection to infants and school aged children. Regrettably, however, until a child is fully vaccinated, which is defined generally as five doses of the vaccine, adults who come in close contact with the child could inadvertently pass on the virus.
CDC is recommending that grandparents, parents, caretakers and other adults who come into close contact with a young infant, get a dose of the whooping cough vaccine at least two weeks prior to contact. This dose will help enhance the protection of newborns, infants and school-aged children from the pertussis virus and prevent whooping cough.
Ask your community pharmacist about whooping cough and learn how you can enhance the protection of your grandchild and other children.
• Learn about the recommended vaccines designed to fight whooping cough.
• Discuss your vaccine history to see if you should have an adult booster dose — recommended by CDC every 10 years.
• Discuss the importance of getting a dose of the whooping cough vaccine if you are in close contact with newborns and infants.
• Understand that if you are pregnant, it is recommended that you receive whooping cough vaccine after completing week 20 of pregnancy, and influenza vaccine anytime during pregnancy.
• Discuss the recommended vaccine schedule for infants and school aged children.
While most infants and newborns receive the recommended vaccinations in their pediatrician’s office, ask your community pharmacy whether they offer adult and adolescent immunizations. Pharmacists are authorized to administer the recommended vaccinations against the whooping cough in 43 states, and stand ready as a community health care resource to help serve your family and your community.