Eat a snack or meal should leave you feeling replenished and energy. Many often wonder why they rather feel exhausted and even ready to take a nap. What you eat, when you eat and how often you eat plays a big role in how you feel overall. Making smart food choices can go a long way in helping you feel your best every day
It is true. What you put into your body has a direct impact on how your body works and how you feel. The body converts food into energy in the digestion process and in turn burns calories. How efficiently you burn calories is measured metabolism, the body’s ability to convert food into energy. Both short and long-term health is determined in part by how you eat. When you eat a lot of junk or fast food, energy levels drop significantly. There just are not enough nutrients in these foods to keep you going.
Think of your metabolism as a flaming fire. When the fire has bright and warm, the metabolism is in full gear and body functioning optimally. As the fire begins to subside, add more fuel or food on the fire to keep it burning hot with a consistent flame. The more you let it subside, the more it takes to get it going again, making it a constant battle to keep it alight.
Eating frequently and load your body up with carbohydrates, sugar and bad fats when eating will weigh you down and have you “running on empty.” Re-fueling with a balance of healthy carbohydrates, protein, fiber and healthy fat will keep you running like a well-oiled machine. You will be up for something and your resistance will be strong, too.
There are many misconceptions about food and energy.
One is that certain foods, such as Thanksgiving turkey can make you feel tired. It is actually the amino acid L-tryptophan which increases serotonin levels and calms you that makes you feel that way.
Another is that eating sugar will give you a quick “sugar rush.” ??The rush or energy boost you experience is actually your body responds to and processing of refined sugar. This energy is short-lived and soon after you will crash.
Finally, drinking caffeine will give you more energy. This is only temporary because caffeine is a stimulant that affects the central nervous system. It will make you alert and focused temporarily, but it will not last. As your body needs more of it over time.
Eating small, frequent, healthy meals throughout the day will have immediate positive results on your body. You will have the ability to maintain a consistent level of energy throughout the day. You will find that your mind is more focused and you can easily multi-task and take decisions lightly. If you try to lose weight, your metabolism will fire up and help you burn more calories throughout the day. It will also be easier to maintain a desired weight without skipping meals. And most importantly, you will be proactively protects you from future health problems because your blood sugar levels will be in balance.
Prevention / Solution
Follow these simple rules to keep energy after eating :.
Eat five to six small meals and snacks a day and avoid eating one or two large meals
Do not let more than two or three hours lapse between meals and snacks.
Carry healthy snacks, such as granola bars and fruit, with you wherever you go so you are not caught in a situation where you can not eat when you’re hungry.
If you work out, eat a snack before and a meal after you exercise to give your body what it needs to recover.
Eat a good breakfast containing protein along with carbohydrates, fat and fiber. Do not skip it!