The genus that includes the magpies.
A vitiated appetite that craves what is unfit for food, as chalk, ashes, coal, etc.; chthonophagia.
The essential feature is the eating of one or more nonnutritive substances on a persistent basis for a period of at least 1 month. The typical substances ingested tend to vary with age. Infants and younger children typically eat paint, plaster, string, hair, or cloth. Older children may eat animal droppings, sand, insects, leaves, or pebbles.
Eating disorder in which there is a craving for material that is not food, such as clay, grass, wood, paper, soap, and plaster.
Craving for non-edible substances.
An uncommon craving during pregnancy to eat none-food items such as laundry starch, dirt and clay. It is sometimes caused by an iron deficiency.
Pica is an eating disorder in which children eat objects that are not food. This can include paint chips, soil, rocks, etc. Adults should be alert to their children's activities to detect behavior of this kind.
eating disorder; repeated eating of non-food things such as clay, dirt, paint.
Desire to eat non-food materials such as starch, clay, ashes, plaster, dirt, or other similar items.
The persistent eating of non-nutritive substances, eg .. chalk, clay, grit etc etc. Often occurs with Pervasive Developmental Disorders, and Mental Retardation.
Is an eating disorder typically defined as the persistent eating of non-nutritive substances for a period of at least one month occurring at an age in which this behavior is developmentally inappropriate. The definition is occasionally broadened to include mouthing of non-nutritive substances.
chronic eating of non-food materials.
eating earth or clay or chalk; occurs in some primitive tribes or sometimes in cases of nutritional deficiency
A behaviour characterized by deliberate ingestion of non-nutritive substances such as soil.
The urge to eat nonfood items
The eating and chewing of inedible substances.
An eating disorder consisting of the craving for and eating of non-nutritive foods or other substances, such as dirt or paint. Seen in a variety of medical conditions, pregnancy and emotional disturbances.
craving and eating of non-food substances, such as paint and clay.
Abnormal appetite for unusual and often inappropriate feed, e.g., dirt, hair, feces, etc.
A craving for specific and often unusual foods or food combinations during pregnancy. Some experts think that these cravings may indicates that the mother isn’t eating a healthy, balanced diet.
the craving of nonfood products, such as cornstarch or clay, during pregnancy. Tell your doctor if you have these cravings. Do not eat these or any other nonfood items.
the persistent eating of non-nutritive substances (such as paint, string, hair, animal droppings, insects, soil) for over a month. The behavior must be developmentally inappropriate and not part of a culturally sanctioned practice.
Pica is an appetite for non-nutritive substances (e.g., coal, soil, chalk, paper etc.) or an abnormal appetite for some things that may be considered foods, such as food ingredients (e.g., flour, raw potato, starch). In order for these actions to be considered pica, they must persist for more than one month, at an age where eating such objects is considered developmentally inappropriate. The condition's name comes from the Latin word for the magpie, a bird which is reputed to eat almost anything.