Course Title: Animation and Interactive Media Studio 1
Part A: Course Overview
Course Title: Animation and Interactive Media Studio 1
Credit Points: 24
345H Media and Communication
|Sem 1 2014,
Sem 1 2015,
Sem 1 2016,
Sem 1 2017
Course Coordinator: Ms Helen Dickson
Course Coordinator Phone: +61 3 9925 9816
Course Coordinator Email: email@example.com
Pre-requisite Courses and Assumed Knowledge and Capabilities
In this Studio you will explore and experiment with the fundamental practices and paradigms of animation design through a series of short projects. You will develop a broad range of techniques that may include 2D/3D animation, stop motion, life drawing, sound, video, interactive design, image creation and graphics production. While working individually and with teams in studio workshops, you will engage with basic animation concepts through first-hand observation and critical discussion with your peers.
IMPORTANT: Life drawing classes may be offered as part of this course. Life models can be clothed or unclothed. Alternative activities and assessment with be arranged for students for whom drawing nude models would be unsuitable. Please consult the course coordinator to discuss alternatives.
Objectives/Learning Outcomes/Capability Development
In this course you will develop the following program learning outcomes:
- Utilise technical skills in motion and interaction design, through a range of authoring systems, to visualise, structure and construct effective linear and interactive media outcomes.
- Work with others in a range of roles and contexts, demonstrating cultural, environmental and social awareness and ethical and reflective practice.
- Communicate using diverse formats and strategies to audiences within and external to your discipline.
Upon the successful completion of this course you will be able to:
- Apply an introductory level of technical skills in animation and interactive media to create simple works with a range of animation techniques.
- Design and realise simple projects in response to a basic brief, in an organised and timely fashion.
- Develop minor concepts within a studio environment utilising peer discussion and feedback.
- Experiment and reflect on a range of animation production processes.
Overview of Learning Activities
You will be actively engaged in learning that involves a range of activities such as studios, project work, lectures, tutorials, class discussion, individual and group activities.
This course engages you in learning about Animation and Interactive Media via an immersion into the discipline, its methods and practices through set projects. These projects involve a range of planned learning experiences in the studio environment including: individual and group problem solving; idea generation and the iterative development of animated linear or interactive concepts; using preproduction methodologies for the purpose of further refining propositions; and presenting and reflecting on individual and collective learning processes.
The iterative development of concepts through to animated linear or interactive productions includes developing a practice of documenting ideas. Learning activities include workshops, group work, independent inquiry and critique.
Overview of Learning Resources
RMIT will provide you with resources and tools for learning in this course through our online systems.
A list of recommended learning resources will be provided by your lecturer, including books, journal articles and web resources. You will also be expected to seek further resources relevant to the focus of your own learning.
The University Library has extensive resources for Animation students. The Library has produced a subject guide that includes quality online and print resources for your studies http://rmit.libguides.com/gamesandanimation.
The Library provides guides on academic referencing: http://www.rmit.edu.au/library/referencing and subject specialist help via your Liaison Librarian.
Overview of Assessment
You will be assessed on how well you meet the course’s learning outcomes and on your development against the program learning outcomes.
Assessment may include Studio projects, assignments, critiques, reports and presentations, individually and/or in groups.
Assessment will cover both theoretical and practical aspects of your learning. You will be able to develop your work in relation to your own specific areas of interest in your professional practice.
Feedback will be given on all assessment tasks.
If you have a long term medical condition and/or disability it may be possible to negotiate to vary aspects of the learning or assessment methods. You can contact the program coordinator or the Disability Liaison Unit if you would like to find out more.
Your course assessment conforms to RMIT assessment principles, regulations, policies, procedures and instructions which are available for review online: Assessment
You will be assessed upon the creative tasks you undertake as part of Animation and Interactive Studio 1.
Each of these creative tasks will be assessed individually, with your academic mark and grade for the semester determined by the sum of the individual results. There will be one task per module.
You will be given full details for these tasks in briefs provided when you are first assigned the tasks.
The Animation and Interactive Studio 1 assessment tasks will be weighted:
- Character design 16.67%
- 3D Animation 16.67%
- Life Drawing 16.67%
- 2D Animation 16.67%
- Interactive Media 16.67%
- Stop Motion Animation 16.67%