Almost everything of lasting value in civilization has its roots in the family. The family is the first successful peace group, the first human institution, the man and woman learning how to adjust their antagonisms while at the same time teaching the pursuits of peace to their children. The function of marriage in evolution is the insurance of survival, not merely the realization of personal happiness; self-maintenance and self-perpetuation are the real objects of the home.
The arts of civilization can continue to increase the pleasures of marriage and the satisfactions of family life. Family life is the promoter of true morality, the ancestor of the consciousness of loyalty to duty. The enforced associations of family life stabilize personality and stimulate its growth through the compulsion of necessary adjustment to other and diverse personalities.
Real families are built upon tolerance, patience, and forgiveness and in this world human and universal spiritual heaven family that we live in, the base is the same.
Property accumulation is becoming an instrument for augmenting all forms of self-gratification, while marriage is often viewed only as a means of pleasure. And this overindulgence, this widely spread pleasure mania, now constitutes the greatest threat that has ever been leveled at the social evolutionary institution of family life, the home.
It is the structure of the family that provides the good social coherence and development. The fundamental anchor of family is the woman, although that father is also important, in several countries women that receive education would present a higher probability for their kids to grow healthier and to survive.
The present state of women and children worldwide, in terms of their access to security, health care, nutrition, and education can not be ignored. Investment in women and children would ensure that the family structure remains intact and future generations are brought up in a balanced, healthy and secure environment.
Families, groups, nations, worlds and the heaven family are relationships of association which possess individuality; and therefore does every member of any such group, large or small, reap the benefits and suffer the consequences of the rightdoing and the wrongdoing of all other members of the group concerned.