Definition of Conifers
1. Noun. (plural of conifer) ¹
¹ Source: wiktionary.com
Definition of Conifers
1. conifer [n] - See also: conifer
Click the following link to bring up a new window with an automated collection of images related to the term: Conifers Images
Lexicographical Neighbors of Conifers
Literary usage of Conifers
Below you will find example usage of this term as found in modern and/or classical literature:
1. The Tree Book: A Popular Guide to a Knowledge of the Trees of North America by Julia Ellen Rogers (1905)
"The yews are not conifers, but are set in a family by themselves. ... The conifers include thirteen genera and a great number of species, ..."
2. Cyclopedia of American Horticulture: Comprising Suggestions for Cultivation by Liberty Hyde Bailey, Wilhelm Miller (1900)
"There are two types of natural or native beauty in the conifers—the symmetrical ... There are also a number of exotic conifers which promise satisfactory ..."
3. Manual of Tree Diseases by William Howard Rankin (1918)
"LEAF-CAST OF conifers Caused by fungi of the genera Lophodermium, ... In Europe the leaf-cast diseases of conifers have often assumed the nature of ..."
4. The Plant World by Plant World Association, Wild Flower Preservation Society (U.S.), Wild Flower Preservation Society of America (1900)
"GEOGRAPHICAL DISTRIBUTION OF conifers. By JOHN M. Com/run. NO group furnishes a better illustration of geographical diversity than do the conifers. ..."
5. Improving Planting Stock Quality: The Humboldt Experience by James L. Jenkinson (1995)
"... Humboldt Nursery SEED SOURCE ASSESSMENTS—OTHER conifers Figure 22—Seed sources used to determine lifting windows for minor conifers in Humboldt Nursery, ..."
6. Science by American Association for the Advancement of Science (1907)
"SOUTH DAKOTA conifers A BULLETIN of more than local interest is No. 102 of the South Dakota Experiment Station, devoted to " Evergreens for South Dakota. ..."
7. Aristocrats of the Garden by Ernest Henry Wilson (1917)
"THE BEST FEW FOR GENERAL USE conifers rank among the patriarchs of the vegetable kingdom and in their size, their beauty, and their usefulness to man they ..."
8. Journal of the Royal Horticultural Society by Royal Horticultural Society (Great Britain). (1893)
"conifers," by Mr. WT Thiselton-Dyer, CMG, FES ; "The Value in the British Islands of Introduced conifers," by Mr. Malcolm Dunn ; " The Quality of Coniferous ..."