Hot mouse loses weight
Genetically engineered "hot mice" that lose weight when they eat more have been created by Australian researchers.
The secret of the hot mouse lies in the c-Cbl (pronounced c-sybil) gene, the latest in an expanding list of genes associated with obesity and obesity-related disease.
The hunt for a 'fat gene' began in the mid 1990s, a by-product of the sequencing of the human genome.
Today almost 50 mouse models with a genetically altered metabolism are documented on the Obesity Gene Map Database.
By knocking out the c-Cbl gene, James and colleagues from the Garvan's diabetes and obesity program essentially revved up their mouse's metabolism.
Its core temperature went up by 1°C, oxygen consumption increased by 30% and it lost 50% of its fat, although it ate 30% more.
It also had improved insulin action, making it more resistant to type II diabetes.
"The good thing about our phenotype is that we're in the midst of mapping a pathway that regulates the decision whether you convert your energy to stores or to heat," James said.
He said unlike most genetically altered mice, which were obese, the hot mouse was thin. And the effects of its manipulation were more pronounced than in similar lean models.
"Ours is one of the stronger phenotypes we've seen," he said.
Are genes the answer?
Dr Tim Gill, the executive officer of the Australasian Society for the Study of Obesity, said the research represented a breakthrough in understanding the biology of weight regulation.
But he said it remained dubious whether genetics would provide a population answer to the growing obesity problem.
Like James, he said it was naive to talk about a single obesity gene.
"Just about every gene has some potential to influence feeding behaviour and energy expenditure ... because our whole biology is geared towards driving us to eat and conserving energy," said Gill.
Gill added there were pitfalls in applying mouse models of obesity to humans because unlike us, mice don't eat for emotional, social or cultural reasons, nor do they live in a consumer society.
And he said speeding up the metabolism can have unwanted side-effects, such as high blood pressure, increased heart rate and over-production of the stress hormones adrenaline and cortisol.