Log entry: This is it! Lord Vader selected me to fly on his wing to take down these rebel scum. Me personally! Well, me and Walter, but I can deal with that. Lord Vader must really recognize my abilities! This may be the performance bullet I need to wow the promotion board. And if Vader puts in a personal recommendation, I’ll be squadron commander in no time!

Log entry: What a pathetic showing from these dumb rebels! The idea that the Republic ever used Y-Wing starfighters in combat seems laughable, but now, 20 years later? Forget about it! We blew all three of them to pieces. Well, mostly Lord Vader blew them to pieces, but I was covering him, exactly like he ordered. 

Log entry: How exactly does one properly “cover” one’s wing leader by flying right next to him down a metal canyon? … Oh crap, no time for that now, there are X-Wings coming this way!

Log entry: Well, these X-Wings are certainly faster, but they can’t maneuver while they’re in this trench. We have the upper hand for sure.

Log entry: Yeah! More rebel scum down in flames! I mean, technically only Lord Vader and Walter got kills on this run, but the Sith Lord has to recognize my invaluable contributions, right?

Log entry: Wow, this new bunch of pilots is really booking it down the trench. One might say they’re flying recklessly fast. No matter, I'm on the dream team!

Log entry: One down and another chickened out!

Log entry: Vader said something over the radio about forces being strong…not sure what he meant by that.

Log entry: Oh, crap! Walter just exploded! Were there lasers coming down from above? Nobody said there’d be lasers from above! Oh wait, I have to cover Lord Vader…um… “Look out!”

Log entry: Well, bantha fodder. I just clipped Lord Vader’s wing and spun him out of control. He is…definitely not going to be happy. Maybe if I just skim the surface of our invincible space station I can get away from the battle and land in a spare docking bay. If I’m lucky, Vader won’t recognize my face, right? There are like, thousands of pilots on the Death Star, after all. Maybe I’ll get through this after all…

Log entry: Oh look, the rebel ships are leaving! I wonder why they-
