When [Jesus’] mother Mary had been betrothed to Joseph, before they came together she was found to be with child from the Holy Spirit. And her husband Joseph, being a just man and unwilling to put her to shame, resolved to divorce her quietly. But as he considered these things, behold, an angel of the Lord appeared to him in a dream, saying, “Joseph, son of David, do not fear to take Mary as your wife, for that which is conceived in her is from the Holy Spirit. She will bear a son, and you shall call his name Jesus, for he will save his people from their sins.” All this took place to fulfil what the Lord had spoken by the prophet: “Behold, the virgin shall conceive and bear a son, and they shall call his name Immanuel” (which means, God with us). When Joseph woke from sleep, he did as the angel of the Lord commanded him: he took his wife, but knew her not until she had given birth to a son. And he called his name Jesus. (Matthew 1)
Not only was Mary a godly and humble person, her fiancé, Joseph, is described here as a just man.
God chose two righteous people, a godly virgin and a godly man, to bear, nurture and love his Son during his life on the earth. And although Joseph was a good and considerate man, he was a carpenter, no one of note.
And so God’s Son would be raised as any kid in the community would be by ordinary, godly folk.
The most remarkable thing about this aspect of Christ’s birth is not so much that he was born of a virgin, although that was surely a miracle and impossible unless God had performed it, but that his name would be called Immanuel – God with us.
The creator, the Lord and master of the universe, saw fit to come into the human race and be one of us, to know what we know, to suffer as we suffer, to experience life as a human person in all its many facets, intricacies and frailties.
As one of us, he learnt what it was to be loved; to love; to be hated; to mourn; to be frustrated; to be lonely; to know rejection and betrayal; to experience physical, mental and spiritual suffering; and ultimately, as he bore our sin, to be abandoned by his own parent, his Father in heaven. (Hebrews 2)
Immanuel … God with us …
Now that is remarkable!
O Come O Come Emmanuel Celtic Ladies Christmas