Israelite Heritage. Justhinkaboutit. Real Israelites. Suggestions on Studying a Foreign Language. Learning a foreign language is not a matter of reading some grammar rules and memorizing some vocabulary words-- although those are important activities, not to be ignored.
Acquiring a language is learning a skill , not a body of information. It's as much like learning to swim or ride a bike as it is like learning about the Revolutionary War. That is, you must not only understand the ideas and concepts, have information at hand, but you must also make your body accustomed to using that information in physical activity: in this case the physical activity involved is speaking, listening, writing and reading. You need, then, not only to memorize and understand, but also to practice ! Here are a few brief suggestions on effective practice/study techniques. Make your mouth or hand do what your mind is learning Study out loud. Study Skills from the Augustine Club. Studying with Intensity How to study efficiently Twenty Time Savers How to make best use of your time.
Making a Schedule: How and Why Scheduling forms in postscript: The Importance of Sleep to Long-Term Memory[forthcoming] Focussing and Reading How to improve your comprehension Studying Foreign Languages A few brief suggestions. An Overview of the Virtues Habits for living a good life, written by James Stenson Online References Find cheap textbooks! Links to new and used textbooks sites Up to the Augustine Club home page Study Skills Self Help Information from Virginia Tech Dartmouth Academic Skills Center UVic Learning Skills Home Page Success in Mathematics from St.
Increase the capacity of your memory. J - Jewish Education & Entertainment (Learn Hebrew, Jewish Games) Hebrew Language. Hebrew Alphabet - Alef-Bet. Click on the above banner for a special offer Please click Like.
Thanks! The Hebrew alphabet has 22 letters, five of which use different forms at the end of a word. The chart below has the block, script, Rashi letters and the numeric values. Learn Hebrew - From Alef Bet to Intermediate - Free Video Intro - At Home With Hebrew - Beginner's Introduction to Hebrew. Hebraic Roots, Christianity & the Hebrew alphabet. Foundation Research: The Hebrew Letters - Individual Portraits. A HEBREW OR GREEK NEW TESTAMENT? Another contibuting factor to misinterpretation is that the books of the "New Testament" are "Greek documents.
" The fact that the "New Testament" texts we have are in Greek, makes them no more "Greek documents" than the Septuagint (Greek) version of the Old Testament, which the rabbis wrote into Greek 200 years before Yeshua. The rabbis did this (as did someone at some point with the "New Testament" letters), for the benefit of the non-Jewish world so that they could also learn of the God and faith of Israel. Thus, the "New Testament" documents remain Hebrew texts written in a Hebrew mindset, and must be studied that way, if we are to determine what the authors' meanings are. And until we learn the true original meaning, discussing "what the verse means to us" (as is done in many so called "studies") is a an exercise in futility and leads to error.
Kehilat Yisrael - Where Yeshua is King, His Torah is taught and Israel is loved. Hebrew - English Bible by Books. Here are direct links to recordings in Hebrew, used with permission from Talking Bibles International ℗ 1992 (to request permission to use recordings write firstname.lastname@example.org); they are not chanted with a melody, but are clearly pronounced in Sephardic-style Hebrew.
Some of these chapter files are large (up to almost 8MB!) , so those without fast internet connections really need patience in waiting for them. If you have a DSL, T1, or Cable high-speed Internet connection, you may prefer book-by-book files also available here. To download a file instead of playing it--in Windows, right-click on the link, choose Save Target As..., choose a suitable folder location, and click Save; in MAC systems, hold down Ctrl and click on the link, choose Download Linked File As..., choose a suitable folder location, and Save.
Once saved, a file can be played over and over without downloading it again, and it can also be transferred to an mp3 player or burned to a CD to share with others. Learn the Hebrew Alphabet. IntroductionBy Jeff A.
Benner Why Learn Hebrew? There are many reasons to learn Hebrew such as to read the Tenach (the Old Testament of the Bible written in Hebrew) in its original language or simply to learn how to pronounce Hebrew words such as those in Strong's Concordance without having to use the transliterations. Probably the most advantageous reason to learn Hebrew is the ability to understand the original author's words, rather than through the translator's opinion of the author's words. Learning the Hebrew language can be both fun and exciting. Direction of Reading. Learn Hebrew - From Alef Bet to Intermediate - Free Video Intro - At Home With Hebrew - Beginner's Introduction to Hebrew.
Learn Hebrew - WannaLearn. The Hebrew Aleph-Bet - Learn Hebrew. Akhlah: The Jewish Children's Learning Network. Welcome to the Center for Biblical Hebrew. Biblical Hebrew Resources. Having taught Biblical Hebrew in both university and seminary contexts for over a decade, I have developed a number of resources for my students.
I have included many of them here to encourage anyone interested in learning (and mastering) Classical Hebrew -- the original language of the Old Testament/Hebrew Bible. If you have not taken any Biblical Hebrew yet, and want some guidance in terms of Hebrew textbooks, then you will want to look at my Learning Biblical Hebrew Page where I survey available introductory Hebrew grammars. For students with one year of introductory Hebrew under their belt, I have put together a set of pages for Mastering Biblical Hebrew. These pages highlight a number of resources that may help you gain further proficiency in Classical Hebrew. I have also put together a page on Hebrew Terminology that will help cut through some of the confusion that besets students once they move beyond their introductory grammars.
I hope you find these resources useful. Shalom! Biblia Hebraica (Biblical Hebrew - Lesson 1) God is Not God's Name. God Is Not God's Name God is not God's name.
That's right. The God of the universe has a name, but "God" isn't it. Books.