Water is the reason there is life on Earth and not on other planets. And yet water appears to be the canary in the coal mine of climate change.
A new NASA study using 18 years of temperature data for California lakes found that Lake Tahoe, Clear Lake, Mono Lake and other large Northern California and Nevada lakes are warming faster than the surrounding atmosphere. Surface temperatures rose twice as fast as local air temperature.
Such dramatic changes, scientists say, will have major impacts on aquatic ecosystems. The invasive species that are already plaguing Lake Tahoe may be caused by the rising temperatures; in any case, routing them will become more difficult as water warms.
But perhaps the biggest problem is that the growing difference between surface and deep water temperatures will make it more difficult for the waters to mix, and mixing is necessary to supply oxygen at greater depths. Without oxygen, plants and animals die and the water becomes foul.
Another new study found that as oceans grow increasingly acidic due to their increased CO2 content, the water won’t just become toxic to coral, but it will absorb less than half as much sound. That will mean trouble for the marine mammals at the top of the food chain, who use sound to communicate and to hunt.
Now, since it’s almost the new year, I’m going to give a philosophical view of what this means (although my baser instincts, which enjoy cold fresh water more than anything, are crying out to be heard). Are these just items to add to a growing list of things to feel bad about? No. They are better considered part of a growing list of things to care about, as reasons to get involved in a global citizens’ movement to ask for better from governments.
The meme casting environmentalists as downers who hate humans ought to go out with 2009. After all, what is more humanistic than caring about the many facets—water, trees, animals—of the planet you live on, and what could be darker than standing idly by while our habitat is destroyed? What is more optimistic than a belief that we can generate energy to power our uniquely human habits, like, say, blogging, without sending arsenic and lead and carbon dioxide into the air we breathe?
What do you think?