H264 also means H.264/MPEG-4 Part 10 or AVC (Advanced Video Coding), a standard for video compression. The final drafting work on the first version of the standard was completed in May 2003.
H.264/MPEG-4 AVC is a block-oriented motion-compensation-based codec standard developed by the ITU-T Video Coding Experts Group (VCEG) together with the ISO/IEC Moving Picture Experts Group (MPEG). It was the product of a partnership effort known as the Joint Video Team (JVT). The ITU-T H.264 standard and the ISO/IEC MPEG-4 AVC standard (formally, ISO/IEC 14496-10 - MPEG-4 Part 10, Advanced Video Coding) are jointly maintained so that they have identical technical content.
H.264 is used in such applications as players for Blu-ray Discs, videos from YouTube and the iTunes Store, web software such as the Adobe Flash Player and Microsoft Silverlight, broadcast services for DVB and SBTVD, direct-broadcast satellite television services, cable television services, and real-time video conferencing.
The H.264 video format has a very broad application range that covers all forms of digital compressed video from low bit-rate Internet streaming applications to HDTV broadcast and Digital Cinema applications with nearly lossless coding. With the use of H.264, bit rate savings of 50% or more are reported. For example, H.264 has been reported to give the same Digital Satellite TV quality as current MPEG-2 implementations with less than half the bitrate, with current MPEG-2 implementations working at around 3.5 Mbit/s and H.264 at only 1.5 Mbit/s. To ensure compatibility and problem-free adoption of H.264/AVC, many standards bodies have amended or added to their video-related standards so that users of these standards can employ H.264/AVC.
Both the Blu-ray Disc format and the now-discontinued HD DVD format include the H.264/AVC High Profile as one of 3 mandatory video compression formats. Sony has also chosen this format for their Memory Stick Video format.
HD Video Converter Factory Pro is the powerful video converter support the popular video converting work. Furthermore, the software also support convert videos with HD standard. It could ensure the least loss of video quality. The one is worth trying.
AVI MP4 MKV Video 3GP FLV MP3 Aspect Ratio 1920*1080 H264 MPEG-4 AVC AVCHD DTS TS FFDShow AAC HD Video Resolution QuickTime Video Encoder Audio BitRate Video BitRate Audio Channels Frame Rate Sample Rate Video Profile iPad iPod PSP iPhone Android Symbian NTSC BlackBerry Nokia Flash FLV SWF YouTube WMV TS Video Editor Video Converter