During a period of about 150 years up to World War II, cast-iron waterkettles with handles and spout, called tetsubin, were popular in Japan both as everyday household utensils and for informal semi-formal tea drinking. Most of them, although made with care , were not considered objects of great artistical consequence. Sparingly decorated, they simply served to heat water for household, and for the purpose they were hung over the fire pit or placed on a hibachi.
During the second half of the nineteenth century, when the serving of infused tea became increasingly popular, those tetsubin, which were especially made as tea utensils, came to be more highly esteemed. They were often elaborately decorated either with cast-iron ornament in high relief, or with inlay of copper, gold, and silver. This rare, out of print, 582 page book is an excellent source of information on the history, identification and reference of the Japanese Waterkettle. Condition: Book in excellent and clean condition but the dust jacket shows ware and was taped on without ruining the book by the original owner. Dimensions: 6-3/4”w x 9-1/2”h x 1-1/4”d
Excellent Condition- In unused, or like-unused condition. No visual or structural or surface wear or damage shown. Pristine. As good as the day it was made.
Great Condition- Appears in slightly used condition but looks "Like New". Some minor wear, but retains the original craft/workmanship. May show minor wear, that does not affect the main design, or associated motif. No cracks, dents, chips or missing elements.
Good Condition- Minor wear which can be restored or repaired; may have surface flaws, like staining or soiling, confined to a small area. The flaw(s) are counterbalanced by another feature, like brilliant color or innovative design. Some fading or the piece may have been altered in some fashion.
Fair Condition- Main aesthetic/design showing damage. Excessive noticeable wear or damage. Worth buying if can be restored/repaired because of its aesthetic or design appeal or rarity. Note: wear/damage consistent with age/use can often enhance the 'Antique' qualities of a piece, giving it a desirable second chance in one's collection