|The International Atomic Energy Agency|
The International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) is the world's centre of co-operation in the nuclear field. The Agency works with its Member States and multiple partners worldwide to promote safe, secure and peaceful nuclear technologies. Its key roles contribute to international peace and security, and to the world's Millennium Goals for social, economic and environmental development.
The IAEA produce Scientific and Technical Newsletters: for further details see link
|The International Commission on Radiological Protection|
The International Commission on Radiological Protection (ICRP) is a charity established to provide independent recommendations and guidance on radiological protection for the public benefit. It has successfully developed the System of Radiological Protection as the basis for radiological protection standards, legislation, guidance, programmes and practice worldwide.
|The International Union of Radioecology|
The International Union of Radioecology (UIR) is an independent, non-political and non-profit scientific organisation. Its role is to perpetuate a "think tank" capacity on radioecology issues through the maintenance of a network of scientists and professionals from all over the world to foster communication between researchers from different fields and geographical regions through brainstorming in task groups, the publication and circulation of technical papers, organisation of conferences, training courses and job alerts.
|The OECD Nuclear Energy Agency|
The Nuclear Energy Agency (NEA) is a specialised agency within the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD). Its mission is "to assist its member countries in maintaining and further developing, through international co-operation, the scientific, technological and legal bases required for a safe, environmentally friendly and economical use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes.
|The National Center for Radioecology|
This press release describes the National Center for Radioecology (NCoRE) in the USA which is a network of excellence for environmental radiation risk reduction and remediation. It is currently being developed by radioecology experts at the U.S. Department of Energy’s Savannah River National Laboratory who are working with partners from universities across the U.S., STAR partner IRSN in France and colleagues at the Chernobyl Center’s International Radioecology Laboratory in Ukraine.
CERAD is designed to perform long term fundamental research to substantially improve the ability to accurately assess the radiological risks from environmental radioactivity, also combined with other stressors. By focusing on key factors contributing to the overall uncertainties, CERAD will represent a state-of-the-art research foundation for the advancement of new tools and methods needed for the better assessment and management of those risks.
|Heads of European Radiological protection Competent Authorities|
HERCA is a voluntary association in which the Heads of Radiation Protection Authorities work together in order to identify common issues and propose practical solutions for these issues. HERCA is working on topics generally covered by provisions of the EURATOM Treaty. The programme of work of HERCA is based on common interest in significant regulatory issues. The goal of HERCA is to contribute to a high level of radiological protection throughout Europe.
|Nordic Nuclear Safety Research|
This site offers information on the purpose, results and structure of NKS (Nordic Nuclear Safety Research). NKS is a platform for Nordic cooperation and competence in nuclear safety including radiation protection and emergency preparedness. The work is financed and supported by Nordic authorities, companies and other organizations.
All NKS reports are also freely available on the website and videos of presentations made during a seminar held in January 2013 in Stockholm on the Fukushima accident and perspectives for Nordic reactor safety and emergency preparedness are available here.
|European Commission - nuclear energy and radiation protection|
|Information from the European Commission on nuclear energy and radiation protection.|