1 ) Anti Cancer :
The Anti-Carcinogenic agents in Basil helps to help fight against cancer and tumors .
Basil herb contains exceptionally High Levels of Beta-Carotene, vitamin A, Cryptoxanthin, Lutein and Zea-xanthin. These compounds help act as protective scavengers against oxygen-derived free radicals and reactive oxygen species (ROS) that play a role in aging and various disease process.
Consumption of natural foods rich in vitamin-A has been found to help body protect from Lung and Oral cavity Cancers.
2 ) Against Radiation :Basil herb contains many polyphenolic flavonoids like Orientin and Vicenin.
These compounds were tested in vitro laboratory studies for possible Anti-Oxidant protection against Radiation-induced lipid per-oxidation in mouse Liver.
3 ) Anti Stress :
Basil leaves are regarded as an 'Adaptogen' or anti-stress agent. Recent studies have shown that the leaves afford significant protection against stress. Even healthy persons can chew 12 leaves of basil, twice a day, to prevent stress. It purifies blood and helps prevent several common elements.
* Chewing few leaves daily during morning and evening will completely prevent stress.
4 ) Heart Problems:
Basil can be used to strengthen those weakened by Heart Disease. It can also Reduce your Cholesterol.
5 ) Boosts the İmmune System; Fight with Cough and Respiratory Problems :
Basil leaves contain many notable plant derived chemical compounds that are known to have disease preventing and health promoting properties. Basil is an important ingredient in cough Syrups and Expectorants. It can also relieve mucus in Asthma and Bronchitis.
( Boiling Basil Leaves with Honey and Ginger is useful for treating asthma, bronchitis, cough, cold, and influenza.
Boiling the leaves, cloves, and sea salt in some water will give rapid relief of influenza. These combinations should be boiled in about two quarts of water until only half the water remains before they are taken.
* Chewing on basil leaves can relieve Colds and Flu Symptoms.
** Cures Sore Throat: If you suffer from sore throat just put few basil leaves in hot water and drink it. You will get instant relief. The same water can also be used to gargle. )
6 ) Removes Kidney Stones :
Basil has strengthening effect on the kidney. In case of renal stone the juice of basil leaves and honey, if taken regularly for 6 months it will expel them via the urinary tract.
7 )Anti-İnflammatory and Anti-Bacterial properties :
Basil leaves contains many health benefiting essential oils such as eugenol, citronellol, linalool, citral, limonene and terpineol. These compounds are known to have Anti-İnflammatory and Anti-Bacterial properties. Use for Mouth Infections: Chewing a few leaves twice daily can cure infections and ulcerations of the mouth.
8 ) Cures for Fever:
Put 9 or 10 Basil Leaves and 3 gms of Black Pepper Powder
to 50ml of hot water and drink it. It is very effective in curing fever. In case of Acute Fever add powdered Cardamom along with basil and black pepper.
9 ) Headaches:
Basil makes a good medicine for headache. A decoction of the leaves can be given for this disorder. Pounded leaves mixed with sandalwood paste can also be applied on the forehead for getting relief from heat, headache, and for providing coolness in general.
10 ) Strengthens Stomach and improves Digestion:
Regular consumption of basil leaves strengthens stomach and aids in digestion. It also prevents constipation, flatulence and acidity.
11 ) Improves Memory Power:
Daily intake of tulsi remarkably improves memory power and intelligence. The tulsi leaves acts as a nerve tonic that sharpens and boosts the memory power.
12 ) Bone Health :
Vitamin K in basil is essential for many coagulant factors in the blood and plays vital role in the bone strengthening function by helping mineralization process in the bones.
13 ) Eye Disorders:
Basil juice is an effective remedy for sore eyes and night-blindness, which is generally caused by deficiency of vitamin A.
Two drops of black basil juice are put into the eyes daily at bedtime.
14 ) Treating Skin Disorders:
The juice of basil leaves are helpful in treatment of ringworm, skin rashes and other skin disorders. Just make a paste of tulsi and aloe vera and apply over the affected area to get quick results. It is also effective in the treatment of Leucoderma.
15 ) Helpful in treating Cholera.
Motive is to get connected with Shia World