Horizons 2nd Grade Penmanship
Horizons Homeschool Curriculum
|Horizons 2nd Grade Penmanship Set|
Not sure how to teach your child cursive writing? No problem. The Horizons 2nd Grade Penmanship Set will take your child from writing in blocked manuscript to elegant, well-rounded cursive script, in no time at all. Set includes student workbook with 160 fun-filled lessons and teacher's guide complete with daily lesson plans.
Bring out the beauty of your child's handwriting with the Horizons 2nd Grade Penmanship Set from Alpha Omega Publications. This effective, Bible-based penmanship curriculum reinforces the basics of manuscript writing in lessons 1-75 and then introduces new cursive writing skills throughout lessons 76-160. Practice writing lessons include inspirational quotes, poems, and Scripture verses (NIV) on ½" lines to perfect your child's handwriting. Friendly, colorful cartoon characters keep each lesson engaging, plus your child will love displaying his best writing on the beautifully bordered practice pages.
But there's even more! The Horizons 2nd Grade Penmanship Set also includes a complete teacher's guide with handy answer keys, reproducible practice pages, and daily lesson plans. Practical teaching tips, activities, and illustrations make the most of your homeschool teaching time so your child can be writing cursive notes to Grandma in no time at all! Sound like the homeschooling penmanship program you want for your child? Try it for yourself.
Transitioning to cursive writing is easy. The colorful Horizons 2nd Grade Penmanship Student Book from Alpha Omega Publications contains 80 lessons that reinforce manuscript and 80 lessons that develop new cursive writing skills with lower- and upper-case letters, words, and sentences. Pages are perforated for easy removal.
Teach your child handwriting skills that leave a lasting impression with the exciting Horizons 2nd Grade Penmanship Student Book. This easy-to-use, full-color student workbook transitions your young child to cursive writing while reinforcing previously learned manuscript skills. Used as a stand-alone or enrichment homeschool resource, easy-to-understand lessons include Zaner-Bloser simplified cursive writing of lower- and upper-case letters, words, and sentences on inch lines. In addition, weekly thought-provoking writing projects of short poems or selected Scripture verses from the NIV translation can be used for memorization. Plus you'll love the helpful guidelines that assist homeschooling parents in teaching correct posture, pencil grip, paper position, and stroke.
Don't write off the importance of good handwriting skills. Whether filling out forms, writing thoughtful thank-you notes, or completing future writing assignments, your child's well-formed manuscript and cursive letters will give him a competitive edge. Try this popular Bible-based penmanship curriculum and discover the difference for yourself.
You'll enjoy teaching penmanship with the Horizons 2nd Grade Penmanship Teacher's Guide. This user-friendly guide contains easy-to-understand lesson plans and practical teaching tips for lessons 1-160 in Horizons 2nd Grade Penmanship Student Book. Includes additional practice pages, alternate lessons, and answer keys.
Nobody knows how to make teaching penmanship easy like Alpha Omega Publications! With the Horizons 2nd Grade Penmanship Teacher's Guide, you'll find easy-to-follow teaching tips for daily lesson plans, guidelines for correct hand, pencil, and posture positions, practical suggestions to prepare your child for cursive writing, a comprehensive scope and sequence for clarifying daily teaching goals, and a manuscript and cursive letter formation guide to help your 2nd grader perfect his penmanship.
But there's more! This must-have teacher's guide also contains reproducible practice pages with attractive borders for writing weekly poems and Scripture verses. Just imagine the fun your child will have coloring and decorating his beautifully scripted handwriting to give as gifts to friends and family members. And if that wasn't enough, you'll also find alternate lessons to use when your child needs a little more practice reinforcing manuscript and cursive handwriting skills. Sound fantastic? It is! Don't give up teaching your child good handwriting.
Alpha Omega Publications
To browse more products click the back button at the top of the page.
Featured Item: Men's 'Our Father Prayer' Cross Necklace Need Help? Call Customer Service at 608-723-5867
8:30AM - 4:30PM Monday-Friday 9:00AM - 11:00 AM Saturday Central Standard Time
Need books or bibles by the case? Special discounts for churches or groups, call 608-723-5867, ask for ext. 100
Despite our best efforts, a small number of items listed on our website may be
These WWW pages ©2017 Books of the Bible Christian Bookstore. All Rights Reserved.
Books of the Bible Christian Bookstores