Symbology is the study of signs and symbols. This can range from the common signs we see every day. Such as road signs, to the more esoteric signs, such as the meaning of two magpies.
Intuitive symbology relates to the latter. The universe is constantly sending us signs; yet, more often than not, we don’t tend to notice, unless they are really obvious. This can happen when we start to see the same thing repeatedly in a short period of time. If you see a cat on your way to work, you may not think this is significant – cats are everywhere, right? But, if you see another cat as you walk into your office building and you’re then greeted by another when you return home, then you may start to question whether this has some sort of meaning.
Read More: Intuitive Symbology
Loving yourself should be something that comes naturally. It is easy to love those you are close to, such as family members. The parents amongst you will understand the unconditional love that comes with having children, yet how many of you can honestly say that you love and accept yourself exactly as you are?
Loving yourself is one of those taboo subjects that nobody likes to talk about; there is an embarrassment or shame attached to admitting you love yourself. It is often used as an insult – ‘look at her, she loves herself doesn’t she?’ is a typical example of how loving yourself is seen as a negative thing. Loving yourself doesn’t mean you are vain; being vain means being obsessed with your appearance; however, loving yourself means appreciating the inner you – the spirit inside your physical body. Acceptance is the most important thing – being happy with who you are.
If you are like a lot of people, you will probably put others’ needs before your own. You may feel unworthy of love. Perhaps you constantly put yourself down or think negative thoughts about yourself. This is self-destructive and leads to unhappiness, stress and sometimes illness. One of the easiest ways to start to love yourself is to start putting your own needs first. Make sure you take some time for yourself each day. Your family members will understand that you need some time to relax. Find something you enjoy doing, such as reading a good book or soaking in a hot bath and think about how great you are as a person. Think about all of your achievements – the things you are proud of. You will then start to see yourself as worthy of being happy and loved.
Read More: How To Love Yourself
We spend over a third of our lives asleep and, according to scientists we enjoy between three and six dreams a night. Dreams are intensely personal experiences, known only to the dreamer unless they choose to share them with someone. They are visual experiences and often, mere words are not enough to convey the subtle nuances involved. We all have unique dreams woven from the threads of our conscious lives, our hopes, fears, memories and imagination. The power to interpret dreams has occupied the great and the good in every generation for centuries. In the distant past, dream interpreters could make themselves powerful and invaluable to princes and rulers, and today there are many books, magazines and websites devoted to understanding dreams.
Many ancient cultures set great store by their dreams and use them to influence their daily activities. For example; The ancient Chinese regarded dreams as the experiences of the soul, which went wondering while the body slept. A bit like an out-of-body experience. The Tibetan Book of the Dead, calls dreaming an intermediate stage between life and death, and many Tibetans believe that sleep is a necessary preparation for the inevitable.
Read More: An Understanding Of Dreams
As the old dies a new way of being will shine forth, you have to let go of what was, so that new growth can come through. You cannot become the true you while you cling to the past. You must learn from every mistake, and every disappointment, do not take anything personally, for that will only bring dark clouds near. A new life is waiting for you, if you listen wisely to the call of your heart. The sun will rise once more if you learn to see beyond what you were once taught.
Not everyone has had the good fortune to have had good teachers and good parents as they grew up. Everyone has learned from those around them, and if the influences were poor so would be the ability to understand this life properly. It is no shame to have had poor teachers, in fact the poorest teachers can often be the best teachers, if you learn to be discerning, for within their contradictions, there is always a grain of truth to be found. If nothing else they teach how not to be.
Read More: The Dawn Of Understanding
The concept of universal love, is not one that is easy to define. On a spiritual level it speaks of unconditional love for all. Universal love is a love for your fellow man, regardless of their race, beliefs and cultural differences; Universal love is extending love, compassion, understanding, respect and tolerance to humanity as a whole.
So, how can we develop an attitude of universal love for all, when human beings are by nature a territorial and tribal species. That through necessity they have evolved to put their own individual needs and the needs of their community, country first. Our efforts at co-existence fail when we claim ‘We are all one’, ‘we are all connected’ but continue to disrespect each others ancient customs and traditions. Even though ‘we are all one’ is a great spiritual truth; people continue to focus on what is different, rather then what is the same!
Read More: Universal Love
You may be wondering what all the fuss is about when it comes to using positive affirmations – surely they’re just words, right? Actually, there’s a lot more to it than you may think. Before I get into a more in-depth discussion about positive affirmations and how they can change your life, I want to explain why we should use them.
You may not realise this, but ever since you were a small child, your subconscious mind has been picking up information from those around you and storing those snippets as limiting beliefs. These beliefs are more powerful if they’ve been reinforced by authority figures, such as teachers or parents. An example of this would be when, as a child, you were constantly told by your parents that ‘money doesn’t grow on trees’ or perhaps your teacher told you that you were clumsy and wouldn’t amount to anything. If this kept happening, then you would start to believe those things. Even though you may have forgotten them, now you are an adult, they are still there inside your subconscious and are having negative effects on your life.
Read More: Positive Affirmations