Bed bug overview
Bed bugs are parasitic insects that are enjoying resurgence after several years’ dormancy. An adult bed bug is reddish-brown in color and has a flattened oval shape appearance. Only 1/4 of an inch in length, these tiny insects are wingless and have microscopic hairs that give them a banded appearance. Bed bugs are nocturnal creatures that feed only on blood. They prefer human blood whenever available but will also feed on other warm-blooded animals.
They like you. They really like you. The truth is that bed bugs are exceptional hitchhikers. They may find you in hotels, on airplanes and anywhere people congregate. They will also travel a far distance with an unsuspecting host. That means you might pick them up at the LaGuardia airport and bring them to Arkansas on your person or belongings. In fact, they will travel a far distance with an unsuspecting host. It's important to remember that bed bugs are not the result of a housekeeping or sanitation issue. These pests will infest any environment possible. According to the NPMA's 2013 Bugs Without Borders Survey, bed bugs are a serious problem in residential dwellings. They are also a serious pest problem for establishments that have high occupancy turnover. Mass transit and the increase in both domestic and international travel are also factors in the increased bed bug epidemic.
Although they bite, bed bugs are not known to carry or spread diseases to us. Their bites often leave behind tiny red welts that appear in a line or cluster and that may cause minor to severe skin irritation. A bed bug bite could become dangerous if infected and in that case medical attention should be sought.
Bed bugs are hard pests to get rid of once they have infested an area. They are most active at night and hide during the day in hard to see areas. Prime hiding spots include furniture cracks and crevices, inside mattresses and box springs and behind wall hangings. Contacting McCauley Services is the ideal way to control your bed bug problems. We offer highly effective bed bug removal services that resolve infestations, no matter how severe.
In a word, no. Solving bed bug problems can be complex. Do-it-yourself methods are not always effective. And products used to kill bed bugs may contain chemicals that are also harmful to people and pets if mixed improperly. Bed bug treatments should be overseen by trained pest control professionals.
The health and safety of our customers, their families or employees is very important to us. That's why we use products and treatments that are EPA registered for pest control use. All our pest control professionals are registered and licensed by the state or local jurisdictions where we provide service to ensure proper application.
We make every effort to be with you as soon as possible. In most cases we can respond on the same or next day.
Treating bed bugs requires a different treatment plan than say ants or roaches and therefore a different price. Our contracts are customized to meet your needs and expectations so our prices reflect that. When you contact our office we can provide you with a general price range for bed bugs. We may recommend a free inspection, where one of our representatives will thoroughly investigate your concerns, give you our recommendation for treatment and pricing information for the service.
Given their nature, bed bugs can be difficult to prevent. Being vigilant while on vacation or a business trip can gel prevent these bugs from catching a ride home. Of course, that is by no means 100% effective. At the first sign of bed bugs, contact McCauley Services.