I was wondering if you could email or show me a few ways to use technology for reading. I'm having a difficult time incorporating it. I have a few ideas for math, but reading is more complex, I think.
As a Technology Integration Specialist, I actually get this question (or some version of it) a lot. When I try to think of my response to this question, I always end up with more questions than answers. The main thing you and I (or any teacher, really!) need to determine is what is your objective for a lesson in which you want to incorporate the technology?
Despite the not-so-recent introduction of the Common Core State Standards, this still seems to be a hang-up for many teachers, and I think that is becuase the scope of our standards and objectives are so vast. When trying to hone in on a tool or resource, it becomes overwhelming, and it gets too easy to put the focus on the tool first.
So let's address how to do some backward lesson planning. For example, if you said you want to focus on comparing and contrasting, I would suggest creating an interactive Venn diagram using Google Drawing. If you said you want to use KWLs to research the history of code talking, I would probably suggest that you push out a Google Docs template via Google Classroom. (No, not all of my answers would be Google, but I do love it ). If you wanted to do a close read on a article you found about the Navajo code talkers, I would suggest either the Diigo Chrome extension, or Read & Write for Google. Just kidding! I would recommend importing the article as a PDF, then using your Mimio tools to annotate the heck out of that thing from your board!
SOOOO that said, here are some go-to resources with suggestions for technology that are based on your objectives:
If you're a teacher who finds yourself asking this question, well . . . even though that seems like a lame-sauce answer, let's focus on your lesson, then tech it up a notch. If you want to shoot me an idea of an upcoming lesson you're doing and what you want the student outcomes to be, I'd be happy to help you find something snazzy!