- Life & Style
- Cars and Bikes
- Your Opinion
- Stories and Poems
Let me introduce you to my innovative scientific project “SPARKS”. sparks is a portable oven cum roaster which do not consume electricity(power) for warming the food items and thus provide anytime oven facility to its owner.
Before I start explaining the concept, let us first try to understand the basics of oven. Oven is a device which restricts the escaping of heat and directs it towards a substance in order to raise its temperature. Usually an oven works on electricity. Now a days we have microwave ovens which using the microwaves, raise the temperature of water/liquid bubble inside the uncooked food items and thus help in baking/roasting/cooking of food. An oven comprises of a chamber where heating is done.
Few years back, a guy had invented a portable ready to use hot coffee can. In this can he had used the basic principles of chemical reaction between Cao & H2O to heat the coffee. What actually happen in this coffee can is that…when we press a button embedded over the can, a certain quantity of Cao & H2O combines chemically in order to raise the temperature inside the can up to 60c. As a result the coffee get heated up and we conserve it.
My oven is base on this very same chemical reaction that can be used to raise the temperature inside the cooking chamber in order to warm up the food item.
In every exothermic reaction certain amount of heat is produced, which if properly used may raise the temperature of the things in surrounding as high as 250c in case of very common chemicals and in 1000s c in case of heavy metals/chemicals.
Spark will comprise of a metallic non-corrosive near vacuum rectangular frame
This can be imagined to be something like a cubical flask. Just like a tea/coffee flask prevents the escape of heat for long, similarly the chamber of sparks will be designed to keep the heat produced inside the reaction chamber for as long as possible. Remember this is the outer chamber.
Surrounded by the chemical or reaction chamber, is the heating chamber of cooking chamber. The wall of the cooking chamber is made of the substance that get heated very soon i.e. good conductor of heat. This is for the reason that as soon as the chemical reaction occurs in the reaction chamber the raise in temperature inside the reaction chamber should directly heat the cooking chamber in minimum time period. The cooking chamber is suspended in between the chemical chamber through proper support and tightens. We can imagine this arrangement similar to the microwave/ordinary oven which has on out insulating frame/cover and a conducting frame inside.
At the top of this oven there will be two small tanks one filled with Cao and other with H2O there will be a network of pipe lines and regulators insuring the proper release of these chemicals inside the reaction chamber. There will be a gas/CO2 outlet and waste outlet to ensure proper and continuous reaction inside the reaction chamber.
The following reactions will take place inside the reaction chamber namely:
CaO + H2O > Ca(OH)2 + H2O + CO2 ^
Ca(OH)2 + H2O + CO2 > CaCo3 ^
When the reaction is complete, the temperature inside the reaction chamber will rise rapidly leading to rise in temperature inside the cooking chamber. After the work the waste outlet will let open to allow to waste to move out. The gas regulator will ensure that excess amount of the CO2 must get released to avoid any accident/leakage.
This is just a brief idea about my project. The amount of chemicals used and rise in temperature depends upon the size of the oven and other condition which is needed to be worked out. Moreover I am not claiming that my innovative idea may prove very useful to the society, I am just try to convince the crowd that we have some other alternatives as well.
I hope you liked my project. Your suggestions are most welcome!