Presentation on theme: "(Unit5-6) 扬中市长旺中心小学 林玲 Guessing game What holiday is it ? It's in April or May. People usually eat chocolate eggs. Have a try( 试一试，自编节日谜语 ) It's in\on."— Presentation transcript:
Sunday Monday Tuesday on Wednesday Thursday Sunday Saturday Talk about the pictures in pairs. Pay attention: last …
Sunday Monday Tuesday Wednesday Thursday Sunday Saturday Try to remember what all the students did in 10 seconds. （ 10 秒钟内记住图中人物做的事情。）
Sun. Mon. Tue. Wed. Thu.Fri. Sat. Jim went to the park with Mike. David collected eggs on a farm. Ben had dinner with his uncle. Su Hai played the violin. Mike visited the zoo. Su Yang watched TV at home. Wang Bing went to the supermarket.
collected eggs on Sunday. David wentto the park on Monday. Jim Ben dinner with his uncle on Tuesday. On Wednesday, Su Hai the violin. Mike the zoo on Thursday. On Sunday, Su Yang TV. Wang Bing to the supermarket on Saturday. had played visited watched went Give a title to this passage. （阅读短文，给该短文加标题。）
know more Learning tips ： 3. 全班交流信息。 1. 自读小短文，在有关节日的重 要信息下画线。 2. 四人一组，交流所划信息。 Thanksgiving Lantern Festival Fool’s Day Double Ninth Festival
Thanksgiving Day in America is on the fourth Thursday in November. On that day, Americans give thanks to others. Thanksgiving Day is usually a family day. Families and friends get together for dinner. Before dinner, people say thanks to God for giving lots of food.Then they eat turkey, corn and pumpkin pies. After dinner,people all sit around and talk, play games, or watch the football games..
The Lantern Festival is in February. It is also called “Yuan Xiao Festival” in China. On that day, all families get together and eat yuan xiao. Yuan xiao has another name:tang yuan. It is sweet and delicious. At Lantern Festival, Children will play with lanterns. It is fun. People usually have a lot of dances, such as a dragon lantern dance, a lion dance and a yang-ge dance.They are really interesting. So Yuan Xiao Festival is popular in China.
Fool’s Day is on the first of April. It is a day to play jokes on others. People love this holiday very much. Because they can play some jokes on the others and have fun. In France, people usually draw a picture of fish on the paper, then put it on their friends' backs to fool them. In England, people play jokes only in the morning. In America, people play small jokes on their friends.
Double Ninth Festival is on the ninth day of September, and it is called "Chong Yang Festival". On the Double Ninth Festival, people usually get together. people usually climb mountains and eat double- ninth cakes. The Double Ninth Festival is also the "Old Men Festival". Old people are especially meant to improve their health by taking part in the activities on the day of the festival.
Spring Festival Spring Festival is in January or Frebruary. People usually eat dumplings.It's delicious. We visit relatives and friends every year. We have a big dinner together. We are always happy. Designer:Miss Lin
Homework 2. Make Christmas cards for your parents or your friends. 3. Surf the Internet and find out some information about the other holidays. 1.Tell your friends ahout the new holidays.