If you have a recalled DePuy ASR, you may have legal claims against Johnson & Johnson. Contacting an experienced Minneapolis defective products attorney is vital to your recovery.
What is the DePuy ASR?
The hip joint is like a ball that fits in a socket. The socket portion of the hip is called the acetabulum. The femoral head (ball) at the top of the thigh bone (femur) rotates within the curved surface of the acetabulum. The ASR XL system consists of three artificial components: the femoral stem, the femoral head, and the acetabulum. The stem is inserted in to the femur which is then connected to the femoral head and aligned to fit in the acetabulum. With an ASR Resurfacing System, a one-piece metal liner replaces the acetabulum.
In August of 2010, the systems were recalled after DePuy Orthopedics, a subsidiary of Johnson & Johnson, received new data showing that nearly 1 out of every 8 ASR hip replacements fail early, requiring revision surgery. A settlement was reached between DePuy and the affected parties in 2015. The recalled hip implant systems first became available in July 2003.
The company has advised anyone who had implant surgery after July 2003 to contact the orthopedic surgeon or the hospital where the surgery took place to determine whether they received an ASR hip implant.
What are the risks?
DePuy ASR hip implants carry the same risks as other metal-on-metal hip replacement systems.
Why is DePuy at fault?
DePuy failed to warn patients and doctors of the risks associated with both the ASR™ XL Acetabular System and the DePuy ASR™ Hip Resurfacing System. Furthermore, DePuy was negligent in their design, manufacturing, and selling of both products.
What type of injuries does the DePuy ASR cause?
DePuy ASR implants can cause infection, pain, loosening parts, dislocation, swelling, and fatigue. The design of the artificial hip creates an increase in the level of friction between the ball and socket, which can cause metallic debris to be released into the body leading to a heightened sensitivity to metal and metallosis (metal poisoning).
What are some of the symptoms and defects of the failing DePuy ASR™ XL Acetabular System?
The symptoms related to the DePuy ASR™ XL Acetabular System will differ from person to person. Some of the most severe problems include:
- serious pain
- loosening of the implant, with possible detachment
- dislocation of the hip implant
- fracture of the bone around the hip implant
- difficulty walking
- loss of bone
- increased risk for tumors
- metallosis (metal exposure)
When would the ASR hip implants been implanted?
The Depuy ASR™ XL Acetabular System first became available in July 2003 and was recalled on August 24, 2010. Anyone who had implant surgery after July 2003 should contact the Minneapolis Defective Products Attorneys at GoldenbergLaw, PLLC to learn about your legal rights and choices. Data recently received by the company shows that more people than expected who received the ASR Hip System experienced pain and other symptoms that led to a second hip replacement surgery, called a revision surgery. New data shows that five years after implantation, approximately 13% of patients (1 in 8) who had received the ASR total hip replacement needed to have revision surgery.
Are there time limits to make a claim?
Yes, there are statutes of limitations that will bar your claim if it is not brought within a certain period of time. Since every state is different, you should consult with us as soon as possible to determine your statute of limitations.
If you have a recalled DePuy ASR, you may have legal claims against Johnson & Johnson. Contacting an experienced Minneapolis defective products attorney is vital to your recovery in a recalled DePuy ASR claim. At GoldenbergLaw, PLLC, we take your health seriously; if you would like to speak to an evaluator about your potential recalled DePuy ASR claim, please contact our office toll free at 1-877-544-1757.
GoldenbergLaw is currently handling DePuy ASR cases in Minnesota and throughout the nation and has been litigating mass tort drugs and devices for over 30 years. We understand and possess the resources needed to successfully pursue these cases and are working with some of the top experts in the nation. Our involvement in other metal-on-metal hip litigations shows our passion and dedication to people injured by defective hip devices.
If you are unfamiliar with the way dangerous medical device lawsuits work, please visit our FAQ page that explains some terms you may hear, such as “mass tort” or “MDL.” For many injured people seeking an attorney, this is their first time having to look for this type of help. Often, their uncertainty or hesitance comes from not knowing which questions to ask.