By Meline Kevorkian
Even though we don't know the perpetrator of the recent horrendous crimes against defenseless animals, specifically cats, we should have concern of who did this and why? The profiles of many serial killers contain violence against animals in their past.
This is a serious problem for society and jeopardizes our safety and security. What is the relationship between animal cruelty and exposure to family violence and what impact does witnessing animal abuse have on our children? The research suggests a strong one.
For example, in 2003, researchers Merz-Perez and Heide collected data from a Florida maximum-security prison found violent offenders were more likely than nonviolent offenders to have committed acts of cruelty toward pet animals as children.
In 2006, researchers Thompson and Gullone reported that a history of witnessing animal abuse was associated with significantly higher levels of animal cruelty among adolescents.
In 2007, Simmons and Lehmann found that abusive males who were also cruel to animals used more forms of violence toward their female victims than men who did not abuse their pets.
South Floridians, like the rest of the country and world, are dealing with the unstable economy. We are at the top of the number of foreclosures and unemployment rates and now this. Stress rises in both adults and children in a turbulent economy. The recent cat and animal killings add stress and anxiety. Recently two horses were slaughtered for their meat in Miramar, Florida. In 2008 a teen, who was not in danger, killed a crocodile for entertainment in Miami.
Cat owners are encouraged to keep their cats inside. The victims are not just the cats, the children and families of these pets are victims too. For many children, the death of a pet can be the first experience of real grief. This can be intensified when the pet has been brutally killed. Have we reached the point that we can’t leave a pet unattended in the yard for a few minutes. We worry about our children playing outside and now pets too.
Meline Kevorkian, Ed.D whose picture graces this post, is a regular contributor to this blog. She is also the author of several books, such as 101 Facts about Bullying: What Everyone Should Know and Six Secrets for Parents to Help Their Kids Achieve in School. She is the executive director of Academic Review at Nova Southeastern University.