Intro to Advanced Acting Technique
Ages 7 to 11
Intro to Advanced Acting Technique is designed to be an older child's first acting class. Self confidence is nurtured in Intro to acting, which is now channeled into developing stage presence. Creative dramatics, improvisation, auditioning, public speaking, voice and movement, monologue and scene study, dialects, commercial work and camera technique are all taught in this course, as well as the beginnings of actor's preparation, inside out technique, creating the character, and advanced vocal and movement work. This class is a perfect beginning to a young actor's training.
Advanced Acting Technique 1, 2, 3, 4
All Advanced Acting Technique classes are primarily the same. What makes them different is that they get progressively more challenging. Since acting students begin their training at many different ages and stages, these choices in level allows us to find a class that’s right for them. Advanced Acting Technique levels 1, 2,3 and 4 offer 7to 19 year olds an extremely challenging and cutting edge curriculum. The class covers a vast array of acting styles and philosophies. The curriculum includes: The Stanislavski System, Meisner Technique, The Uta Hagen Exercises, and the work of Michael Chekhov, Joseph Hart, Pierre LeFevre, Harold Scot, plus sense memory, scene study, auditioning, public speaking, camera technique, dialects, masks, improvisation, performance art and voice, movement, commercial and monologue work. This program is designed to give our students the advantage they need in this competitive field and specializes in proper preparation for college auditions as well as the acting industry itself. Discipline and respect for the craft are taught, along with a thorough process of education in the art of acting. These classes are the most popular and most enduring, not to mention they are the heart of our school. Its curriculum has been widely recognized by some of the country's most respected universities. Many of this program's alumni have gone on to attend virtually every major college conservatory theatre program in the world, many others have gone on to successful careers in film, television, and theatre. Judging by its reputation and success rate, we think you'll find these unique classes to be second to none.
Advanced Acting Technique for Adults
Ages 19 and up
Advanced Acting Technique for Adults concentrates primarily on breaking into the acting industry, with all the techniques, teachings, styles, and philosophies the advanced acting technique classes offer including: The Stanislavski System, Meisner Technique, The Uta Hagen Exercises, and the work of Michael Chekhov, Joseph Hart, Pierre LeFevre, Harold Scot, plus sense memory, scene study, auditioning, public speaking, camera technique, dialects, masks, improvisation, performance art and voice, movement, commercial and monologue work. Networking, agent and manager showcases, play readings, and industry seminars are also a big part of this program. These classes serve as a communication hub where actors, writers, and directors can come together and jam, as well as a place where modern acting technique is taught and practiced. Auditioning for all levels and for all mediums is extensively covered, as well as advanced voice and movement work, voice over technique, and acting for the camera as well as many opportunities to perform in student and independent films. Class unity and the acceptance of each other's freedom of creative expression are strongly encouraged; dissention of any kind is not tolerated. This is a nurturing artistic environment where one who is focused and dedicated can thrive. This program's absolute focus is on the ultimate artistic goal of its students.
Ages 11 and up
This class will explore several different techniques that are taught in Conservatory Programs worldwide. We will spend 10 weeks learning the intricacies of Shakespeare, 10 weeks on hand-to-hand stage combat, and 10 weeks on a new technique to the Playground called Viewpoints. The final weeks will be spent putting all these techniques together, rehearsing scenes with combat elements and using practices learned throughout the year to create a new artistic piece.
Acting for Film & Television
In this class we will concentrate on preparing students to work in the film and television industry. They will learn audition techniques, hitting their mark, and getting comfortable in front of the camera. Students will spend time on-camera and garner footage they can use to put together a reel.
In this class students will have the opportunity to create original characters and scripts. They will learn what is important to include in a script, how to work with actors and directors, and how to market completed scripts. Finally students will be able to participate in staged readings of their plays and screenplays.