Types of Rosé Wine
A Rosé is a wine made from red wine grapes, and is sometimes called a blush wine.
The biggest difference between a red wine and a rosé is the amount of time that the wine stays in contact with the grape skins. For a rosé, it is normally only a couple of hours to a couple of days. The result is a lighter colored, lighter wine. Rosés can range from pink or light orange, to darker, fuller pinks and salmons.
Blush wines, many of which are from California, are produced through a different process called bleeding. This process involves making a white wine and then bleeding juice off the top of a red wine, which condenses the red and causes the white to blush. These are typically sweeter, less dry wines.
Rosé wines are often enjoyed in the summertime or early fall and can be paired with a wide variety of foods as their flavours vary from light and crisp to heavy and full-bodied.
The grapes most likely used in making a rosé include:
1. Grenache: typically features aromas of berries, such as strawberry and blackberry.
2. Pinot Noir: has scents of strawberry and cherry.
3. Gamay: produces a fruity flavor, with hints of berries, vanilla and sometimes oak.
4. Cabernet Franc: often with aromas of berries and green bell pepper.
Tavel is an area in the South of France where the wineries combine Mourvedre grapes and Cinsault grapes to make rosé. In fact, Tavel is an appellation for rosé wine, which means that no other wine than a rosé can claim this region as an appellation. Mourvedre tastes of berries and is the main grape in France's southern region. Cinsault tastes of strawberries and is said to be an excellent blending grape.
Because the White Zinfandel is not made like a traditional rosé wine, there is debate regarding whether it should be classified as a rosé wine. Winemakers take away most of the liquid from a red wine, creating a more concentrated red. The liquid that is removed, which is less tannic and much lighter, is rebottled and sold as white zinfandel.
Serving Rosé Wine
The lighter a rosé is, the more chilled it should be, but it never should be served as cold as a white wine. Alternatively, the darker it is, the warmer it should be served, but, again, it never should be served as warm as you would a red wine. Clear as mud?
One thing is clear, on a warm, sunny day there are few wines more refreshing than a bottle of rosé. It's perfect with almost any type of meal: brunch, picnics, appetizers, BBQs, and even fancy dinner parties. When serving rosé with cheese, look for cheese that will pair well with the bracing acidity and subtle berry flavors that are typical of a dry rosé (such as goat, feta, or rocchetta). Try combining it with a simple baguette with butter and prosciutto, pâtes au pistou, or braised rabbit and lamb.
And think pink!