Home > Solution > Construction > Cement Grinding Mill
Cement Grinding Mill
Cement Grinding Mill Introduction
In lots of varieties of cement, silicate cement is the type of cement with all the most fundamental and the most amount in application. Interior decoration, this kind of cement is usually the preferred. Moreover, white cement and colored cement can also be utilised in the decoration. A cement grinding mill may be the gear employed to grind the really hard, nodular clinker from the cement kiln in to the fine grey powder which is cement. Cement grinding mill, also known as cement mill is made use of for grinding raw materials of cement in the cement grinding processing.
Current Types of Cement Grinding Mills
As to the optimization of cement grinding mill, we have to find the current types of cement grinding mills. Nowadays, common cement grinding mills include the ball mill, LM series vertical cement mill, Raymond mill, etc. Each of the cement grinding mill has its advantages and disadvantages, so cement producers should make the most of their advantages and keep clear of the disadvantages, which is also the important principle of the optimization of cement grinding mills.
Ball mill is widely applied in cement industry, new building materials, fire-resistant materials, fertilizer, porcelain and glass industry for grinding iron ore, gold ore, concrete, slag, zinc, copper ore, tantalite, etc. It has two ways of grinding: dry process and wet process. The hollow axis adopts the cast steel, and the lining can be replaced. The big rotary gear is forged from cast rolling gears. The barrel body is inlaid with wearable plates, so ball mill has long serve life. The ball mill runs steadily and efficiently.
LM series vertical mill can be widely used in cement making, power, metallurgy, chemical and nonmetalliferous ore industries. It can be used as coal mill, cement mill, iron ore mill, tantalite mill, copper ore mill, manganese mill, etc. This series vertical grinding mill used to grind lumpy, granular and powdery materials to the required size.
Raymond mill can produce powder from more than 280 kinds of non-flammable and non-explosive mineral materials with Mohs hardness below 7 and humidity below 6%, such as barite, limestone, quartz, calcite, granite, porcelain clay, basalt, gypsum, trona etc. The final size is between 613 micron and 440 micron.
Cement Grinding Mill Manufacturer
Zenith is usually a popular cement grinding mill machine manufacturer in China. Zenith has a long tradition in cement grinding mill plant and mining equipment. Zenith has the people today, technologies, knowledge, and item help services to assist you maximize the efficiency of your cement grinding plant inside the mining procedure. We also deliver buyers the cement grinding plant to all the consumers. Zenith gives good quality equipment and top quality solutions essential to maximize the return on your beneficiation plant investment. We will work with you from initial conception via the life in the project.