TWO major Ellesmere Port companies have hit back at claims they are releasing cancer-causing chemicals into the atmosphere.
Using what it says is data from the Environment Agency, pressure group Friends of the Earth accuses Associated Octel and Shell's Stanlow plant of emitting more than 2,400 tonnes of these chemicals, known as carcinogens, into the air.
It says Octel is responsible for 2,234.9 tonnes of these and Shell 169.1 tonnes. Friends of the Earth also claims the North West is the most polluted region of England, with industrial emissions amounting to almost 8,000 tonnes a year.
And the group makes a direct link between pollution and poverty, claiming that two-thirds of all cancer-causing chemicals come from factories in the most deprived communities in England including Ellesmere Port's Stanlow base, which includes both the Octel and Shell plants.
It is calling for Government action to cut factory pollution nationwide by 80% by 2005.
A spokesperson for Associated Octel said: 'Airborne emissions from our Ellesmere Port plant are strictly within limits set by the Environment Agency.
'Since 1990 all emissions from the site have been reduced by 85%, well ahead of the FOE's unofficial targets.
'Potential health hazards have been studied by independent experts and there is no evidence of human carcinogenity. Therefore it is incorrect to list Associated Octel as an emitter of carcinogens.'
Shell spokesman Edward Brady said: 'We suspect the Friends of the Earth data is out of date and fails to take account of continuous environmental improvement at Stanlow.
'The local authority recently did a detailed analysis of air quality and concluded these emissions are well within regulated limits.'
Ellesmere Port Labour MP Andrew Miller said: 'The FoE seem to be confusing carcinogens with emissions. They are adding up all the materials emitted and saying they cause cancer, which is simply not true.
'FoE also seems to be publishing information selectively and making rash decisions. They need to put things in perspective.' He added: 'I can assure them that such issues are being addressed. Pollution in Ellesmere Port is much lower than it was 10 or 20 years ago. However, it is important to keep the pressure on. An example of this is the public air quality forums in Ellesmere Port.
'There has been a cultural shift in industry and a greater understanding of what a hazard is. Companies realise that safety is the number one priority because otherwise they would not survive.'