Origin of the Name Herron
family history was found in the allfamilycrests.com archives.
Over the centuries Surnames developed a wide number of variants. Different spellings of the same name can be traced back to an original root. Additionally when a bearer of a name emigrated it was not uncommon that their original name would be incorrectly transcribed in the record books at their new location. Surnames were also often altered over the years based on how they sounded phonetically and depending on the prevailing political conditions it may have been advantageous to change a name from one language to another.
Variants of the name Herron
include Heron, Haran, Heran and MacElheron. Herron in Scotland is an old personal surname which was a nickname for a tall thin person resembling a heron. This name is found in many ancient manuscripts in Scotland . Examples of such are a Walterus de Hayroun who was clerk to William the Lion 1178-80, and Robert Heyron who was Parson of the Church of Forde in 1292.
Names were recorded in these ancient documents to make it easier for their overlords to collect taxes and to keep records of the population at any given time. When the overlords acquired land by either force or gifts from their rulers, they created charters of ownership for themselves and their vassals. It was by creating, maintaining and updating these reference books that they were able to maintain their authority and enforce laws.
Settlers from Scotland brought the name into Ulster Province in Ireland , especially during the seventeenth century. The name in Ireland can also be derived from the Gaelic O'hEarai sept of County Armagh and is sometimes a variant of the name Ahearne, derived from the O'hEachthigheirn sept.
The Herron coat of arms came into existence centuries ago. The process of creating coats of arms (also often called family crests) began in the eleventh century although a form of Proto-Heraldry may have existed in some countries prior to this. The new art of Heraldry made it possible for families and even individual family members to have their very own coat of arms, including all Herron descendants.