Allergy Cure Medicines find usage in relieving several symptoms such as common cold, rash, watery eyes, runny nose, itching, cough, sneezing, itchy eyes or nose, etc. The mentioned medicines are also used for preventing vomiting, fever, dizziness and nausea. These medicines block histamine which is a natural substance made by our body during the time of allergic reaction.
These medicines are used for the treatment of symptoms such as emotional problems, shaking and slowness in the movement which are caused by the Parkinson's disease. Antiparkinson Drugs works either by increasing the activity of dopamine or by minimizing the activity of acetylcholine in the motor system of the central nervous system.
Asthma Cure Medicines can be consumed in various forms such as injection, pills, tablets or inhalers. Such medicines helps in giving a quick relief to the patients by directly affecting on the lungs. These helps in the opening up of the airways and helping in patients to breathe normally.
We offer Antidepressants Medicines that helps in minimizing the symptoms of depression by making neurotransmitters to function properly and by correcting their chemical imbalances. These are also used to correct other mental conditions and to treat long term pain. Other conditions that can be treated by them include agitation, neuropathic pain, anxiety disorder, disorder caused by post traumatic stress, etc.
Cardiovascular Medicines reduces the clotting ability of blood by treating certain conditions relating to blood vessels, lungs and heart. These medicines are used for preventing the growth of the clots that may further cause many serious problems. Our offered array of such medicines are also prescribed for preventing recurrent strokes or fists.
The mentioned medicines are used for treating diabetes by lowering down the level of glucose in the blood. Diabetic Cure Medicines are taken after considering the nature and type of diabetes, medical condition and age of the patient. These are used to cure and prevent both types of diabetes- Type I and Type II.
Our offered Gastrointestinal Medicines are used to cure and treat several digestive problems like constipation, diarrhea, indigestion, bouts of vomiting. Apart from treating these minor digestive problems, these can treat some specific and major gastric problems. These medicines work by preventing the growth of bacteria that causes such problems.
The mentioned medicines are used to prevent or stop the severe headache usually called as migraine. This category also includes the medicines which are used for treating thyroid which works by blocking the effect of thyroid hormones. Our range of Migraine and Thyroid Cure Medicines help in the prevention of several substance that can help in the generation of pain.
Our offered Pain Relief Medicines are very effective to get relief from mild, moderate or severe pain including backache, headache, knee pain, neck pain, etc. These are available in many forms like tablets, gels, creams and sprays. The mentioned medicines have no harmful effect on the kidneys or any other organ of the body.
Our array of Urogenital Medicines is used for relieving the irritation caused due to urinary infections by soothing the lining of urinary tract. The mentioned medicines should only be consumed after the prescription of the doctor or the physician as the dosage is strictly based upon the medical condition of the patient.
Skin Care Medicines that we offer are treating several skin conditions such as eczema, psoriasis, wrinkles, blemishes, acne and many more. These are used for the treatment of skin infections that occur on hands, feet or nails. Apart from treating the aforementioned infections and other skin conditions, these are also used to add natural glow to the skin.
Our rendered Women Hormones Medicines are prescribed to the patients who suffer from endometriosis, urinary incontinence, bacterial vaginosis, menstrual irregularities and many other disorders. All these problems can be easily treated by using our offered medicines but the mentioned medicines should be taken only after the consulting the gynecologist.
The mentioned General Medicines for Health Care are used for several purposes such as for the treatment of nausea, constipation, headache, vomiting, neck pain, stomachache, diarrhea and many more. This range of medicines also include the medicines that are prescribed to the people who want to quit smoking.
Eye Drop is an excellent way for soothing irritated or sore eyes. This provide lubrication to the dry eyes in order to hydrate them. Several other eye complications which are caused by cataract, ocular hypertension, etc. can be treated by using this range. The nozzle of the bottle is designed in such way that it offers easy application.
The mentioned tablets are prescribed to the patients who suffer from cardiovascular disorders or hypertension. Blood Pressure Tablets should only be taken by a patient by depending upon the type of the blood pressure such as high blood pressure or low blood pressure. These help in relaxing the blood vessels by regulating the flow of blood in the body.
Our offered Pharmaceutical Formulations are prepared by using a variety of chemical substances that are combined together in order to render the final medicine. These are prepared by considering several factors such as polymorphism, solubility, particle size, and pH because of these influences the activity of the medicine.
ACE GOLDEN INTERNATIONAL All Rights Reserved.