Also found in: Dictionary, Thesaurus, Encyclopedia, Wikipedia.
Italian pathologist, 1843–1926.
A lamellar membranous organelle in almost all cells, best viewed by electron microscopy. It consists of curved parallel series of flattened sacs that are often expanded at their ends. In secretory cells, the apparatus concentrates and packages the secretory product. Its function in other cells, although apparently important, is poorly understood.Synonym: Golgi complex
A multipolar nerve cell in the cerebral cortex and posterior horns of the spinal cord. Type I possesses long axons; type II, short axons.Synonym: Golgi neuron
Golgi complexGolgi apparatus.
Golgi neuronGolgi cell.
Golgi tendon organAbbreviation: GTO
A spindle-shaped structure at the junction of a muscle and a tendon. The structure is thought to function as a feedback system that senses muscle tension through tendon stretch, inhibits muscle contraction of the agonist, and facilitates contraction of the antagonistic muscle. The purpose of this mechanism, known as autogenic facilitation, is to prevent overuse and damage to the muscle and corresponding joint.
Golgi,Camillo, Italian histologist and Nobel laureate, 1844-1926.
Golgi apparatus - a membranous system of cisternae and vesicles concerned with intracellular transport of membrane-bounded secretory proteins. Synonym(s): dictyosome; Golgi body; Golgi complex; Golgi internal reticulum; Holmgrén-Golgi canals
Golgi body - Synonym(s): Golgi apparatus
Golgi complex - Synonym(s): Golgi apparatus
Golgi internal reticulum - Synonym(s): Golgi apparatus
Golgi osmiobichromate fixative - an osmic-bichromate mixture used to demonstrate nerve cells and their processes.
Golgi stain - any of several methods for staining nerve cells, nerve fibers, and neuroglia.
Golgi tendon organ - a proprioceptive sensory nerve ending embedded among the fibers of a tendon. Synonym(s): neurotendinous organ; neurotendinous spindle
Golgi zone - part of the cytoplasm occupied by the Golgi apparatus.
Golgi-Mazzoni corpuscle - an encapsulated sensory nerve ending.
Holmgrén-Golgi canals - Synonym(s): Golgi apparatus