A conversation with primary school teacher Mónica Gimeno (Valencia, Spain)
I learned about Paper when it launched in 2012. It was so simple and, to me, perfect, that very soon I knew we would become good friends. Paper is a great help when I need to get a lesson ready. When I'm at home, I use the app to prepare lesson plans, and in the classroom, I use it while connected to our whiteboard. Then I sketch or diagram my explanation to my students, like a live-editing presentation. They love it, and I do, too. Paper makes it so simple. It's magic!
I also use the app to make drawings for myself, as a way to fight anxiety. I'm just a teacher, not an artist, but Paper can transform any simple sketch I make into something I feel is great.
As a teacher, I'm always planning and drawing diagrams to make information easier for my students to understand. The Think Kit diagramming tools in Paper are perfect for teachers and students. I love the clean way they organize my ideas with shapes for charts, diagrams, and flows. No matter what you're trying to write, the final results are always clean and visually attractive. And when there's only boring text on the screen, I love adding pictures with simple textures as a background, just to beautify and improve the presentation.
This picture shows one of the main ancient entrances to Valencia, where I live in Spain, built during the medieval times. I often use the Spotlight feature to focus on the main vocabulary. In this case, the word my students were learning was "gargoyle" and you can clearly spot them in the picture.
Here I combined some Think Kit rectangles in different shades of blue, and added a picture as a blurred background to give it some depth. That's how I thought I could improve this worksheet about the different layers of the earth's atmosphere.
How Mónica Uses Paper To Teach
This is an example of a worksheet from one of my science classes about the parts of a flower. First, I insert the picture of a flower and Spotlight the main area we need to focus on.
Then I draw a picture of the inside of the flower, and add arrows and other shapes for my students to fill in...
Finally, the students fill in the blank spaces with the new information they learn: