Books of The Times; The Klan's War Against Jews in the Deep South
By HERBERT MITGANG
Published: February 24, 1993
Terror in the Night The Klan's Campaign Against the Jews By Jack Nelson Simon & Schuster. 287 pages. Publisher.
Jack Nelson was the Atlanta bureau chief of The Los Angeles Times in the summer of 1968 when he got a call in the middle of the night from Roy Gunn, the police chief of Meridian, Miss. " 'O.K., Jack, get your pencil out,' the booming voice commanded. 'There's gonna be some wailing and gnashing of teeth.' "
So begins "Terror in the Night," a melodramatic, personalized account by a greatly respected reporter of the civil rights battle in the streets and for the minds of Southerners a quarter of a century ago. If one thinks back to that violent decade, thoughts quickly turn to anti-Vietnam War marches on Washington, the assassinations of the Kennedy brothers, the murders of black and white volunteers for justice by rabid segregationists with ropes and guns, the slaying of the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr.
But after all these events and the passage of years, something else kept gnawing at Mr. Nelson: the much lesser-known scapegoating campaign against the Jews in the Deep South by fanatical members of the White Knights of the Ku Klux Klan and the hidden story behind the counterattack by local police chiefs, Federal Bureau of Investigation agents and Jewish leaders. With the help of the Freedom of Information Act, Mr. Nelson gained access to F.B.I. files and, using his strong contacts, uncovered Mississippi police records. To bring his story up to date, he returned to the scene of the crimes and conducted interviews with F.B.I. agents, Jewish leaders and former Klansmen who, more or less, had found religion.
This results in a startling reconstruction of the way the F.B.I. and the Mississippi police decided to fight fire with fire even if, as Mr. Nelson strongly states, it meant bending the law. Under pressure from arrests in civil rights cases involving blacks, the Klan decided to change tactics and to focus its violence against Jews. The shift in strategy led to the bombing of a new synagogue in Jackson, the dynamiting of a rabbi's house and the marking of certain Jewish leaders for death. On a tape recording obtained by the F.B.I., one Klansman argued in favor of bombing a synagogue while many worshipers would be there, including children. The Klansman is heard to say, "Kill 'em while they're young."
Mr. Nelson, originally from Mississippi and now his newspaper's bureau chief in Washington, is especially perceptive about how an indifferent Christian clergy and the assimilationist Jewish community in Mississippi -- some of whose ancestors fought for the Confederacy during what was still called the War Between the States rather than the Civil War -- were ambivalent about openly pressing for civil rights. Only after the violence erupted did the Jewish leaders realize that the hate literature (like The White Patriot, distributed by Americans for the Preservation of the White Race, a front organization for the White Knights of the Ku Klux Klan) tolled for them, too.
By the middle of the 1960's, the F.B.I. estimated that the White Knights had grown to a membership of 5,000 to 6,000 members. They had infiltrated some local police departments in Mississippi; not every policeman could be trusted with anti-Klan plans. Then the F.B.I. moved in. Its special agents in Mississippi decided it was necessary to find a private bankroll to buy information and trap the Klan killers. Secretly, the Federal agents obtained tens of thousands of dollars from Mississippi's Jewish community, bought Klan informers and used them to set up an ambush to capture or, more likely, kill the Klan's most dangerous hit men.
The two hit men turned out to be a man and a woman, the Bonnie and Clyde of "Terror in the Night." Thomas Albert Tarrants 3d was a 21-year-old terrorist and dynamiter, an anti-Semite with an arrest record; Kathryn Ainsworth was a 26-year-old schoolteacher by day, a Klan bomber at night. They were the trusted confederates of Samuel Holloway Bowers Jr., Imperial Wizard of the White Knights of the Mississippi Klan. On the evening of June 29, 1968, their mission was to pull off what the Klan called a "No. 4" -- a murder -- against a prominent Jewish businessman in Meridian.
In the most gripping chapter of the book, an elaborate ambush is devised by the F.B.I. and local police. The two Klan terrorists, armed with machine guns and sticks of dynamite, drive up a darkened street toward their target. A car chase follows; Tarrants is pursued, wounded and captured. Ainsworth is killed and becomes a martyr, worshiped by Klansmen. Long afterward, Mr. Nelson interviews Tarrants and finds that he is now a Christian convert, "involved in religious teaching and Bible training."
"Terror in the Night" is an exciting work of personal storytelling that, regrettably, lacks a parallel context to give it special meaning now. Mr. Nelson is so intent on being the digging reporter that he fails to deal with matters that demand interpretation. A book isn't a newspaper; it permits passion as well as objectivity. After all, he is writing about the evil nature of the most dangerous bigots in American life and their political successors, without hoods, who talk of religious war in the United States today. Had he included an afterword or epilogue about such matters, Mr. Nelson could have created an even more valuable book of current history.
Photo: Jack Nelson (Bernie Boston/Simon & Schuster)