S: Baby's First Year
FC: Casey's Baby Book
1: She will fill our lives with sunshine.... And our hearts with love.
2: \ | PHYSICAL DEVELOPMENT: | Physical Development: You might hear a health care professional or child care provider talk about your toddler's physical development. This term encompasses both fine motor and gross motor skills as well as whole body movement and sometimes even growth. Using muscle cooperation and learning how to walk, crawl, or ride a bike, are great examples of physical development. | Walking is an example of physical development because you are using your legs to prop yourself up and you are gaining balance.
3: Riding a bike exercises your physical development because you use your leg muscles to push the pedals and you use hand-eye coordination while steering the bike.
4: A baby is born with a need to be loved -- and never outgrows it. | MORAL DEVELOPMENT: | Moral development is a development type that is concerned with the principles of right and wrong behavior and the goodness or badness of human character. For example, believing in Santa Claus can be an example of moral development showing the "goodness" of the human character and believing in something that's not real. Being gentle with a puppy instead of throwing it around, and learning your manners is knowing between right and wrong with behaviors.
6: EMOTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: | Emotional development is something that is aroused or characterized by intense feeling. For example, smiling because you are happy, or showing you are angry because someone tried sitting on your lap, shows that you have emotion. | This picture is an emotional because I was happy that my mom was playing with me.
7: This picture shows emotional development because I was very angry that someone wanted to sit on my lap. I wanted to be independent and not have anyone sit on my lap.
8: This picture is intellectual because I am finding the yellow egg like instructed by my mom.
9: INTELLECTUAL DEVELOPMENT: | Intellectual development is reasoning and understanding objectively while getting older with age. For example, learning about a starfish and how it lives, or learning the colors of easter eggs. | Here, it's intellectual because I am learning about starfish.
10: SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT: | Social development has to do with the way that a child interacts with other people. | In this picture, I am being social because I am holding hands with one of my friends.
11: "Courage, determination, pride...that's what little girls are made of." | In this picture, I am getting to play "Red Rover" with my friends at a pool party.