Presentation on theme: "Learning Objectives To revise the definitions of LGBT. To identify the LGBT musicians in history To understand the ‘Trouser Role’ To understand the role."— Presentation transcript:
Learning Objectives To revise the definitions of LGBT. To identify the LGBT musicians in history To understand the ‘Trouser Role’ To understand the role of Cherabino in ‘Le Nozze di Figaro by Mozart To analyse and identify classical harmonic formulas in the aria ‘Voi Che Sapete’
What do these musicians have in common? LisztDana InternationalTchaikovsky Elton John George MichaelBenjamin Britten Bessie SmithK.D. Lang John Cage Cole PorterFreddy mercuryChopin Melissa EtheridgeMadonnaJanis Ian Beth DittoScissor SistersLeonard Bernstein
Listen and watch this clip of Cherubino singing ‘Voi Che Sapete’ from The Marriage of Figaro by Mozart http://www.youtube.co m/watch?v=o7y3_SZqNi 4&feature=related http://www.youtube.co m/watch?v=o7y3_SZqNi 4&feature=related
Definitions – Research and prepare your answers: Note: Use ‘Guide to the trouser role’ and the internet to help you What is a trouser role – give an example? Which voice type sings the trouser role? What is the range of this type of voice? What is the name of the male voice that sings in this range? In which Era’s were these voice types popular? Give two examples of composers who wrote for these voice types?
Read through the libretto and discuss the intent of the performance Tell me what love is, what can it be? What is this yearning burning me? Can I survive it, will I endure? This is my sickness, is there a cure? First this obsession seizing my brain, Starting in passion, ending in pain. I start to shiver, then I'm on fire, then I'm aquiver with seething desire. Who knows the secret, who holds the key? I long for something - what can it be? My brain is reeling, I wonder why; And then the feeling I'm going to die. By day it haunts me, haunts me by night. This tender torment, tinged with delight! Tell me what love is, what can it be? What is this yearning, burning in me?
Look at the score of ‘Voi che sapete’ Analyze the harmonic structure identifying classical conventions Refer to: Key Modulation Left hand accompaniment Ornamentation Performance markings Cadences Identify: A Tonic chord iib V 1 cadence Modulation to the dominant Modulation to the relative minor Key changes
What were your findings? Give a short presentation to the group detailing your analysis of the harmony and conventions of ‘Voi che sapete’ and give reasoned conclusions as to why it firmly belongs in the classical era