Presentation on theme: "Marriage in Christianity Why do people get married?"— Presentation transcript:
Marriage in Christianity Why do people get married?
What is a Christian marriage ceremony? A custom is something that people do at special times and on special occasions within a family, a religion, a country or a society. Customs mark events to remember. A marriage is celebrated at a ceremony called a wedding. At a wedding there are various customs, which show that the bride and the groom are making an agreement to care for each other and share the ups and downs of life together.
Words In many Christian weddings the bride and groom promise to love each other for better or worse, for richer or poorer, in sickness and in health until they are parted by death. They say these words loudly in the presence of everybody (including the priest). The bride and groom make their marriage vows when they give each other a ring. They say: I give you this ring as a sign of our marriage. With my body I honour you, all that I am I give to you, All that I have I share with you, within the love of God.
Symbols and Actions Often words are said and promises made. Rings are given, scarves are used to join the couple, hands are held and agreements are signed. Many people have a religious ceremony because these customs are made sacred and because they believe that their God is present to bless their marriage.
It is a custom for Christian brides to wear a white or cream wedding dress. White is a symbol of purity and innocence. Many brides get married in a veil, which covers their face. The groom lifts up the veil to make sure that he is marrying the right woman. For Christians in Britain it is a custom to finish off the meal with a wedding cake. The cake is usually made of fruit, covered with white icing and has three tiers or levels. Traditionally couples are supposed to save one layer for the birth of their first child. One custom that sometimes takes place after a Christian wedding is crossing the threshold. The man carries his bride over the threshold or doorway of their new home. Doors are important symbols. When a couple cross the threshold they are opening the door to their new life together.
Rings Wedding rings are usually smooth gold bands that have no beginning or end. Rings are like circles of love that have no beginning or end, so they are symbols of eternity. They show that the couple belong together and hope to stay with each other for life.
Task Why is it important for Christians to get married? What symbols are used in a Christian wedding ceremony?