Grey Nun Academy 5th Graders Graduate D.A.R.E. Program and Present on Career Day
Students Learn the Importance of Good Decision-Making & Planning for the Future
May 16, 2017 -- Yardley, PA – Fifth Graders at Grey Nun Academy (GNA), an independent, Catholic, coeducational elementary school in Bucks County, PA, recently completed the D.A.R.E. program and were honored at a graduation ceremony. In addition, students completed extensive research-based Career Day projects and considered many options for their future careers.
D.A.R.E.—which stands for Drug Abuse Resistance Education—was founded in 1983 with the intention of teaching the youth about substance abuse prevention. Since then, the program has evolved to include lessons that promote self-esteem, good decision making, effective communication, and coping with challenges faced while growing up.
Earlier this month, Officer Brian Omlor of the Lower Makefield Township Police Department, presented the students with their certificates of completion for the D.A.R.E. program. Officer Omlor spent 12 weeks working with the fifth graders, teaching them how to make mature decisions that will benefit their mental, emotional and physical health.
“The lessons learned through the D.A.R.E. program are invaluable to our students,” said Deborah Kost, Head of School at GNA. “It is so important that the children begin to thoughtfully consider the consequences of their decisions. We are thankful to Officer Omlor for teaching them these important lessons. D.A.R.E. teaches them the tools they need to make the right choices that will lead them on a path to success.”
For some students, this path may lead to careers in law enforcement or education. In addition to the D.A.R.E. graduation, the fifth graders also participated in Career Day this month. Each student chose a career that interests them and prepared research-based presentations. They came to school dressed in the proper attire for their field of interest and presented their career choices via Google Slides to faculty, staff, family and friends.
The students thoughtfully considered their career options and researched important facts about their choices. Students chose a variety of fields – dentist, lawyer, veterinarian, computer and automotive engineers, composer, filmmaker, jewelry maker and many more. Each student’s presentation included the major function of their jobs in society and why they think they would excel in these areas.
“The students put so much work into these projects and did a fantastic job presenting,” said Mrs. Wolf, fifth grade teacher at GNA. “Each student’s career choice reflects their personalities and highlights their personal strengths. I have no doubt they will continue to work hard to reach their career goals.”
With the decision-making tools learned through the D.A.R.E. program and the goals set for their futures, the fifth graders at Grey Nun Academy are prepared to succeed in the next school year and beyond.
About Grey Nun Academy
Founded in 1963 by the Grey Nuns of the Sacred Heart, Grey Nun Academy is an independent, Catholic, coeducational, elementary school in Bucks County, Pennsylvania for students in prek3 to eighth grades. The Academy's mission is to offer an academically rich curriculum that meets the unique needs of individual students while respecting the rights, interests, and dignity of each child. Grey Nun Academy is a member of the National Association of Independent Schools (NAIS) and is accredited by both Middle States Association and AdvancED. The Academy welcomes children of all faiths and cultures. The school's educational process leads children to embrace and promote peace and social justice in our world. To learn more, please visit www.greynunacademy.org or contact Lisa Grabowski at 215-968-4151.