You can store all the food in the world, but there is no substitute for fresh fruits and vegetables. Even taking vitamin supplements can’t make up for the nutritional value of real food, and eating the same canned and freeze-dried meals everyday gets old fast. These are just a couple of reasons why urban survival gardening is so important. Some fresh tomatoes, cucumbers or beans can make your meals both healthier and tastier.
Most people living in the city have small backyards, and those in apartments have nothing more than a balcony. But this is not a problem. There are many methods for growing food in small spaces, but for now let’s focus on one in particular: 5-gallon buckets. In particular, I recommend a 5 Gallon Round Nursery Pot. They’re not very sturdy, but they do the job.
Whatever bucket you use, make sure it has holes in the bottom so the water can drain and the roots don’t rot. Place several inches of rocks in the bottom and fill it up to a few inches from the top with rich soil. Obviously some fertilizer will help a lot, but if you’re in an urban survival situation, you’ll just have to make do with what you have. Place your bucket in direct sunshine, then plant your seeds and watch them grow. Be sure to water them daily or as often as necessary to keep the soil from drying out.
Tomatoes and cucumbers grow well in buckets, although you’ll need to support them with stakes or a cage. Plants like melon and squash can grow up a trellis. Some other plants that grow well on buckets include: beans, beats, cantaloupe, carrots, eggplant, green beans, lettuce, onions, peas, peppers, and radishes.
If your garden is visible to neighbors or passersby, you might want to consider camouflage gardening. This involves surrounding your veggies with flowers and other bushy plants so people will think it’s just an ordinary garden. Herbs such as mint, oregano, rosemary, sage and thyme are great for this. Plus, they can add flavor to your meals. I hope this article on urban survival gardening has been helpful. Good luck!