A good education is nothing without strong moral values, as both are needed to create great leaders.
Instilling moral values such as gratefulness and preserving one’s good name is an essential part of moulding worthy members of society. Unfortunately, we are now so distracted with material wealth and luxury that we have forgotten the importance of such values.
The spread of social problems such as gangsterism and baby dumping can be curbed if we are proactive in inculcating in our children the right moral values, as those without strong moral foundations are the ones most likely to make bad decisions.
Moral values are important because they guide us in everyday life decisions. Our moral values dictate how we live our lives and treat each other. Values play a large role in society.
It is a big questions for the schools that how to manipulate moral values among the students. How and when moral values should be teaching the students? It is going to be a big question for the schools when schools have been facing different types of behavioral problems among the students. Sometimes we can say that it is the influence of modern time or it may be an effect of improper care by parents or it may be an effect of change in the society and changing family environment.
Need of Moral Education:
However it is a big problem of many schools that students are morally not perfect and they behave irresponsible. It became a big problem for schools to deal such students. The lack in moral values and the unhealthy attitudes of students is a main reason of many problems in several schools. It is a very good reason about teaching moral education. They have been realizing the importance of moral education in school. Now many schools need to improvement in student’s moral education.
Advantages of Moral Education:
What the advantages of good moral values in education are? Why moral education should be taught in the schools? Why school teachers should have to teach moral lessons to the students? Actually man is a social animal and he have to live and react within the society. He has to learn different social habits like helping the people, gentleness, respect the elders and teachers and so many. These good habits make his a good social creature and he is known as a good person for others. When a student attains these qualities he becomes a responsible and a good students and he is able to behave gently within the society. When he learn these qualities within the school time, his homework and preparation become good.
Many schools have been searching the reasons of depreciation in moral values and they have been working for developing good moral values among the students. However moral values are integrated part of the education and it is great emphasized in almost all countries. Generally Moral Education is not a specific subject for schools but it is taught under different subjects like languages, literature, supplementary reading books etc. Moral Education is taught as a separate subject like Moral Science in a few schools.
Schools have been doing several efforts to manipulate the moral values among the students. The syllabus is designed such type to combine many moral values by stories, poems and by many lessons. Sometimes textbooks include many inspirational lessons about the great persons so that students may learn by their life.
It is true that textbooks and syllabus fulfill the needs of moral values but when a teacher wants to teach moral values he needs some other things also. Sometimes he uses moral sayings, moral stories, and different type’s cultural activities to enhance the level of moral education. Cultural activities are very useful to manipulate and to teach the moral education lesson.
How a teacher can use cultural activities to teach the moral values? Actually in many countries there are many festivals, days and occasions for any special idea or special event. When schools organize these festivals they have great and innovative opportunities to impart various lessons. Children assembly (In Hindi BAL SABHA) is a great example for this. It is a very famous and well known cultural activity for schools where each student finds an opportunity to express himself.
In several school level festivals there is a freedom for teachers to choose desired planning for any activity. Teaching moral education is not a particular topic but it can be teach under various programs and activities. Teachers can use different plays and such activities to demonstrate various moral education lessons. Cultural activities can play a great role in this. Beside cultural activities there are many interesting activities for providing moral education lesson like daily prayer where teachers can arrange a daily activity as “The quote of the day”; where students say nice thoughts.