New clues about the very first stars - SpaceTime with Stuart Gary Series 20 Episode 21
Stream Episodes on demand from www.bitesz.com or www.spacetimewithstuartgary.com (both mobile friendly)
*New clues about the very first stars
Astronomers studying a distant galaxy have discovered some new evidence about the very first stars to shine in the universe.
The team made the remarkable find while observing a young remote galaxy located some 13.3 billion light years away.
*NASA’s mission to Jupiter’s ice moon Europa
NASA has formally named its next mission to the Jovian ice moon Europa “The Europa Clipper”. The mission which is slated for launch around 2022 will explore the frozen world which possesses all three of the ingredients necessary for life: liquid water, chemical nutrients, and energy sources sufficient to enable biology.
*A perfect storm of fire and ice may have led to snowball Earth
Scientists have a new hypothesis to explain what caused the largest glaciation event in Earth's history, known as 'snowball Earth' – a runaway glaciation that covered the planet in ice from pole-to-pole.
*The Super Earth 55 Cancri e
The exoplanet 55 Cancri e is 40 light years away and orbits its host star so closely it has two faces. Because it is tidally locked to its star – the side facing the star is covered in molten lava – while the opposite side is in perpetual night and freezing cold.
For Enhanced Show Notes, including photos to accompany this episode: http://www.bitesz.com/spacetime-show-notes
Subscribe, rate and review SpaceTime at all good podcasting apps…including iTunes, audioBoom, Stitcher, Pocketcasts, Podbean, Radio Public, Tunein Radio, google play, etc.
Help support SpaceTime : The SpaceTime with Stuart Gary merchandise shop. Get your T-Shirts, Coffee Cups, badges, tote bag + more and help support the show. Check out the range: http://www.cafepress.com/spacetime Thank you.
Plus: Get a free audio book of your choice, plus 30 days free access from audible.com. Just visit www.audibletrial.com/spacetime or click on the banner link at www.spacetimewithstuartgary.com
Join our mailing list at http://www.bitesz.com/join-our-mailing-list
For more, follow SpaceTime on Facebook, twitter, Tumblr, YouTube, Google+ and Clammr:
If you're enjoying SpaceTime, please help out by sharing and telling your friends. The best recommendation I can get is one from you. Thank you...