For what purpose are we to remember the Sabbath day? It's in the Bible, Exodus 20:8, NIV. "Remember the Sabbath day by keeping it holy."
When according to the Scripture does the Sabbath begin and end? It's in the Bible, Leviticus 23:32, RSV. "From evening to evening shall you keep your Sabbath."
When does evening begin? It's in the Bible, Mark 1:32, RSV. "That evening, at sundown, they brought to Him all who were sick or possessed with demons."
Work is not to be done on the Sabbath. It's in the Bible, Exodus 20:9-10, NIV. "Six days you shall labor and do all your work, but the seventh day is a Sabbath to the Lord your God. On it you shall not do any work, neither you, nor your son or daughter, nor your manservant or maidservant, nor your animals, nor the alien within your gates."
What Sabbathkeeping counsel does Isaiah give? It's in the Bible, Isaiah 58:13-14, TLB. "If you keep the Sabbath holy, not having your own fun and business on that day, but enjoying the Sabbath and speaking of it with delight as the Lord's holy day, and honoring the Lord in what you do, not following your own desires and pleasure, nor talking idly—then the Lord will be your delight, and I will see to it that you ride high, and get your full share of the blessings I promised to Jacob, your father. The Lord has spoken."
What Sabbathkeeping counsel does Nehemiah give? It's in the Bible, Nehemiah 13:15,19,22, NIV. "In those days I saw men in Judah treading winepresses on the Sabbath and bringing in grain and loading it on donkeys, together with wine, grapes, figs and all other kinds of loads. And they were bringing all this into Jerusalem on the Sabbath. Therefore I warned them against selling food on that day.
When evening shadows fell on the gates of Jerusalem before the Sabbath, I ordered the doors to be shut and not opened until the Sabbath was over. I stationed some of my own men at the gates so that no load could be brought in on the Sabbath day. Then I commanded the Levites to purify themselves and go and guard the gates in order to keep the Sabbath day holy. Remember me for this also, O my God, and show mercy to me according to your great love.
What evidence is there that the Sabbath was designed to be a day for public worship? It's in the Bible, Leviticus 23:3, NIV. "There are six days when you may work, but the seventh day is a Sabbath of rest, a day of sacred assembly."
Jesus suggested that the Sabbath hours be used for doing good deeds. It's in the Bible, Matthew 12:11-12, NIV. "He said to them, 'If any of you has a sheep and it falls into a pit on the Sabbath, will you not take hold of it and lift it out? How much more valuable is a man than a sheep! Therefore it is lawful to do good on the Sabbath."