This post has already been read 2818 times!
Betelgeuse star α of the constellation Orion, the apparent variable magnitude between 0.5 e1,1. It is a supergiant star button, with diameters ranging between 300 and 400 solar diameters, and luminosity of 40,000 times that of the Sun; Is 300 light years from Earth.
However, a similar brightness is not attributable exclusively to the wide surface; This is why astronomers are inclined to believe that the star possesses a high mass, equal to 15-20 times that of the sun. Therefore it is possible that the star will end its existence exploding in a supernova. Some surveys conducted in the second half of the eighties suggested the possibility that Betelgeuse was a multiple system, consists of at least three members; subsequent comments did not confirmed this evidence. Betelgeuse is a star of the northern hemisphere, but it is still close enough to the celestial equator as to be observable from all areas of the Earth, with the exception of the inner part of the Antarctic continent; north however the star appears circumpolar far beyond the Arctic Circle.
Betelgeuse can be distinguished very easily even from the big cities: it is the tenth brightest star in the sky when viewed with the naked eye, the ninth individually considering multiple systems components; Also part of the unmistakable constellation of Orion, which forms the north-eastern summit, and stands out from the others for its color, an intense orange, which contrasts with the blue typical of the other stars of this luminous sky . It is also the northwestern summit of the great and brilliant asterism of the Winter Triangle. Betelgeuse starts low on the eastern horizon make out in late autumn evenings, but it is during the months of January and February that the star dominates the night sky, being the bright red brightest star of winter. The month of May sees instead the definitive end below the horizon west, between the lights of dusk; becomes visible in the east just before dawn, in August.
© ALL RIGHTS RESERVED