The Redplain CTO thinks distributed objects are the best way to deal with the complexities of programming multiple processors on a chip (MPoC).
After decades of anticipation, multiprocessors are becoming a fact of
life for most software engineers, especially in embedded systems.
Symmetric multiprocessors which use a number of identical processors,
one operating system and a shared memory are relatively easy to
because we can use additional processors to execute additional threads.
(But watch out for multi-threaded software that assumes its running on
uniprocessor, so when a high priority thread is running, a low priority
Asymmetric multiprocessors, which lack shared memory, have
processors or run different operating systems on different processors
are more difficult to program, but increasingly common. Threads of
execution on different processors are isolated from each other and
cannot directly access the same data. The software must ensure that
threads have the data they need when they need it. Results may be
affected by the order in which events occur on different processors.
Asymmetric multiprocessors are effectively distributed systems and
of the tools and techniques of distributed systems can help us address
One example is a computational model involving threads
communicating by exchanging messages using inter-process communications
(IPC). This model is attractive because it reflects the underlying
reality, but it has limitations. It introduces a new basis of software
partitioning - the message - in addition to the familiar concepts of
function calls and member function calls. It forces the developer to
deal with remote processing and local processing in different terms and
to make up front decisions about what can and cannot be accomplished
remotely. It also forces early decisions on where different processing
Consider what happens if we start a high level design by
application into threads exchanging messages. When a message is passed
to a thread on the local processor, a message passing overhead (albeit
reduced) is incurred, so message passing must be used sparingly and
where remote processing is a possibility. The messaging schema
determines the data available to each thread and vice versa. This
approach commits us to the location of data and of processing before we
have a good understanding of our new design's behavior. If we get it
wrong, we have to start over. If the hardware environment changes, we
have to start over.
A "distributed object model" is an alternative to the threads and
messages approach. It brings all the benefits of object oriented
programming and adds some benefits of its own. It divides application
data into discrete objects, allowing us to assign processing to
different processors by locating objects on them.
A logical thread of
execution visits whatever processor it needs to, in order to complete
its work. The message passing layer of software is hidden inside remote
method calls, which are semantically and syntactically identical to
local method calls. The message passing layer can be automatically
generated from method signatures and any method in any class can
potentially be called remotely with a corresponding message. Local
method calls incur no message passing overhead.
Consider what happens if we model an application in terms of
objects instead of threads and messages. A detailed system model can be
built in terms of objects and methods without undue attention to object
location. (I say undue attention because object location must be borne
in mind in key scenarios, but need not be completely specified at the
A method call is a method call and we don't worry too much about
whether it's local or remote. The message passing layer is a
consequence of the classes and methods that are remotely accessed,
in turn are consequences of object location.
Object location can be
decided late and changed easily. When it is decided or changed, the
message passing layer can be automatically generated, not hand written.
So distributed object design methodology can reduce the cost and
increase the flexibility of a distributed application. Load balancing
and ports to different hardware architectures can both be addressed by
reassigning objects to different processors.
Distributed object middleware has been very successful in
distributed processing. CORBA, COM and Java RMI are well known
implementations of the paradigm. But these technologies are designed
big computers with big operating systems on slow networks. They focus
largely on defining and implementing interfaces between subsystems,
each subsystem confined to an individual processor. Used carelessly,
they give disappointing results.
The multicore environment demands distributed object middleware as
and as fast as hand-optimized message passing. It must be highly
transparent to allow most objects to be remotely accessed, not just a
few. Remote invocation needs to be like walking into another room, not
visiting another house. If this can be achieved, distributed object
technology can greatly reduce the difficulty, risk and cost of software
development for asymmetric multiprocessors.
Dominic Herity is CTO of Redplain.com. He can be contacted at email@example.com.
Prior to founding Redplain, he served as
Technology Leader with Silicon &
Software Systems and Task Group Chair in the Network Processing
Forum. He has lectured on Embedded Systems at Trinity College Dublin,
he contributed to research into Distributed Operating Systems and High
Availability. He has many recent publications on various aspects of
Embedded Systems design.
For other articles about this topic, go to More
about multicores, multiprocessors, and tools.