(Please refer to the citation table at the end of the article or download the APA Style citation table as a PDF file if you are in a hurry).
The APA Style ® (formally Publication Manual of the American Psychological Association) is one of the widely used standards for publication in social and behavioral sciences. In this article we show you how to become a pro in citing your sources according to the latest edition of the APA Style.
In this interview, Professor Mark Reed, an expert in socio-technical innovation, shares some of his insights on the effective communication of research in achieving wider impact, what impact should really mean to researchers and why relationships are so important. Continue Reading
If you are a mathematician, physicist, engineer, computer scientist or economist, chances are high that your papers will be interspersed with equations. Equations make papers hard to read as they interrupt the flow of text, yet they have an essential function in any numerical research and with proofs.
Open peer-review, and open science in general, is a topic of increasing interest among scientists. Open peer-review journals provide online referee reports to readers alongside a published paper, working towards the goal of increasing transparency in academia and scholarly communications. Some open peer-review models also require referee identities to be revealed to authors or the public, which is usually done once a paper’s peer-review process has been completed.
Here are some important points to consider in deciding whether or not to submit your work to an open peer-review journal:
Stealing another’s expression of an idea or work without permission and/or proper attribution is considered plagiarism. This specifically includes copying large parts or the entirety of someone else’s work while pretending that it is one’s own work, copying small parts of someone else’s work under fair use without proper attribution (that is, missing quotation marks and missing, misleading or wrong citation), grossly copying ideas or the narrative of another work without attributing the origin of the ideas or narrative, re-using images or photos without permission, etc.
Plagiarism has real legal implications. While ideas themselves are not copyrightable, the artistic expression of an idea (the “work“) automatically falls under copyright when it is created. Under fair use, small parts may be copied without the permission from the copyright holder. However, even under fair use, you must attribute the original source. What is considered fair use is rather subjective and can vary from country to country. See, for instance, here for a short introduction on fair use in the USA.
To avoid the plagiarism trap, here are 8 simple rules each researcher should follow:
Q&A with Professor Peter Howe, School of Biomedical Sciences and Pharmacy, The University of Newcastle, Australia
We have interviewed Professor Peter Howe, School of Biomedical Sciences and Pharmacy, The University of Newcastle, Australia regarding the importance of publishing and editing to building a career in academia.
Here are five strategies for obtaining a free copy of a paper.