It has been estimated that the condition alopecia affects nearly 150 million people worldwide. This can be an embarrassing condition but it is important to seek help and advice as soon as possible.
What Is Alopecia?
Alopecia is when your immune system starts to attack the hair follicles on your head, arms legs or body. It can happen to anyone at any age. It is more common in people who have not yet reached the age of twenty.
What Are The Symptoms Of Alopecia?
There are several signs that you have started to develop alopecia. You might notice hair from your body on the bedding when you wake up in the morning. You might also notice that clumps of hair have started to accumulate in the shower when you are having a wash. You will be left with spots of smooth skin where your hair used to be.
In most cases, the hair will grow back over a period of time. This is not going to happen overnight. You also need to be aware that around 10% of people who suffer from this condition will lose the hair permanently.
What Can Be Done To Combat Alopecia?
When you have been diagnosed with alopecia, a female hair loss clinic in Bristol will be able to offer you a range of different options.
The most immediate thing that you can do is choose from a range of different extensions which will blend in with the rest of the hair on your hair. You will be able to find a style that suits you completely without looking out of place.
Once the hair extensions have been put in place by the specialists, you will forget that you ever had alopecia in the first place. You will be able to easily cut and style the hair extensions once they have been put in. You might even want to change to a different colour if you find that the current hair extensions do not suit you as well as initially thought.
The hair extensions can be braided, platted and you can even wear your hair up if you want to do that. There is no limit to what you can do once the extensions have been installed.
If you experience total hair loss due to alopecia, then it will not be practical to have hair extensions installed. You might think that a wig is a bad solution to the problem, but modern wigmakers are very aware that they need to make the wigs as realistic as possible. A hair treatment specialist will be able to put you in touch with a wig maker who will be able to provide you with several different styles.
When you are dealing with alopecia, you are not alone. You will be able to talk to specialists who can find the best solution for the problem that you are having.