Qul law anna AAindee ma tastaAAjiloona bihi laqudiya alamru baynee wabaynakum waAllahu aAAlamu bialththalimeena
The Aya says:
Say (O Muhammad) if I had what you are asking for in a hurry, then the matter is concluded between me and you (plura) and Allah knows more of the unjust.
My personal note:
This continues the theme and the message from the previous Aya. It points out that if he gave them what they were asking for then it is the end of their existance and a point of their arrival at the truth but too late. The Aya ends in reminding them that Allah knows the unjust. It is meant to touch deeply in our psyche to be honest with ourselves and with God.
Translation of the transliterated words:
Qul: Say/ communicate/respond
Note: the root is Qaf-W-L and it means saying or communicating. QUL is an order or a request addressed to a singular. It means: say or communicate.
Aaindee: at mine/ I have/ in my possession
tastaAAjiloona: you (plural) seek in a hurry/ demand hurriyingly
Note: the root is Ain-J-L and it means speed and to be in a hurry. TASTaAAJILOON is an action that is being completed or will be completed. It means: the seeking or demanding the object (bihi= in him opinting to what they are demanding) in a hurried manner is happening or will be happening by the subject (second person plural).
Bihi: by him/ With him
Laqudiya: then would have reached conclusion/ end/ point of finish/ completed.
Note: the root Qaf-Dhad-Y and it means a mandate that one makes to completion of it and anything in between. It points to determination at the beginning and the finishing of it towards the end. The meaning of the word is according to the sentence, sometimes the sentence allows the whole range and at others, part of the range of the meaning. LAQUDIYA is an action that is completed. It means: the mandated object (ALAMRU= the matter/ implement) happened or was completed by an undeclared subject.
Baynee: between me
Wabaynakum: and between you (plural)
waAllahu: and Allah/ while Allah
aAAlamu: more knowledgeable/ more knowing
Note: the root is Ain-L-M and it means knowing/knowledge or knowledge of facts. aAALAMU means more knowing or more knowledgeable.
Bialththalimeena: in the unjust/ in the transgressors
Note: Bi suggests that what comes after it is either an association with the action, a tool of the action or an object of the action or any combination of the three. If bi serves as an object of the action that it serves as an emphasis of the action. ALTHTHALIMEEN is derived from the root THA-L-M and it means darkness in the most concrete form. This word also takes the meaning of misplacing right from wrong and transgression or injustice since injustice is displacing right from wrong and a decision made in darkness. ALTHTHALIMEEN are the unjust or the one who misplaces right from wrong intentionally and that is the one who decides and acts in darkness.
Salaam all and have a great day.