Key stage 1 is the collective name given to Years 1 and 2. All students follow the National Curriculum for England and Wales for all subjects. Within the structure of the National Strategies, Programmes of Study set out what students should be taught, and the attainment target sets out the expected standards of students' performance.
Twelve subjects are taught in Key Stage 1:
Islamic Studies or Citizenship
Art & Design
Design & Technology
Music and Physical Education
At Newton International School we use the National Literacy Strategy to deliver the English programme. Each unit of work covers aspects of Speaking and Listening, Word level work, Sentence level work and Text level work. Within the Word level work children will look in depth at different spelling patterns, rhyming words and handwriting skills. Sentence level consists of grammar and punctuation work while text level work looks in depth at how texts are constructed and teaching the children to write their own texts in these styles.
The National Literacy Strategy ensures all students are given the opportunity to work with different types of texts, both fiction and non-fiction. The following may be included: Stories with familiar settings, instructions, patterns on the page, traditional stories, explanations, really looking, different stories by the same author, information texts, silly stuff, extended stories and non-chronological reports.
Speaking and Listening is integrated into every aspect of school life. The students are always encouraged to speak in English. They have opportunities to perform in class assemblies to a wide audience, which also encourages listening skills.
A very important part of English teaching is reading. The students read books in school during Guided Reading and at home to practice the words and fluency of their reading as well as their comprehension. Students also read other texts during the Literacy Hour. These texts may be more difficult than their individual reading book so the range of abilities in the class is covered.
At NIS we follow the National Numeracy Strategy which is use to plan and implement the Mathematics programme. Mathematics lessons are carried out daily in every class across the primary school. These daily lessons last for 1 hour. The main scheme of work used to facilitate this learning is The Heinemann Mathematics Programme. Assessment is on-going throughout the year. It involves the regular completion of practical tasks and written assessment pages related to the units covered. End-of-topic assessment tasks are carried out throughout the year. Heinemann provides material for different levels of work that support the learning needs of individual children as suggested in the Numeracy Strategy. On most occasions children are grouped according to their ability, and the activities they complete reflect their level of knowledge and understanding. Teachers differentiate their lessons according to the ability levels in their class.
Geography and History are often linked. History topics include a study of the seaside, Florence Nightingale, Toys, Homes and the Great Fire of London, Ancient Egypt, Qatar History, Ancient Greek, Life of a famous person, Victoria England, Romans and a Viking Case Study. KS1 Geography covers topics such as Around the School, Leisure Time and Travelling, Local area and safety and The Seaside. In KS2 Geography covers topics such as Desserts, Recycling, Passport to the world, Rainforests, Weather around the world, A Village in India and Rivers and Mountains.
In Science students will experience an integrated programme through a variety of topics. Students will learn about a wider range of living things, materials and phenomena. They will start to create links between ideas and apply their knowledge and understanding of scientific ideas to everyday things and their personal health.
Students will have the opportunity to take part in a "Science Week," in which they will have the chance to do lots of "hands on" science activities.
Each class will visit the computer suite once a week.
Here at NIS, we feel that it is very important for our students to be confident in using the computer. Students will have the opportunity to use multimedia packages to present their work and use a variety of programmes to broaden their knowledge base.
Each year group follows a prescribed course, based on the National Curriculum.
In P.E the students acquire and develop skills in dance, games, gymnastics and swimming.
Understanding the need to be fit and healthy and developing skills in movement and coordination are the fundamentals of our P.E. programme. All students are required to take part for their own personal benefit and safety.
Art & Design and Design & Technology
Here students have the opportunity to study the work of artists and copy their artistic style. They will use different methods to nurture creativity and innovation through designing and making. D&T will also help them to develop an understanding of technological processes, products, and their manufacture, and their contribution to our society.
Students attend a music lesson each week. Not only do students learn to sing new songs, but they also have the opportunity to learn to play instruments, and play these in time to different rhythms. Music is a compulsory part of the British National Curriculum, and all students are expected to take part in the lessons.
Arabic and Islamic
We follow the standards of the Supreme Educational Council for Arabic and Islamic. Students receive two hours of Arabic and 1 hour of Islamic in KS1 & 2.
Click to view the links
Guide to Understand Progress and Assessment in Mathematics
Introduction to the renewed Primary Framework
The National Literacy & Numeracy Strategies in the Primary Curriculum