Intuition is something that everyone has. Some people’s intuition is more sensitive than others, but everyone has the ability to develop it and be able to use it. Intuition is easiest to describe as the feeling of just knowing something that will happen before it happens.
A good example of intuition is when you know the phone will ring and it does. This may happen occasionally or you may have it happen every time the phone rings. Either way it is your intuition working.
Intuition is a psychic ability. Even people who do not believe in psychic powers will usually believe in intuition. Some may refer to it as a gut feeling or a hunch. It is just a knowing. Intuition can give you warnings or it can be a guide.
You can use your intuition in many ways. Once you are able to harness its power you can begin to use it in your daily life to help you in many ways.
To get in touch with your intuition you can begin by simply listening to it. You have surely had experiences where you just knew what was going to happen or you had a feeling about making a decision. These are times when your intuition was working.
Many times we fight our intuition or ignore it. We chalk it up to nerves or indecision. However, when you stop working against your intuition you will find that it can be very helpful.
The next time you start to get that feeling of intuition you should listen to it. Go with what you are feeling and trust your gut instinct. You will likely be surprised when you find out that your feeling was right.
It can be difficult at first to start trusting your intuition. You may have to work to make yourself start listening to your intuition. It can be hard especially if you have ignored it for a long time.
It can help to keep a journal of your efforts so that you can really see your intuition working. You can write down throughout the day the times when your intuition worked for you. By seeing the impact of your intuition in your life, you may find it easier to start listening to it on a regular basis.
Learning to trust your intuition can have a great impact on your life. You will find that you are able to make decisions easier, that you are happier with your choices in life and that you are able to avoid problems more easily.