Once upon a time, in a village far, far away, there lived a little elephant named Frida. Frida was the smallest elephant in her village by a long shot. Her legs were wobbly, and her trunk was thin. The other elephants never made fun of her, but they never asked for her help with anything. If something big needed to be moved, they asked Max. Max was the biggest, strongest elephant in the whole town. Everyone loved him because he helped them and because, as even Frida could admit, he looked REALLY cool. There wasn't a problem Max couldn't solve. Or at least, that's what everyone thought...

One day, the whole village was celebrating the birthday of the very youngest in the group - Maggie. Frida always felt awkward because, even though Maggie was much younger than her, Frida was much, much smaller than Maggie. But she went to the party anyways, determined to have a good time. Just as the cake cutting was about to begin, however, Maggie let out a loud yelp. Everyone turned to look. Maggie's birthday balloon was floating away into the sky! And to make matters worse, she had tied her favorite stuffie, Poppy, to the end of the balloon! Everyone watched in fear as Poppy and the balloon came to rest on the top branch of the tallest tree in the village. It was a very old and VERY big tree -- alive for much longer than any of the elephants in the town. No one knew what to do!!

Max was determined to get the balloon down. He wrapped his trunk around the tree and tried to uproot the whole thing, but as much as he tugged and grunted, the tree stood firm. Maggie started to cry. Suddenly, Frida had an idea! It might not work, she thought, but she was the only one who could do it! To the amazement of everyone at the party, Frida started to CLIMB the tree! Now, of course, any normal elephant would be much too heavy for a tree, but Frida was no normal elephant! She climbed to the top, carefully untied Poppy and the balloon, and brought them safely back to the ground. The whole town cheered! From then on, Frida was a hero too, and a reminder that the strongest isn't always the best.
