Discovery Tables are back, all summer long! Drop into the Headquarters, England Run, Salem Church, Snow, and Porter branches for a rotating series of self-guided, discover-it-yourself STEM (science, technology, engineering, and mathematics) activities. Grades K-6.
When? June 15-25, June 29-July 9, July 13-23, July 27-August 6, August 10-20, during operating library hours.
-Gears, Gears, Gears! Gear up your engineering skills with simple mechanics.
-Build It Up! Design and build a unique structure using everyday items.
-Magnetic Magic! Use your imagination to create and build with colorful magnetic shapes.
-Sharks, Let's Get Chummy! Interesting facts about these misunderstood creatures.
-Shake It Up! Learn how scientists measure the magnitude of earthquakes.
"...that’s the fun of it to create from scratch, it’s to me, it’s creative in one sense of the word. I try to make exciting books for children and of course, I do them for myself too, I put everything I have into them."*
There was a stuffed bear in a department store who was missing a button, but a little girl loved him anyway. She didn’t want a perfect companion. She wanted Corduroy. Don Freeman’s stories about the plucky bear and his friend are still treasured and shared decades after they were written. A true classic, Corduroy can found in pretty much every library and book store with space set aside for young ones.
Officially, May Day is the 1st of May, but really anytime during this splendid spring month is a perfect opportunity to share small gifts of the season with everyone: teachers; friends; neighbors; and family. You can do that with May baskets—a wonderful, old-fashioned tradition.
Pants are warm. Pants are soft. Pants are for pandas? No, absolutely not, according to the adult panda in Panda Pants, by Jacqueline Davies. But baby panda desperately wants a pair of pants—with pockets, please!
As parent and child wander through the bamboo forest debating the merits of pants, sharp-eyed readers may notice the tell-tale signs of danger stalking the pair. When a leopard attacks, will it be the end of our pandas? Or, can quick-thinking baby panda save the day . . . with a little help from a pair of pants?
Not every child today learns in a big building with lots of other students all studying the same things at the same time. In the past twenty years, the homeschool phenomenon has caught fire across America.
Summer is almost here! Sure, that means warm weather, time at the pool and/or beach, and time spent outside with friends, but it also means that it’s time for our annual Summer Reading program! This year's theme is Build a Better World. You can work on building a better you by signing up to read (or getting read to) and earn prizes based on what you read. But, that’s not all! This year we’re excited to announce the addition of Missions to our Summer Reading program, and, YES!
April is Poetry Month, the perfect time to share the beauty of poetry with a child. If you are an adult who enjoys poetry, you are probably already regularly reading poetry with the children in your life. If you are an adult who is either intimidated by poetry or simply doesn’t enjoy it, I urge you to take a look at poetry written for children. I often enjoy children’s poetry much more than that written for adults. I like the humor, wit, and silliness of children’s poetry, as well as the simplicity of the more serious poems.
These pages are designed to make it easy to browse and download amazing books and audiobooks. We update our lists with fresh titles each month. Feel like exploring on your own? You can browse by topic by clicking on Subjects.
Want to see the entire eCollection? Click "Back to Main Collection" at the top to see all the eBooks and eAudio.
Happy reading--and listening!
Maya Angelou is famous today for her memorable words. She should also be remembered for her indomitable spirit.
There is a witch in the woods. The people of the Protectorate know it. Each year, they are forced to leave a baby as a sacrifice to the witch, lest she destroy the whole city.
But just who is the witch in Kelly Barnhill’s Newbery Award-winning book, The Girl Who Drank the Moon? Maybe it’s Xan, who can’t figure out why the people of the Protectorate keep abandoning their children, but protects the babies with her magic until she can find them adopted homes in the Free Cities. Or, perhaps it’s Xan’s adopted granddaughter Luna, who became enmagicked and now spends her days with Fyrian, the Perfectly Tiny Dragon who thinks he’s a Simply Enormous Dragon, or Glerk, the poetry-obsessed monster who lives in the Bog. It’s certainly not Antain, a young man from the Protectorate who is becoming more and more determined to stop the yearly sacrifice.