Basic Life Support: CPR and First Aid
You will learn how to perform CPR, use an automated external defibrillator (AED) and become familiar with the signs and symptoms associated with heart attacks and respiratory arrest. Managing shock and controlling external bleeding are other skills covered that can help save lives
Emergency Oxygen for Scuba Diving Injuries
When a diving accident occurs, being able to recognize the problem and respond with the appropriate care can speed the diver's recovery and minimize lasting effects. Oxygen first aid provides needed oxygen to body tissues, enhances the elimination of inert gases such as nitrogen obtained from breathing gases, and helps shrink any gas bubbles that may have developed during ascent — bubbles that contribute to decompression sickness and arterial gas embolism.
First Aid for Hazardous Marine Life Injuries
Divers may experience unintentional encounters with fire coral, jellyfish and other marine creatures. Any time a person enters the marine environment there is a chance of being stung, bitten or cut. This course will teach you where you can expect to encounter potentially hazardous marine life and how to provide first aid when injuries occur. The more you know about the marine environment, the greater your chances of having safe, memorable dives.
Stroke is the third-leading cause of death and the leading cause of long-term disability according to the American Heart Association. Decompression illness (DCI) can present as a neurological injury associated with scuba diving. Rapid recognition of and response to a suspected neurological injury, regardless of cause, can help convince
the injured person of the need for emergency oxygen and help the responder monitor the injured person's condition and report findings to emergency medical services (EMS).
Diving Emergency Management Provider
When a dive accident occurs, multiple things happen. Separate small problems can compound to create a larger problem. DAN's Diving Emergency Management Provider (DEMP) program prepares you to handle the kinds of multifaceted accidents that may occur. It's an easy and fast way to take four of DAN's core first-aid courses in one program.