On this page:
Definition of the noun ethnocentrism
What does ethnocentrism mean as a name of something?
noun - plural: ethnocentrisms
- belief in the superiority of one's own ethnic group
- example: Monolingualism is like a disease as it leads to ethnocentrism and culture isolation. But this disease can be cured.
- lexical domain: Cognitive Processes - nouns denoting cognitive processes and contents
- more generic words: partiality / partisanship = an inclination to favor one group or view or opinion over alternatives
Alternative definition of the noun ethnocentrism
- The tendency to look at the world primarily from the perspective of one's own culture.
- "Ethnocentrism" is a book by Władysław Bartoszewski.
- also known as "Ethnocentrism beliefs and stereotypes, a study of Polish-Jewish relations in the early 20th century"
- "Ethnocentrism" is a book by M. K. Du Toit.
- also known as "Ethnocentrism: we are wonderful"
Ethnocentrism is judging another culture solely by the values and standards of one's own culture. Ethnocentric individuals judge other groups relative to their own ethnic group or culture, especially with concern for language, behavior, customs, and religion. These ethnic distinctions and subdivisions serve to define each ethnicity's unique cultural identity. Ethnocentrism may be overt or subtle, and while it is considered a natural proclivity of human psychology, it has developed a generally negative connotation.
- also known as 民族優越感
Printed dictionaries and other books with definitions for Ethnocentrism
Click on a title to look inside that book (if available):
Us Against Them (2010)
Ethnocentric Foundations of American Opinion by Donald R. Kinder, Cindy D. Kam
Ethnocentrism is a mental habit. It is a predisposition to...
by Judith Dwyer
Ethnocentrism is the belief that one's cultural norms are superior to those of other social groups. Cultural relativism ...
Sociology: The Essentials (2016)
by Margaret L. Andersen, Howard F. Taylor
Ethnocentrism is the habit of seeing things only from the point of view of one's own group.
Ethnocentrism is a powerful force because it combines a strong sense of group solidarity with the idea of group superiority.
Intercultural Communication (2014)
A Contextual Approach by James W. Neuliep
Whereas racism refers to the hierarchical ranking of one race above the others, ethnocentrism refers to the strong preference for...
by Christian Ndubueze Anyanwu
Ethnocentrism is a sociological terminology first used by William Graham Summer.
Casting Light or Shadow by Craig E. Johnson
Ethnocentrism is the tendency to see the world from our cultural group's point of view. From this vantage point, our ...
The First Decade of the New Millennium by Chris Rowley, Malcolm Warner
Ethnocentrism is a universal phenomenon, exhibited by virtually all groups throughout the world which makes it...
by Illinois State University Nweze Nnakwe, Nweze Nnakwe
Ethnocentrism is a way of looking at the world through a personal lens that has been influenced by personality, genetics,
by Donald B. Pope-Davis, Hardin L. K. Coleman
Ethnocentrism is a major obstacle in the field of counseling and psychotherapy for two reasons. First, one of the world's leading centers of rescarcli and practice in the area of counseling and therapy is the United States. Second, the dominant ...
Cross-Cultural Management (2008)
Essential Concepts by David C. Thomas
Ethnocentrism is an attitude that one's own cultural group is the center of everything, and all other groups are evaluated...
Although related to a narrow or provincial perspective often labeled parochialism, ethnocentrism is a universal tendency ...
by Don H. Hockenbury, Sandra E. Hockenbury
This tendency to use your own culture as the standard for judging other cultures is called ethnocentrism (Triandis, 1994). Although it may be a natural tendency, ethnocentrism can lead to the inability to separate ourselves from our own cultural ...
A Guide to Building Relationships with People of Other Faiths and Cultures by Rajendra Pillai
STAGE Form: EMBRACING ETHNOCENTRISM Ethnocentrism is the belief that one's own race is superior to all others. In varying degrees some form of ethnocentrism is ingrained in most cultures of the world. Some traditions reinforce it in the ...
Archaeological Theory (2011)
An Introduction by Matthew Johnson
Ethnocentrism is the belief that the values and attitudes of one's own culture are normal and universal. Thus an assumption that, for example, witchcraft belief is ' irrational' is ethnocentric, since it assumes that Western logic is the only form of ...
Social Marketing (2012)
by Michael T. Ewing
E THNOCEN TRISM Ethnocentrism is a sociological concept first introduced by Sumner (1906) that refers to a tendency to regard the beliefs, standards, and code of behaviour of one's own as superior to those Albert Caruana and Saviour C ...
Urban Family Medicine (2012)
by Richard B. Birrer
Ethnocentrism is the result of underemphasizing culture values and assuming similarities where they don't exist.
Culture and Dignity (2012)
Dialogues Between the Middle East and the West by Laura Nader
Ethnocentrism is a disease, one that breeds hubris no matter what its origin. A knowledge of the history of our whole world can help reduce its pernicious consequences. Such a world history enriches Western-centric stories and disrupts ...
The Social Art (2006)
Language and Its Uses by Ronald K. S. Macaulay
Ethnocentrism is that state of mind in which the ways of one's own group seem natural and right for all human beings everywhere. Roger Brown and Eric Lenneberg, “A Study in Language and Cognition” ...
Cosmos & Hearth (1996)
A Cosmopolite's Viewpoint by Yi-fu Tuan
THE UNITED STATES Ethnocentrism is a trait common to all societies. This does not mean, of course, that societies are equally ethnocentric, that they — to anything like equal degree — see themselves not only as the center of the world, ...
by Yo Jackson
See also Ethnocentrism; Institutional Racism; Multicultural Counseling Competencies; White Privilege FURTHER READING...
Ethnocentrism is broadly defined as an interpretive framework based on the perception that one's own ethnic or ...
by Richard T. Schaefer
Ethnocentrism is a tendency to see one's own group as the center of the world and to rate all other groups according to the norms, values, and characteristics of the observer's group. William Sumner is often credited with the ...
by Vincent N. Parrillo
Myers See also Cultural Values; Ethnic Group; Ethnocentrism; Subcultures Further Readings Goldstein, Eric L. 2006. The Price of Whiteness: Jews, Race, and American Identity. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. Jacobson ...
by Wilhelm Kirch
Cross-References ▷Ethnic Identity Ethnocentric Strategy ▷Ethnocentrism Ethnocentrism Synonyms Ethnocentric strategy Definition Ethnocentrism is a bias based on the assumption that one's own culture is superior to other cultures.
by W. Edward Craighead, Charles B. Nemeroff
ETHNOCENTRISM 337 338 ETHNOCULTURAL PSYCHOTHERAPY. animal relation. Therapists use animals as adjuncts in individual therapy (animal- assisted therapy). Residential group settings also use caring for animals as a vehicle for ...
Issues, Terms, and Concepts by Lena E. Hall
there can be several problems related to ethnocentrism in psychology. There may be problems related to the tasks used in crosscultural studies. The assumption may be that the ...
by Chris Brooker
ethnocentrism n the belief that one's own culture and lifestyle are superior to those of other groups. Often makes the assumption that the beliefs, values, priorities and views of one's culture are ...
Online dictionaries and encyclopedias with entries for Ethnocentrism
Click on a label to prioritize search results according to that topic:
Video about Ethnocentrism
Video shows what ethnocentrism means. The tendency to look at the world primarily from the perspective of one's own traditional, deferred, or adoptive ethnic ...
See also the pronunciation examples of Ethnocentrism!
Scrabble value of E1T1H4N1O1C3E1N1T1R1I1S1M3
The value of this 13-letter word is 20 points, but it's not an accepted word in the Official Scrabble Players Dictionary.
Share this page
Go to the usage examples of Ethnocentrism to see it in context!