If you are dealing with allergies, irritability, and aches and pains like me, it may be a time for a recharge. Stress, sugar, food sensitivities and environmental factors can cause inflammation which can wreak of havoc on most of the normal operations of our body systems, affecting your energy, mood, and cravings. Let’s look at some option for reducing inflammation.
- Eat more plant-based, whole, nutrient-dense foods.
Focus on what you can do to fuel your muscles, brain, cells with good nutrients and avoid refined sugar and flour, processed junk, animal products, etc. by adding a variety of plant-based whole foods to your diet. These foods will flood your body with the vitamins, minerals, cancer-fighting phytochemicals, antioxidants and fiber it needs to recover from chronic inflammation.
- Focus on gut health.
Your gut holds approximately 60-70 percent of your immune system, so it stands to reason that it would be a great place to reduce chronic inflammation. And if your gut is out of balance, you can only imagine that your immune system is out too. Try natural probiotics like natural unsweetened yogurt everyday, or a good probiotic supplement. Click here.
- Identify and address food sensitivities and chronic (or hidden) infections.
You could be fighting a losing battle if you’re ignoring potential food sensitivities and/or infections. If your body is working to cope and fight these challenges everyday, you can bet that you’re feeding the fire of inflammation on a regular basis.
Gluten, soy, dairy, eggs and yeast are common problem foods that might be distracting your immune system every time you sit down for a meal. These allergies can be identified with a blood test. Or try eliminating them one at a time. While following the elimination approach, you remove all common allergens from your diet and then slowly reintroduce them, one by one. Consider trying a cleanse too.
- Relax and Rest. Most doctors recommend seven to eight hours of sleep per night. If you’re cutting corners in the snooze department, you’re cheating your immune system, which means it needs to kick into high gear in an effort to keep you well.
Lack of sleep and unrealistic expectations on what your body can handle, keep stress hormones elevated. Unfortunately, when you’re stressed out all the time, you’re also producing more of the hormone cortisol—which keeps inflammation on high. You deserve to take a break from stress even if its for 10 minutes a day. I focus rather on the big picture – create margin, cut back on some things, and spend more time with God and the people that you truly care for.
Whether you call it commradiere, team work, or group motivation, its all the same thing, we succeed in living a healthy lifestyle when we surround ourselves with others who want to make healthy choices a part of life. According to the Blue Zones project, finding the right tribe can add years to your life than just about anything else. Over the next few months, Ill share habits of the world’s longest lived people. These people were either born into or purposefully choose to create social circles that support healthy behaviors. Related research shows that certain behaviors are contagious, so you attract and stimulate strong social circles by proactively surrounding yourself with the right tribe: people who share your desire to do activities that strengthen your body and fuel your brain, individuals that challenge you to learn and grow intellectually, creatively and spiritually, and people who share the behaviors that you want to be a part of your healthy life. If this is not your family or closest connections, begin by building one at a time, and your right tribe will grow.
Visualization leads to Actualization
Includes Excerpt from fitness coach, Joy Jones
Visualization, done right, can be extremely powerful in achieving any goal. As you think about your goals for the New Year, take into consideration the following…Using your imagination and concentrating on your desire, see yourself already in possession of your goal. Picture yourself with the healthy and fit body you desire, and literally feel what it is like to have it. You cannot achieve anything in your “outer world” until you first see it in your “inner world.”
Here’s what a I challenge you to do: if you have goal to reach you, first, make sure its realistic. Then you begin to form in your mind what you are doing, what you are wearing, how you are living, who you are spending your time with, what you are saying, what are you eating, etc.
Creative Visualization is distinguished from normal daydreaming in that Creative Visualization is done in the first person and the present tense – as if the visualized scene were unfolding all around you; whereas normal daydreaming is done in the third person and the future tense. Using affirmations that begin with “I am so happy and grateful now that…” is an excellent way to begin programming your subconscious mind to move towards your goal.
Visualize to Actualize
Remember, all things are created twice – first in the imagination and then second in the physical world. Study this excerpt from Napoleon Hill’s famous book, Think & Grow Rich:
Read also Romans 12:2
“Do not be conformed to this world, but be transformed by the renewal of your mind,that by testing you may discern what is the will of God, what is good and acceptable and perfect.”
Tips for Success
- Create an affirmation statement and visualize yourself with your goal achieved • Put your affirmation statement in places you’ll see it often like your bathroom mirror, car and desk. Put it on a card and keep it in your pocket at all times
- Spend some time in Prayer, seeking strength and insight from God.-our bodies are the only vehicle we have to fulfill our purpose in this life. We only have 1,
- Create a Vision Board – cut out pictures of your goal (i.e., fit bodies, athletes, etc.) and make a collage that you can view often. Get emotionally involved when you look at it.
There are no can’ts in this scenario. You rise above the failures of your past, and create a new future. With His strength, you can do anything.
Changing lifestyle habits is hard. Not only are they ingrained into our behaviors, thoughts, and daily actions, they are a part of our culture and the engine of the media. Simply changing one behavior can led to a challenge for other behavior changes. As a trainer, I’m used to addressing the thoughts and emotions that go along with making changes. I wanted to go deeper for my own challenges, and do more to help people with the great challenge of change – our thoughts – so and I began praying for a way to do that. Along came First Place 4 Health, and in October 2013 I began the process of equipping for ministry at my church.
Over these last 12 weeks, our first “Feed Your Spirit” group has completed our wellness class and bible study, focusing on our emotions, our thoughts, our heart, and our physical body. I experienced God working through all these areas in my life in a whole new way. It was as if all the bible studies and leadership training I’ve had over the last 3 years led up to this next step in my journey to know God more and who I am in Christ. For the first time ever, I was able to follow my Lenten sacrifice, and shed light on some significant strongholds in my life. As we studied obedience, confession, forgiveness, temptation, and renewal, I began to see a “new” renewal in myself. The group participants were seeing the same thing, a greater trust in God, as we dug into the word and shared our thoughts on the study each week.
As in Romans 12:2 We are challenged not to conform to the pattern of this world, but be transformed by the renewing of your mind. Then you will be able to test and approve what God’s will is—his good, pleasing and perfect will.
We receive clarity and guidance in how to step away from the behavior that damages our body and mind, and how to step towards greater wellness and fellowship with others who struggle against the culture too.
New 6 Week Class June 7th: I look forward to the next 6 week summer study and our 12 week program in the fall. I am super excited to see what God has planned for us next! Classes include practical wellness topics in nutrition and fitness, as well as a new bible study. The next class begins June 7th on Sunday mornings. Get more details here. http://www.fp4h.com/feedyourspirit
Connecting to our spiritual selves can lead to life long happiness and longevity. Whether its growing in your relationship with God and His purpose for your life, meditation, or personal reflection, focusing on our soul’s need for truth and peace is a necessity for living a fulfilled life.
All you need is for this 10 days’s in the Word is a desire to connect to your spiritual self and a bible. We will be centering on scriptures that feed our spirit – our heart, soul, mind, and body.
Especially during the holidays, the true spirit of Christmas can get lost among the shopping and parties. We will focus on God’s word each day, and I will be merely sharing what the holy spirit has put on my heart for you to hear. We will dedicate about 12 minutes each day. This will be an email and private facebook based, as well as I will be using my conference call # to record some of my messages. 605-475-4700 code# 351619#
Combine your commitment to feed your spirit by helping to feed others. Your donation will be given as a donation to Community Helping Ministry, who provides: Emergency non-perishable food pantry, Pantry for personal hygiene and household cleaning items, Shower services for homeless individuals, Some financial assistance for utilities, housing, transportation, etc.
***We will begin this study on Saturday, December 12th. Group forming now.
1. Email Kim@trimwithkim.com to be added to our email list.
“2014 is almost over. I’m so busy right now and then the holidays will be here. I’m just going to wait til January” said someone to me who was considering a healthier lifestyle. Sadly I hear that quite a bit this time of year.
That’s when I threw down the gauntlet so to speak. For a minute, let us consider an athlete or a team sport and the team has made it into the playoffs – wink, wink. Those who do not throw in the towel at the critical hour are the ones who decide that they are going to give it their all, and most likely end up winning the game. I know from experience that when we do some activity consistently and regularly, we can get a giddy up in our step and that translates to feeling better! The first 10 day challenge was created.
12 People enrolled in my 10 Day fitness challenge and they are all doing great! I am super excited to see who’s going to win the $100 plus pot this Friday!
Judi was traveling this week yet made time to workout at the hotel and even at the airport!
Lori got out for a walk “even though she didn’t feel like it” and spent the day playing with her kids at the park.
Mary rocked her volleyball game, with the added challenge of staying ahead 5 points during the game.
Congrats to Pam, one of the regular attendees at our corporate Fit Solutions classes. Pam joined us at Westport about a month ago and has worked out more than 20 times since starting, and continues to be part of the group!!!
This challenge all comes down to making time for what we want to do, what is our priority. I know there will always be distractions and obligations, so fitting in exercise will sometimes be downright a major pain in the rear. This time,it will be worth. Finishing this challenge, participants just need to show via facebook or tracking sheet that they did something everyday and earn a change to win over $100 from the pot. And our next 10 Day Challenge begins Monday November 17th. Good luck!