THE earth's northern latitudes have become about 10 percent greener since 1980, thanks to more vigorous plant growth associated with warmer temperatures and higher levels of atmospheric carbon dioxide, scientists report after analyzing data gathered by sensors aboard weather satellites.
The researchers found that the heightened greening occurred from 1981 to 1991 in the peak summer growing months of July and August north of the 45th parallel. This line, halfway from the Equator to the North Pole, runs through or near Yellowstone National Park, Minneapolis, Ottawa, Boston, Bordeaux, Belgrade and Vladivostok. North of the line lie vast North American and Russian wheat belts, and the new findings may therefore have important implications for agriculture in a warming world.
Not only are the northern climes greener, they are also green longer, according to the new findings. The scientists affirmed an earlier report that spring on average is arriving about a week earlier. Fall comes a bit later, the researchers found, making the growing season on average 12 days longer, give or take 4 days. The new findings are reported in the current issue of the journal Nature by Dr. Ranga B. Myneni, a biologist and climate researcher at Boston University, and four colleagues.
Dr. Myneni said further analysis since the study was completed had found that both the enhanced greening and the longer growing seasons continued through 1994.Continue reading the main story
The increase in plant growth was not in itself so surprising to experts, but its magnitude was. Ten percent is ''a very large number,'' said Dr. Inez Fung, a climate expert at the National Aeronautics and Space Administration's Goddard Institute for Space Studies in New York, who wrote a commentary on the study in Nature. Calling the finding ''extremely exciting and provocative,'' she said it was the first direct observation that plant growth had increased over such a wide area over so long a period.
But she also expressed what she called scientific skepticism, calling the 10 percent figure ''a hard number to explain.'' The reason, she said, is that the increase is far greater than would be expected to result from an observed 4 percent increase in atmospheric carbon dioxide, which stimulates plant growth by spurring photosynthesis. Atmospheric concentrations of the gas have been increasing as a result of the burning of fossil fuels like coal and oil.
A warming climate may help account for the difference. Besides stimulating plant growth, carbon dioxide traps heat in the atmosphere. Mainstream climatologists say that growing concentrations of the gas are probably responsible for at least part of an average global warming of about 1 degree Fahrenheit over the last century. The warming has been substantially greater at higher latitudes; Dr. Myneni put it at more than a degree Fahrenheit per decade in recent decades. And while he stopped short of attributing the warming to any human cause, he said the new northern greenness was probably linked to it.
''The warming we are seeing in high latitudes has contributed to this plant growth,'' he said.
The warmth is particularly pronounced, he said, in the winter and spring. Earlier studies have established that decreased snow cover has accompanied the high-latitude warming. They have also shown that a more extensive melting of snow in the spring allows the ground to absorb more solar energy, thereby giving an extra boost to springtime temperatures. This, said Dr. Myneni, could be causing plants to ''green up'' earlier, get a better start and therefore produce more vegetation.
Last year, Dr. Charles D. Keeling of the Scripps Institution of Oceanography in San Diego reported that an earlier spring was reflected in the seasonal rise and fall of atmospheric carbon dioxide levels. When living plants drop their leaves in winter, levels of the gas increase. The levels drop in the spring when the plants regain their leaves. The earlier spring was revealed in these fluctuations, Dr. Keeling and colleagues determined. Dr. Keeling is also an author of the new study.
Dr. Myneni and his co-researchers, following a different method, analyzed changes in solar radiation absorbed by plants as they perform photosynthesis. This enabled the scientists to infer both rates of overall plant growth and the arrival of spring.
''To get that information out of the weather satellite is a triumph,'' Dr. Fung said. But she questioned how robust the finding of a 10 percent increase in plant growth might be. Writing in Nature, she said it would be a challenge to explain it. One possibility, she said, is that warmer temperatures have directly stimulated photosynthesis.
If Dr. Myneni and his fellow researchers are right, she said, it means there may be feedback mechanisms at work that could magnify or lessen the warming, though it is impossible to say which. Among the possible feedbacks, for example, are changes in the earth's ability to reflect sunlight and in the amount of water entering the atmosphere because of plant respiration. Water vapor is itself a powerful heat-trapping greenhouse gas.
Dr. Myneni and his research team also found enhanced greening at temperate latitudes south of the 45th parallel. But it was substantially stronger between the 45th and 70th parallels, in a swath stretching from Alaska southeast to the Great Lakes and northeasterly to Labrador, and in a second band across central Europe, southern Russia and the Lake Baikal region in Siberia. Northern Scandinavia, northern China and northeastern Siberia were also affected.
Computer models predict that a human-induced global warming should improve grain yields at middle and high latitudes, while depressing agricultural production in some parts of the developing world. ''We're very interested in exploring the agricultural implications of these results for the wheat belts in Canada and Russia,'' said Dr. Cynthia Rosenzweig of the Goddard center, an expert on agriculture and global change.
Many questions remain, however. For one thing, she said, the new study measures the increase in biomass, or total plant material, while crop yields are not necessarily associated with biomass: shorter plants sometimes have bigger yields than taller ones. Moreover, she said, it is unclear how climatic change would affect the water resources without which no increase in plant growth is possible. Other scientists say that more rapid plant growth can make for less nutritious crops if there are not enough nutrients available in the soil.
In any case, said Dr. Rosenzweig, the new findings may prove useful in trying to understand the effects of climate change on agriculture.Continue reading the main story