Norfolk Island is a small island in the Pacific Ocean located between Australia, New Zealand and New Caledonia, 1,412 kilometres directly east of mainland Australia's Evans Head, and about 900 kilometres from Lord Howe Island.
Our group spent a memorable week visiting this unique and special island in late October and enjoyed so much of what it has to offer.
Top of the list is the Interesting early Australian history associated with the island which was discovered by Capt Cook in 1774. The First Settlement from 1778 to 1814 was abandoned due to its remoteness and lack of shipping. Norfolk still has no docking port and all goods are transferred to shore on lighters. By all accounts this is an interesting process to observe if one happens to be visiting at the time, and is dependent on weather conditions.
In 1825, Norfolk Island became one of Australia’s harshest convict settlements and much of this history is re-enacted today amongst well preserved buildings and ruins of the era. The current settlement, known as the Third Settlement, stems from the relocation of the population of Pitcairn Island in 1856, many of whom were descendants of the Bounty mutineers. The descendants are still living there today and much has been done to keep their history and culture alive including the annual celebration of Bounty Day.
The coastal scenery is stunning and the protected Norfolk Island pine is plentiful in all its majestic and ordered beauty. Cows have right of way on the island and always look happy and relaxed. There are 30 food outlets including cafes and restaurants on the island all serving delicious home grown and seasonal produce along with plenty of fresh fish of course.
Our group enjoyed meeting the locals and participated in all the ‘must do’ experiences including the Fish Fry at Puppies Point, a progressive dinner and Night as a Convict to name a few.
While the modern world has given Norfolk Island many of the comforts we appreciate, the pace of change has been more gradual and it is refreshing and relaxing to step back in time for a while. More change is coming though, with the Australian Government soon to take control of this external territory of Australia which has been self-governed for over 150 years. We certainly can commend to you a visit Norfolk Island for an experience that will touch your heart and soothe your soul.