Bearded Dragons are Omnivores which means they eat meat (usually live insects) greens, vegetables and fruit. Fruit and veg should make up at least 20% of your baby beardies diet rising to 70%- 80% after 18 months of age. Young Bearded Dragons will eat 80% live food. Mimicking a natural diet that a Beardie would eat in the wild is recommended. All Bearded Dragons are different so some will enjoy greens and veg, and some won’t, which is why feeding their live food the same veggie diet, called Gutloading, will give the Dragon some of the nutrients needed. Always try to be persistent with veg and greens. As with us humans we require staple foods and occasionally indulge in treats so moderation should be exercised with your Beardie.
Water and Hydration
Access to water in their most of their habit is very scare so they keep hydrated through the food that they eat. In the wild Dragons will take in dew from plants to hydrate themselves. During colder months they will absorb moisture from soil when in Brumation , Despite the fact that Dragons rarely drink water, a clean fresh water bowl should be placed in the vivarium everyday. The water should be checked regularly as Beardies sometimes mess in the bowl. Some owners spray their Beardies with water but, please bare in mind that some Dragons do not like being sprayed.
Live foods should be dusted with calcium and vitamin D3 supplements like Nutrobal. The dusting regime is controversial amongst Dragon owners. I do 2 days Calcium, 1 day Nutrobol and then repeat.
Crickets – Available in different sizes/pin head crickets for Baby Beardies. Can feed daily as part of their staple diet.
Locusts – Available in different sizes. Can feed daily as part of their staple diet.
Dubia Roaches – Available in different sizes. Can feed daily as part of their staple diet.
Meal Worms – Not recommended for Beardies under a year. Feed as a treat.
There are other grubs and worms you can feed a Beardie but the above are the most common.
Never feed wild insects, worms or bugs to your Bearded Dragon as it could make them ill or even kill them.
Gut Loading – Feed the live foods with the veg/fruit and calci that you would give to your Dragon.
The live foods will ingest them and pass the goodness onto your Beardie, Especially good if your Beardie is fussy and won’t eat his fruit and veg.
Vegetables and Greens
|Collard Greens/ Spring Greens||No||Regular|
Plants and Herbs
Many plants and herbs are safe to eat but many are not so it is best to check first. Beardies will eat Basil, Carnations, Clover, Coriander, Fennel, Lemon Grass, Mint Leaves, Oregano, Rose Petals, Fresh Rosemary and Thyme, Watercress.
Foods you should never feed a Beardie
There are several foods that should not be given to a Bearded Dragon, so if you are not sure, then don’t give it. There are plenty of good nutritious foods to choose from above which will give your Beardie a balanced diet. Foods you should avoid are Avocado, Beef mince, Wheat or Bran including Bread, Chicken, Chives, Egg Plant, Garlic, iceberg Lettuce, Onions, Pork, Rhubarb, Salmon. The items in this list are either poisonous or very bad for your Beardie. Please be aware that there are many plants, leaves and flowers which are poisonous.