This day in History November 4th
Find Out What happened 4th November This Day in History on your birthday
Find Out For Next 7 Days - November
4th Nov, 1970 - U.S.A. - - Feral Child Genie
November 4th, 1970 : Genie a feral child is taken to Children's Hospital Los Angeles after her mother enters a welfare office in Temple City, California, to seek benefits for the blind. Genie had spent nearly all of the first thirteen years of her life locked in her bedroom. During the day, she was tied to a child's potty chair in diapers and at night, she was bound in a sleeping bag and placed in an enclosed crib with a cover made of metal screening. She was never allowed to talk as her father beat her every time she made any sounds. At 13 years of age her vocabulary consisted of about 20 words. The movie Mockingbird Don't Sing was based on this tragic true story .
4th Nov, 1956 - Hungary - - Soviet Tanks
Soviet tanks and troops crush protests against Soviet rule with thousands killed and wounded, and nearly a quarter-million Hungarians fled the country..
4 Nov, 1920 U.S.A. - - New Air Mail Service
Air mail service has opened between U.S. and Canada. The first route had been planned from Seattle, Washington to Victoria, B.C. The pilot of this plane was scheduled to meet all boats arriving and departing from the British Columbia capital area.
4 Nov, 1922 - Egypt - - King Tutankhamen
November 4th, 1922: British archaeologist Howard Carter and his workmen discover a step leading to the tomb of King Tutankhamen in the Valley of the Kings in Egypt..
Full Size Public Domain Image can be found here
4 Nov, 1931 - China - - Manchuria
According to the press, it was announced that the possible inference of Soviets in Manchuria was a "made up" story. The Japanese had allegedly made up this story to cover up an alternative advancement northward.
4 Nov, 1944 - U.S.A. - - Franklin D. Roosevelt
Governor Thomas E. Dewey criticized President Franklin D. Roosevelt as the reason why the Second World War was prolonged. Dewey stated that the war had continued on as a result of Roosevelt's "confused incompetence".
4 Nov, 1953 - South Korea - - Anti Communist Protest
A group of UN members along with neutral observers led an angry anti-communist protest. This particular incident took place while a Communist drilling of Chinese prisoners was going on.
4 Nov, 1956 - Hungary - - Hungarian Uprising
After the Hungarian Uprising last week led by Prime Minister Imre Nagy the soviet air force has been bombing the capital of Hungary Budapest and have now amassed 1,000 Soviet tanks on the outskirts of Budapest to crush the uprising once and for all. In the next month the Soviet Union took back full control of the country deploying tens of thousands of troops and tanks and replaced the head of government with Janos Kadar. During the following months more than 50,000 were killed and 200,000 Hungarians sought political asylum in the West during the Soviet crackdown.
4 Nov, 1958 - Vatican - - Pope John XXIII
November 4th, 1958: Pope John XXIII the son of a poor Italian farmer was crowned 262nd pontiff of the Roman Catholic Church on the balcony of St Peters Basilica with 200,000 spectators watching from St Peters Square in a 4 hour ceremony .
4 Nov, 1963 - Germany - - Russians
The Russians had stopped another U.S. convoy while it was traveling on the autobahn between West Berlin and West Germany. This halted convoy had just been used in a training exercise in West Germany.
4 Nov, 1966 - Italy - - Florence Flooding
November 4th, 1966 : The Arno River floods causing the flooding of nearly 2/3rd's of the city of Florence with some areas of the city in as much as 8 feet of water. The floods knocked out all power to the city including hospital emergency generators and caused the death of more than 100 lost their lives. Florence has always been famous for it's historic books/manuscripts and fine art and estimates put the number damaged between 3 and 4 million with 10's of thousands damaged beyond repair and restoration.
4 Nov, 1973 - Egypt - - Peace Talks
President Sadat of Egypt was scheduled to meet U.S. Secretary of State Kissinger. Egypt was skeptical of the intentions of the United States. The purpose of this meeting was to initiate Middle East peace talks.
4 Nov, 1973 - Holland - - Car Free Sunday
Following on from the experience of "Car Free Sundays" in The Netherlands during the Suez Crisis in 1956
, the Netherlands organises the first Car Free Sunday during the 1973 oil crisis with Highways deserted which are solely used by cyclists and roller skaters.
4 Nov, 1973 - U.S.A. - - Shortage of Electricity
A magazine article was published regarding the possible shortage of electricity in some areas of the United States. Americans were urged to conserve energy in case the Arab boycott would continue for an extended period of time. A gasoline shortage was also expected, and as a result a motion was made to lower speed limits. Measures were taken to help reduce the possibility of brownouts or blackouts in the U.S.
4 Nov, 1974 - Iran - - US Hostages Taken
November 4th, 1979: Militant student followers of the Ayatollah Khomeini storm the U.S. embassy in Tehran taking 90 hostages. The students were enraged that the deposed Shah had been allowed to enter the United States for medical treatment and they threatened to murder hostages if any rescue was attempted. No diplomatic solution could be found and President Carter ordered a rescue mission in which eight U.S. military personnel were killed and no hostages rescued. The hostages were held in captivity for 14 months and were eventually released when the US Government released $3 billion in frozen Iranian assets and promised $5 billion more in financial aid.
4 Nov, 1980 - U.S.A. - - Ronald Reagan
: Former Hollywood actor and Republican Ronald Reagan wins the US presidential elections beating Democrat Jimmy Carter with a huge majority.
4 Nov, 1983 - Israel - - Middle East War
This was another busy bombing day for the Israelis and Palestinians. First, an Israeli bombing post in Tyre was struck by a suicide bomber. Israel then fought back using air fighters. They struck Palestinian bases located in the central mountains.
4 Nov, 1985 - Italy - - Yasser Arafat
It was revealed on this day that Italian prosecutors made plans to interrogate Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat. He was believed to be a reliable witness to the hijacking of the cruise ship Achille Lauro.
4th Nov, 1988 - U.S.A. - - Computer Virus
A computer virus has infected many thousands of computers connected to the Internet. The Internet ( ARPANET ) currently connects 50,000 computers from Government agencies and Universities. The virus closed down a number of the computers as operations slowed down and the computers were forced to reboot. The virus was targeted to any computer running the operating system Berkeley UNIX Version 4.3. The virus was traced back to a Computer student at Cornell University.
4th Nov, 1995 - Israel - - Rabin Assassinated
: Prime Minister Rabin was assassinated. At this time it was believed that the man responsible for the death of Rabin was affiliated from a right-winged group. This man was also said to have been from Herziliya. Rabin was hit in the back, shoulder, and side.
4th Nov, 2002 - Turkey - - Islamic
A political party with Islamic affiliation won at the polls. Some concerned existed as to whether or not religion would play a part in the politics of this new leadership. However, it was assured by Turkey that this would not be the case.
Persons such as the Justice and Development leader Recep Tayyip Erdogan assured that this country will not continue to revel in the victory. Instead, they plan on developing a government "where common sense prevails".
4th Nov, 2006 - United States - - Anglican female bishop
Katharine Schori is taking office as the first female bishop in the Anglican denomination. The choice is controversial, as most other Anglican Churches do not allow women to become bishops. More than three thousand well-wishers attended her investiture ceremony at the Washington National Cathedral, and seven conservative US dioceses have already said that they will not accept her authority.
4th Nov, 2006 - Iran - - Anniversary of U.S. embassy siege in Tehran
: Thousands of Tehran's school children and college students have marked the anniversary of the 1979 hostage-taking at the American embassy. The speaker of the Iranian parliament has said that it is similar to the current nuclear row, and that America is always trying to put Iran under pressure. In a rowdy celebration of student power, it had boys and girls segregated outside the former American embassy. Another red flag that said "Death to America" was burned. ( And Iran wonders why the west do not trust them ? )
4th Nov, 2006 - Germany - - The Master Race
A group of children that had been selected by Adolf Hitler's Nazi regime to help create an Aryan master race has met for the first time as adults. Children from the Nazis' 'Lebensborn' or 'Font of Life' project have gathered in the German town of Wernigerode to discuss the trauma over their origins.
4th Nov, 2007 - Middle East - - US Secretary of State states that a two state solution is necessary between Israel and Palestine
The US Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice says that a two-state solution between Israel and the Palestinians is needed. Ms Rice urges Arab states to accept a peaceful and permanent home for Israel, and Israel says there will be no deal for a Palestinian state unless its own security is guaranteed. Rice has gone to the region to prepare for the peace conference that will be taking place in the US that month, but she says that she was not yet ready to set a date for the conference.
4th Nov, 2008 - United States - - Barack Obama Wins Presidential Election
The United States Presidential election. The Democratic Party did well on the national level, with increased majorities in both houses of Congress and won the Presidency. Barack Obama was the Democratic nominee. The incumbent Vice President, Dick Cheney, did not run for the office. This year's presidential election is the first since 1928 in which neither an incumbent president nor an incumbent vice president was a candidate. Obama will be inaugurated on 20th January
4th Nov, 2008 - United States - - California Proposition 8
Californian voters have approved Proposition 8, which bans same-sex marriages. With more than 95% of the vote counted, the measure has 52.1% to 47.9%. The measure to ban gay marriage in California will throw doubt onto the 'unions' of the approximately 18,000 Same Sex couples that have 'wed' during the last 4 1/2 months.
4th Nov, 2009 - Italy - - Italian leaders and the Vatican are dismayed at the banning of crucifixes in the classroom
Italian political leaders are uniting to condemn the European court ruling that crucifixes can't be displayed in schools, and are a breach of human rights. The Italian government, the Vatican and Catholic right wing parties are dismissive of the European Court of Human Rights ruling, which started from the case that was brought about by an Italian mother having opposed to the hanging of crucifixes on classroom walls.
4th Nov, 2011 - China - - Many Miners Trapped in Coal Mine
Over fifty coal miners were trapped in a Chinese mine after a rock burst occurred after an earthquake. Eight miners died as a result of the accident while some others were able to escape, and those who were trapped were able to be rescued the day after the incident.
4th Nov, 2013 - Egypt - - Morsi Returns for Trial
Egypt's former president, Mohammed Morsi, who was kicked out of office in July of 2013 by the Egyptian military after people began protesting his rule. Morsi, along with several other Muslim Brotherhood associates, are charged with killing protesters. Security was tightened with the arrival of the former president as there were calls for protest and people gathered outside where he was being kept.
Celebrating Birthday's Today
Born This Day In History 4th November
4th November 1916 St. Joseph, Missouri, U.S.
Died: 17th July
, 2009 New York City, New York, U.S.
Known For :
Is best known and remembered as anchorman for the CBS Evening News from ( 1962 - 1981 ) , But his news reporting days went back as far as 1937 , during his time he covered most of the important news stories of modern times including World War II and the later Nuremberg trials, The Vietnam War, assassination of President John F. Kennedy, Watergate, The 60s music era including The Beatles' first American TV broadcast, and his coverage of the U.S. space program including landing a man on the moon.
4th November 1921
Passaic, New Jersey, U.S.
Known For :
Best known for her role as Major Margaret "Hot Lips" Houlihan on M*A*S*H. from 1972 to 1983. She is also known as a stage actress who won critical acclaim for her stage performances.