Kagiso name means peaceful
Local Origin of Name: African
From the name Kagiso
Emotional Spectrum • A quiet, babbling brook in the storm of
life. Personal Integrity • She will tell the truth even when it hurts.
Personality • A penny saved is a penny earned.
Relationships • Doesn’t need much out of life but to be loved.
Travel & Leisure • Winter sports are attractive to Kagiso.
Career & Money • A career in entertainment would suit Kagiso.
Life’s Opportunities • She must guard against deals that appear too-good-to-be-true
” If the world is cold, make it your business to build fires. ”
Created By Firstnamestore.com
Find out more name in our sites. Send us your name meaning and origin. Sung@nydob.com
A given name (also known as a personal name, first name, forename, or Christian name) is a part of a person’s full nomenclature. It identifies a specific person, and differentiates that person from other members of a group, such as a family or clan, with whom that person shares a common surname. The term given name refers to the fact that the name is bestowed upon, or given to a child, usually by its parents, at or near the time of birth. This contrasts with a surname (also known as a family name, last name, or gentile name), which is normally inherited, and shared with other members of the child’s immediate family.
Given names are often used in a familiar and friendly manner in informal situations. In more formal situations the surname is more commonly used, unless it is necessary to distinguish between people with the same surname. The idioms “on a first-name basis” and “being on first-name terms” allude to the familiarity of addressing another by a given name.
Your name is not a accident. Your name means everything about you. Find more your name meaning and origin. Find your friends name. Share with us your name origin. Share with us your family name.
Name tells itself. Enjoy your name meaning. Make beautiful name for your babies. Create beautiful name certificate for your family and friends. Post your photos and stories.