It is estimated that there are over 10,000 known diseases in the world. Some of which are easily survivable and curable, but others are make life very difficult and are terminal. Diseases can be caused by your environment, such as Tuberculosis. Diseases that originate from your surroundings are environmental diseases. Some can be caused by your lifestyle choices, such as diabetes or an STD. Diseases that come from lifestyle choices are ones that you can get by doing certain things. And others can be caused by genetics, such as Down syndrome. Genetic diseases are ones that you can give to your children in their DNA. Teh
1. What is it? Tuberculosis is a lung disease that causes an individual to have trouble breathing and causing them to cough up blood. This shortens the ability of said lung(s) and thus causing many fatalities with this disease.
2. What causes it? It is a pathogenic bacteria known as Mycobacterium tuberculosis.
3. How is the affected individual's life impacted by the disease? Most people with TB are ill all or most of the time. It is hard for them to go out into public places because TB is highly contagious. And TB is a very deadly disease, so i'd imagine that they're scared everyday of their lives.
4. Is it curable or treatable and HOW?
All of these are medicines are used to treat Tuberculosis.
- isoniazid (INH)
- rifampin (RIF)
- ethambutol (EMB)
- pyrazinamide (PZA)
1. What is it? Diabetes is a disease where your body produces too much sugar in the blood and a high blood glucose.
2. What causes it? It can be caused by obesity and bad eating habits.
3. How is the affected individual's life impacted by the disease? Some people have to take shots of insulin to keep their bodies in a balance and have to limit their eating habits.
4. Is it curable or treatable and HOW? There isn't a cure for diabetes. There is only treatment for it. You can lose weight, exercise, and take insulin shots.
1. What is it? Parkinson's is a disease where you have tremors, stiffness of the body, trouble sleeping, and sensory problems.
2. What causes it? Parkinson's is the progressive impairment or deterioration of neurons in the brain.
3. How is the affected individual's life impacted by the disease? When you have Parkinson's, it is difficult to live your life. You basically have to rely on other people to help you. And your mind slowly deteriorates.
4. Is it curable or treatable and HOW? Parkinson's can be treated by Tolcapone (Tasmar), Selegiline (Eldepryl), Rivastigmine (Exelon).