Uranus is the loneliest thing in the solar system. It hasn’t had contact with anyone in over 30 years, since NASA’s Voyager 2 spacecraft whizzed by it on January 24th, 1986. Thankfully, some good folks at NASA and elsewhere are advocating for missions to Uranus and its Ice Giant companion, Neptune, which could take…
Saturn’s rings are easy to love. They’re hauntingly beautiful reminders of how insignificant we are in the scope of the universe. But they also unfairly outshine the rest of the gas giants’ ring systems. Uranus, for example, is a wonderland encompassed by at least 13 rings. Jupiter’s got its own ghostly rings, too.…
Neptune, the farthest named planet in our solar system (sorry Pluto), is unusual in a lot of ways. One rotation around the sun lasts about 165 Earth years, and each season is around 40 Earth years. Another noteworthy thing about the planet is its atmosphere, which has a fluctuating brightness.
No need to worry, everything is fine! It’s just that a mysterious dark vortex has opened up in the skies over Neptune.
There’s been dozens of probes that have gone out exploring the solar system since 1959's Luna 2 probe. PopChartLab has gone and noted down each one since in this beautiful poster of the Solar System.
There could be a new ninth planet floating beyond the dark edges of our solar system, according to new research published in The Astronomical Journal from CalTech professors Mike Brown and Konstantin Batygin.
On the 23rd and 24th of January, 1930, a young astronomer working in Flagstaff, Arizona, scanned a small patch of the night sky. He was taking pictures of star positions, looking for anomalies that would signal movement somewhere at the edge of the solar system. He took the pictures then set them aside, not realizing…
Dwarf planets, comets, and asteroids are all the rage these days, but we shouldn’t neglect our Solar System’s outer gas planets and their moons. In this new NASA video, 70 days of Neptunian activity was compressed down to 34 seconds — and the effect is pretty damned cool.
On August 25, 1989, Voyager 2 sailed past Triton, capturing our first real look at Neptune's moon. With half the moon lost in shadow, we only got a glimpse of the icy moon. Now that footage has been restored and enhanced for your viewing pleasure.
From tiny balls of rock to giant egg-shaped objects, there's a rich and varied array of alien worlds that sit outside the orbit of Neptune. You're looking at the ones that the European Space Agency's satellite Herschel has spotted.
One of the hottest areas of oceanic research centers around deep sea hydrothermal vents and the unique animal species that call it home. But at depths of more than a mile, donning a snorkeling mask and flippers just won't cut it. That's why Ocean Networks Canada has deployed a state-of-the-art camera to document life…
Faster than you can say "trans-Neptunian object" three times, the reaches beyond Neptune's orbit start to fill out in this animation. And it's astounding. Dots representing icy bodies large and small fill the area.
Neptune has a moon called Naiad that was discovered by Voyager 2 in 1989 when the space probe made its flyby — but it hasn't been heard of since. Now, some 24 years later, astronomers have finally been able to spot it from Earth, and they did so using archived photographs.
Most of the space porn we come across is constructed from recorded images of objects in space. But painter Erik Olson prefers to interpret our solar system through his own lens, rendering our celestial neighbors with oil on canvas.
It's been a decade since astronomers last spied a moon orbiting Neptune. Now, the Hubble Space Telescope has spotted a new satellite circling our solar system's most far-flung planet.
Astronomers have spotted a new moon orbiting Neptune—the first to be discovered in over a decade—by studying images that were archived all the way back in 2009.
It's hard to listen to music while you're swimming because even waterproof earbuds that actually stay on try to conduct sound through air to reach your eardrums, and there's not a lot of air underwater. The FINIS Neptune works on this issue by sending sound waves straight into your face. Total bombardment. In a good…
Almost fifty years after his death, Frank R. Paul remains one of the biggest names in science fiction art and pulp magazine illustration. These visions of life on moons and planets throughout our solar system (recently posted to reddit with no attribution to Paul, his work, or his impact) provide us with another…
Pretty much everyone can rattle off the names of our solar system's eight (formerly nine) planets, but ask the average person to list some moons and you'll be lucky if they can tell you more than two or three.