Thermal Paper Roll
Thermal paper is paper that is impregnated with a chemical that changes color when exposed to heat. It is used in thermal printers and particularly in cheap, lightweight devices such as adding machines, cash registers, and credit card terminals.
Thermal paper is used as the communication carrier of text and graphics in a fax machine-- the fax paper. As record materials which are used for the medical and the measurement system, such as ECG, thermal recording paper drawings.
Carbonless Paper Roll
With the popularization of the computer and the development of office automation, carbonless copy paper can easily print on a computer terminal, suitable for office automation. Carbonless copy paper with no special carbon paper, writing paper for all originals and copies of the number of copies increases greatly and can be copied more than 6 copies, and by a clear, bright color. This paper has no printing ink on the surface of copy, which is easy to use. Its application is more and more widely used in banking, postal, telecommunications, taxation, transportation, hotels, customs, insurance and other fields.
ATM Paper Roll
ATM paper rolls are a type of thermal paper rolls that are used as receipts in ATM transactions. When you make a transaction over an ATM such as a withdrawal, you get a receipt from the machine. This receipt has the amount of money you have withdrawn printed on it.ATM receipts can help you to track your bank account.Why can printed on it ?Because there is a special chemical in it. When the paper exposed to heart,the heat caused a change in color of the paper.
Bond Paper Roll
Bond paper roll is a high quality durable writing paper,looks like ordinary paper,its surface is smooth, white and meticulous. Bond paper rolls are used in impact printers that utilize ink ribbons. They are mostly used for letterheads, stationery, business forms, etc. Bond paper rolls are made to perform equally well for pencil, offset printing,laser printing and ink-jet printing.
Computer Printing Paper
Computer printing paper is also named Carbonless Continuous Paper,is made from virgin pulp NCR (non-carbon ) paper, used for dot matrix machines with ink ribbon.NCR paper is a type of coated paper designed to transfer information written on the front onto sheets beneath. Widely used for banks, hotels, offices,requiring receipts.
Labels may be used for any combination of identification, information, warnin, instructions for use, environmental advice or advertising. They may be stickers, permanent or temporary labels or printed packaging.