Anchor Worm (Lernaea)
Lernaea (also spelled Lernea) is a genus of copepod crustaceans commonly called anchor worms, parasitic on freshwater fishes. They mate during the last free-swimming (copepodid) stage of development. After mating, the female burrows into the flesh of a fish and transforms into an unsegmented, wormlike form, usually with a portion hanging from the fish's body.
Crustacean parasite, Lernaea. The juvenile stages settle in the gills of Koi, when they mature they mate and the male leaves the Koi, the fertilized female settles on the body of the Koi and continues to grow, becoming the familiar worm shape.
The female buries into the skin and underlying tissue to hold on. The damage caused can become a target for bacterial or fungal infection which can spread.
Symptoms of anchor worm can be as follows:
- Anchor worms (lernea) can be seen with the naked eye
- Frequent rubbing or "flashing"
- Localized redness
- Inflammation on the body of the fish
- Tiny white-green or red worms in wounds
- Breathing difficulties
- General lethargy
There are several treatments for anchor worm in the aquarium/pond. Potassium permanganate is usually considered the best treatment and can be used either as a tank treatment or a "dip". Other treatments include a salt dip, a formalin dip, and modern antiparasitics may help. Salt in the aquarium at 1 to 2 tablespoons may help prevent secondary infections.
Manual removal of the parasite is one of the surest ways to get rid of it; this can be done by holding the fish in the hand and removing the parasites with a pair of tweezers, being careful not to break the tail off leaving the head embedded and dipping the fish back into water every few seconds so it can breathe. Sometimes the parasite can burrow so deeply that pulling it out can cause more trauma then leaving it in and just treating it.
Columnaris (Flexibacter columnaris) or Cotton Wool Disease is another bacterial infection. The common name comes from the white tufts that develop around the mouth and spread to the body and fins, often...(click on product image for more details)
Costia is a minute Flagellate with 3-4 flagella. It affects both the skin and gills of Koi, and reproduces itself by binary fission. Infestations of this parasite can appear very rapidly indeed, and Koi...(click on product image for more details)
Raised scales (rather like a pine cone) and eyes standing out from the head.
Dropsy itself is not a disease, but rather a result of some other cause. Dropsy is a term given to the swelling that occurs...(click on product image for more details)
Gill maggots are the mature females of the parasitic crustacean Ergasilus.
Ergasilus (gill maggots) will appear as grayish black and white parasites several millimeters long infesting the gills.
A number of bacteria are associated with fin rot, lesions and internal hemorrhaging, notably Aeromonas and Pseudomonas. Ulcers usually start at the site of an injury, the bacteria then infect it causing...(click on product image for more details)
Argulus another crustacean parasite, round and up to 1cm wide. They have a sucker to hold on to the Koi with needle-like mouth parts which they stick into the Koi and inject a toxin. This causes intense...(click on product image for more details)
Every pond owner with fish, at some time or another, will probably have to medicate their pond. Though Koi are extremely hardy, it is very important to keep a watch on their environment to keep them at...(click on product image for more details)
One of the most common fungal infections of Koi. The fungal spores will grow anywhere on the Koi, including the gills, initially germinating on dead tissue. Their threadlike hyphae release digestive juices...(click on product image for more details)
Gill and Skin flukes are two of the family of monogenetic trematode genera, all of which are characterised by the large grappling hooks which are used to attach themselves to their victims.
Flukes are...(click on product image for more details)
Caused by Ichthyopthirius multifiliis. The white spots on the skin, gills and fins are individual protozoan cells that are under the skin and feed on the body fluids and cells. They then punch out of the...(click on product image for more details)