Whether you are a parent or a student trying to find an idea for a science project, a teacher looking for experiment ideas for the classroom, or just a science enthusiast who enjoys the delight of experimentation – welcome, you have come to the right place!
Have fun and learn about the amazing world of science. Browse hundreds of exciting science projects in our e-Books!
No time to waste? No problem, quickly learn what Experiland is about by taking the short introductory tour.
Help Centre [FAQ]
Do you need help with some specific questions? Please make your way to our extensive help centre.
Science Project Samples
No sure what to expect? View our free ‘5 project’ sample science project e-book.
Featured Science Project e-Books
Experiland's Most Popular Science e-Books
Discount Bundles [Full series], The Mad Scientist series
Play As You Learn with Experiland
All our e-books contains plenty of original colourful illustrations written in easy to understand language specifically for each grade (All terms are defined)
Our science experiments follow a scientific method with detailed step-by-step guide how to proceed from start to finish.
A list with playful thumbnail pictures of all items required per project. Most items are ordinary household items while others can be purchased inexpensively at a local store.
All our science experiments have been tested to work and have a fully explained ‘Why it works’ section for each science project.
Each science project contains a ‘Learn more’ section with relevant information and fun science facts that are sure to surprise and amaze you!
Our science experiments are specifically designed for grades 1 to 8, with subjects divided into 5 five main categories: Chemistry, Earth science & astronomy, Electricity & magnetism, Life sciences and Physics!
Save many hours of searching for suitable ideas with our huge database of hundreds of fun science experiments in every field of basic science.
Great ideas for kids’ science fair projects that take from a few minutes to a few weeks to complete! Our science projects are neatly organized and can be browsed by category, grade, difficulty level and time required.
- TEACH Magazine - teachmag.com | Canada
"Experiland covers a wide variety of topics, making learning fun and entertaining! Some of the exciting experiments include, building a Franklin Bell device for detecting high voltage lightning storms or growing your own crystals on a piece of string!"
- Rebecca Allison – Elementary school teacher, UK - cellsignet.org.uk
"I am a big fan of anything that makes learning fun for kids and adults of all ages!"
"If you’re a parent and you want to do something with your kid that isn’t related to cleaning the toilets or forging through homework, check out Experiland’s great science projects that you can complete in the confines of your humble abode."
- Pat Wyman - America's Most Trusted Learning Expert - HowtoLearn.com
"Absolutely love Experiland!"
"Hundreds of science topics for even the most inquiring minds. The full worksheets is nicely laid out with illustrations. The go-to science fair resource right at your fingertips throughout the year! HowToLearn.com is proud to award Experiland as one the Best Educational Websites 2011!"
- Hellokids.com - Operated by Cobalink US Inc.
"Great fun for young scientists!"
"Hellokids.com is proud to recommend this great website and online resource for curious young scientists! Hellokids is one of the most popular kids' education websites in the world."
- Homeschool Coach - Homeschool-How-To.com
"Experiland's science books contain a diverse range of hundreds of science projects for kids professionally designed by science teachers. They make lesson preparation easy with a complete listing of required materials, step-by-step instructions on how to carry out the project, why it works and additional information on the subject."
- Davidson Institute - davidsongifted.org
"Fun & educational all at the same time!"
"This website and online store offers well researched, hands-on science projects in a variety of science subjects aimed at young people. A great source of kids’ science information indeed! Supporting our nation’s brightest young people."
- Ann Simpson - Homeschool.com
"Great array of science experiments!"
“Very thorough and easy to follow. Some of the sections of the experiments are not available unless you purchase their e-books but we feel is well worth it! Homeschool.com - the #1 homeschooling site on the Internet (named by Encyclopedia Britannica)”