Robot battle at UNSW as some of Australia, NZ's brightest minds test engineering skills
Some of Australia and New Zealand's smartest minds are going head-to-head in a robot challenge to outwit and outlast each other in a test of their design, computer and construction skills.
The National Instruments Autonomous Robotics Competition, being held this year at the University of New South Wales (UNSW), comes after months of planning, coding, designing and building by more than 20 teams of university students from Australia and New Zealand.
The challenge is to create robots, that have no human intervention, which navigate an obstacle course and complete challenges.
It's fully autonomous so it can locate itself in the world with laser scanners we have on the side.Jack Fuge
This year the theme is transport and logistics, with robots needing to pick up and drop off cargo throughout the obstacle course.
Event organiser Mark Phillips said the competition helped nurture the young minds that will create the technology of the future.
"The aim of the competition is to inspire and recognise and really drive student innovation and give them the opportunity to work on a real-world project that's really deadline driven and have the opportunity to showcase that talent," he said.
He said the competition allowed the young engineers to "prepare themselves for industry and taking on the engineering challenges that are out there that need to be solved".
Students were consumed by the project for months.
"It's been a lot of late nights and long days to get to the point where we are today. But it should be a very good competition," Jack Fuge from Swinburne University in Melbourne said.
Mr Fuge said the robots work on their own, free of human operated controls or computers.
That's the brains of the operation of actually finding where we are in the world.Jack Fuge, Swinburne University student
"It's fully autonomous so it can locate itself in the world with laser scanners we have on the side," he said.
"They scan out across the world and the way the robot works it maps itself in the space."
He said once the robot could find where it was in the space, it could begin actions like loading and unloading cargo through the obstacle course.
"So that's the tricky bit. That's the brains of the operation of actually finding where we are in the world," Mr Fuge said.
Daniel Griffiths from the University of South Australia (UniSA) said his team had been working on their robot for seven months.
He said in previous years the robot had lost a wheel and crashed into the first wall, but this year he was confident they would succeed.
"This is the third time we've entered and the robot is actually robust and knows what it's doing this time," Mr Griffiths said.
The UniSA team installed a crane on their robot to make it more realistic in terms of how it would pick up and deliver pallets.
Andrew Short from the University of Wollongong said creating the robot brought together a broad range of engineering spectrums from mechanical design to electrical software.
He said it looked to be stiff competition this year and was counting on his team's robot to be reliable.
"It's going to be difficult because there are a lot of good robots out there so it's going to be very challenging," Mr Short said.
The competition is running at UNSW all day and will conclude with the grand final event this afternoon.