If you happen to visit Patna the capital of Bihar on your way to Bodh Gaya, I suggest you take a look at the building called the “Golghar” (that literally means “round house”). The Golghar situated near the Gandhi Maidan in Patna was built by Captain John Garstin, in 1786 as a granary. India faced a severe famine in 1770 that killed 10 million people in Bengal and Bihar. India at that time was a British colony. The then Governor General of India, Warren Hastings ordered the construction of this building to store grains for the British Army (not for the starving Indian people). Now the building serves as a picnic and site seeing spot.
This amazing structure has no pillars from inside and is able to hold 140000 tons of grains. The Golghar has a staircase that spirals around the building where people are able to go all the way to the top. The stairs was designed in such a way that porters were able to carry bags of grains and drop it inside from a hole at the top. From the top, one is able to view almost whole of Patna along with the River Ganges flowing nearby.
Video Golghar, Patna
Further places to visit in Patna
Kumhrar – the site of Patliputra (capital of ancient India). There are pillars thought to be of a hall where the Third Buddhist Council was held under the guidance of Ashoka the Great.
Patna Museum – a museum of great historical importance as it houses the ashes of Lord Buddha and other amazing Buddhist artefacts.
Indira Gandhi Planetarium or the Patna Planetarium – one of the biggest in Asia. It’s one of the best places to visit in Patna. It has shows on astronomy and Indian space projects.
Takht Sri Harmandir Sahib at Patna Sahib – Patna happens to be the birthplace of Guru Govind Singh, the tenth guru of the Sikhs. This Gurudwara is one of the holiest pilgrimage centres for Sikhs other than the Golden Temple of Amritsar.
Mahaveer Mandir (Temple) – one of Patna’s most famous Hindu temples dedicated to Lord Hanuman.
Sanjay Gandhi Biological Park – a zoo that even houses a white tiger.