Here are some articles from the Covington Journal of July 13, 1861 discussing Kentucky and its potential role in the Civil War.
The Neutrality of Kentucky
Mr. Mallory, the Representative of the Louisville District, speaking, it would seem for the Union Representatives of Kentucky on the floor of the House, has pledged the State to stand by Lincoln's government in the prosecution of the war.
And so falls to the ground the neutrality of Kentucky.
The neutrality of Kentucky was urged and defended by Mr. Crittenden. It was endorsed by the Legislature and sanctioned by the people. It has kept our beloved State out of the war, and secured for her comparative quiet.
Is this principle to be given up at the bidding of a few politicians at Washington city? Let the people speak
Is it Disinterested Patriotism
The telegraph informs the public that at a meeting of Kentuckians (not members of Congress) at Washington city, it was resolved that the government must be sustained in its war policy.
Now who are these Kentuckians at Washington who propose to give tone to public sentiment? - In all probability they are men seeking appointments from the Federal administration in the civil service or in the army, or sharpers on the lookout for fat contracts. Of course they are all for sustaining the government in " a vigorous prosecution of the war."
400,000,000 Dollars and 400,000 Men
President Lincoln asks for four hundred millions of dollars and four hundred thousand men with which to prosecute the war against the South. The share of Kentucky will be twenty millions of dollars and twenty thousand men. Will Kentucky furnish her share of the men and money?
The same edition published this untitled article as well.
Within a few days past, some twenty gentlemen have left this city and vicinity for the Confederate States. Maj.S.K. Hays, Capt. A.Madeira, Lieuts. W.T. Estep and W.B. Phelps are, we believe of the number. - It is understood they rendezvous at Clarksville, Tenn., where two or three regiments of Kentuckians will formed (sic) for the Confederate army.