Democracy – 1. government by the people; a form of government in which the supreme power is vested in the people and exercised directly by them or by their elected agents under a free electoral system.
2. a state having such a form of government: The United States and Canada are democracies.
3. a state of society characterized by formal equality of rights and privileges.
Dictatorship – 1. a country, government, or the form of government in which absolute power is exercised by a dictator
2. absolute, imperious, or overbearing power or control.
3. the office or position held by a dictator.
Freedom – 1. the state of being free or at liberty rather than in confinement or under physical restraint: He won his freedom after a retrial.
2. exemption from external control, interference, regulation, etc.
3. the power to determine action without restraint.
Third world country – 1. the underdeveloped nations of the world, especially those with widespread poverty.
2. the group of developing nations, especially of Asia and Africa, that do not align themselves with the policies of either the U.S. or the former Soviet Union.
3. the minority groups within a nation or predominant culture.
New world order – 1. the post-Cold War organization of power in which nations tend to cooperate rather than foster conflict.
Euro dollar – A eurodollar is U.S. currency held in banks outside the U.S. (typically in Europe). Eurodollars are not the same thing as euros, the currency of the European Union.
The great white shark is the apex predator in the ocean which means it is at the very top if the food chain when it comes to all marine life bottom line is no other animal in the ocean stands a chance against the great white shark, this awesome animal is built for destruction, it can grow from 10 to 25 feet long it can get up to 2500 to 5000 pounds and it can travel thirty to 40 miles per hour underwater and it also can breech out of the water 5 to 15 feet high. We the middle class citizens of America right now at the bottom of the social food chain the big boys upstairs are desperately trying to wipe out middle America when this happens this country will move from a democracy into a dictatorship which will turn us into another third world country, and when that happens this world will fall into a one world government which will then lead into one world currency and at that point the anti Christ will be in charge there is really no way at all to block this, all you can do to ensure your safety is to accept Jesus Christ as your personal lord and savior. just like we have the holy trinity there is also a in holy trinity these very bad and evil individuals want to corrupt, disrupt distort and destroy everything that god has built up, the enemy wants to kill steal and destroy our faith, this is how he plans on destroying gods people he wants to hurt our Heavenly Father and he wants to do it through us gods people. Through the fire still alive a little battered and bruised but still alive thank you Jesus. The enemy cannot win, it kind of makes me wonder just what role will the illuminati, skull and bones and any other secret society will play in all of this???