"Centuries ago, herds of pronghorn antelope roamed freely in Antelope Canyon, which explains the canyon’s English name. It is not known exactly when people first discovered Antelope Canyon, but according to local Navajos, who have lived here for generations, the canyon is a place where cattle grazed in winter."
Antelope Canyon is found on Navajo land near Page, Arizona. The canyon is a beautiful piece of art made from something that can lead to tragedy. But this time those tragedies were not made and what was made is now one of the top 25 places to visit in the U.S. The Antelope Canyon was created by flash floods that came through the Navajo Sandstone. The Navajo Sandstone was already something incredible that turned into something even more beautiful and incredible.
"The Navajo Indians are the largest federally recognized Native American Indian tribe in the United States. Their reservation is spread out through out the four corners of Arizona, New Mexico, Utah and Colorado."
"Formed over hundreds of years of water running through sandstone, Antelope Canyon is both a sacred site for the Navajo and a favorite destination for tourists from all over the world."
"Antelope Canyon’s vertical, winding walls were carved by fast-flowing flash flood waters. The floods carried abrasive sand, rocks, logs and other debris picked up by the sudden torrents. Over millennia, these floods sculpted natural corridors through the soft sandstone."
By watching the video above it is clear this canyon is unlike any other canyon. The shapes and depth that was made from flash floods is unbelievable, and how the sun peaks through the spirals is absolutely beautiful. These tunnels and shapes that were made are amazing to see and amazing to really think about because our Earth's forces did this.
Even the bad in this world, can turn out to be something good.
Upper and Lower Antelope Canyon
There are two parts to the Antelope Canyon. One of them is the Upper Antelope Canyon which is called "Tsé bighánílíní", "the place where water runs through rocks" by the Navajo. The other part is the Lower Antelope Canyon, which is called Hazdistazí, or "spiral rock arches" by the Navajo Indians, and are located a few miles away.