Frequently Ask Questions
Why do areas of pigmentation appear on the skin?
Dark spots that appear on the skin are usually caused by sun damage and inflammation related to acne. Nearly all forms of hyperpigmentation are a result of excess melanin production, the protein that gives color to our skin. The body responds to sun exposure by increasing its production of melanin to protect the skin from further damage. These dark spots are commonly referred to as sun spots or age spots and can take years to form. Post inflammatory hyperpigmentation occurs when a pimple or other skin injury triggers an overproduction of melanin. Hyperpigmentation is also associated with hormonal changes. Melasma, also known as the “mask of pregnancy,” is the appearance of dark spots across the cheeks and nose during pregnancy.
Will areas of pigmentation fade on their own?
Spots that occur as a result of post inflammatory hyperpigmentation will eventually fade, but it typically takes between three months and two years for the spots to become undetectable. Sun spots and age spots will not resolve on their own, but there are many treatments available to fade them from sight, including Metamorphosis.
How does Metamorphosis treat excess or abnormal skin pigmentation?
Metamorphosis is not a skin bleaching system, which is an unsafe treatment for pigmentation and rarely recommended by dermatologists. Our product is not designed to change your skin’s natural color, but rather to remove layers damage and uneven pigmentation so that the skin is restored to its previous youthful state.
In addition to minimizing existing pigmentation, our product addresses the root cause of hyperpigmentation – the inflammation that leads to excessive pigment production. Metamorphosis works in three ways to treat excess pigmentation:
What skin types are prone to hyperpigmentation?
- Shedding of old, superficial skin to reduce existing hyperpigmentation.
- Decreasing new pigmentation production and its distribution.
- Reducing the triggers of new pigment production, including inflammation and free radical damage.
All skin types are prone to the formation of dark spots as a result of sun exposure and post inflammatory hyperpigmentation. People with darker skin tend to have darker areas of pigmentation than people with lighter skin, but pigmentation spots tend to be more obvious on fair-skinned people due to the contrast in colors.
How can I prevent sun spots from appearing?
The use of a daily SPF moisturizer and avoidance of the sun during its strongest hours can help prevent sun spots from forming; however, sunscreen will not prevent sun spots that have already begun forming from appearing. When undergoing any type of treatment to lighten areas of pigmentation, it is important to continue to use sunscreen so that the future pigmentation problems can be prevented.