Nine Billion Tons of Coal Cemari Atmospheric CO2 Every Year
Denpasar (ANTARA News) – Nine billion tons of CO2 (carbon dioxide) generated by burning coal in factories and power plants in the world, has been polluting the atmosphere every year.
The figure was obtained by considering the assumptions of the world’s coal consumption 5.3 billion tons per year, which is 75 percent of them to the needs of power generation, said experts on Climate and Sea Water Increase ITB, Dr. MT Armi Susan in Denpasar, on Wednesday.
Opening the dialogue participants coal, climate and its impact, he said, for the Asian region including China and India uses about 1.7 billion tons of coal per year and is expected to increase to 2.7 billion tons in 2025, ”
Coal is one of the primary energy source of the fastest growing in the world, with the level of coal use by 25 percent within three years.
“But on the other hand, coal is also the largest source of emissions of carbon dioxide (CO2) which is the main cause of global warming,” he said.
He said the burning of nine billion tons of coal releases carbon dioxide into the atmosphere each year, of which 70 percent comes from power plants.
“Coal-fired power plant, not only releasing billions of tons of CO2 into the atmosphere each year, but also cause negative impacts on health, livelihoods and the environment,” he said.
He mentioned, already thousands of workers die as a result of coal mining in the world, including the communities living around coal-fired power plants suffer respiratory and other health problems.
“While the advanced industrial countries such as Europe are competing to develop clean and renewable energy sources, such as wind, solar and ocean waves,” said Armi.
He regretted that instead of coal fired power plants grown in Asia, where high economic growth pushes companies based in industrial countries sending dirty technology to that country.
“Because in their country has no market and even the companies involved do not have to bear the commercial risk of their own,” he said. (*)
In my opinion
we should have to stop using coal for generating electricity because coal combustion to destroy the earth we live in can even cause global warming.
So whether we want if we destroyed the earth? And may interfere with the survival of our children and grandchildren later. we should refrain from using coal as power plants and we should also not be sacrificed for the sake of our planet benefit the rich.
So better we can not let go for a big gain for smooth survival of our children and grandchildren.