Benefits of a Home Water Purification System
Home water purification systems are worthy investments and depending on where you live, may be essential for healthy drinking water. Hundreds of contaminants are found in most municipal drinking water–even after it has been treated. Installing a water purifier or reverse osmosis system are the best ways to ensure that your drinking water tastes better and is better for you.
While most hazardous contaminants are filtered out during the water treatment process, there are still traces of chlorine, copper, lead, and mercury. This is often due to the fact that water must pass through numerous pipes before leaving your tap, picking up contaminants along the way. Additionally, many water delivery systems are outdated and can increase this contamination. A water purification system can help further treat your tap water before consumption.
Tap Water Chemical Content
The chemical content of tap water varies, but most tap water contains traces of metal salts like arsenic, radium, lead, mercury, aluminum, and copper. Water may also contain pesticides, nitrates, and other harmful pathogens that contaminate the water as it passes through pipes. Municipal water is typically treated with a number of chemicals to remove dangerous pathogens and bacteria on a large scale. These chemicals often include: chlorine, calcium hydroxide, fluorosilicic acid, aluminum sulfate, and sodium silicofluoride. Because of the risk of exposure to many of these toxins in drinking water, it is important to test your water and then consider the benefit of a water filtration system.
Testing the water will give you an idea of the overall water purity by providing a parts per million reading of the Total Dissolved Solids present in the water. A TDS meter will tell you the quantity of the Total Dissolved Solids. Typically, tap water shows a reading of between 150 and 420 ppm. Anything above 500 ppm is cause for concern and indicates that the water is probably not suitable for consumption. After establishing this data, consider an external water filter or a complete reverse osmosis system to further clean the water.
Reverse Osmosis Systems
Installing a reverse osmosis system is one of the most effective ways to purify tap water. These systems rely on a semi-permeable membrane to filter out any contaminants larger than a water molecule. This method is able to catch a large quantity of contaminants passing through the pipes and into the filtration system. The resulting water is cleaner and retains a purer taste than ordinary tap water. These systems can cost a couple hundred dollars to install, but for purer water they can be a nice addition to the home and will ensure that the water you are consuming is safer and better tasting.