smoke pots may also be used. Smoke generators may be employed if wind and weather conditions will
not carry the smoke across areas occupied by friendly forces and thus degrade friendly operations.
b. Screening Smoke. Screening smoke is that smoke employed in friendly operational areas or
between friendly and enemy forces to conceal friendly positions and maneuver from enemy aerial and
ground observation. Screening smoke can conceal a unit in its assembly area, denying the enemy
Screening smoke can also conceal maneuvers, assaults, and recovery operations.
Screening smoke may be employed as a smoke blanket, a smoke haze, or a smoke curtain. The smoke
blanket is used when restrictions on friendly maneuver are considered acceptable, such as in an
assembly area. Smoke hazes could be used during armored assaults, during decon operations, and at
refueling sites, where visibility and maneuver are critical along with concealment. The smoke curtain
would be placed between friendly and enemy forces. It can be used against an attacking enemy armored
force to isolate different echelons or to force the enemy to deploy into assault formations while crossing
through the smoke curtain, making enemy forces more susceptible to friendly fire when they exit the
Screening smoke may be produced by smoke pots and smoke generators. The introduction of the M157
Smoke Generator System enhances our ability to produce and sustain screening smoke since the smoke
vehicle may maneuver in the smoke cloud while making smoke. However, this action requires careful
planning of smoke vehicle maneuver patterns and sustained coordination with the unit being supported
to preclude vehicle accidents.
c. Deceiving Smoke. Deceiving smoke is that smoke used in unoccupied areas to confuse the
enemy concerning the position, strength, and intentions of friendly forces. An armored force
commander may want deceiving smoke along several key avenues of approach to confuse the enemy
concerning which axis of attack he will actually use. Deceiving smoke employed at several locations
along a water obstacle may confuse the enemy concerning which site will actually be used for a river
crossing. In addition to causing confusion, deceiving smoke requires the enemy to utilize resources,
such as men and vehicles, to determine which smoke screen hides an actual force. This reallocation of
resources weakens its attacking or defending force.
Deceiving smoke is produced by smoke pots or smoke generators. The M157 Smoke Generator System
can add to deceiving smoke since the sound of the smoke vehicle maneuvering in the smoke cloud may
be interpreted as representing mechanized vehicles.