Vaccinate children against the flu as soon as possible rather than holding out for the new quadrivalent versions, the American Academy of Pediatrics urged in its annual influenza recommendations.
Four-strain vaccine wasn't preferred over the trivalent vaccine in the recommendations published in the October issue of Pediatrics.
"Vaccination should not be delayed to obtain a specific product," Michael T. Brady, MD, of Nationwide Children's Hospital in Columbus, Ohio, and colleagues wrote in the guidelines. "Any available, age-appropriate trivalent or quadrivalent vaccine can be used."
Quadrivalent influenza vaccines add protection against the "Victoria" lineage B virus strain atop the other main B virus strain and two A virus strains in the trivalent vaccine.
Sanofi Pasteur's Fluzone Quadrivalent vaccine was approved for everyone 6 months and older, Medimmune's FluMist Quadrivalent for those age 2 years and older, and GlaxoSmithKline's Fluarix Quadrivalent for those 3 years and older.
Each year vaccine manufacturers have hedged their bets on which of the B virus strains to include in the trivalent vaccine based on what happened in the Southern Hemisphere's flu season, but including both in the quadrivalent vaccine takes away the guesswork.
And the four-valent advantage is only if the circulating flu strain in the Northern Hemisphere doesn't match the trivalent vaccine, added Angela L. Myers, MD, MPH, a pediatric infectious disease specialist at Children's Mercy Hospitals and Clinics in Kansas City, Mo.
"While it may provide better immunity to B if the circulating strain does not match what is in the three-strain inactivated influenza vaccine, we do not know for sure at this time what will be circulating," she wrote in an email to MedPage Today.
"It is much better to get your child immunized with what is available than to wait for another vaccine and leave your child at risk of influenza during that time."
And that's somewhat likely, suggested Carol J. Baker, MD, executive director of the Center for Vaccine Awareness & Research at Texas Children's Hospital in Houston.
"I suspect this year we won't have a large, robust supply of the quadrivalent," she said in an interview. "If you can get the four-strain, great. But three out of four is pretty good."
Once physicians run out of the first shipments they ordered months ago, she suggested they check back with the companies and the pediatrics society website for updates on availability.
The guidelines left the dosing algorithm for administration unchanged from last year, again recommending vaccination for all children 6 months of age and older.
Also, pediatrics offices should consider providing immunization for adults who care for children, particularly those at high risk of flu-related complications and those under 6 months of age to "cocoon" them, the guidelines suggested.
"As always, pediatricians, nurses, and all health care personnel should promote influenza vaccine use and infection control measures," they added. "In addition, pediatricians should promptly identify influenza infections to enable rapid antiviral treatment, when indicated, to reduce morbidity and mortality."
The statement was "in parallel" with CDC recommendations and reports, which are based on literature reviews, analyses of unpublished data, and deliberations of CDC staff, its Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP) Influenza Working Group, and American Academy of Pediatrics liaisons.
The American Academy of Pediatrics stated that any conflicts of interest were resolved through a process approved by its board of directors.
- Reviewed by Robert Jasmer, MD Associate Clinical Professor of Medicine, University of California, San Francisco and Dorothy Caputo, MA, BSN, RN, Nurse Planner