(above) 「大日本帝国」『万国新地図』訂正増補６版 富山房編 東京 小野英之助 明治26 １冊 22cm （普通学全書第16編）
On 28th March, 2012, Korea’s Northeast Asian History Foundation exhibited 10 Japanese maps and claimed Japanese recognized Takeshima as Korean territory.
"The Empire of Japan" from "The New World Atlas"(189.) by Ono Einosuke marked Japanese mainland, Kuril islands and Ryukyu islands in yellow, but left Korean territory, including Ulleung Island and Dokdo blank. (Donga-Ilbo)
However, as we can clearly see, there is no “Dokdo”, Japan's Takeshima/Liancourt Rocks, shown on it. The island labelled “Takeshima” is apparently a phantom island Argonaut, and the other, which is labelled “Matsushima”, is Ulleungdo, which located at 37°30′N 130°52′E. On the other hand, the island Liancourt Rocks located at 37°14′30″N 131°52′0″E.
Because of the confusion of mapping error from western maps in the early 19th century, Japanese started to call Ulleungdo as Matsushima and believed this is a new unknown island which they can log the trees. After the on-site survey of Ulleungdo by the warship Amagi(天城) in 1880, Japanese government finally identified and conclueded that Matsushima is Korea’s Ulleungdo in 1881. At the end of 1881, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Interior confirmed Takeshima and the other island (Ulleungdo=Matsushima) is Korean, revealing “the other island” in 1877’s Dajokan order was not Takeshima/Liancourt Rocks, but Ulleungdo.
In 1883, the instruction which prohibits Japanese from travelling to Matsushima/ the other name Takeshima, which is Korea’s Ulleungdo, was announced officially to not only Shimane but also to the other prefectures like Tokyo and Osaka. The Maps published in the early Meiji era shows this recognition and no wonder this map “The Empire of Japan” shows Matsushima as Ulleungdo. The point is, Japanese Government lost track of Takeshima/Liancourt Rocks, the old name of Matsushima briefly. Japanese started to call the island “Ryanko” or “Ranko”.
北緯三十七度三十分西経八度五十七分（東京本丸天守台ヨリ起算）ニ位スル日本称松嶋一名竹島、朝鮮称蔚陵嶋ノ義ハ従前彼我政府議定ノ義モ有之日本人民妄ニ渡海上陸不相成候條心得違無之様可致此旨及内達候也I have no idea why Korean keeps making such an easy mistakes.
The island that Japan calls Matsushima or Takeshima and that Korea calls Ulleungdo, located at 37 degrees 30 minutes north latitude and 8 degrees 57 minutes west longitude (from the castle tower of the keep of Tokyo Imperial Palace), is the island that Japan and Korea had an document of agreement saying that Japanese would not sail to nor land on the island without reason. We hereby notifiy this fact so that there will be no confusion about it.
“The New World Atlas(『万国新地図』)” is the 16th series of “The Complete Book of General Studies(『普通学全書』)” published by Fuzanbo(冨山房). According to the production note of the atlas, the first edition was published in 1891.
Ono Einosuke(小野英之介) is a son of Ono Gishin(小野義真), who was one of the promoters of Nippon Railway(日 本鉄道) and the one of the founder of Koiwai Farm(小岩井農場). He invested the money to Sakamoto Kajima(阪本嘉治馬), a representative of Fuzanbo Publishing.
According to the book “50 years of Fuszanbo(『冨山房五十年』)”, Ono Einosuke was born in 1871 and graduated from Tokyo College(東京専門学校), the antecedent of Waseda University(早稲田大学), in 1896(the 28 year of Meiji). It doesn’t make sense that 20 years old student could make such a map in 1891, though.
References;"East Sea and Dokdo in Old Maps " hosted by the Northeast Asian History Foundation_ The 26th column “Seeking Truth Based Solely on Facts(実事求是)”