“Lisbon” lemon trees (Citrus limon “Lisbon”) grow evergreen in U.S. Department of Agriculture plant hardiness zones 9 and 10. This variety of lemon tree tolerates heat, cold and windy conditions as well as producing several crops each year, with the main harvest occurring in early spring. According to the University of California Riverside College of Natural and Agricultural Sciences, this variety of lemon tree is the most common lemon tree grown in California. With proper care, the “Lisbon” lemon tree will reach 30 feet tall with a canopy spreading 25 feet wide.
“Lisbon” lemon trees prefer a full sun location with good-draining soil, because they do not survive in an area with standing water after a rain storm. In cold winter areas, lemon trees are grown in containers where they can be brought indoors during cold weather. This variety of lemon tree starts producing juicy fruit in three years.
The “Lisbon” lemon tree requires regular watering, especially during the first growing season, when the roots are growing. Reducing the watering sessions after the first year prevents over-watering. Mulching the root zone with 4 to 6 inches of mulch, like compost, reduces soil moisture loss through evaporation and reduces weed growth around the base of the lemon tree.
“Lisbon” lemon trees need a good supply of nutrients to grow healthy and produce plenty of lemons. These ever-bearing trees grow best with citrus fertilizer in the amount recommended on the fertilizer package. The fertilizer applications need to be spaced out two or three times through the growing season, starting in the spring before new growth appears and again at the end of August. If growing the lemon tree in a container, apply the fertilizer each month during the summer to keep the soil nutrient rich.
All suckers that form along the trunk of the tree need removing whenever they grow. Shaping and branch pruning is done in the winter when the growth of the “Lisbon” lemon tree slows, as lemon trees grow all year round without entering a dormant period in the winter. Pinching off excess fruit while they are still small produces larger lemons. The ideal spacing is 4 to 6 inches apart.
“Lisbon” lemon trees are frost tender, with freezing temperatures killing fruit and branches. Threading holiday lights through the canopy gives off enough heat to stop frost from settling on the tree. For longer freezes, the canopy needs to be wrapped in a large blanket with the lights on under the covering.
- Jupiterimages/liquidlibrary/Getty Images