Also found in: Dictionary, Thesaurus, Medical, Legal, Financial, Acronyms, Encyclopedia, Wikipedia.
Related to average: standard deviation
than the average bear
A comparative phrase meaning more/less, better/worse, etc., than the average person or thing. Originates from the animated character Yogi Bear, whose catchphrase is that he is "smarter than the average bear." He's certainly tougher than the average bear. I don't excel at all my subjects, but I still think I'm smarter than the average bear.
An average, unexceptional, or ordinary girl or woman. Derived from the more common phrase "average Joe," which generally refers to a boy or man. What sets me apart from your average Jane, though, is my tenacity and ferocity in business. I'm as much a fan of the show as the average Jane, but I don't watch it religiously.
An average, unexceptional, or ordinary person, especially a boy or man. So many movies try to cater to as many people as possible, watered down for the average Joe. I like to think I'm a bit more intelligent than your average Joe.
The average, ordinary, or typical person. Primarily heard in US. The inner workings of congress might be familiar to a political science student like yourself, but to Joe Average, it is often a completely unknown process. We strive to ensure that our computers can handle the highest demands of an IT professional but still remain accessible to Joe Average.
The average person or thing. It is typically used as a point of comparison in the phrase "than the average bear." Originates from the animated character Yogi Bear, whose catchphrase is that he is "smarter than the average bear." He's certainly tougher than the average bear. I don't excel at all my subjects, but I still think I'm smarter than the average bear.
a cut above average
Considered not the best but a little above average. The quality of this dress isn't the finest that I've seen, but it is a cut above average.
on an average
Typically. On an average, how many cupcakes does your shop sell daily?
average out (to)
1. To calculate the median number of a set of figures. In this usage, a noun can be used between "average" and "out." You need to average out your expenses and make a budget for yourself. I haven't averaged the kids' test scores out yet, but I don't think it will be a very high number, as most of them failed.
2. To reach an amount that is indicative of an overall situation (rather than the occasional high or low points). In this usage, "to" is commonly part of the phrase. I've had both high and low test scores this semester, but I think it will average out to a decent overall grade.
To calculate the median number of a set of figures. In this usage, a noun can be used between "average" and "up." You need to average up your expenses and make a budget for yourself. I haven't averaged the kids' test scores up yet, but I don't think it will be a very high number, as most of them failed.
Better than most people or things in a certain area. Because Jerry's SAT scores were well above average, he was able to attend the college of his choice. Our sales were above average for this market.
higher or better than the average. Max's grades are always above average.
average out (at something)and average out (to something)
to equal something as the average of a set of figures. The figures averaged out at what was expected. Will the charges average out to a reasonable figure? Over time, our expenses will average out to a low monthly outlay.
average something up
to calculate the average of a set of figures. Please add these figures and average them up. Please average up all the monthly expenses for the previous year. Will you please average these figures up on the calculator?
lower or worse than average. Tom's strength is below average for a child his size. Dad asked why my grades are below average.
a cut above average
better than average. John isn't the best mechanic in town, but he's a cut above average.
on the averageand on average
generally; usually. On the average, you can expect about a 10 percent failure rate. This report looks OK, on average.
on the averagealso on average
usually Health conditions were on the average pretty good. Women on average tend to be more interested in shopping than men are.
Etymology: based on the literal meaning of on average (when two or more amounts are added together and divided by the number of amounts)
average out to something
to equal an amount over a period of time I think our hotel costs would average out to thirty-five or forty dollars a night per person.
the law of averages
the probability that you will get one result about the same number of times as another if you do something often enough By the law of averages we can't give a good performance every night of the tour.
law of averages
The idea that probability will influence all occurrences in the long term, that one will neither win nor lose all of the time. For example, If it rains every day this week, by the law of averages we're bound to get a sunny day soon . This colloquial term is a popular interpretation of a statistical principle, Bernoulli's theorem, formulated in the late 1600s.
on the average
As a rule, usually, as in On the average, about 15 percent of the freshmen class will drop out before graduation. This expression uses average in the sense of "a norm or standard." [First half of 1700s]
1. To calculate the average of something: Let's average out the students' scores to see how well the class did overall. We took the rainfall figures for every summer since 1950 and averaged them out.
2. To have some amount as an average: The time you spend on the phone averages out to three hours each day. Though there are some very high prices here, there are some low ones, too, and they average out.