Turn Out the Lights!
Like your parents always said, turn off the lights in unoccupied rooms. Replace your incandescent bulbs with equivalent compact fluorescent light bulbs (CFLs). CFLs last longer and use 66 percent less energy. LED based lights are even more efficient.
Use a Power Strip
Plug appliances and electronics into a power strip so you can turn them all off at once.
Upgrade Your Old Refrigerator
Look to replace your refrigerator if it is more than 10 years old. A new Energy Star refrigerator uses at least 15 percent less energy than required by current federal standards.
Schedule an Energy Audit
Perform an online energy audit or have an energy auditor survey your home. Simple, inexpensive improvements often provide big savings.
Purchase a Programmable Thermostat
Programmable thermostats allow you to adjust the temperature of your home while you are away. Every degree of temperature reduction can save 3 percent on heating costs.
Regularly Clean or Replace Your Heating/Cooling Filter
Dirty filters reduce the required air flow and make the equipment work harder. A clean filter can help save 5 percent in heating costs. The same is true for the lint trap on your clothes dryer.
Take a Shower
A quick shower using a low-flow showerhead will use only half the water required for a typical bath.
Wrap Your Water Heater
You can save up to 10 percent of the energy required to operate an electric water heater by installing a tank insulating blanket (available at home improvement stores). Insulate the water pipes exiting your water heater to further reduce energy loss.
Wash Clothes in Cold Water
Up to 80 percent of the energy used by a washing machine is from heating the water it uses. Washing in cold or warm water saves energy. For drying, consider using a clothesline instead of the dryer.
Scale Back Appliances
Using small appliances such as toaster ovens uses less energy than their larger counterparts. Only run dishwashers when there is a full load, and select the energy saving cycle.