Over deze norm
1.1 This guide covers procedures that are specifically related to permanent decommissioning (closure) of the following as applied to environmental activities. It is intended for use where solid or hazardous materials or wastes are found, or where conditions occur requiring the need for decommissioning. The following devices are considered in this guide:
1.1.1 A borehole used for geoenvironmental purposes (see Note 1),
1.1.2 Monitoring wells,
1.1.3 Observation wells,
1.1.4 Injection wells (see Note 2),
1.1.6 Wells used for the extraction of contaminated groundwater, the removal of floating or submerged materials other than water such as gasoline or tetrachloroethylene, or other devices used for the extraction of soil gas,
1.1.7 A borehole used to construct a monitoring well, and
1.1.8 Any other vadose zone monitoring device.
1.2 Temporary decommissioning of the above is not covered in this guide.
1.3 Most monitoring wells and piezometers are intended primarily for water quality sampling, water level observation, or soil gas sampling, or combination thereof, to determine quality. Many wells are relatively small in diameter and are used to monitor for hazardous chemicals in groundwater. Decommissioning of monitoring wells is necessary to:
1.3.1 Eliminate the possibility that the well is used for purposes other than intended,
1.3.2 Prevent migration of contaminants into an aquifer or between aquifers,
1.3.3 Prevent migration of contaminants in the vadose zone,
1.3.4 Reduce the potential for vertical or horizontal migration of fluids in the well or adjacent to the well, and
1.3.5 Remove the well from active use when the well is no longer capable of rehabilitation, or has failed structurally; no longer required for monitoring; no longer capable of providing representative samples or is providing unreliable samples; or required to be decommissioned; or to meet regulatory requirements.
1.4 This guide is intended to provide information for effective permanent closure of wells so that the physical structure of the well does not provide a means of hydraulic communication between aquifers or react chemically in a detrimental way with the environment.
1.5 The intent of this guide is to provide procedures that when followed result in a reasonable level of confidence in the integrity of the decommissioning activity. However, it may not be possible to verify the integrity of the decommissioning procedure. At this time, methods are not available to substantially determine the integrity of the decommissioning activity.
1.6 The values stated in inch-pound units are to be regarded as the standard. The SI units given in parentheses are for information only.
1.7 This standard does not purport to address all of the safety problems, if any, associated with its use. It is the responsibility of the user of this standard to establish appropriate safety and health practices and determine the applicability of regulatory limitations prior to use.
1.8 This guide offers an organized collection of information or a series of options and does not recommend a specific course of action. This document cannot replace education or experience and should be used in conjunction with professional judgment. Not all aspects of this guide may be applicable in all circumstances. This ASTM standard is not intended to represent or replace the standard of care by which the adequacy of a given professional service must be judged, nor should this document be applied without consideration of a project's many unique aspects. The word“ Standard” in the title of this document means only that the document has been approved through the ASTM consensus process.
|Nederlandse titel||Standard Guide for Decommissioning of Groundwater Wells, Vadose Zone Monitoring Devices, Boreholes, and Other Devices for Environmental Activities|
|Engelse titel||Standard Guide for Decommissioning of Groundwater Wells, Vadose Zone Monitoring Devices, Boreholes, and Other Devices for Environmental Activities|