Accidents involving vehicles can happen anytime and anywhere, but certain days in a year and certain times of a day or certain places are more vulnerable to accidents. Driving can always be dangerous, and fatal accidents still happen everyday in the roads. Deaths however, in these accidents have reduced, since the past forty years. There are certain days of the year that have been recognized as the deadliest days of the year, and statistics say that the greatest number of accidents occur on the traditional days of celebrations. The major cause of accidents in these days is the increase in the consumption of alcohol, and huge traffics on the roads. It is sad that July 4th is considered to be the most deadly day for all accidents, and has the highest death rates. The other days that have high accident count are July 3, December 23, August 3, January 1, August 6, August 4, August 12, July 2 and September 2. All these days are considered to be the most deadly days of the year and people are required to be much careful on these days.
In a week too there are certain days considered to be more susceptible to accidents. Saturday followed by Sunday have the highest records of accidents. The main factor that contributes to so many accidents is traffic congestion and rash driving in order to reach home in the weekend. The deadliest days are considered to be Friday to Sunday and Saturday being the day with the greatest number of accidents. Alcohol also has a major role in the traffic snarls and the rash driving. If you follow the trends of the accidents, you will see that there are certain times of the day that are considered to be the deadliest times. There is often a rush to go home from a long stressful day of work, and the hurry causes many bad driving decisions. The time that is considered to be the deadliest is between 3pm to 6pm. The early morning is considered to be the safest than any part of the day.
In order to save yourself from an untimely death and injury, you are required to follow certain safety precautions. The seat belt is important while driving, as the seat belts can save you from the many fatal accidents. Safety precautions are necessary not only for the drivers, but these are essential even for the pedestrians, as there has been an increase in the number of pedestrian deaths. Parents are always requested to keep a watch on the children, when they are in the important cross sections, while they are on their way to school and back.