Framework Posts: This section adds supplementary materials to the CUNY HSE Curriculum Framework. We are currently adding teaching materials for functions, geometry, evolution, genetics, and more. Sign up for email updates.
CUNY Webinar on TASC Math: There have been different versions of the TASC since it was first introduced in 2014. What’s changed? 52% of the test is functions and algebra, but what does that look like on the TASC? Find the answers to these questions and more as we explore the math content on the current form of the test.
CUNY Webinar on TASC Science: Learn how to use the TASC Science Item Specifications with a focus on an important aspect of Life Sciences.
Mathmemos.org: What makes a good problem? Teachers share math problems and how they used them in their classes. Includes teaching strategies, samples of student work and printable handouts. Sign up for email updates.
If you’re like me, you’re compulsively reading news about the candidates for president, thinking about the state of our democracy and anxiously waiting for Election Day. Recent news has probably come up in discussion among your students as well. This is a great opportunity to connect your curriculum with the issues at play in this election, but it’s important to have appropriate materials and advice for handling these discussions.
Luckily, the New England Literacy Resource Center (NELRC) has put out a great collection of resources on teaching the election in adult literacy, HSE and ESOL. Continue reading Teaching about the Election
The TASC Writing Skills test requires that students understand basic sentence structures, punctuation marks that are used with these structures, and an understanding of certain types of grammatical errors. Grammar Bytes has a wealth of resources to help both teachers and students develop a firm grasp of these often tricky points. And, it can actually be fun!
Here are some of the TASC emphases for grammar:
- Proper use of the comma, semi-colon and dash;
- Parallel structure;
- Active and passive voice.
Grammar Bytes has the following resources to help students “conquer” these grammar points: Continue reading Byte the Bullet! Teach Grammar!
We work hard to help our students build their academic skills and develop the content knowledge they need to earn their HSE diplomas, but there are many other factors that can make or break our students as they attempt to successfully cross the divide into college coursework and degrees. For graduating high school seniors who are the first in their families to go to college, being successful in college can be extremely difficult because of academic, social and financial pressures. For adult students, after they struggle to get their high school equivalency diploma, a college degree can seem impossible. It is important that they see people like themselves struggle and pick themselves up as they work through college. Our students need to see resilience at work and prepare themselves for some of the same challenges. Continue reading Supporting 1st Generation College Students
In June of 2016, DRC CTB released item specifications documents for each of the five tests on the TASC exam. The documents define the content and format of the test for item writers, but they also give teachers more specific information about what is being tested than we have had before. In a July 11th webinar hosted by the CUNY Adult Literacy/HSE Program, panelists discussed a standard in life science in order to explore how the item specifications work. Goals of the webinar included increasing understanding of the item specifications documents and, specifically, the content standard on cellular division and differentiation (p. 51), while exploring ideas on teaching these science topics. Continue reading CUNY Webinar: Exploring the TASC Science Item Specifications