CONSUMER'S WORLD; Saving Campers From Lyme Disease
By DAVA SOBEL
Published: June 17, 1989
Many youngsters heading for camp this year will pack insect repellents and long pants to protect them from Lyme disease, the widespread tick-borne illness that reaches its zenith in summer.
Camp directors in the Northeast and upper Midwest, where the incidence of Lyme disease is high, are taking steps to assure parents that their children will be protected, inspected and instructed on the facts of life among ticks. Interviews with directors at more than a dozen camps in high-risk areas for Lyme disease disclosed a wide range of educational activities and some campaigns to rid campgrounds of ticks.
''Everybody here in Westchester County knows about Lyme disease because, unfortunately, the problem is a serious one for us,'' said Jeff Ackerman, director of Elmwood Day Camp in White Plains. He has mailed a brochure on tick-borne diseases (Lyme disease is the most common) to the parents of campers, along with a letter stating the camp's policy on Lyme disease.
''The Board of Health has counseled us against spraying the children or the camp,'' he said. ''We'll be watching the children for ticks, of course, but we'll do it tactfully, so as not to frighten them.'' Some campers at Elmwood are as young as 3 years old, and could not be expected to search for deer ticks on themselves.
Lyme disease is caused by spirochetes, corkscrew-shaped microbes carried by the white-footed mouse. Adult deer ticks live on white-tailed deer but lay their eggs on the ground, where the young become infected by feeding on the mice. The spirochetes are commonly transmitted to humans by deer ticks in the nymph stage. The nymphs, about the size of a sesame seed, get onto people when they walk in brush or grass where the nymphs are clinging.
The disease often signals its presence with a circular red eruption on the skin, typically about two inches in diameter, though it may take other shapes and some victims never have a rash. Other early symptoms may include fatigue, a stiff neck and flulike symptoms. The infection can usually be treated successfully in its early stages with antibiotics. If untreated, the disease can cause neurological complications, heart abnormalities, meningitis, encephalitis, Bell's palsy, which afflicts the facial muscles, or chronic arthritis.
Tick checks conducted by campers, counselors or nurses will figure prominently among camp activities wherever Lyme disease is a concern. Since infected deer-tick nymphs usually do not transmit the disease immediately, camp directors view careful daily checks and prompt tick removal as good safety measures.
At the Dorothy P. Flint 4-H Camp in Riverhead, L.I., for example, all the 7-to-15-year-old campers will be taught to examine their bodies for deer ticks after every shower, and to check each others' backs. Advice on Tick Removal
Counselors everywhere will be telling youngsters not to try to remove ticks themselves, but to go to the camp physician or nurse for help.
Camp staffs are going through orientation programs that include instructions on identifying deer ticks and nymphs, and recognizing the symptoms of Lyme disease. At Camp Wyonegonic in Denmark, Me., where some 150 counselors from 30 camps met for orientation this week, the director, Carol Suddith, distributed a memorandum on Lyme disease along with samples of tick repellent. Repellents that contain DEET (often listed on containers by its scientific name, diethyl-M-toluamide or N,N-diethyl-meta-toluamide) are known to be effective tick repellents. Among them are Cutter, Deep Woods Off!, Tick Garde, Muskol and Ben's 100.
In northern Wisconsin, near Woodruff, Michael Cohen, the director of Camp Timberlane, will try using Permanone, which kills ticks on contact; it can be sprayed on clothing, but not on the skin. (Permanone is not licensed for sale in New York, but is available in Connecticut, New Jersey and two dozen other states.) The quintessential camper's outfit - T-shirt, shorts and sandals - is less popular where Lyme disease is common. Experts advocate long, lightweight pants, preferably in light colors that contrast with the black or brown bodies of ticks, to be worn tucked inside the socks in areas with brush or tall grass.
''This year we'll be notifying parents of the days when we go hiking,'' said David Silverstein, director of Summer Trails Day Camp in Greenwich Springs, N.Y. The parents can choose between dressing their children in long pants or having them excluded from the hike.
At Camp Kamaji in Cass Lake, Minn., attended by girls from across the nation, Michael Jay, the director, plans a post-camp program for parents. ''A few days after the girls leave,'' he said, ''we'll mail the parents a list of symptoms to look for. The incubation period of the disease can be several weeks, and signs may not show up until after the camp season ends.''
Some directors decline to use commercial sprays meant to kill ticks on vegetation, like Sevin, Diazinon and Dursban, either because no product is proved effective against ticks or because they fear the effect of sprays on the environment and the children.
But some camps spray. The Girl Scouts of Long Island plan to combat ticks at Camp Blue Bay in East Hampton and Camp Tekakwitha in Hampton Bays with every weapon.
''We're having a licensed exterminator spray the entire acreage at both camps six times during the tick season,'' said Jane Cammann, executive director of the Girl Scouts of Nassau County. ''Those areas that are mouse-infested will have Damminix applied twice. We also try to inform everyone on the sites that they're in tick-infested areas.''
Damminix consists of cardboard tubes filled with cotton treated with insecticide. The tubes are set out in wooded areas where mice can find them, use the cotton for their nests and thus kill the ticks on their bodies. KEEPING TICKS AT BAY
Here is advice from experts on protection against ticks:
Wear long, light-colored pants tucked into socks when going into areas with tall grass, brush or woods. Light colors make it easy to see ticks.
Give children going to camp an insect repellent that has a high concentration of DEET. These work best when applied to clothing rather than the skin.
When children return from day camp, inspect them for ticks. In boarding camps, children should inspect each other daily or ask a counselor to.
To remove a tick, grasp it firmly with a pair of tweezers or forceps and pull it straight out. Then clean the area of the bite and wash your hands.
It's a good idea to preserve removed ticks in a jar while waiting to see if symptoms develop. If they do, take the tick when you go to the doctor.
Never try to remove a feeding tick from the skin with a hot match, chemicals or petroleum jelly; such irritants can make the tick spew Lyme-disease spirochetes into the skin.
Photoso of at Camp Tekakwitha on Long Island, Joe McGill indicating brush sprayed to kill deer ticks; a store display of tick repellents; Damminix, another type of tick exterminator (NYT/Michael Shavel).