40 CFR 60.601 - Definitions.
Nongaseous losses means the solvent that is not volatilized during fiber production, and that escapes the process and is unavailable for recovery, or is in a form or concentration unsuitable for economical recovery.
Polymer means any of the natural or synthetic compounds of usually high molecular weight that consist of many repeated links, each link being a relatively light and simple molecule.
Precipitation bath means the water, solvent, or other chemical bath into which the polymer or prepolymer (partially reacted material) solution is extruded, and that causes physical or chemical changes to occur in the extruded solution to result in a semihardened polymeric fiber.
Rayon fiber means a manufactured fiber composed of regenerated cellulose, as well as manufactured fibers composed of regenerated cellulose in which substituents have replaced not more than 15 percent of the hydrogens of the hydroxyl groups.
Reaction spinning process means the fiber-forming process where a prepolymer is extruded into a fluid medium and solidification takes place by chemical reaction to form the final polymeric material.
Recovered solvent means the solvent captured from liquid and gaseous process streams that is concentrated in a control device and that may be purified for reuse.
Solvent recovery system means the equipment associated with capture, transportation, collection, concentration, and purification of organic solvents. It may include enclosures, hoods, ducting, piping, scrubbers, condensers, carbon adsorbers, distillation equipment, and associated storage vessels.
Solvent-spun synthetic fiber process means the total of all equipment having a common spinning solution preparation system or a common solvent recovery system, and that is used in the manufacture of solvent-spun synthetic fiber. It includes spinning solution preparation, spinning, fiber processing and solvent recovery, but does not include the polymer production equipment.
Spandex fiber means a manufactured fiber in which the fiber-forming substance is a long chain synthetic polymer comprised of at least 85 percent of a segmented polyurethane.
Spinning solution means the mixture of polymer, prepolymer, or copolymer and additives dissolved in solvent. The solution is prepared at a viscosity and solvent-to-polymer ratio that is suitable for extrusion into fibers.
Spinning solution preparation system means the equipment used to prepare spinning solutions; the system includes equipment for mixing, filtering, blending, and storage of the spinning solutions.
Synthetic fiber means any fiber composed partially or entirely of materials made by chemical synthesis, or made partially or entirely from chemically-modified naturally-occurring materials.
Viscose process means the fiber forming process where cellulose and concentrated caustic soda are reacted to form soda or alkali cellulose. This reacts with carbon disulfide to form sodium cellulose xanthate, which is then dissolved in a solution of caustic soda. After ripening, the solution is spun into an acid coagulating bath. This precipitates the cellulose in the form of a regenerated cellulose filament.
Title 40 published on 2015-08-22
The following are ALL rules, proposed rules, and notices (chronologically) published in the Federal Register relating to 40 CFR Part 60 after this date.