THE vaccine given to girls to help ward off cervical cancer is showing promise in providing population-wide protection and reducing infections it is not designed to affect.
New Royal Women’s Hospital-led research shows the Gardasil vaccination program is also having a protective effect on the population with indications of “herd immunity”.
The research, published in The Lancet Infectious Diseases, has substantially reduced human papillomavirus (HPV) types since the national immunisation campaign was introduced in 2007.
It has even reduced infections in unvaccinated women, indicating that the lower level of the viruses circulating in the community is having a protective effect on the population.
Co-lead author Associate Professor Sepehr Tabrizi said there was also evidence to suggest the vaccine provided cross-protection in three other HPV types in women who had all three doses of the vaccine.
The paper confirmed earlier findings that the vaccine cut the prevalence of its targeted HPV types by 77 per cent.
But it also found a 35 per cent decline in HPV targeted types in women who were not vaccinated.
These four types are responsible for almost three- quarters of cervical cancer, but do not eliminate the need for routine screening. The study compared HPV prevalence in 1000 Australian women aged 18-24, recruited after the vaccine was introduced, and 200 women from before it began. Previous research has reported large reductions in genital warts and high grade cervical lesions in vaccinated women.
Director of Australia’s HPV vaccine register, Dr Julia Brotherton, said the findings were great news for parents of girls and boys, who are now eligible for vaccination in the first year of secondary school.
In a separate comment piece Dr Lauri Markowitz, from the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in Atlanta, said the herd immunity effects were expected.
The research was in collaboration with the Victorian Cytology Service, Sydney University, the University of NSW and Family Planning Victoria, NSW and WA Monash University.
Originally published as Vaccine triggers wider protection