The Birth of Soul Music written by
Soul music can be a music genre originated in the United States, a sort of blend between gospel and rhythm and blues music. Like a significant few musical movements and genres, soul music came out of mostly black culture. Soul music carries a few key characteristics that comprise the genre – it borrows from all sorts of arenas, including gospel, R&B and jazz. Soul music has even inspired the invention and creation of entirely new and different genres, including disco, brokenbeat, funk, new jack swing and R&B.
Soul is characterized by a number of key traits. These comprise of hand claps, call-and-response patterns, soloist instrument parts, catchy rhythms, heartfelt lyrics and tense vocals. Soul music also depends on improvisational skills from the musicians, or being able to comprise songs or vocals right then.
Soul could be traced to the 1950s, when music by African Americans was still considered underground, but was beginning to gain some serious recognition. The instruments typically first involved in soul included guitar, bass, horn, piano, the organ, drums, keyboard and of course vocals. Musicians and individuals like Ray Charles, James Brown, Fats Domino and Little Richard tend to be viewed as figures who spearheaded the soul music movement, although some individuals were more based in rock n’ roll music than anything.
Lots of people believe the birthplace of soul music being large cities, ones with rich musical background as well as places in the South, where struggle was evident for African Americans and gospel music was prominent. Motown Records, situated in Detroit certainly played the spine in establishing soul music being a huge force in popular music – they featured artists who’re still relevant today during the 1960s, including Stevie Wonder, Gladys Knight and Marvin Gaye. Through the 1970s, it is likely that the soul genre began to change and turn as new genres and magnificence of music arrived to the mainstream and began to meld with soul. This included aspects of disco, funk and psychedelic rock, all of which were also very popular during the time. Musicians knew it was important to keep an open mind if it located songs and collaborations, which was reflected inside their music. Race also dropped as a type of boundary when it stumbled on music – some genres has been often considered as very black-or-white, but alternatively soul music became ready to accept Caucasians and all forms of races, beyond its’ Black origins.
The evolution of soul continued through the 1980s and 1990s, especially using the rise of hip hop and rap culture. Though race wasn’t any longer a boundary when it stumbled on soul and rhythm and blues music, rap and hip-hop were largely created and originated by African Americans, and they found themselves to get heavily depending soul – you can still hear and see this influence during today’s popular music. Soul music has truly come full circle.