Want to simplify your Spring Math Lesson Planning?
Spring is in the air! And I am back again with a Top 10 FREE Math Centers round up, this time they are all themed for spring! My goal? To simplify your math lesson planning. Hopefully, having all these amazing free math activities and games in one place will save you some time and frustration! Plus, stay until the end for tons more free math centers added by amazing teacher-authors!
If you are a upper elementary teacher, check out this Top 10 Free Math Centers for Spring (3rd-5th) post!
In no particular order…
This is such an easy and cute math center with a bee theme. This puzzle helps kids practice making ten. The Kindergarten Connection also has Carrot Counting Addition Cards and Easter Egg Dice Games that are spring themed free math centers.
These super cute Froggy Fraction Clip Cards are a great math activity for your math workshop. The students use clothespins to clip the correct fraction for each card. The Stem Laboratory also has a great Jellybean Addition Sort and a Bunny Spin and Subtract activity.
Jenny has sets of these amazing pop art coloring sheets. She has this beautiful one for free! This would be a great no-prep math center for spring!
This great subtraction mat is a perfect addition to your math centers! Students choose a subtraction card and then model it on the mat. Life Over C’s also has a Ladybug Addition Mat and Bug Counting Puzzles.
This is a great packet of printables for math workshop. There are 8 sheets covering addition, subtraction, fact families, even and odd numbers, inequalities, skip counting, and missing addends.
Spring Addition Spinner on Playdough to Plato written by Recipe for Teaching
This is a super fun, really easy activity for practicing addition. Students spin the first spinner to determine which object they will be adding (you can use small erasers or the freebie comes with little counters). Then the student spins the second spinner. He uses the ten frame to count out the objects. This is repeated a with a different object, and the addition problem is recorded at the bottom. This would be a great center activity because it is reusable and has very little prep! Playdough to Plato also has an awesome Spring Ten Frame Subtraction you should check out!
This is a really fun center activity. There are puzzles with addition facts and answers on eggs. Heidi Songs also suggests that you give the kids counters to use to solve the problems, and you can put them into plastic Easter eggs. She also has tons of teaching tips to help kids understand the concept of counting on as an addition strategy.
Firefly Catch on 123HomeSchool4Me and written by Math Geek Mama
This math game is so fun that your kids will forget that they are learning! Kids use a spinner to add or subtract fireflies from their jar. The first player to get exactly 10 fireflies wins! Your kiddos will love this game. Plus, you can play it over and over again! Math Geek Mama also created a Spring Counting Game (Numbers 1-20) on 123HomeSchool4Me that you have to try!
This is an adorable matching game that is perfect for an easy math center. This activity would be great for sorting on a pocket chart or just matching on the floor. The cards are all adding ten to two and three digit numbers. Great for reinforcement of this skill!
This is a great freebie for practicing word problems. It is highly versatile and can be differentiated to just about any level. She suggests that students work as partners. One student creates the word problem and the other solves it. However, you could also use this set for teaching word problems. You could show them in a pocket chart or on a document camera. In the example above, you could show the students how changing the wording at the end would create an addition problem instead of a subtraction problem. You could really get creative with this one!
Need Even More Ideas for Spring Math Centers?
Check out these awesome FREE center ideas as well! I would love for you to share your FREE Spring Math Centers or Activities! After you link, check out at least 3 of the other centers and leave the author some feedback! Then, share with your friends on social media!