Human Resource Management Assignment Help
Human Resource Management (HRM) is a strategic and coherent approach of the management of an organization’s most valued assets-people who work there and contribute individually and collectively to the achievement of organization’s objectives. It is a set of interrelated policies with an ideological and philosophical underpinning. Along with this assignment help, it is the function within an organization that focuses on recruitment, management and providing direction for the people, who work in the organization. HRM is the organizational function that deals with issues related to compensation, hiring, performance management, organization development, safety, wellness, benefits, employee motivation, communication, administration, and training.
It is a strategic and comprehensive approach to manage people, workplace culture and environment. HRM enables employees to contribute effectively and productively for achieving organizational goals and objectives. HRM is a specific managerial and organizational philosophy that views people as organizational assets. It is an integration of personnel management function into strategic management of the organization. In present, HRM is moving away from traditional personnel, administration and transactional roles due to increasing outsourcing of workforce. HRM helps to add value in strategic utilization of employees. The new role of HRM involves strategic direction and HRM metrics and measurements to demonstrate value.
Primary function of HRM
HRM plays an important role in effective selection and utilization of employees to best achieve the goals and the strategies of the organizations, as well as the goals and the needs of employees. As per HR assignment help experts,following are primary functions of human resource management:
Human resource planning: It includes planning of human resource for present and future demand and supplies. For planning this, it is important to research the external market, changes in policies and demands of labor and availability of talented people.
Recruitment and selection: It is the primary function of HRM to meet workforce demands and labor force trends. This function mainly deals with the identification of potential applicants for current and future openings and for assessing and evaluating to make a selection and placement decision. This function ensures that the organization selects the most skilful and competent person from a sea of applicants at that time. It includes evaluation of ability and competency of potential employees in relation to needs of organization.
Compensation and benefits: This function is related to provide an equal wage structure, competitive benefits package, incentives, awards, salary increments, bonus and promotions. These tools are helpful to motivate employees for improving their performance and skills.
Employee relations: This function is related with communication system through that employees can share their problems and grievances. These issues are solved by management to develop effective relations with employee. HRM provides safe and healthy work environment.
Human resource development: It is related with employee training and development, new hire orientation, leadership training professional development seminars and workshops, career planning to improve the skills and knowledge of employees.
Role of HR in Strategic Plan
Human resource plays an important role in strategic plan. It formulates policies and strategies required for ensuring an effective strategic plan. HR also develops long term and short objectives for strategic plan. Mission is also developed by human resources to achieve strategic goals for which the strategic plan is constructed by the organization. It is the human resources, who prepare different activities for the strategic plan. Along with this, human resources also perform the task of conducting situational analysis. Under this analysis, SWOT analysis, competitor analysis, market analysis etc are performed by human resources.
In addition our assignment experts says that, HR also performs the task of formulating marketing strategies. Under these marketing strategies, HR develops segmentation strategy, targeting strategy and positioning strategy for marketing the products and services. Furthermore, human resource also develops budget related activities. In addition, human resource develops contingency plans. This contingency plan is effective to ensure success of the strategic plan. Apart from this, human resource also performs the task of developing monitoring and control related aspects.
Under these activities, strategies related to monitor the progress and results of the strategic plan are monitored. Moreover, human resource also performs the task of controlling the strategic plan related issues and challenges. It helps in avoiding any unexpected outcomes. Resource implications are also performed by the human resources to ensure effective strategic plan. Human resource also performs the task of executing the strategic plan related activities that are needed to achieve the long term and short term goals
How to get Human Resource Management Assignment Help with assignmenthelpexperts.com
At Assignmenthelpexperts.com, you will get complete and original human resource assignment help services of all subjects. Our assignment writing experts are available 24X7 so that you can get any time business assignment help. Students who need management assignment help can touch with our 24X7 live support system or can send e-mail at
I read blog of this website always. This help me a lot in making my assignment. All important topic available in this blog. fantastic work…
used quality and real content on my work. i am highly impressed from work of experts
awesum work.. I have made a lot of assignment from assignment help experts. overall good work