Pandora's Box was hidden in the most secure vault in the world. The President's most elite sorcerers had warned that the box shouldn't be opened under any circumstances. It was crafted by the great and wise magicians of an era long past. No one could guess what it contained, but the mere temptation to open it necessitated great security measures. Today, Penny would open Pandora's Box and discover the secret of the ancients. Her plan was relatively simple, exploiting a fatal flaw of the Alchemists' Sanctum: there was only a single vulnerable security check for invisibility spells. Penny crept into the building, hopped into an elevator with a maintenance staff member, and slipped past the first door unnoticed.

The big problem would be getting past the invisibility sensor: an array of lasers that would give her away, but Penny had a plan for that. The laser array to detect invisibility was unmanned; she would simply transform herself into one of the employees, revealing herself for a brief moment. She held her breath as she went through the lasers, taking the form of one of the chief Alchemists.

The guard station would notice her passing, but she had accounted for that, too. As soon as she was past, she turned herself invisible again. She dashed to the guard station, which, thank goodness, had been left open. The guard was looking where the Alchemist should have been walking up to the station. He had no idea that Penny was right behind him with sleeping powder. One nighty-night later, she was in the final room with Pandora's Box. Her time was short if she was going to pull off this heist.

She allowed herself an excited little tremble of the fingers before she pried the lid open. Dumbfounded, she picked up the protection talisman. This was it? Protection talismans were extremely common, almost ubiquitous, and worth nothing. She checked the back, checked it from all sides—even tried a reveal spell just to be sure. She held it in her hands, unsure what to do next. Eventually, she put the talisman in the box and made a swift escape. She couldn't help but chuckle as she retreated safely. This was the best-kept secret in the world, and only she knew that it was a massive prank.
