Unhealthy Kidneys Lead to Disease & Death. Sharon Kleyne Urges More Education about Kidneys.
Water Life Science® advocate, Sharon Kleyne, recently talked about the kidneys—the body’s filtration system–and the critical importance of water in maintaining their health. Kleyne, the founder of Bio-Logic Aqua® Research Water Life Science®, stressed that education about water and kidney function for the masses must become a priority. “Everyone should consider the fact that water research needs to be revived to avert even bigger global disasters.
Remember,” said Sharon Kleyne, “that our organs are mostly water. Our eyes are 99% water; the brain is 80-85% water; blood is 50% water; bones are 20% water. The liver is 70-75% water and the kidneys are 76% water.” Kleyne has for more than thirty years researched water and focused on understanding the evaporation of the human body’s loss of water vapor. We must supplement the body’s water vapor every day,” said Kleyne, “in order to achieve optimal health.”
Sharon Kleyne, host of the nationally syndicated The Sharon Kleyne Hour Power of Water radio program on Voice America, has long promoted water research and creation of a new water lifestyle. “Every day,” said Kleyne, “the kidneys filter approximately 120 to 150 quarts of fluid.” Kleyne went on to describe how one to two quarts are removed via urine, while the rest of the fluid is recovered by the bloodstream. If they kidneys malfunction, waste products and excess fluid can accumulate in the body. Urinary tract infections can occur and infection can spread rapidly. Kidney stones may also form and can be excruciatingly painful. “Severe dehydration will cause kidney failure,” said Kleyne, “and that is why we need to drinks lots of water every day. Did you know,” Kleyne asked, “that drinking enough water a day to produce two liters of urine can decrease the risk of kidney stones by half? Well, it’s true.”
Sharon Kleyne hopes people always remember that we live together as a family on planet earth, and that our lives depend on water. “In the beginning, earth was surrounded by water vapor, which eventually fell to earth as rain,” said Kleyne. “The water came down with the rhythm of the solar system, and it came down with the breath of life. There is nothing more magical than water. There is nothing more blessed than life thanks to water. If you drink enough of it, your kidneys will thank you. Believe me!”