The Shamrak Report produced by Steven Shamrak is a 'Pro-Israel' report that brings together various pieces of news from a variety of sources to demonstrate the inherent racism involved in the politics of the Middle East. (Comments in brackets are made by Steven Shamrak)
UNRWA vs UNHCR Goals and Agenda
by Yona Levy Grosman
UNHCR - within a period of a few months, and no more than one year, all refugees acclimatize to their new home and begin to build their new lives. UNHCR considers "Family planning" as a very important issue for adapting to their new countries.
UNHCR Goal: Its primary purpose is to safeguard the rights and well-being of refugees. It strives to ensure that everyone can exercise the right to seek asylum and find safe refuge in another state , with the option to return home voluntarily, integrate locally or to resettle in a third country. UNHCR provides basic material help and passes to the shelter countries all the other needs of the refugee.
UNRWA - creates total dependence on its support system for the refugees and their descendants, with no limit of time. It prevents rehabilitation resolutions in many cases.
UNRWA Goal - Its main goal is to educate and to execute the "Right of Return" to Palestine (which was designated to Jews as Eretz-Israel, the Land of Israel, in 1922 by the League of Nations ). In order to achieve this goal, all means are valid; to preserve the refugees' refugee status even though some of them receive citizenship in other countries. UNRWA works as an autonomous authority, to preserve its main programs - health, education as they have been for many decades.
Does UNHRC Care about Real Refugees?
The United Nations' Human Rights Council (UNHRC) appointed three officials to conduct a fact-finding mission on how the Jewish communities in Judea and Samaria (Yehuda and Shomron) affect the lives of PA Arabs. Israel 's Foreign Ministry subsequently decided to sever its ties with the UNHRC, saying the decision stems from a series of unilateral moves that the "Palestinians" are trying to lead against Israel.
- (There are hundreds of thousand refugees pouring into the Southern Sudan. There is a shortage of shelters and food. They are waiting for UN assistance in a swamp. But, there are no senior UN stuff members to coordinate care for them. For over 60 years UNHRC's main focus is welfare of the fake Palestinian refugees, who are living in comfort of (cities) the so called refugee camps)
Food for Thought by Steven Shamrak
They say that I use word "hypocrisy" to often in my letters. Unfortunately there is too much of it around with respect to the international attitude toward Israel. The word "bastardy" would be more appropriate, but I afraid they will call me "rude"! I have also been accused of being "one-sided". How many sides do Muslim/Arab Israel-bashers have?
Welcome to Brotherhood - Jewish Voters Taken for Granted!
United States President Barack Hussein Obama has invited his Egyptian counterpart Mohammed Morsi to conduct an official visit to the US in September. This would be the first visit ever to the US by a member of the genocidal Muslim Brotherhood in an official capacity. Obama's invitation to Mursi is in breach of Obama's assurances to US Jewish leaders. His key promise was not to invite Mursi to the White House until the Egyptian president met certain conditions, the foremost of which was a public and specific statement of Egypt 's commitment to its 1979 peace treaty with Israel as a central theme in Morsi's earliest foreign policy speech.
- (This invitation indicates Obama is not overly concerned about a negative reaction by Jewish voters as long as Muslims are pleased!)
Legalisation of Outposts is Recommended
A government-commissioned report has recommended that Israel legalise dozens of settlements in Judeaand Samaria. The report also reaffirmed Israel's longstanding position that the West Bank is not occupied territory and therefore Israel has the legal right to settle it. The panel's recommendations, which include annulling past Supreme Court orders and other legal rulings in order to facilitate settlement construction, have not been endorsed by the government.
- (The time has come for Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu, the Likud party and all decent politicians in Israelto realise that policy of appeasement does not work. Anti-Semites will never be happy with anything Jews are prepared to sacrifice. It is time to protect and start to build a future for the Jewish nation!)
Friendship is Two-way Street
Washington has sharply criticised the Israeli legal panel ruling that Jewish settlements on the West Bank are not illegal under international law: US State Department spokesman Patrick Ventrell said Monday: "We do not accept the legitimacy of continued Israeli settlement activity and we oppose any effort to legalise outposts." The panel headed by retired Supreme Court Justice Edmond Levy found that the term of occupier is not applicable to Israel since the West Bank never belonged to a Palestinian state and its capture by the Kingdomof Jordan never won international recognition.
- (One again the USgovernment has shown its true 'friendly' support for Israel!)
Hypocrisy of the Headlines:
"Israel continues deadly attacks in Gaza" - Al Jazeera - Most people read the headlines only. The first line of the article stated: "Fresh air raid leaves one Palestinian dead, after Hamas fighters fired 45 rockets across the border in 24 hours." This manipulative technique, placing Israels defensive/retaliatory action first in a headline, is quite often used by anti-Israel press!
African Migrants Tortured in Sinai
For several years the world was pre-occupied with Israel 's treatment of African migrants. At the same time very little attention was paid to the killings, torture, organ harvesting and enslavement of African migrants, most of whom were Muslims, by Bedouins in Sinai with the participation by, or inaction of, Egypt 's government for years. Only now, in order to undermine the Muslim Brotherhood, has aljazeera.com begun exposing this cruel reality.
Self-hating Idiot is Undermining Zionist's Ideals
President Shimon Peres came under fire on Tuesday for criticising the Jewish settlement enterprise in Judea and Samaria (Yehuda and Shomron). Peres, who spoke during a memorial ceremony for the founder of Zionism, Binyamin Ze'ev Herzl, said, "Israeli settlement in territories that are densely populated with Arab population... can lead to a threatening demographic change. That is, a risk to the Jewish majority in Israel."
- (There are many ways to end Arab occupation and remove them off Jewish land. But this self-serving and corrupt stooge is not interested.)
Whom does the United States Government Represent?
The United States of America is under siege and the coup near complete. A new government study (paid for with your taxpayer dollars) reads like an al Qaeda reader. The study says "Muslim terrorists are widely misunderstood and dont wish to impose Islam around world as is commonly believed in the west, they simply murder innocent people to defend against foreign attacks by enemies of Islam." This is the kind of jihad propaganda written by Muslim Brotherhood operative like CAIR, ISNA or Obama White House adviser Dalia Mogahed.
Quote of the Week:
"What you fail to mention here (re: my editorial letters)is that the Arabs being the way they are suits the Israeli state beautifully. Israelhas only grown and prospered at the expense of the Arabs. When Israeltalks peace even while establishing new settlements, it can only make the Arabs even more bitter and completely disbelieving the Jews. After all the Jewish cunning is not something that can be denied." - Syed A..., reader of my editorial
- This is a twisted view of an Arab intellectual. It looks like Arabs have adopted the traditional anti-Semitic ideas that Jews deserved, asked and are benefiting from the cruelty they have been subjected for centuries. If you remember, for a while Jews were also blamed for the Holocaust! The definition of Jews as "cunning" is just anti-Semitic icing on the cake. I have only one request for those people: Do us a favour - stop doing us 'favours'!
The Mandate - A Story of Legalised Robbery!
by Steven Shamrak.
From the moment of recognising the right of Jewish people to live on the land of their ancestors the international community, represented by the League of Nations and the United Nations have made all possible efforts to deny the Jewish people this right. Lead and controlled by the Great Britain and France , those institutions rubberstamped and authorised the greatest legalised robbery in modern history. Any conceivable shady and disgusting deals were made to prevent the creation of the state of Israel on Eretz Israel (Land of Israel)!
On 24 of July 1922, the League of Nations entrusted Great Britain with the Palestine Mandate. Recognising "the historical connection of the Jewish people with Palestine," Great Britain was called upon to facilitate the establishment of a Jewish national home in Palestine - Eretz Israel (Land of Israel).
Preamble: Whereas the Principal Allied Powers have also agreed that the Mandatory should be responsible for putting into effect the declaration originally made on November 2nd, 1917 , by the Government of His Britannic Majesty, and adopted by the said Powers, in favour of the establishment in Palestine of a national home for the Jewish people... ( not Palestinians, who were invented in 1960s)
Article 2. The Mandatory shall be responsible for placing the country under such political, administrative and economic conditions as will secure the establishment of the Jewish national home, as laid down in the preamble...
Article 5. The Mandatory shall be responsible for seeing that no Palestine territory shall be ceded or leased to, or in any wayplaced under the control of the Government of any foreign Power...
Three months later, in order to obtain full control over the Suez Canal, Great Britain made a deal with Hashemite Kingdom, Egyptand France. The trans-Jordan (77% of the Mandate) was given to the king's brother in exchange for the Sinai, which was given to Egypt. Golan Heights (5% of the Palestinian Mandate) was ceded to the French controlled Syrian Mandate. This robbery was legalised immediately by the puppet of the Great Britain and France, the League of Nations! It was a clear violation of Article 5 of the Palestinian Mandate. Our 'friends' are still quite generous in giving away the Jewish land!
Between 1922 and 1948, Jews were not allowed to move and live in the Trans-Jordan, but Great Britain and the Arab sheikhs facilitated the transfer of tens of thousands of Muslims to the Western side of the Palestinian Mandate. They were brought by truck loads from Syria, Iraq , Iran and Egypt to the remaining part of the Mandate. At the same time, the immigration of Jews was restricted and continuously hindered by Great Britain, the governing authority.
At the end, in its 'generosity', the United Nations divided the remaining 18% of the Palestinian Mandate into a maze of six ugly triangles. Three of them were given to Jews, Jerusalem was not included!
The Jewish people have been systematically robbed by the International community of their land rights. Our rights and inspirations have being ignored and crushed by the cruelty of International anti-Semitism! Why do Jewish leaders subscribe to the anti-Israel lies of our enemies? Why are Israeli political leaders not demanding the return of the Jewish land? We have all legal, historical, moral and spiritual rights to reclaim the Palestine Mandated lands as - Eretz Israel!
The Shamrak Report brought to you by Steven Shamrak
The aim of this independent editorial (The Shamrak Report) is to present the Jewish point of view on the Arab-Israel conflict and motivate people to support ideals and inspirations of true Zionism, the Jewish National independence movement. We are not affiliated with or sponsored by any government or political party.