Definition of nomenclature
2 : the act or process or an instance of naming nomenclature … is at its simplest the task of assigning a name to each distinct species — R. I. Smith
3a : a system or set of terms or symbols especially in a particular science, discipline, or art the nomenclature of inorganic chemistryb : an international system of standardized New Latin names used in biology for kinds and groups of kinds of animals and plants
nomenclaturalplay \ˌnō-mən-ˈklāch-rəl, -ˈklā-chə-\ adjective
nomenclature was our Word of the Day on 05/18/2016. Hear the podcast!
Examples of nomenclature in a Sentence
the nomenclatures of zoology and chemistry
the nomenclature, “tuxedo,” derives from the fact that the jacket first became popular in the resort area of Tuxedo Park, New York
Recent Examples of nomenclature from the Web
Paris was simply the city that hosted the talks after which, in the long tradition of diplomatic nomenclature, the agreement was named.
Alas, the fuddy-duddies of international mineral nomenclature insist that, since the stone doesn’t actually contain the real-world element krypton, it can’t be officially called kryptonite.
These example sentences are selected automatically from various online news sources to reflect current usage of the word 'nomenclature'. Views expressed in the examples do not represent the opinion of Merriam-Webster or its editors. Send us feedback.
Did You Know?
In his 1926 Dictionary of Modern English Usage, grammarian H. W. Fowler asserted that it was wrong to use nomenclature as a synonym for name; he declared that nomenclature could only mean "a system of naming or of names." It is true that nomenclature comes from the Latin nomenclatura, meaning "the assigning of names," but the name sense was the first to appear in English (it is documented as long ago as 1610), and it has been considered perfectly standard for centuries.
Origin and Etymology of nomenclature
Latin nomenclatura assigning of names, from nomen + calatus, past participle of calare
First Known Use: 1610
NOMENCLATURE Defined for English Language Learners
Definition of nomenclature for English Language Learners
: a system of names for things especially in science
Medical Definition of nomenclature
: a system of terms used in a particular science; especially : an international system of standardized New Latin names used in biology for kinds and groups of kinds of animals and plants—see binomial nomenclature
Learn More about nomenclature
See words that rhyme with nomenclature Thesaurus: All synonyms and antonyms for nomenclature Spanish Central: Translation of nomenclature Nglish: Translation of nomenclature for Spanish speakers Britannica English: Translation of nomenclature for Arabic speakers Britannica.com: Encyclopedia article about nomenclature
Seen and Heard
What made you want to look up nomenclature? Please tell us where you read or heard it (including the quote, if possible).