For Release: December 1996
Contact: 202-507-6398 or [email protected]
The Environmental Policy Task Force has just released a Directory of Environmental Scientists and Economists, a publication featuring the names and biographies of 141 scientists, economists, and public policy experts in environmental affairs. The directory includes individuals with expertise in such environmental disciplines as atmospheric issues, waste disposal and management, endangered species, and air pollution. The Task Force, a project of The National Center for Public Policy Research, developed the directory to ensure that journalists and policymakers alike have ready access to real environmental scientists, economists and experts rather than political activists.
"The environment is too important to leave in the hands of political activists. Yet, this is precisely where the United States has left most environmental decision-making in recent years," said David Ridenour, Vice President of The National Center for Public Policy Research and director of the Environmental Policy Task Force. "Political activists -- not authentic environmental scholars, scientists and economists -- have come to dominate both the headlines and Washington's legislative agenda. Activists with little or no practical experience or scientific training are frequently cited in the national news media as experts -- or worse, as scientists. As a result, the federal government often spends billions in taxpayer dollars regulating peoples' lives to solve questionable environmental risks while ignoring real ones."
The Directory of Environmental Scientists and Economists lists experts with a wide range of views and expertise on environmental issues in 27 different environment fields. Interviews with any of the directory's 141 experts can be arranged by contacting the Environmental Policy Task Force.
The Environmental Policy Task Force is a project of The National Center for Public Policy Research, a non-partisan, non-profit educational foundation based in Washington, D.C. The Task Force was created to find and promote innovative, workable solutions to environmental and regulatory problems -- solutions that minimize the suffering of working Americans. The Task Force measures the success of government policies not by the number of bureaucrats it employs, pages of new regulations it adds or additional taxpayer dollars it expends, but by whether or not these policies work.
To arrange interviews with any of the 141 experts featured in the directory, or for more information about the Directory of Environmental Scientists and Economists, please contact The National Center.
<<< Return to the National Center Home Page