Microsoft codenames are the codenames given by Microsoft to products it has in development, before these products are given the names by which they appear on store shelves. Many of these products (new versions of Windows in particular) are of major significance to the IT community, and so the terms are often widely used in discussions prior to the official release. Microsoft usually does not announce a final name until shortly before the product is publicly available.
Visual Studio Codenames
Visual Basic 1.0. The first version of Visual Basic. The standard dialogs and controls created by the Visual Basic runtime library all have "Thunder" as a prefix of their internal type names (for example, buttons are internally known as ThunderCommandButton).
Microsoft Visual C++ 4.1. After Zamboni, an ice resurfacing machine.
Visual Studio 98 (6.0). Ski Resort in Colorado
C#. Short for: C-based Object Oriented Language
Visual Studio .NET 2002. After Rainier, a small town south of Seattle. Mount Rainier is a dormant volcano.
Visual Studio .NET 2003. After Everett, a large city near Seattle.
Visual Studio 2005. After Whidbey Island in Puget Sound. A little farther from Seattle than Everett.
Visual Studio 2008. Named after Orcas Island, located in Puget Sound. Farther still from Seattle.
Team System-only release after Visual Studio 2008. Named after a resort located on Orcas Island.
Visual Studio Team System. Unknown, although it is the name of a North American manufacturer of snowboards.
Successor or Orcas. An island 'much further out' than Orcas or Whidbey. Also, where the development team plan to celebrate its completion.
Visual Studio Team System's Source Control System. Named after the Cape Hatteras Lighthouse in the Outer Banks region of North Carolina.
Visual Studio Team System load testing suite. Named after the Ocracoke Island Lighthouse on Ocracoke Island, also in North Carolina.
Team Foundation Work Item Tracking. Named after the Currituck Beach Lighthouse in Corolla, North Carolina.
Team Foundation Server SDK. Named after the Bodie Island Lighthouse in North Carolina.
Visual Studio Team System's designers for architects.
Includes Application Designer, Logical Data Center Designer, System Designer, and Deployment Designer.
Visual Studio 2005 Extensions for WinFX. Named after Fidalgo Island, located in Puget Sound in the San Juan Islands.
Online version of Visual Studio. Currently a research project.
Microsoft Surface. Table-top style computer with multi-touch touchscreen interface.
Windows CE .NET-based technology for smart displays.
Experimental operating system based on the Microsoft .NET platform, using software-based type safety as a replacement for hardware-based memory protection. Project homepage.
Windows Presentation Foundation
.Net My Services. Project to make MSN-hosted user data available to the same users at non-Microsoft web sites; never released
Windows Communication Foundation
In Microsoft jargon, the "toaster" is the hardware equivalent of fictional entities, such as the Contoso company or the http://tempuri.org/ URI, used in documentation and sample code as placeholders to be redefined by third-party developers.
A framework that takes advantage of Windows Communication Foundation and the Entity Data Model (EDM) to allow developers to expose data in the cloud. Read More...
Shared Source Common Language Infrastructure (SSCLI)
An implementation for ASP.NET of Ajax native to the .NET Framework 2.0.
Windows XP SP2
Windows Vista/ Windows Server 2008 (In Development). Named after the Longhorn Bar in the Whistler-Blackcomb resort
Windows Vista Service Pack 1
Windows Media Player 11 for XP
Windows Media Player 11 for Vista
SQL Server Codenames
Windows Live Codenames
Microsoft Office Communicator 2005Technorati Tags: Microsoft Code Names , .Net , Technology , Thinder , Zamboni , Aspen , Cool , Rainier , Everett , Whidbey , Orcas , Rosario , Burton , Hawai , Hatteras , Ocracoke , Currituck , Bodie , Whitehorse , Fidalgo , Tuscany , Lightning , Clarity , Milan , Mira , Singularity , Avalon , Hail Storm , Indigo , Jolt , Paxos , Toaster , Astoria , Rotor , Atlas , Hydra , Sphinx , Shiloh , Yokun , Katmai , Akadia , Kahuna , Tornado
Monday, November 12, 2007
Microsoft Code Names
Today, CBSE Board, India declared class X result for year 2010. But here is a catch – this year they changed the rating from numbers to grad...
Microsoft’s long-term productivity vision explores how we will create and share content; collaborate across teams, organizations and network...
Interesting one in reference to: "EMBED THE IMAGE BELOW ON YOUR SITE" - History of Hacking - Online MBA ( view on Google Sidewiki...
As a developer, many time I wished to redirect user to a new URL into a new browser window. I wanted to use response.redirect at server sid...
It was winter saturday and a sunny day. I decided to go out with family. Usually we hang out at some mall in Delhi but this time my wife sug...