By Carla Wheeler, ArcWatch Editor
Developers are quickly adding elements of "where" to their Web sites along with other important data. They're creating "mashups"popular applications that, in the GIS world, merge cartographic and other types of data from multiple sources into one Web mapping application. Mashups combine Web services to create new content.
For example, a police department's online database can be combined with basemaps of a city's neighborhoods taken from another Web service to provide citizens with an online view of where crimes, such as motor vehicle thefts, burglaries, and vandalism, have occurred.
"With the 9.3 release, Esri will give you even more tools for pushing GIS technology to the Web," said Bartley, an Esri product engineer on the ArcGIS Server team.
For example, a developer could create a Web application that would allow users to do analysis on the Web using their own data, data from Esri, or a Web service, said Bartley.
These extensions will help developers create mashup applications that utilize the basemaps and application frameworks of Google Maps or Microsoft Virtual Earth along with services provided by ArcGIS Server. ArcGIS Server mapping and geoprocessing services can come from hosted services, like those available from ArcGIS Online, or from other GIS servers including services based on local data resources. In these scenarios, the look and feel of the application is that of either Google Maps or Microsoft Virtual Earth, but the GIS behavior is ArcGIS Server.
Bartley, Chivite, and Sai will show developers how to build and customize simple mapping applications that integrate ArcGIS Online, Microsoft Virtual Earth, and Google Maps. Coding examples, design patterns, and best practices will be included.
"With the release of ArcGIS Server 9.3, any Web developer will have easy access to services running on ArcGIS Server," said Bartley. "This means that the entry point is much more accessible for developers who just want to build pure client-side Web applications that take advantage of services running on ArcGIS Server technology."
Learn more about ArcGIS Server.
To learn more about Esri, visit www.esri.com.