Homework Policy – A Summary
Homework should be achievable by child, i.e provide opportunity to practice work already done. Homework is prepared by the teacher in school.
At teacher discretion, some homework can be given to provide a challenge. All children expected to do their homework to the best of their ability
Weekly schedule Homework is given from Monday to Thursday. It not normally given on Fridays, except if a child has not fulfilled his/her homework requirements during the week. Middle and senior classes sometimes required to work independently on projects at weekends. Sometimes children are given “homework off ” as a reward or on a special occasion.
Content Ideally homework will be a balance of reading, learning and written tasks.
Homework may be reading, spellings, tables, written work, pieces to be “learned by heart”, drawing/colouring, collecting information/items and finishing work started in class. Children often feel that reading and “learning by heart” is not real homework. In fact it is the most important part. Parents and teachers should help children to see the value of it.
How much time should be spent on homework? Different children will complete the same homework in different lengths of time. Time spent will vary from day to day and also from the beginning to the end of the school year. Teachers sometimes ask parents to note in the homework notebook how long homework is taking.
General guidelines only: In infants homework is at the discretion of the teacher and is usually based around reading activities e.g. learning nursery rhymes, practicing words, listening to stories etc.
First; 20 minutes
Second; 20 -30 minutes
Third; 30 -40 minutes
Fourth; 40 -50 minutes
Fifth; 50 -60 minutes
Sixth; 1 hours – 1 hour 15 minutes
Please note: The Learning Support Teachers will often give homework to their allocated pupils as a reinforcement of work done in LS class. Reading is routinely given as homework. Homework may need to be differentiated for children attending LS and others. Homework which is given by LS is given precedence as it is tailored to the individual’s needs.
How often should parents monitor homework?
Parents should check and sign a child’s homework journal every evening. The pupil’s journal is an important record of the child’s homework. It is also a way parents and teachers can communicate. Ideally, all written messages to teacher should be in the homework notebook. Child are taught to record homework neatly on the correct page and tick each item of homework when completed.
If homework is stressful experience for parent and child, something is wrong. If this happens please contact the class teacher for advice and guidance.