Friday, October 31, 2008
We live far off the road in a neighborhood with few trick-or-treating young children - so we don't expect a lot of callers. Still, we prepare for the few who brave the dark, long drive, and tonight -- the cold. The grands will be with their friends, and for us, it will likely be a quiet evening -- with a small candy bowl all for ourselves!! LOL
I'm reprinting an article I wrote a while back about the origins of Halloween --
The Origins of HalloweenThe Origins of Halloween
By: Lin Frye
Hobgoblins, ghosts, black cats, pumpkins, haystacks, scarecrows,
larger-than-life cartoon characters, and more “other worldly” figures parade around the streets, knocking on doors and begging “Trick or Treat!” Each fall the holiday many children, and lately adults, look forward to is Halloween … but where did our traditional observances come from?
Most folklore authorities agree that Halloween as we know it began as a combination of druidic practices and classical Roman religious beliefs. During the second century B.C., the Celtic communities of Northern and Western Europe, especially in Ireland and Scotland, celebrated their year’s end on October 31,
the eve of “Samhain (“summer’s end”). This event was marked with agrarian festivals that celebrated the ending of the year (with foods such as nuts and apples). After grains had been gathered the sun was thanked for the harvest. At the same time, the sun was “honored” in hopes that the winter would not be
too severe and would return in the spring. “Samhain” was an occasion for feasting since the harvested foods were often abundant.
It was also on this feast night, that townsfolks extinguished the fires in their hearths and met at the center of town. The priests would alight the sacred oak to kindle a new fire in honor of the sun god and to frighten away any lurking evil spirits. Each family head of household would receive an ember from the sacred fire so that he could kindle a new fire in his own hearth to protect the
household throughout the year.
The Celts also believed that on October 31, the lord of the dead assembled the souls of those persons who passed away during the year. Since it was also believed that on this day the souls of the dead played tricks on the living, the druids offered sacrifices to appease the souls and protect the survivors.
Our modern Halloween practices reflect some of the influences from the Roman festival honoring “Pomona,” the goddess of fruit and nuts. A harvest festival was held November 1 to thank Ponona for the harvest bounty. Today, many of our Halloween decorations and foods include seasonal varieties of these crops.
It took centuries to incorporate October 31 into the Christian calendar. During the fourth through seventh centuries, the idea of honoring numerous martyrs and saints grew out of the fact that there were fewer days in the calendar than there were saints to worship. Pope Gregory III placed a single day in the church calendar to celebrate all the saints. This day occurred during the
spring of the year. However, during the reign of Pope Gregory IV, he placed All Saints Day and the vigil All Hallows’ Eve on November 1 and October 31 respectively. Historians believe this was done to offset the paganisms of the old “Samhain” rites. Nonetheless, the Christianizing of the Halloween observances took even more time.
Customs of pagan origins continued to flourish in Ireland, Scotland, Wales and parts of England well into the 18th century, and even later in some places. Outside of the Church, folks still held the belief that Halloween was the gathering time for unruly spirits, including witches and those with evil intent. Common practices continued as folks believed the “spirits” were out on Halloween stealing milk, playing pranks, and destroying crops. To allay their
fears of these spirits, people would gather in groups and make strange or loud noises, to keep the evil spirits away. As they wiled away the time during this fearful night, they played games, such as bobbing for apples, and feasted on new crops that included the traditional fruit and nuts.
Halloween was also considered the time of prophecy, and various “discoveries” could be made that night. For instance, young women would divine their marriage prospects by placing nuts in the fireplace coals, naming one nut for her and the other two for admirers. If one of the admirer’s nuts burned quietly besides the
woman’s, it meant that the gentleman would remain true. If, however, one of those named nuts split, it meant no lasting happiness with that individual.
Another discovery was made when young people went in pairs into a field of cabbages. The shape of the cabbage and the size of the vegetable they selected indicated the appearance of their future husband or wife.
While most of these earlier beliefs and observances have disappeared, many others have survived with the European settlers in the new world. Through time and changes, many of these former traditions were revamped and revitalized. In pioneer days, some Americans celebrated Halloween with corn-popping parties,
taffy pulls and hayrides. With the Irish Potato Famine in the 1840s and the influence of great numbers of Irish immigrants, Halloween mischief of the “fairy folk” or “little people” came to America. Instead of using pumpkins, which were unavailable in Ireland, the Irish used oversized rutabagas, turnips and potatoes to carve into hideous faces and light with candles to be used as lanterns during
Halloween. In fact, the name “Jack-o-Lantern” is reputed to have come from an Irish tale of a man named Jack who was famous for being stingy and drinking too much. In several encounters with the Devil, Jack tricked him, making the Devil very angry. When Jack finally grew old and died, he was banned from Heaven because of his past behavior and banned from Hades because of all his pranks. Jack, in desperation, begged the Devil for a live coal to light his way out of the dark. Jack put the coal in a turnip he was eating at the time, and according to myth, was condemned to roam the earth with his lantern until Judgment Day.
By the late 1800s, Halloween had become a national observance in the US. Traditions had been altered enough to recognize the parties, dressing in costumes and trick or treating that we do today. Though not all folklorists agree as to where trick or treating came from, one suggestion is that this custom came to the US when European peasants went from house to house asking for
money to buy items for a Halloween feast and demanding that contributions be given to them. If donors were liberal, good fortune was assured to the giver. However, if the donors were stingy, then threats were made and pranks carried out.
A drive around the area assures us that Halloween observances are alive and well. Decorations of haystacks, scarecrows, black cats, witches and the like spice up many neighborhoods and shops. And on the night of October 31, we’ll hear the ghosts and goblins knocking on our doors threatening “Trick or Treat!”
Remember to be generous … prosperity may follow!
Thursday, October 30, 2008
The poms are making their way into our grocery stores -- and I love them. They were always a holiday treat for us from Thanksgiving to Christmas. And as a bunus, they're filled with wonderful vitamins and all good healthy things! My daughter sent me some incredible tea with pomegranate flavorings -- yum!
And with mornings like this, cold and brisk, the flavored tea sure tastes great!
Teresa (http://blueberriesartlife.blogspot.com/) and I have been 'chatting' for several months but only yesterday were able to meet for dinner! There is something about written correspondence, I think, that lets one know just how many things you have in common with another -- somehow, and I wish I knew just HOW, one can 'tell.' And this 'knowing' didn't fail us yesterday.
Teresa drove up from her home in NC to my office and from the very meeting, we laughed, chatted, shared stories,and didn't stop talking until well past sundown. What a true JOY! And such a delightful, beautiful woman.
After a light dinner, we drove to Clayton to visit the gallery (we're standing by my painting -- and yes, I really am that short! LOL), and spent a good hour viewing the wonderful paintings, pottery, and other sundry items displayed. We laughed and giggled so much that the owner of the gallery joined us in the merriment ...!
It was a fabulous evening, and one I truly hope we can repeat again soon! Thank YOU, Teresa for making the trip -- and keep on writing your wonderful blog!
Wednesday, October 29, 2008
I've been perusing my photo reference collection and decided to do a few flowers and fruits this week and practice with 'reds' ... so poppies it was!
The 'shadows' of this came out a bit too muddy in the actual watercolor -- they don't look as muddy scanned, I think -- but I know they didn't quite 'do' as I had hoped -- but I suppose, that's what 'practice' is for! LOL
Stay warm today --- !
Tuesday, October 28, 2008
This sketch is from a photo of rose hips, leaves still on (as they are in some of the more protected areas), and those brilliant berries are ripe and ready for feasting by hungry wildlife. Rose hip tea is a good warm drink for us two-leggeds --chock full of Vitamin C ... especially welcome during this cold and flu season.
Stay warm everyone!!!
Monday, October 27, 2008
This is an painting of a wonderful fountain we found during our trip to Sicily several years ago. The name of the property in Italian mean "Water in the Rock" - apparently referring to this spring. I painted this several times, still not achieving the wonder we felt when we saw this ... but getting closer!
We're expecting a hard freeze this week, so in between laundry, chores and the rest, took down the last of our still producing tomatos (those Italian Juliet, olive-shaped tomatoes produced exceeding well!!!), gathered the last of the wild persimmons, and tried to paint a bit.
Next week we replace the heater and air conditioner for both upstairs and downstairs since they're not working as efficiently as they should, so I expect another full weekend.
Temperatures are cold at night, dipping into the 30s and 40s -- but afternoons have been in the 50s and 60s and very pleasant. We've about reached the peak color for my trees, and last night as the sun was setting, the blaze of yellow/gold was truly spectacular!
Have a great week! And thank you for your generous congratulations yesterday!!!
PS - Boots and Babes are doing very well!! The babies are exploring the area, and Momma Boots keeps reigning them in .. they're hilarious as they learn about climbing trees, jumping from the porch, and playing ball with the
Sunday, October 26, 2008
It's a beautiful gallery - and also offers classes in all forms of art - guitar lessons, visual art and more.
We left the gallery and spent the rest of the evening doing the kinds of chores and shopping that seem to take far longer than they should.
Saturday, October 25, 2008
We named her 'Pepper" (still not sure if it IS a 'her') after the first cat I ever owned -- a black, white and gray patterned just like this one - the coloring reminding me of grains of pepper.
We're off today to the opening of "Eye of the Eagle" Gallery and the artist reception there. I have 2 paintings at the show and was asked to bring 2 more ... should be fun!
Have a great Saturday!
We brought Boots (mom) and her 5 kittens back together yesterday -- and was it ever joyful! But first -- they had to eat!!
Truly, the three weeks we had separated mom from her babies while her surgery healed, seemed like a minute after the six of them got together. After polishing off their breakfast, mom fell into her motherly role of cleaning the babies -- much to their chagrin -- and then the six of them romped, jumped, explored, chased, ran, hid and had a high old time. Watching how those kittens playfully grabbed at Boots, I'm glad we waited until her incision was totally healed before bringing them together -- their sharp claws and teeth, the way they used their paws on her (as on each other in play), would have opened her surgery to infection.
What I most enjoyed was the way Boots, good as she is, reassumed her parenting role and the kittens followed and obeyed her as she kept them from wandering off or getting into too much trouble.
Watching them is a belly-laughing time-- the antics of six distinct, playful personalities romping through the hedges and hiding under porch steps is enough to make one's day!
Friday, October 24, 2008
I've been a huge fan of Karlyn Holman for a long time (www.karlynholman.com) and will be taking more classes from her when she's in Raleigh next month. Karlyn is a fabulous watercolorist, and what I enjoy most is her sense of 'play.' Karlyn has an incredibly spontaneous perspective to painting, and is open to using mixed media, unusual 'brushes,' stamps, collage and miscellaneous materials in her work and encourages others to consider trying these alternatives.
When I first began my journey into visual art, I began with collage - loving the various textures, found objects, inclusion of inks, paints, napkins and more to create a pleasing image. So I'm rather enamored with that side of visual art, but since I've been determined to learn traditional watercolor methods, I haven't 'played' as much as I might have. Until last night.
Inspired by Karlyn's grapes painting, I went hunting for some of my own grape leaves, now golden yellow and turning quickly to crunchy brown, and used those to 'stamp' the watercolor onto the paper. Unlike the acryllic paint I'd stamp onto my shirts, watercolor was very WET and far less easy to control. So I stamped and drew a bit, stamped a bit more.
The result was too light and abstract, and so I used some negative painting methods to darken, enhance, fill in some of the 'open' areas left by the watery stamping. I added some drawn and brush-painted grapes, splatter, and if I were playing even more, would have added some fibers simply for play.
I'm fairly happy with the result, though I fight myself for not being 'totally traditional -- meaning using only a brush" ... but I'm getting over that, I hope! LOL
Thursday, October 23, 2008
The cold has begun to settle in and we're experiencing more and more leaf drop ... Still, those trees that are still holding their leaves are becoming more and more vivid with the cold.
I hope to get in a 'walk in the park' today -- or at least a walk once the temperatures warm ...
Wednesday, October 22, 2008
After all the vivid colors of fall, I thought I'd try a 'softer' approach to these apples. The State Fair had an incredible display of apples -- from pinker varieties, like this, to a purple that was as deep as eggplant .. so I thought I'd try a bit of 'soft' for a fall practice.
It's getting colder these days -- and I"m running the heat in the morning and a/c in the afternoons ... but it won't be long before our afternoons match our cold mornings!
Tuesday, October 21, 2008
graciously sent me some photographs of her trip to Venice -- including this incredible door. THANK YOU JONA! If you haven't seen her blog -- check it out -- terrific work!
If all goes well, I will be in Tuscany and Venice next year on a two week art trip (fingers, toes, eyes and ears crossed!!! LOL), and so I keep trying to get in a bit of architecture and water practice .. and Jona's photographs have inspired me to keep trying these topics!
The fair yesterday was terrific! The day started out mighty cold (for me!) and wound up being in the 60s -- fabulous weather to be among crowds, fair-food, and super displays of our state's agricultural heritage. The horticultural gardens (small plots designed and landscaped by individuals, schools, professionals, were the epitome of inspiration - and we've been invited to participate next year. We'll defnitely consider it! I loved seeing the competitions too -- everything from food and animals to humongeous pumpkins and sweet potatoes and apples to arts and crafts. Old timey farm implements and equipment, displays of bees and hives, flowers, and so much more. A harvest celebration to be sure!
Monday, October 20, 2008
We're off again today to the State Fair to take in the horticulture exhibits, so I'll be away from the computer until either late tonight or tomorrow morning ... I can't remember fall being as busy last year! LOL
It's VERY cold today - in the mid 30s ... figures we'd be outdoors this cooler week instead of last when the temps were in the 70s! LOL
Sunday, October 19, 2008
My company sleeps and the house is quiet for a bit longer. What a joy to see my daugher and her family again! So much to talk about, so much fun watching all three grands playing together -- and how they enjoyed the kittens!!! I don't know who wore out first!
A quick painting done over two days of one of the old barns C and I found on our travels. I am really enjoying our sojourns into the county to find these old barns and trying to capture them before they're all gone!
Have a restful Sunday!
Saturday, October 18, 2008
My daughter and family arrived very late last night, and my son and his family arrive later this morning, so I'll be scarce until tomorrow night -- meantime I hope everyone has a terrific weekend!
It's raining here and chilly, so I imagine we'll all be indoors or on the porch -- the grandchildren will have a blast playing together .. look out kitties!
Friday, October 17, 2008
Thank all of you for your kind and truly generous and incredible encouragement and kind words ... I am humbled by your kindness and thank you profusely ....!
The painting here is from the White Gardens at Sara Duke Botanical Gardens ... I am enamored with the various natural textures as they contrast with human-made objects... It is such a blessing to be able to visit the many oustanding arboreta in this one area of North Carolina!
When I began attempting 'visual' art through collage work a few years ago, I met a group of incredibly talented women from all over the US ... We became close friends and each year, the group of us would meet in Rhode Island for a long weekend of 'arting' .... I haven't been able to make that trip in a few years, but this weekend, one of the 'girls' is taking some classes nearby, and we're meeting for lunch! I can't wait to see her after all this time!
My daughter and her family are also heading this way for a visit, and my son and his children will be here as well.
My gracious, it feels like Christmas!!
Thursday, October 16, 2008
Since we live so far in the country, our newspaper must come via mail -- so it'll reach us tomorrow. But Charles, my sweetest supporter, found a copy and brought home one or two ... LOL .. I think my mom will love it! LOL
This viburnum from my own property, has wonderful white blossoms in the spring that look like balls of snow; hence, the common name. This fall, those blossoms have turned into varied-hued red to deep purple berries, and the foliage, those warm, earthen tones I so love.
With all the berries, nuts and seeds around this fall, the birds haven't been too busy around my feeders. Folklore tells us that a fall heavy with fruit and nuts signifies a 'difficult' winter. This year, I can't really tell if that will be true for the weather, but if the economy doesn't improve, it will certainly prove true in that regard! We're getting more and more calls with questions on planting vegetables ...
OH! Before I forget -- we've launched our Arboretum webpage!! And with it, I'll be keeping a blog and taking more photos ... have a look, leave a comment if you'd like ...
Click on 'blog' to read about our trip and see some of the photos, and if you scroll back to 'previous posts' in the blog, there's an article about small scale gardening ... here's the link in case you want to jump right in:
Wednesday, October 15, 2008
We had a FABULOUS time yesterday!! Our group of 16 toured the Life and Science Museum and really enjoyed the tropical butterfly house - everyone oohing and ahhing and taking lots of photos. I loved the new exhibit of sound -- an entire room partioned into sound squares. Each square producted a different sound, so by running and jumping, moving and twirling, you created some really wonderful music. I wore off about 6 French Fries making music!!! LOL
And the walk around Duke Gardens was fun, though by the time we got there in the afternoon, temps were well over 80, and the walking was up and down small hills, tiring for a lot of folks. Still, the fall foliage and flowers were spectacular!
It's back to routine today and back to Smithfield -- It's been a sheer joy to be home in the evenings ....!
Tuesday, October 14, 2008
and uploaded a few things ...
But I got my sweatshirt today!!! And guess what I"m wearing in the morning!!!! LOLOL
Spent the day yesterday in faculty development classes. Our focus was how our personality styles affect how we teach ... interesting. I have taken these "Meyers-Briggs' type of tests before, so this one didn't hold any surprises .. but it's always fun to see how 'close' those 'predictors' come.
Our conference room tables were decorated for fall, and I was able to sketch a quick pumpkin resting its napkin before my hands were busy writing other things .... I painted it from memory and a few notes in the right hand corner after I got home. A quick, colorful practice.
I drove the 90 miles back home after the workshop since today we're taking a group of folks to both the Musuem of Life and Science and Sarah Duke Botanical Gardens, and both of those are a quick, easy drive from where I live. Being at home in the middle of the week is such a wonderful treat! I got to play with the kitties and see C! But it's hard to 'remember' that I'm not 'off from work' yet -- LOL
Temperatures today promise to be in the mid-70s to low 80s -- a perfect fall day for visiting the exhibits and gardens!
Monday, October 13, 2008
I was able to finish this shot of Target this weekend -- seen here with her/his feet in the strawberry basket ... the leaves of which, now are long gone ....
The week is going to be as busy as the weekend -- today is a full day of faculty development and tomorrow the Arboretum is hosting a trip to the Botanical Gardens and Science Museum, so I won't be near a computer until Wednesday ... But the weather is supposed to absolutely glorious -- warm, sunny and perfect for our travels ...
Have a great week!
Sunday, October 12, 2008
It took us a long time to get to the plein air outing yesterday -- not for the distance, but for all the stopping we did to snap photos of the barns along the way -- each surrounded by signs of fall - cornstalks, hay bales, colored leaves. The lighting was awful, I have to admit -- but the variation of scenes was inspiring!
As was the paint out! This farm in Graham, NC was an incredible painting opportunity -- each turn presented a vignette to capture -- the owner, a sculpture of large pieces, had the most incredible array of objects d'art -- and his friend, who contributed to the landscape and sculpture collection, had huge MOVING sculptures .. INCREDIBLE! The wife of the owner apparently was a gardener, for each piece was set among flowers and ornamental grasses and shrubs that benefitted both the piece AND the garden.
Not only the sculpture, LAKE, gardens and 2 miles of walking trails, but barns, a cottage rennovated from the 1700s .... a glorious fall day -- and the opportunity to capture a piece of all this astonishing beauty.
But I have to blame it on beauty-overload. I painted, or tried to -- it took at least an hour to DECIDE what to paint -- and then - sketch, paint , wipe out, redo-- and it just wasn't working ...try as I might. Angles were off, lighting was off, mud was everywhere ... and so instead of embarrassing myself today, I'll simply admit to being intoxicated with the beauty I found there ...and I'll redo instead of trying to rescue ... my meager attempt.
So leaves today instead of cabin, or sculpture, or lake, or garden. At least for now. But oh my gracious -- what a place ....!!!
Saturday, October 11, 2008
They've eaten, played, and I've put some of Emily and Nick's plastic toys in there too, and they've been having a ball. Some of them have even begun using the litter pans!
They've developed new game called "King of the Basket" where they jump up and 'claim' dominance on top of the strawberry plant. Fun to see and watch.
Of course, the Strawberry plant no longer looks so good ....
Clumped together, Muly grass in bloom looks like pink cotton candy .. and with the light shining on them -- like the lights of fairies ...
Friday, October 10, 2008
Scenes like this continue to challenge me in the most incredible ways -- angles, buildings, depth, size -- so practicing such complex scenes is something I need to do far more often. This is from a photo refrence and reminded me so much of the view I remember from our trip to Sicily several years ago.
Boots Update: MUCH better -- more sleeping, but mercy, as an outdoor cat being confined to indoors, she is NOT happy, refuses to use her litter box, and is totally BORED, though she has three rooms to roam. At least, the two of us have gotten some sleep! Kittens spent the night in the metal kettle on the front porch ... much like a snug basket!
I've an appointment this morning for an interview with the local newspaper -- I'm taking along a number of paintings and it should be fun.
Thursday, October 09, 2008
Pepper 2 - named after my first cat with the same coloring
Whiskers - named for the bits of long white hairs along its back
Blackie - obvious! LOL
Spot - Also obvious - for that wee spot of white between its eyes
Target - named for the black 'target' on his haunches that circles his rear 'cheeks' and from which his tail emerges -- too funny!
Boots is currently sleeping -- thank heavens!
I'm not entirely satisfied with the way this turned out, but considering all the medical distractions with Boots yesterday, I was grateful to practice at all!
Boots Update: I was warned that some animals respond to anesthesia with grogginess or by becoming hyper -- well, poor Boots --- poor ME --LOL Boots came home insanely HYPER! According to the vet, Boots must remain away from the kittens for at least 14 days so they don't open her sutures, stay in a climate-controlled room for at least 7, stay QUIET (LOLOL), and the first night, eat a light meal and rest, no exercise for 7 days. HA!
Poor babe looked all around for her kittens, cried continually, dashed from room to room, kept jumping off and on the bookcases (not easy to do), whined for more and more food, wants to go outdoors to potty instead of use the litter box, etc. etc. We comforted her as much as we could, but she was so uncomfortable and so confused. I confined her for a few hours to calm her down, which worked .. fed her small amounts of food every hour or so .. and eventually, she got quiet --- but cried all through the night. I mean A L L THROUGH THE NIGHT!!!!!!!!!! Sigh.
It's going to be a rough day as the anesthesia wears off. I have some pain meds for her and I go up and down the stairs to check on the kitties every little bit -- but getting out the door from Boots' area to the stairs is a real challenge -- that cat is FAST! And today -- I'm probably far more groggy than I wish she had been! LOL
Anyway, it's supposed to rain most of the day, so I'm hoping for a bit of rest for us all!
Thank you all so much for your kindest comments yesterday and good wishes for Boots....! We haven't quite figured out how to seep mom and babies apart with our insane working schedules ....I'm hoping for a brainstorm too! LOL
Wednesday, October 08, 2008
When Boots returns, I'll have to keep her quiet and away from her babies for a few days -- she won't like that, and after her surgery, will probably be a 'tad' angry at me as well ... mercy ... My fingers are crossed it all goes well ..and Boots returns as the loving, sweet cat she is ...
Oh yes, and I have a moment to sketch! LOL
Tuesday, October 07, 2008
I'd like to thank Peggy from "Passions of an Odd Chick" (http://passionsofanoddchick.blogspot.com/) for her generous arty award "This is an award for arty blogs in WORDS, PICTURES, DRAWINGS and THOUGHTS..." THANK YOU Peggy! Please visit her wonderful blog -- filled with artwork, collages, photography! Thank you again, Peggy!
The vignette I sketched last night was from a recent trip my colleagues and I made to a nearby garden center as we sought inspiration for decorating the Arboretum for fall. Incredible displays of pumpkins, gourds, mums and all varieties of fall fare made us dizzy with delight! I could have stayed at the Center and sketched all week!
The cooler weather is turning more and more trees into colorful displays .. I LOVE fall -- from the harvest to the colors to the bit of melancholy that it seems to bring. It's a season, to me, that encourages us to tie up loose ends, finish tasks and begin to prepare for the busy holidays ahead and the hunkering down, restive time of winter. But before that, we are treated to a vivid display of nature's bounty and majesty! I read a quote this morning that I'll paraphrase: "Fall is a second spring ... each colored leaf.. a wildflower." I couldn't agree more.
Monday, October 06, 2008
Weekend seemed to fly by -- but we scratched a LOT of items off our chore list and I did manage a bit of painting. But these last warm days, I, like so many others, long to lengthen the days with a bit more relaxation...! Here's hoping NEXT weekend is a bit slower ....!
Sunday, October 05, 2008
With little time to paint, I sketched these from a photo I took during a visit to Raleigh's Farmers Market ...
The cool evenings have begun to change the foliage colors in earnest ....I even spotfed a few reds yesterday!
Saturday, October 04, 2008
The weather has been incredible -- though the nights are cold, the days are in the 70s, sun-shiney, clear ...those kind of lingering warm days that lull you into thinking that winter won't come for a long time ...but we know this period of warm flirtation is merely a tease ...still, we are all enjoying the intoxication it brings ...
More chores and running around today - but at least we'll be able to be out of the house for a while.
Kitties are now eating real food, and romping, rolling, playing on the porch. When I go outside to feed them, it's like a 5 ring circus with Mom in the middle making sure I don't forget to give HER some attention too. Their antics are sheer delight ... and sweet C, too, looks after them as though they were our rambunctous children ... ah, grandparenthood ....
Friday, October 03, 2008
This practice sketch is based on a photo I took of the Mediterranean while visiting Sicily two years ago ...I haven't made it to the beach at all this summet, so I 'embellished' this scene with some memories of both our visit to Sicily and my visits to South Carolina beaches.
It promises to be another busy, chore-filled weekend and the cooler night-time temperatures have begun to change the landscape into more vivid yellows and oranges ...I truly hope to find some quiet time to get outdoors and paint!
Thursday, October 02, 2008
It's that time of year! And though our leaves are still not brightly colored, mums, pansies, hay bales, corn stalks, pumpkins, and gourds are making their appearance.
At the Arboretum, we're decorating too ...our gardener has put out flats of pansies and several mums and our sign is decorated - and these gourds were just waiting to be sketched.
Some new news -- a few months ago I was asked to exhibit some of my work during the month of November at one of our local libraries! So November will be my month to take my paintings off my newly painted walls and hang them in town! If you have favorites you think I absolutely MUST show, I'd love to hear from you!
More news -- I'd like to thank Marilyn (http://hrt2hrt4mike.blogspot.com/) for giving me a "Brilliant Weblog" award!! THANK YOU, Marilyn!!!
Temps this morning are in the 50s .. BRRR ...maybe after a few more of these cooler evenings our trees will show more signs of the season ... Meantime, I'm going to brew something hot to drink!