Journalism is a broad field that is ever-growing, changing and merging with other industries. Journalists are professional writers who write about current events, topical information and interesting content. They may write for magazines, newspapers, websites or other forms of media. The role of the journalist varies by position and publication, but the main goal of a journalist is to provide some kind of information to the public.
Magazine journalists, often called writers or editors, write copy for magazines. Magazines tend to come out each week or month, but there can be other printing intervals as well. Magazine writers write in the voice of the magazine at large, gearing their articles toward a specific demographic—their readers. There are many kinds of magazines, including those that share information news, fashion, music, lifestyles, home and garden, exercise, technological, financial and other information. Magazine writers and editors tend to write copy that is edited thoroughly and designed on a page along with photos and graphics. According to the United States Bureau of Labor Statistics, most magazine writers should have a degree in English, journalism or communications.
Journalists who write for newspapers report on current events on a local, regional or global level. Many newspaper writers and editors write about events with a short deadline—typically, writers will report on events that have happened within the past 24 hours. There are many kinds of newspaper writers. Some focus on financial or business news, while others write about fashion, trends, travel, the arts or other topics. According to Education-Portal.com, newspaper journalists often have a degree in journalism or communications. Some writers have degrees in the specific fields they write about, such as finance or science.
Web journalists write copy for many different online media, such as Internet dailies, blogs and information websites. Web journalism often blends with print journalism, as some magazines and newspapers have a web component. Many journalists may write for a magazine or newspaper's online section, while others write for both the website and the publication. Many journalists write for several different online sources. According to the United States Bureau of Labor Statistics, online news sources have increased in popularity following the turn of the twenty-first century, providing more opportunities to those who want to write for the web.
Broadcast journalists report in front of a camera. They typically report news for a regional or local television news service. Broadcast journalists usually get a degree in journalism, communications or broadcast journalism. Radio journalists report on the news and often discuss topical or cultural information on the air for listeners.