Plastic or green? Sustainable or not?
Those are the big questions many families debate each Christmas season as they choose a holiday tree. One couple I know alternates, one year they have a live tree; one year they do without as the wife is reluctant to cut a living tree.
The debate is not nearly so complicated as the old paper or plastic choice in the grocery store (You do have your re-usable bags now, don't you?). Hands down, the sustainable winner is a regionally grown, fresh cut Christmas tree.
Plastic trees are made of petroleum products and use up resources in both the manufacture and shipping. Artificial trees do last forever, and that's a problem. Research shows they are typically discarded as repeated use makes them less attractive, according to EarthEasy, a Web site for sustainable living. Discarded artificial trees are sent to landfills, where their plastic content makes them last forever.
Live trees are a renewable resource grown on tree farms. They are replanted regularly as they are grown as row crops, just like corn. They contribute to air quality while growing and can be recycled into mulch.
Try to, choose a tree that is grown with the least possible chemical input - ask local merchants if they have an organic farm supplier - or order from Freshchristmastree.com, a grower that ships to 46 states and uses sustainable methods.
Live trees are usually grown closer to home, saving both transportation costs and added air pollution. Most of the fresh trees sold in the Savannah area come from North Carolina, where it gets cold enough to grow firs and spruces. There are a few cut-your-own tree farms locally that specialize in Leyland Cyprus.
Supporting local agriculture is always a sustainable choice.
When buying a live tree, consider:
-- Live potted trees: If you buy a small tree in a large pot, you may be able to reuse the tree for two to three years without re-potting or planting. However, Mississippi plantsman Felder Rushing says most potted trees do not do well in the house and are hard to replant successfully in the South. And they can be expensive.
-- Replant the tree: If you have the space, and can keep it alive, replant the tree outdoors. Be sure to anticipate the full-grown size of the tree, and avoid planting near foundations or underground services.
-- Chip and mulch the tree: Savannah's "Bring one for the Chipper" chips your tree for free. If you can keep the chipped material, it makes excellent mulch.
Lighting, paper go green
You also can green up your holiday by switching from traditional to LED (light-emitting diodes) lights to decorate your tree and home. They're more expensive, but last much longer and use 80-90 percent less power than conventional minibulbs.
LEDs, which cast a bright white light, also stay cool to the touch so they won't singe the tree or your child's fingers. And they now come in styles that look just like the big, fat lights that decked the house in "A Christmas Story."
Be more sustainable, cut the wrapping paper.
EarthEasy claims that half the paper consumed in the U.S. each year is used to wrap gifts. The annual trash and shopping bags totals more than 4 million tons. If everyone wrapped three gifts in re-used paper, it would save enough paper to cover 45,000 hockey rinks.
Use wrapping paper with recycled content and soy inks and re-use paper and ribbon. Or wrap your gift in the comics section of the newspaper; a bandana; or old calendars, maps and posters.
It is easy to find recycled content cards and envelopes or you can recycle last year's cards by just cutting off the fronts and reusing. Card fronts also make great gift tags.
Gifts of service
It may be time to re-think giving altogether. Do your friends and family really need more stuff? Gifts of service and donations to charity are sustainable options.
My favorite gift this year comes from the City of Savannah in the form of Earth Machine compost bins and Systern Rain Barrels both manufactured by Norsemen Plastics. The city, the Metropolitan Planning Commission and the City of Tybee Island are offering the bins and barrels at an extreme discount. All you have to do is pre-order and then pick them up at the Eisenhower Drive Resource Center. Read more about the bins and barrels in the Nov. 28 article by Mary Landers.
Compost bins are $45 and rain barrels are $55, far below retail prices. To reserve yours, contact Sarah Barlow at Sarah_Barlow@savannahga.gov. You must place your order by Dec. 11.
Gail Krueger is a Master Gardener. Send her an e-mail at firstname.lastname@example.org.
Read more environmental news at savannahnow.com/greenliving.