It is not every day that you celebrate love and affection St. Valentine’s way. There are many rituals associated with Valentine’s Day celebrations, including expressing your love through poetry. Nothing overwhelms a woman like a poem, whether simple, sappy, or intense. Poems give you a medium to express your deepest emotions in a brand new way.
Give mom a personalized poem this year and celebrate the love you share for her and your family. It will touch her in a way normal presents can’t, though you might complement your poem with the gift of roses, hearts, and candles.
You can print out your poem and leave it on her pillow or, if you are blessed with eloquence, you can recite the poem aloud and in front of the whole family. This effort on your part will be greatly appreciated by your beloved.
Valentine Day poems are usually based on the theme of love and beauty. Roses and hearts form an integral part of Valentine poems. Great poets like Shakespeare, Shelly, Byron, and Keats have written beautiful love poems, such as this one by Percy Shelly:
"The fountains mingle with the river
And the rivers with the ocean,
The winds of Heaven mix forever
With a sweet emotion;
Nothing in the world is single;
All things by a law divine
In one spirit meet and mingle.
Why not I with thine? –"
Valentine poems written by Joanna Fuchs and John Masefield are also very popular. They not only write soulful poetry but also short catchy verses for every situation and every aspect of love.
If you don’t have a lot of experience writing poetry, you can always start with an old standard:
"Roses are red,
Violets are blue,
Sugar is sweet,
And so are you."
From there, either rewrite the last two lines or use the same rhyme scheme to make up your own verse.
More adventurous rhymers might want to try longer poems that use a repeated rhyme scheme (ABAB or ABAC) and carry forward over a longer piece.
Another easy and popular poetic form is haiku. Haiku usually only has three short lines. The first line usually contains five syllables, the second line seven syllables, and the third line contains five syllables. Haiku doesn't rhyme. A Haiku paints a picture in the reader's mind.
Poetry is a challenge and takes some work to put together, but it will be appreciated by your Valentine, especially since it is increasingly rare as a Valentine’s Day tribute, unless seen on the inside of a greeting card.
This Valentine’s Day, pen your innermost thoughts; weave it into a touching poem which will bring a smile on your Valentine’s face.
Check out Valentines’ Day for gifts, ideas, and more.