High blood sugar, also referred to as hyperglycemia, is usually found in people with uncontrolled diabetes. Symptoms range from mild to severe and shouldn’t be ignored or taken lightly.
Mild high blood sugar symptoms occur when your blood glucose levels are above the normal range, but not seriously high. These symptoms may involve increased urination, an increased thirst and appetite, moderate weight loss, and general fatigue.
If you have high blood sugar but don’t increase your fluid intake, the risk of dehydration becomes much greater as higher blood sugar levels cause fluid loss. Fluid loss occurs because your blood thickens as blood sugar increases. The sugar goes from your blood to your urine and causes a type of filtering action that draws fluid from your body to help filter out the sugar.
Mild high blood sugar is harder to spot as the symptoms are pretty innocent. However, as your blood sugar rises, symptoms will also increase.
Moderate to severe high blood sugar symptoms include blurred vision, feelings of lightheadedness, hot and dry skin, extreme fatigue, and restlessness. The most severe symptoms include rapid breathing, a fast heart rate, bad breath that takes on a fruity odor, nausea and vomiting, and abdominal pain.
Causes Of High Blood Sugar Symptoms
High blood sugar levels and the symptoms associated with the condition can be caused by a genetic predisposition to high sugar levels, but they can also be triggered by poor lifestyle choices. Your blood sugar can go up if you eat a diet high in simple carbohydrates, and if you already have diabetes and have problems producing insulin, eating these foods is a losing battle.
A sudden decrease in your daily activity level may also cause blood sugar to spike. Alternatively, strenuous activities in people with diabetes can cause an increase in blood sugar if the person’s insulin levels are too low.
Outside influences like stress, a simple cold, or a sudden infection can also cause your blood sugar to rise. If you have diabetes and are on medication or insulin treatments, skipping dosages can also cause blood sugar to increase to dangerous levels.
No matter the specific cause of your high blood sugar symptoms, they should be addressed and treated quickly. Ongoing high blood sugar levels can cause serious damage to your body and your health.
Treatment Of High Blood Sugar Symptoms
If you experience high blood sugar symptoms, seek out a doctor’s advice and begin immediate treatment before it gets out of control. Treatments may include various medications and/or a simple nutrition plan to better control your sugar levels.
If you’re diagnosed with diabetes, insulin may be prescribed to help regulate your blood glucose levels. Alternatively, at home programs like the Diabetes Destroyer can help you reverse diabetes naturally. See www.newspapercat.org for details.