Veneer is a thin covering that is commonly used on top of another surface. It is made out of wood and is glued to another wood surface to give it a finished look. Veneer is smooth and has a flat surface. Plywood is a little thicker and oftentimes is installed underneath the veneer. Cutting veneer is slightly different than cutting plywood, but it will almost always be necessary. Whether you are cutting 1/4-inch plywood or 1/4-inch veneer, there are specific procedures that must be followed.
Things You'll Need
- Tape measure
- Black marker
- Utility knife
- Circular saw
- Safety goggles
Run a tape measure along the sheet of 1/4-inch veneer and mark its cut location with a black marker. Line up a T-square and draw a straight line with the marker along the cut location. Follow along the T-square with the marker down the entire piece of veneer.
Set the veneer on top of a flat surface. The plywood that also needs to be cut can be used as the surface. Run a sharp utility knife along the marker line and score the piece of veneer. Move back and forth along the same line until the utility knife has gone completely through the veneer.
Pick up the veneer and carefully snap it in half by hand. Grip the veneer on both sides and break it apart. Measure the cut piece and verify it is the proper size.
Locate the cut mark made from the veneer on the 1/4-inch plywood. Line up a T-square at the mark and draw a straight line over the mark with a black marker.
Line up a circular saw to the cut mark and turn on the saw. Adjust the blade of the saw so it is slightly deeper than the thickness of the plywood. Run the blade of the saw along the cut line. Continue straight through the plywood with the saw until it has been cut in two.
Measure the plywood and verify the proper cut was made. Set the veneer on top of the plywood and compare the sizes. Check that they are the same size and that the veneer fits over the plywood perfectly.
Tips & Warnings
- Always wear safety goggles when working with a circular saw.
How to Cut Plywood
Plywood is a versatile wood product used extensively in shelving and cabinet construction because it resists warping and shrinking. Made from many...
How to Cut a Large Circle in Plywood
Cutting a large circular hole in a sheet of plywood is a fairly simple task so long as you have the right...
How to Cut 3/4" Plywood
There are lots of ways to cut plywood but just a few ways to cut plywood that produce clean edges and straight...