Gum disease is far too common and potentially destructive if
left untreated. Not only does it lead to disastrous consequences for your teeth
and gums, but there are a number of systemic disease that are made worse by
this illness. Dr. Parviz Rhoshanzamir is a general dentist in Vancouver, BC
that specializes in identifying and treating this
illness. We work to restore your oral health and general healthy balance of
your entire body.
The Cause of Gum Disease
There are a number of contributing factors such as
hereditary predisposition to the illness and diet, but the biggest problem
facing most patients is poor oral
. Failure to brush, floss, and go to regular cleaning appointments
with your dentist, allows plaque to buildup on your teeth.
Eventually the bacteria trapped in the plaque begins to create
acids that destroy the bone and soft tissues in your mouth. Infections spread,
and your teeth can become loose and fall out.
The warning signs are easy to miss in the early stages, but
if you notice that your gums are red and swollen, or if you have experienced
bleeding while brushing your teeth, you need to get help right away.
Beyond just the damage to your mouth, excessive plaque
buildup also increases your risk for other illnesses.
Cardio vascular problems
As your body is introduced to more toxins, your immune
system must fight harder to prevent sickness. Eventually the strain on your
vital organs becomes too great, and serious long-term health issues begin to
How to Protect
No amount of brushing or flossing can remove plaque that has
seeped down below the gum line. You need the services of a professional dentist.
Laser technology and deep cleaning techniques can remove the plaque and kill
harmful bacteria. In some instances, surgery may also be required.
Your dentist can tell you more about these procedures and
set up a treatment plan to correct your condition. Call us at our office today
at (604) 210-4722 to make an appointment with Dr. Roshanzamir.
Currently rated by 0 people