McLaren Lapeer Region Diagnostic Tests Get to the Heart of the Matter
The hospital’s new Cardiac Catheterization Lab is a valuable tool in diagnosing heart conditions, especially coronary heart disease. As cardiac catheterization is not the first test completed, a patient may have one or more non-invasive tests that are also tremendously important in determining the cause of heart dysfunction.
The most common tests utilized at McLaren Lapeer Region to diagnose heart conditions are electrocardiogram (EKG), chest X-ray, echocardiogram, and stress tests.
The standard chest X-ray provides an image of the heart structure and helps in assessing the heart’s condition.
The electrocardiogram produces a record or electrical activity of the heart. It is used to evaluate for heart arrhythmias, diagnose heart attack, and check an assortment of abnormalities. To substantiate a diagnosis of a heart problem, the patient may be asked to wear an EKG holter monitor for 24 or 48 hours. The patient’s heart rhythm is recorded as they go about their daily activities. This allows a correlation to be made against possible arrhythmias. Computer downloads the test and the cardiologist reviews the final report.
Another test that enhances cardiac diagnosis is the echocardiogram. An echocardiogram is an ultrasound examination of the heart that allows the sonographer to view and record the blood flow that is pumped through the chambers of the heart. The echocardiogram is utilized as a stand-alone test or may be done in conjunction with stress testing.
A stress test can be conducted to reveal coronary heart disease; blood flow and muscle function, and identify abnormal heart rhythms. The stress test also helps physicians determine how effective a medication might be in controlling a heart condition. A stress test typically involves a patient exercising on a treadmill though even a person who is unable to do this can be evaluated using medication to stimulate the heart and simulate exercise. A thallium stress test done in nuclear medicine uses radioactive material to enable images of the heart to be taken. The images help to evaluate the health and function of the heart.
Cardiac enzyme analysis of blood through the Clinical Laboratory is very helpful in determining the severity of a heart attack and when it occurred.
In addition to these exams, McLaren Lapeer Region patients have access to electro physiology testing at McLaren Flint Heart and Vascular Center to determine what might be causing arrhythmias and to EBT testing that can determine calcium levels in the coronary arteries.