It is believed that Kutani ware was first manufactured in what was the Kaga Province of Japan in the seventeenth century, supposedly inspired by the techniques used at Arita. However production of Kutani ware ceased towards the end of the 17th century, and it was not until the 19th century that production was revived. The objects produced during the short period of about 60 years that the kilns were in production in the 17th century are called ko Kutani, but objects from this period rarely appear on the market. The items sold as Kutani, also known as Kaga-style wares, are from the 19th century. The colours used included a brownish red, muddy yellow and intense green, on a greyish ground. Many different porcelain products were made, mostly for the Western market, including tea and coffee sets, dishes, bowls, incense burners and small decorative items.
A rare and large Japanese Kutani porcelain vase depicting traditional Samurai fighting scenes late 19th century, mid Meiji period signed Kutani and other character marks to base. Height 38 cm (old restoration to rim)
Japanese Kutani lidded pot on tripod feet, handles in the shape of birds with a model of a Chilong on the knop of the lid. Coloured in the Kang His manner, the pot is decorated with a scene of Chinese men in a garden with a white elephant. Meiji period (18
An exceptional and massive Kutani vase, with all over decoration in iron red, blue, green enamels and gilt, the central panel has a scene of a maple viewing party, the neck and shoulders decorated with dragons and HO-o birds. Meiji period (1868-1912). Heig
A Japanese Kutani floor vase, Meiji period, 1868-1912 of inverted pear form decorated in polychrome enamels, the vase body depicting a dignitary with attendant holding a sun umbrella and other dignitaries amongst a landscape with blossoming prunus, fluted
We do not automatically renew subscriptions, however you will be contacted prior to the expiry date and you may choose to renew if you wish.
We offer library subscriptions at competitive rates for both in-library access via IP address and off-library access through EZproxy software or similar. One subscription covers all libraries in your group.