Pedors Shoes, Pedoprene™ and the importance of stretch materials in accommodative footwear.
The idea of using the latest developments in material technology to design an accommodative shoe to cope with the various demands feet make on footwear was a challenge that needed to be met.
This challenge was the platform from which the Pedors brand has evolved. The foot represents an infinite combination of unique characteristics where no two feet are the same- even on the same human. The daily physical demands we place on our feet are enormous and footwear and orthotic devices designed to assist the foot in biomechanical function have evolved as advances in material technology have become available.
Pedoprene™ is a stretch material that is a blend of neoprene and EVA that offers the ability to take a spot heat mold where one might be necessary. This is of particular benefit when trying to accommodate a bunion, hammer toe, or other forefoot deformity to eliminate pressure points where the foot comes into contact with the shoe.
Short stretch compression therapy in compression hosiery is proven to help reduce edema in the lower limbs. Similarly, the use of Pedoprene™ in Pedors footwear contributes to the efficacy of compression therapy when worn in conjunction with compression hosiery. Pedoprene™ stretches to accommodate swelling over the course of a day but also offers some compression benefits as well.
Diabetic Shoe Design and Construction Features
Peripheral neuropathy, often present in the diabetic foot, causes the foot to become insensate. The loss of protective sensitivity often results in trauma to the foot going undetected. Over a period of time, something as minor as a blister or a callus on the diabetic foot can ultimately lead to ulceration, gangrene and often amputation. A diabetic shoe is designed to minimize the likelihood of trauma to the foot being caused by the footwear a diabetic is wearing. Of particular consideration is the design of the internal structure of the shoe. Shoe patterns should eliminate seams or stitching that could result in rubbing or trauma to the foot. Ideally the forefoot of the shoe should be seam free.
The importance of getting the right fit.
Fitting the correct size and width is equally critical when choosing footwear for the diabetic foot. A shoe should neither be too large where the foot moves in the shoe during gait or too small where the foot is pinched or where pressure points are created. A diabetic shoe should also be able to accommodate an orthotic device when necessary to minimize the amount of sheer forces in the shoe. An accommodative diabetic insert cradles the foot by creating 100% contact with the plantar surface of the foot. In order to accommodate footwear, shoes need to be extra depth so that there is enough room and the foot is not compromised when a shoe with a device is fitted.
A shoe that changes as your foot changes
Stretch materials add the benefit of being able to accommodate swelling that may occur over the course of the day. Combined with the design features as described above along with an adjustable touch closure design, the Pedors Classic evolved, over a series of modifications and tweaks into the industry recognized leading orthopedic stretch diabetic shoe.