ACTFL Nov. 17, 2012
Rationale: World wide change; QR codes
Developing some language skills:
Speaking: their world, real things, apps → speaking, speaking eportfolio, peer assessment
Reading: authentic newspapers, TV website mini-articles, ereader for literature, create own readings
Writing: text teacher, text activity, twitter, wiki/blog
Culture: see actual up-to-the -moment culture, analyze cultural differences within the target countries
Assessment and formative feedback: short formative assessments, QR codes for differentiated feedback, Edmodo
Concern: Dumping textbooks, etc on mobile devices;
school can create QR code sheets per unit as their textbook.
Creating QR codes:
1) Shorten url by using bit.y (https://bitly.com/). Type web address in upper right. If you accept their name or click on custom to customize your url.
2) Next go to http://createqrcode.appspot.com/, type in the URL (you can put more than one in), decide on your size, copy it. I usually save it, then copy the graphic into my document or PowerPoint.
How do you use cell and smartphones to improve Modern Language learning?
My Spanish spontaneous speaking activities (25+) includes Modified Speed Dating (Students ask partner a question from a card-whole class), Structured Speaking (Students substitute in or select words to communicate in pairs), Role Playing (Students talk as people in pictures or drawings from 2-4 people), Speaking Mats (Can talk using a wide variety of nouns, verbs and adjectives to express their ideas- pairs or small group), Spontaneous Speaking (based on visuals or topics in pairs), and Grammar speaking games (pairs or small group). Available for a nominal fee at Teacherspayteachers: http://bit.ly/tpthtuttle. I have a series of modern language visual stories (the beach, the city, school, etc.) for two students to role play; the restaurant role play involves four students. Can use in any language since there are just visuals, no words.
Free Flickr Images for common vocabulary collected by my students Blog, http://wp.me/p262R-De for full info. 1) Go to http://www.flickr.com, 2) click on the word Search, 3) click on Tags only, on the right side of the search box, 3) then enter spancon +(casa, clima, comida, deporte, descripcion, la hora, naturaleza, numeros, or trabajo- see the blog for the listing such as spancon +comida. No words, just pictures. Can be used in any language for quick vocabulary review using real objects and for speaking in short sentences. Click on Slideshow in upper right for pictures to show the pictures quickly.
Improving Foreign Language Speaking Through Formative Assessment (Larchmont, NY: Eye on Education). For each of fifteen language functions such as socializing, asking for and giving information, explaining, etc., my book provides ten different speaking strategies to help students to improve. Also, includes a procedure to assess all students in just three minutes. http://bit.ly/flspeakfa. Also, have a book,Formative Assessment, Responding to Students.
Two Youtube videos on the importance of speaking in modern language class http://bit.ly/mlspeaking and of monitoring students’ speaking http://bit.ly/MLFAP2
Search for modern language on my education and technology blog bit.ly/hgtblog
(Am on EdTech’s “The Honor Roll: 50 Must-Read K–12 Education IT Blogs”). Am in the process of moving all modern language blogs over to this blog.