The Negative Pressure Instrument was developed by Electronic Diversities to fill an experimental need to create controlled suction blisters on skin.
The prototype and early instruments contained complex temperature controllers, bulky power and vacuum components and were packaged in various cabinetry. These instruments led the evolution to the current NP-2 and NP-4 units which are compact and operate up to four blister chambers simultaneously. Due to several researcher's requests for unheated chambers, the NP-V instrument was introduced in 2002. The NP-V is similar to the NP-4 but does not have the heating controls or heated chambers.
The self contained Negative Pressure Instrument has the unique capability of forming multiple blisters, of various sizes and patterns, in a relatively short and painless procedure. These blisters can later be used for dermatological transplant purposes or other research needs.
Our Negative Pressure Instrument continues to be cited in leading medical journals as a critical tool for researchers in many medical, pharmaceutical and commercial institutions. Throughout the instrument's evolution, the basic operating principles of the early instruments have been maintained to assure continued success.
Note: References to heated chambers do not apply to the model NP-V
The Negative Pressure Instruments are self-contained instrument packages to successfully create suction blisters on skin. Blisters are created by skin being drawn through the openings of a warmed aluminum orifice plate that is fitted to a suction chamber. The orifice plate is removable and interchangeable, and various plates can be produced with various orifices and sizes to meet specific needs.
The lightweight chambers are attached to the patient by Velcro® straps. The instrument console contains the power source, vacuum pump, temperature and vacuum controls to operate multiple suction chambers. The suction chambers are connected to the console via flexible tubing that supplies the chamber's vacuum and heating circuits. Each of the chambers has an individual temperature controller in the console and all chambers share a common adjustable vacuum system.
For convenience and improved blister success, each chamber has a transparent viewing window so that the actual blister formation process can be monitored.
Additionally, special chambers, and adaptations can be created to meet the needs of small animal or special research needs.
Negative Pressure Instrument