Safflower (Carthamus tinctorius) is most commonly grown as a culinary herb, but it is also used as an ornamental plant for its fuzzy, golden yellow flowers and lengthy blooming period. As an annual, safflower must be started from seed each year. The seeds sprout in just 10 to 15 days, although they must be sown at the right time and under the correct conditions to help guarantee successful, even germination.
The safflower plant originated in western Asia where the summers are long, hot and dry. The seeds should be started indoors roughly four to six weeks before the last frost to give them a head start, particularly in areas with cooler summers or unpredictable late-season frost. The seeds can also be started directly in the garden, but it is not an ideal method for ornamental horticulture.
Safflower plants produce a robust root system early on, including a fragile taproot that can reach 8 feet in length. For this reason, it is best to start the seeds in individual, 8-inch-deep pots to allow room for their early root development. The pots must be washed in hot, soapy water and thoroughly rinsed out before use, then filled with a fresh mixture of equal parts potting soil, sand and compost. Prepare one pot for each safflower plant you wish to grow.
Incorrect sowing means the difference between life and death for young seedlings. Safflower seeds must be sown at a depth equal to four times the width of the seed, which is a depth of 1 to 2 inches, depending on the size of the seed. Moisten the growing mixture before sowing the seed, then firmly tamp the soil after sowing to increase contact between the seed and the moistened growing mixture.
Safflower seeds germinate best at temperatures between 68 and 72 degrees Fahrenheit. Placing the pots on a germination mat will produce the consistently warm conditions ideal for successful germination. If a germination mat is unavailable, the pots can also be placed atop a refrigerator where temperatures remain steady 24 hours a day. The top 4 inches of soil must be kept moderately moist during the germination process, but the top 1/2 inch or so should be allowed to dry out between waterings to prevent overwatering.
After first safflower seedlings emerge in 10 to 15 days, move the pots to a bright location with indirect sunlight. After the last frost, the pots should be moved to a sheltered location outdoors to acclimate the safflower seedlings to garden conditions. Plant the seedlings 12 inches apart in a sunny location with fast-draining soil once all frost danger has passed. Provide 2 inches of water each week for the first month, then gradually reduce it to 1 inch every 10 to 15 days in summer.