There can be times when you're concerned about someone else's wellbeing and want to get involved or understand more about their health and any treatment they're having.
A parent may want to know about their teenage child or there may be concerns about elderly parents, step-parents, friends and neighbours.
This is understandable, but the NHS has strict codes of confidentiality that govern the release of all our medical records and help to protect us all.
What does this mean if I want to get help for someone else?
Doctor-patient confidentiality means all patients have a right to complete confidentiality.
Anything said to a doctor in the privacy of their consulting room is covered by the Data Protection Act, including the fact a person was even there.
This means a doctor cannot share medical information with another party, including spouses and siblings, unless the patient has given explicit consent for that information to be released.
All medical professionals are governed by confidentiality, so nurses and hospital staff such as radiographers can't breach it either.
Are there any exceptions to this rule?
There are circumstances where personal data can be released without consent.
- If it is the legal duty of the GP practice, for example in reporting abuse.
- If ordered by a court of law, for example to determine if a person's medical condition affects their fitness to work.
- If the interests of the public or another person override the rights of the patient, for example if the patient is at risk of harming others.
Can I make an appointment for someone else?
In practice, friends and family do make appointments for other people.
But the patient should always be aware that an appointment has been made and, ideally, confirm with the doctors' surgery they are happy for that appointment to go ahead.
If the person's reluctance to get help is down to nerves, you could always offer to go along with them to the surgery and offer support.
The person may even want you to accompany them during the consultation – but this must be their decision, not yours.
So what can I do?
It can be distressing if a friend or relative refuses to get medical help.
But unless they require treatment under the Mental Health Act, confidentiality means it is often difficult to help them get treatment.
You could make an appointment to discuss your concerns with that person's doctor.
While this information can be helpful, it's likely the doctor will only listen to what they are told and say little in response.
This is not rudeness or a sign your concerns are being ignored, but simply helping to protect the confidentiality of the other party.
You don't have to belong to the same GP practice as your friend or relative to do this.
If you don't know who the person's GP is, you can arrange treatment by taking them to a walk-in centre, A&E or by calling an ambulance.
I'm a parent and I'm worried about my child
It is generally accepted that a child aged 11 or under does not have the capacity to consent to treatment or make major decisions about their own care.
So in these cases, as a parent, you will be kept informed about your child's health.
But doctors have no right to provide any medical information about older children, even to close family members.
They also have no obligation to inform parents about teen pregnancies.
I'm worried about an elderly relative
In these cases, members of the family apply for legal power to make decisions on the incapacitated person's behalf. This is called power of attorney.
I'm worried the person is going to end their life
This includes treatment against someone's will, and requires signatures from a consultant and social worker who is trained in the Mental Health Act – one doctor alone is not enough.
Psychiatrists work in hospitals, so you will need to take the person to A&E or talk to a GP first to access this help.
Other sources of help
If you're concerned about a friend or family member's health, there are other things you can do to help.
- You can offer practical and emotional support.
- You can find information about their condition and share it with them.
- You can contact one of the many national support groups that can offer specialised help to people with health problems. Many of these groups also offer advice to friends and family members affected by these issues.
Other people also read:
A to Z of hospital departments: there are many hospital departments.
How to choose a GP: how do I find a surgery?
Getting the most out of a GP appointment: be prepared.
NHS hospitals: choosing a hospital.