Preparation of rough copy
1. Write a annotation. After collecting all the research materials, print them (if they were obtained from online sources) and mark in them all that is necessary for you to write the work. This step is very important: read the material you found, make the appropriate notes, underline key facts and statements. You can write on printouts or stickers.
Work with care and passion at this stage, in order to ease the problem in the future.. Mark everything that you might find useful!
Feel free to append comments to selected fragments to don’t get confused. Write down your thoughts about how you can use one or the other fragment.
2. Put in order your materials. Annotation process can take a long time, but this is not the end – it is necessary to restore order in your materials and work will easier and easier. In this case, it’s appropriate to divide all categories-topics. For example, analyzing the known literary work for the theme can be used characters, a list of references to certain aspects of the plot, the symbolism of the text, and so on.
Not bad will write all on separate sheets or cards – so it will be easier to re-categorize them.
Another useful advice – work with colors. If each category assigned a separate color, the work will be easier. For example, everything that is connected with the characters work, underline the green, and anything related to the subject – orange.
3. Prepare a preliminary list of literature. Working with materials, do not forget to write the authors, year of publication, publisher, number of pages and, most importantly, the same page that you find the desired information. So you greatly simplify your life in the future.
4. Determine the purpose of your writing work. Generally speaking, there are two types of research. Each of them requires a special approach that should be taken into attention at the stage of preparation of rough copy.
Discussion research builds on a controversial issue, or argues for a particular point of view. Of course, the problem should be initially controversial, but such that the opponents could lead logical counterarguments.
Analytical research offers the basis for a fresh perspective on any important issue. Subject may not cause any controversy, but you should try to convince your audience that your ideas deserve attention. In these works it is appropriate to represent their own unique ideas based on studied material.
5. Decide what audience is intended your job. Who will read it? Will it be published? It’s important that your work has been reflected, so to speak, and its readership. If you write an article for a scientific journal, there is no need to explain the basics – write about something new that you have found. The converse is true – if your article is for those who are not very well versed in the subject, it should explain everything, giving examples and comments.
6. Write a preliminary thesis, based on objective research. The thesis serves as a general idea of your work, making a statement about a particular issue, then argues for this claim. At this stage, only a preliminary outline the thesis of your work (in 1-2 sentences, no more), because in the course of the study it can be changed. Remember that all your research work should be linked with the thesis, and therefore it is essential to identify the thesis quite well.
The thesis – in general the same question, finding the answer to that is dedicated to your work. What is it? What hypothesis you want to confirm or deny? For example, the question is: “How do sociocultural destigmatization increases the chances of successful treatment of mental illness? “From this we can deduce the thesis – and they will answer you received on this issue. Thus here – easy, simple and elegant.
The thesis must express the main idea of the work, but didn’t include in this an argument for or against, as well as retelling all of your work. Thesis – it’s just a statement, not a list of arguments, which, by and large, acts the article itself.
7. Identify the major issues of the article. In fact, working on this article, you will need to provide answers to questions that you feel are the most important (in the context of the topic, of course). Here you can advise only one thing – return to all of your found materials and rough copies, and see what questions are going through. Think about what you can write a paragraph, or even more? What are your ideas validated set of objective facts? Write your basic questions on paper and then write down under each of them all the related materials.
At this stage, the order of presentation is important. Most of your best findings or issues place at the beginning of the article, and more controversial – closer to the end.
It is not necessary to limit yourself on a “one main point – a single paragraph of text,” especially if you write serious research. The basic idea can be to express the extent of the text, which you deem necessary.
8. Do not forget about the requirements for formatting. Depending on what kind of article you write, it may apply different requirements for registration. More on this subject you can ask the person who gave you the task. Remember that formatting requirements may change the way in which you will prepare the finishing version of the article.
9. Complete the work on rough copy. Taking into attention all of what we have told you, prepare a rough copy of article. Do not forget about the alignment, indentation, and other. A rough copy is a summary of your article in a list format. By the way, do not forget to add to this list yet, and all the relevant quotes to not waste time to find them later.