Rightsizing has become a common term used to describe a proactive, strategic plan by a business to operate with efficient human resources. In contrast to the more reactive or cost-cutting measure of downsizing, rightsizing is intended as a long-term move to get the company set up with the right level of talent in each location, department or position.
To understand rightsizing, it is helpful to understand how it has evolved from downsizing. Downsizing is a planned layoff of many employees within an organization. In some cases, a business lays off tens or hundreds of workers at once. The primary motive of a downsizing maneuver is to cut labor costs. Often, it results from a company's reaction to economic slowdowns or rapid changes in the industry structure.
If correctly applied, rightsizing occurs when a company restructures its human resources to align with company goals and strategies. Human resource executives commonly sit in on business management teams to help coordinate talent management with strategic plans. If the company intends to shift its focus or optimize production efficiency for the long term, the move may require HR and management to rightsize. This move may include a combination of department and position cuts, with a reshuffling of responsibilities for remaining employees.
A key difference between downsizing and rightsizing is that downsizing is a specific action, whereas rightsizing is typically an ongoing process. If a company calls layoffs "rightsizing," but the move has no long-term premise and ongoing review, it is more likely downsizing. With a rightsizing strategy, company leaders perpetually review organizational structure and employment levels to ensure optimization with current market trends and customer demand.
Unfortunately for small-business leaders, communities often view layoffs and job cuts in any form as negative. While using the word "rightsizing" in press communication may sound nicer, the notion that you periodically put people out of work can trouble locals. Ideally, a small business can gradually build its employment force to align with more predictable and consistent customer demand. However, volatility is common in some cases. Marketing and advertising firms often implement rightsizing to adjust to ebbs and flows in clientele.
- BananaStock/BananaStock/Getty Images