YORK — Mary Bulman is interred in the Old Burying Ground, an 18th century woman whose mother survived the 1692 Candlemas Raid in York and who herself in later life watched as her Charlestown, Massachusetts, home burned to the ground during the British blockade of Boston.
But Mary Bulman is best known in York and among leading New England preservationists not for the incidents that buttressed her life but for the legacy she left behind — an intact and vibrantly beautiful 16-piece embroidered bed hanging believed to be the only one if its kind extant in the country.
Now, two years after a painstaking conservation effort, the Museums of Old York is once again displaying the Bulman bed hangings in its exhibit space at the Parson’s Center.
“There really is nothing else like them,” said Old York director Joel Lefever. “These really are the best of the collection. They prove that life in the early 18th century was not all drudgery but it could be colorful, and that York was not a backwater — that people aspired to sophistication here.”
According to Lefever, what makes the bed hangings valuable is that they are all together, and were cared for from the time they were created, likely in the 1730s, until they passed out of the family in 1908 and were given to the Old Gaol Museum.
“Few sets of early 18th century American bed hangings survive, and those that do are often fragmentary, having been cut up and distributed to family members as mementos,” said Lefever. “The hangings created by and for Mary Swett Bulman, kept together by family circumstance, truly are extraordinary.”
Mary Swett was 15 when she married her husband and York’s physician, Dr. Alexander Bulman, in 1730 when he was 29. They settled into their house, now 192 York St. next to Town Hall, and at the time a stately home. Her father’s family helped found Hampton Falls, New Hampshire; her mother was a Sayward, a well-known York family. Her mother and two aunts were taken as captives to Montreal by members of the Abenaki tribe after the Candlemas raid; she was later ransomed and returned to York.
According to Lefever, Bulman likely started working on the bed hangings as part of her trousseau, although experts have determined as many as four people of varying skills would end up working on it. He said an artist, probably from Boston, took the plain hand-woven linen cloth and drew the design freestyle. Evidence of the underlying drawing can be found on the fabric.
“The pattern comes from an Indian chintz design” featuring flowers and other patterns typically on a light background, said Lefever. “In the 17th century, chintz was all the rage.”
He estimates it probably took at least several years to complete the bed hangings — which were among the household’s most valuable possessions. Alexander Bulman died from disease while serving as regimental physician at the Siege of Louisboug in Nova Scotia in 1745. In his probate inventory, the bed hangings were assessed at 20 pounds, the same worth as a 10-acre plot of land also in the inventory.
Mary had no children survive into adulthood, so the hangings were passed down through a niece’s line, before coming back to York in 1908.
Mary, by the way, continued to have an interesting life. She remarried a minister, moved to Charlestown, Massachusetts, and the parsonage and church were burned to the ground during the 1774 British blockade, said Lefever. She was in Boston through those early years of the Revolution. “She really lived through an amazing time in our nation’s history,” he said. Mary returned to York and died there in 1791.
Here in York, the bed hangings were at the Old Gaol for nearly 70 years, and then were on a bed at the Emerson-Wilcox House. He said while they have been cleaned over the years, the bed hangings have not been conserved before. Old York received a $35,000 grant from the Coby Foundation, which supports historic textile conservation, and a $10,000 grant from the Davis Family Foundation in Yarmouth.
While that work was underway, Old York had to create a new bedstead to support the hangings. At the time, bedsteads that supported bed hangings were not particularly well made because they were not meant to be seen, and likely were thrown out, said Lefever. However, a bedstead in the Warner House in Portsmouth, New Hampshire, was still in use and matched the age and dimensions needed. A new bedspread was created from a reproduction colonial textile by a group of women from Williamsburg, Virginia, and donated to the museum.
“The Bulman bed hangings are a national treasure,” said Jane Nylander, president emeriti of Historic New England and an advisor to the conservation project. “It is wonderful that Old York has secured funds to support needed conservation work, and ensure their long-term preservation.”
Lefever said the bed hangings have not been appraised for value, but said they are “irreplaceable.” At a time when foundation dollars are spread so thin, “it can be difficult to raise money in this climate for something that is for the arts. This project seems to have found a niche. But it’s a niche to feed your soul.”