focus, focusing, focussing, focal point, direction, centering(noun)
the concentration of attention or energy on something
"the focus of activity shifted to molecular biology"; "he had no direction in his life"
maximum clarity or distinctness of an image rendered by an optical system
"in focus"; "out of focus"
maximum clarity or distinctness of an idea
"the controversy brought clearly into focus an important difference of opinion"
focus, focal point, nidus(noun)
a central point or locus of an infection in an organism
"the focus of infection"
special emphasis attached to something
"the stress was more on accuracy than on speed"
focus, focal point(noun)
a point of convergence of light (or other radiation) or a point from which it diverges
a fixed reference point on the concave side of a conic section
concentrate, focus, center, centre, pore, rivet(verb)
direct one's attention on something
"Please focus on your studies and not on your hobbies"
cause to converge on or toward a central point
"Focus the light on this image"
concenter, concentre, focalize, focalise, focus(verb)
bring into focus or alignment; to converge or cause to converge; of ideas or emotions
focus, focalize, focalise(verb)
become focussed or come into focus
"The light focused"
focus, focalize, focalise, sharpen(verb)
put (an image) into focus
"Please focus the image; we cannot enjoy the movie"
a point at which reflected or refracted rays of light converge.
The heat of sunlight at the focus of a magnifying glass can easily set dry leaves on fire.
a point of a conic at which rays reflected from a curve or surface converge.
The fact of the convergence of light on the photographic medium.
Unfortunately, the license plate is out of focus in this image.
The quality of the convergence of light on the photographic medium.
During this scene, the boyu2019s face shifts subtly from soft focus into sharp focus.
concentration of attention.
I believe I can bring the high degree of focus required for this important job.
the exact point of where an earthquake occurs, in three dimensions.
The earthquake's focus was at exactly 37 degrees north, 18 degrees south, seventy five meters below the ground.
The indicator of the currently active element in a user interface.
Text entered at the keyboard or pasted from a clipboard is sent to the component which currently has the focus.
The most important word or phrase in a sentence or passage, or the one that imparts information
To cause (rays of light, etc) to converge at a single point.
To adjust (a lens, an optical instrument) in order to position an image with respect to the focal plane.
You'll need to focus the microscope carefully in order to capture the full detail of this surface.
To concentrate one's attention.
Focus on passing the test.
To make (a liquid) less diluted.
To concentrate oneu2019s attention.
If you're going to beat your competitors, you need to focus.
Origin: focus, of unknown origin.
a point in which the rays of light meet, after being reflected or refrcted, and at which the image is formed; as, the focus of a lens or mirror
a point so related to a conic section and certain straight line called the directrix that the ratio of the distace between any point of the curve and the focus to the distance of the same point from the directrix is constant
a central point; a point of concentration
to bring to a focus; to focalize; as, to focus a camera
Origin: [L. focus hearth, fireplace; perh. akin to E. bake. Cf. Curfew, Fuel, Fusil the firearm.]
FOCUS is a computer programming language and development environment. It is a language used to build database queries, and is regarded as a fourth-generation programming language. Produced by Information Builders Inc., it was originally developed for data handling and analysis on the IBM mainframe. As newer systems were developed and smaller computers became more powerful, the available platforms for FOCUS were extended to personal computers and in 1997, to the World Wide Web in the WebFOCUS product.
Chambers 20th Century Dictionary
fō′kus, n. (opt.) a point in which several rays meet and are collected after being reflected or refracted, while a virtual focus is a point from which rays tend after reflection or refraction—the principal focus is the focus of parallel rays after reflection or refraction: any central point:—pl. Fō′cuses, Foci (fō′sī).—v.t. to bring to a focus: to concentrate:—pa.p. fō′cussed.—adj. Fō′cal, of or belonging to a focus.—v.t. Fō′calise, to bring to a focus: to concentrate.—n. Focimeter (fō-sim′e-tėr), an instrument for assisting in focussing an object in or before a photographic camera—usually a lens of small magnifying power.—Focussing cloth, a cloth thrown over a photographic camera and the operator's head and shoulders to exclude all light save that coming through the lens.—Conjugate foci, two points so situated that if a light be placed at one, its rays will be reflected to the other; In focus, placed or adjusted so as to secure distinct vision, or a sharp, definite image. [L. focus, a hearth.]
Focus is a private, venture-funded company located in San Francisco founded in August 2005 by a team committed to making world class business expertise available to everyone. Today, Focus is the world’s fastest-growing business research and media company. When you visit Focus.com, you will find high quality research, 1:1 analyst support, and a thriving community of business and technology professionals. Whether it’s data-driven product research, topical briefs, or real-time support, the information on Focus is sourced from real experts - professionals like you. Best of all, it’s free and available to anyone who wants help making better business decisions. That’s why millions of people have relied on the expertise of Focus to make better business decisions.
To direct one's attention for a specific purpose.
You need to focus on your homework!
Song lyrics by focus -- Explore a large variety of song lyrics performed by focus on the Lyrics.com website.
British National Corpus
Spoken Corpus Frequency
Rank popularity for the word 'focus' in Spoken Corpus Frequency: #2660
Rank popularity for the word 'focus' in Nouns Frequency: #1135
Rank popularity for the word 'focus' in Verbs Frequency: #423
The numerical value of focus in Chaldean Numerology is: 9
The numerical value of focus in Pythagorean Numerology is: 1
Sample Sentences & Example Usage
Sadness is pervasive, so focus on joy, focus on happiness.
Do not focus on being happy, focus on doing something useful; afterwards, happiness will flow towards you!
To have a productive happy life you have to focus on two things: focus on what you want and enjoy what you have.
Focus is about saying, No. And the result of that focus is going to be some really great products where the total is much greater than the sum of the parts.
As a fund, we focus on late-stage opportunities, or companies that are 2-3 years away from potential IPO, if you focus on growth-stage companies, chances are you'll pick the wrong horse.
Images & Illustrations of focus
Translations for focus
From our Multilingual Translation Dictionary
- концентрирам, фокус, фокусирам, съсредоточавам се, концентрирам се, сгъстявамBulgarian
- enfocar, focusCatalan, Valencian
- fokus, koncentrere, fokusereDanish
- Fokus, Konzentration, fokussieren, [[sich]] [[konzentrieren]], Epizentrum, BrennpunktGerman
- fokuso, subcentroEsperanto
- punto focal, foco, foco de atención, centrar, enfocar, enfoque, hipocentro, concentrarseSpanish
- fookus, keskendus, epitsenterEstonian
- tarkentaa, polttopiste, leikkauspiste, keskittyminen, keskittyä, fokusFinnish
- concentrer, attention, épicentre, focaliser, mettre au point, se concentrer, se focaliser, foyerFrench
- su, fuoco, concentrarsiItalian
- 焦点, 集中, 震央, 注目を集める, 濃縮, 震源, 絞る, ピントを合わせる, フォーカスJapanese
- 초점, 焦点Korean
- сосредоточува, концентрираMacedonian
- brandpunt, focusDutch
- foco, enfoque, epicentro, focalizarPortuguese
- сосредоточиться, [[фокальный, фокус, концентрация, концентрировать, сконцентрировать, средоточие, [[наводка]] [[на]] [[резкость]], фокусировать, сфокусировать, [[концентрация]] [[внимание, сосредоточение, сосредоточивать, сосредоточить, эпицентр, концентрироваться, сконцентрироваться, сосредоточиватьсяRussian
- brännpunkt, fokus, skärpa, ställa in fokus, koncentrera, fokusera, ställa in skärpan, koncentrera sigSwedish
- odak, odaklanmakTurkish
Get even more translations for focus »
Find a translation for the focus definition in other languages:
Select another language: