Balancing Blood Sugar in a Child with Sugar Diabetes
Balancing blood sugar every day in a child with Type 1 sugar diabetes is a no simple feat. Children constantly growing and developing. The insulin regimen and diabetes diet adiquate for today will be outgrown tomorrow. There is no single magic diabetes management plan that will work for years.
You, as a parent with a child with Type 1 diabetes should take full responsibility for child’s wellbeing. You should become familiar with all tools and techniques that help balance blood sugar.
Blood sugar level is essential in evaluating the blood sugar balance and sugar diabetes control. As parents and child or teenager continue to learn about the Type 1 sugar diabetes together, they begin to feel more confident about the decisions they making. You can gradually teach a child with diabetes to check her own blood glucose level three to four times a day using her personal glucometer without you hovering around. The more you include a child in daily sugar diabetes management and problrm solving, the faster a child can learn to become selfreliable and proficient in self-managing for future independence. I am sure that you have a minute now to pay attention to my illustrious ads to the right. Right? 🙂 Minimum three tests of the blood sugar level should be done every day. First test in the morning before breakfast, second test before supper, and third test before the bedtime snack. Testing the blood sugar level with glucometer four times a day is ideal but can be difficult. Usually, three tests a day give pretty clear picture for blood sugar swings in a child with sugar diabetes. Keeping records in a logbook is a must, of course.
Sometimes, blood sugar level should be checked outside the routine. For example, in case of some energy consuming activity such as hiking or hockey game, or during the illness.
Only by using constant blood sugar level monitoring can you see patterns in your child’s diabetes. If the blood sugar level staying outside the target range for a long period of time, more daily checks may be in order to determine the appropriate insulin dose adjustment. Additionally, you should check the blood sugar level of your child with Type 1 suar diabetes: if symptoms of hypoglycemia are present, every two hours during an illness, or when you are study impact of a different food on blood sugar level.
Checking the blood sugar (glucose) level on daily basis is a cornerstone in any sugar diabetes management plan. For children with Type 1 diabetes knowing how to check blood glucose level must be of utmost importance. It is very simple to check blood sugar level at home. All you need is lancing device and blood glucose meter (a.k.a. glucometer). Lancing device at the touch of a button activate a lancet to prick the finger to obtain a drop of blood. That drop of blood is placed on plastic test strip and inserted into blood glucose meter. Each test result must be logged in logbook. Keeping logbook is very important for sugar diabetes management and decision making.