Definition of Air sickness
1. Noun. Motion sickness experienced while traveling by air (especially during turbulence).
Generic synonyms: Kinetosis, Motion Sickness
Derivative terms: Air Sick, Airsick, Airsick
Air Sickness Pictures
Click the following link to bring up a new window with an automated collection of images related to the term: Air Sickness Images
Lexicographical Neighbors of Air Sickness
Literary usage of Air sickness
Below you will find example usage of this term as found in modern and/or classical literature:
1. Shield and Compressed Air Tunneling by Bertram Henry Majendie Hewett, Sigvald Johannesson (1922)
"This illness is called "Compressed air sickness," "Caisson Disease," "Diver's ... Cause of Compressed air sickness.—The cause of compressed air sickness is ..."
2. Physiology and Biochemistry in Modern Medicine by John James Rickard Macleod (1922)
"COMPRESSED-air sickness; CAISSON DISEASE; DIVER'S PALSY Divers and caisson workers are susceptible to peculiar symptoms. These are frequently of sufficient ..."
3. The Oxford Medicine by Henry Asbury Christian, James Mackenzie (1920)
"of air-sickness is the same as the cause of sea-sickness, namely unaccustomed ... Some people are more prone to air-sickness than others, just as is the ..."
4. Aviation Medicine in the A. E. F. by William Holland Wilmer (1920)
"Seven pilots of this type discontinued training at this time because of air sickness. Two of the four who continued had good flying records, ..."
5. Report of the International Commission to Inquire Into the Causes and by International Commission to Inquire into the Causes and Conduct of the Balkan Wars, Carnegie Endowment for International Peace Division of Intercourse and Education (1915)
"(397) air sickness, etc.—Popular writers are referring to some maladies attendant upon the employment of air ships as air sickness. ..."
6. The Doctor in War by Woods Hutchinson (1918)
"When we came to send up flyers by the scores and the hundreds, it was soon found that the majority of them never suffered from this balancing "air-sickness" ..."
7. Flying: Some Practical Experience by Gustav Hamel, Charles Cyril Turner (1914)
"Cause and Remedy for Air-sickness Bert has rightly attributed all the symptoms to want of oxygen, and his analyses were supported by others such as ..."