A MYTHICAL monster of the deep has for the first time been observed and photographed in its wild habitat.
Japanese researchers captured images of a 26ft giant deep sea squid attacking bait at a depth of almost 3,000 feet.
It became snagged on a hook and in its struggle to get away, left behind one of its 16ft-long tentacles.
The giant squid, Architeuthis, is the stuff of sea legend. For hundreds of years mariners have told tales of the creatures attacking ships.
Little is known about the elusive animals, which spend most of their time far below the ocean surface. Only about 50 specimens or body parts, have been recovered in the past century and they had never been seen swimming in its natural environment.
The Japanese scientists led by Dr Tsunemi Kubodera, from the National Science Museum in Tokyo, used a combined camera and depth sounding device on the end of a long line. Baited hooks were suspended below the camera, which pointed vertically down into the darkness.
A 26ft long giant squid attacked one of the baits.
The creature shot out two long tentacles which wrapped themselves in a ball around the bait, and became ensnared.
More than 550 images were taken by the camera as the squid frantically attempted to free itself. After four hours, the creature broke free, severing one of its tentacles. The dramatic events were described today in a science journal.
The scientists wrote: "The severed tentacle remained attached to the line and was retrieved with the camera system. The recovered section of the tentacle was still functioning, with the large suckers of the tentacle club repeatedly gripping the boat deck and any offered fingers."
The tentacle, which measured more than 16ft, was one of the two long club-ended limbs used by giant squid to attack prey.
The longest giant squid on record measured 60ft, of which about 40ft consisted of the long feeding tentacles. Giant squid also have the largest eyes in the animal kingdom, measuring up to 18 inches across.
The images indicate that giant squid are highly-active predators.
The researchers said: "It appears the tentacles coil into an irregular ball in much the same way pythons rapidly envelop their prey within coils of their body immediately after striking. There is still much to learn about these spectacular animals."