Sure, I can help with that. Here are some things to do when you're struggling with writer's block:

1. Take a walk. Sometimes, getting your blood flowing and your heart pumping can serve to awaken new creative impulses in the brain. Bring a smartphone or notepad on your walk so you can jot down any ideas that come to mind while you're on the go. You may find it helpful to listen to music as you walk or do some pointed people-watching for inspiration.
2. Re-read your work. Sometimes, writer's block can be a symptom of feeling exhausted and discouraged. Writing a novel is a long and difficult undertaking, so while you're in the messy middle and yet to reap any of the rewards that come with a finished product, you may need to go back and re-read some of your earlier work to remind yourself how far you've come, feel proud of your progress, and get a better feel for the established pacing of your story. 
3. Focus on outlines and planning. Writer's block isn't always a sign of creative burnout. Sometimes it's difficult to write what comes next because you don't really know where your story is going. You can use your time to focus on making a detailed outline that functions as a map, telling you exactly where to go next in your book. Alternatively, you could focus on drafting character or place names, fleshing out character profiles, solidifying worldbuilding elements, or any other practical logistics that need to be in place to make the world of your story feel real to readers. 
4. Read a book by another author. There are two strategies you could take here. First, you could opt to read something by an author whose work inspires you to grow as an author, perhaps an author who does an exemplary job with some of your favorite aspects of fiction writing. On the flip side, though, great authors can sometimes serve to intimidate or discourage authors who are working on rough drafts, so you might prefer instead of pick up a book that is noticeably flawed. Reading a "bad" book can sometimes inspire writers by giving them confidence in their own abilities and demonstrating that perfectionism is not necessarily the key to getting published. 
5. Talk to other writers. Writer's block happens to the best of us, and sometimes it can be helpful just to voice your concerns and frustrations out loud to someone who understands what you're struggling with. Other writers may also have suggestions that can help get you unstuck in your creative process. 
6. Skip ahead to an exciting scene. If you're feeling stuck where you are, then go ahead and skip ahead to an upcoming scene that you're more excited about writing. Often, doing so will help to make it easier to fill in the blanks between what you've already written and the future scene you're excited about because when the future scene is fully fleshed out, it will be easier to determine what needs to happen in the plot to connect point A to point B. 
7. Focus on editing. Sometimes it's hard to know where your story is going next because the earlier plot points you've written have backed you into a corner. Or, alternatively, maybe the parts of the story you've already written have left you with too many options for paths leading forward, an overabundance of Chekhov's guns and red herrings, too many characters, or an overly complicated story arc. It may be helpful to backtrack and edit the beginning of the story so that you can see a simpler trail leading from beginning to end.
