Hospice Myths. Mary Ann Bleeke, LCSW-C, CEAP Social Worker. Myth #1: Hospice is a place.
Mary Ann Bleeke, LCSW-C, CEAP
Fact: Hospice is actually a philosophy of care that focuses on quality of life issues when the course of a patient’s disease can no longer be reversed or when a patient has chosen comfort over cure. Hospice care is provided wherever patients live, whether in their own home, assisted living facility or long-term care facility.
Fact: Hospice is the “something else that CAN be done” for patients and their families when an illness cannot be cured. Hospice is not an end to treatment – it is a shift to comfort-oriented care which is focused on helping the patient live his or her life to the fullest. In addition to managing pain and symptoms, we provide extensive counseling and social service support to address the psychosocial and emotional/ spiritual aspects of coping with a terminal illness.
Fact: While about half of patients receiving hospice care are cancer patients, the other half suffer from illnesses that include heart disease, lung disease, dementia, stroke, HIV/AIDS, debility and neuromuscular diseases.
Fact: Hospice is family-centered care. It is focused as much on the coping family as it is on the patient. In most cases, hospice care includes counseling and grief services for family, friends, and the community at large.
Fact: “nothing else can be done.”Should a patient with an advanced illness live alone or with family members who are unable to provide care; Hospice of the Chesapeake will coordinate community resources to make home care possible, or help to find an alternative location for the patient to receive care.Myth #5: Hospice can only help when family members are available to provide care.
Fact: Hospice is serious medicine. Hospice of the Chesapeake is Medicare certified and we employ skillful and experienced medical and nursing personnel who are capable of providing State-of-the-art palliative care, which is a part of the hospice program. These advanced technologies are used to prevent or alleviate distressing symptoms.
Fact: level of care. While those affected by advanced illness come to terms with their prognosis, Hospice of the Chesapeake provides psychosocial support to patients and their families. Social Workers are readily available to discuss all options, provide individual and family therapy and to facilitate family decisions.Myth #7: Hospice is only for people who can accept death.
Fact: Most people who use hospice are over age 65 and are entitled to the Medicare hospice benefit. This benefit covers virtually all hospice services and requires little, if any, out-of-pocket expense. Even for younger patients whose private insurance may not fully cover hospice care, end-of-life care with hospice can be far less expensive than the alternative of hospital or nursing home care.
Fact: level of care. While managed care organizations (MCOs) are not required to include hospice coverage, Medicare beneficiaries can use their Medicare hospice benefit anytime, anywhere they choose. They are not locked into the end-of-life services offered or not offered by the MCOs. On the other hand, while those under age 65 and not eligible for Medicare are confined to the MCO’s services, they are likely to gain access to hospice care upon inquiry.Myth #9: Hospice is not covered by managed care plans.
Fact: level of care.All licensed hospice programs must provide certain services, but the range of support services and programs may differ. Hospice of the Chesapeake is a not-for-profit organization – our revenues are used to provide patient care and community services. Other programs are administered by for-profit groups, which are accountable to their shareholders.Myth #10: All hospice care is the same.
Fact: Hospice neither hastens nor prevents death. However, it is believed that hospice patients may actually live longer once their pain is adequately managed.
Fact: Although the majority of hospice patients choose to sign a DNR order prior to entering hospice care, it is not required for admission. If the patient or family makes the decision to sign a DNR order, the document may be signed at any time. DNR status has no bearing on the care that a patient receives while enrolled in hospice services.
Fact: The referring physician is a vital member of the hospice team. In fact, many physicians find that hospice greatly enhances and extends the care they can provide. Hospice of the Chesapeake encourages physicians to follow their patients through the hospice journey. And, while the physician remains the attending physician for that patient, it is appropriate to bill insurance carriers for all services that the physician provides related to the terminal diagnosis.
Fact: It is actually easy. Ask yourself, “Would I be surprised if this patient were still alive a year from now?” If the answer is yes, consult with the patient’s physician about a hospice referral or call Hospice of the Chesapeake’s admissions office at 410-987-2003. A member of the admissions team will be glad to contact the patient’s physician.
**If a patient has cancer with metastasis, as few as one of the criteria may be all that is necessary. For non-cancer diagnosis, usually three or more of the above criteria are necessary to determine hospice appropriateness.
National Hospice and Palliative Care Organization ( their patients enter hospice.http://www.nhpco.org).
http://www.americanhospice.org/griefzone/debunking.htmHOSPICE INFORMATION REFERENCES
Living well; working well; building relationships well
Using the gift of time
Giving voice to your wishes and desires
Assuring your values are respected