Bioengineering in this textbook is taken to be the application of the concepts and methods of the physical sciences and mathematics in an engineering approach to problems in the life sciences. The aims of such studies is to understand the physical processes and engineering aspects of a systems performance both under normal and abnormal conditions, and to design and use diagnostic or artificial devices meant to measure, improve, safeguard, or replace life functions. An experienced team of instructors in mechanical, electrical, chemical and nuclear engineering from the University of California at Berkeley developed the book including contributions on orthopaedics and biodynamics. The topics covered mirror the fundamental engineering science taught, usually at intermediate university level, and are each applied to problems in the biological world. The basic principles of engineering science are presented so that students will be able to grasp the essence of a particular topic quickly, whatever their background. Many worked examples and problems (together with selected solutions) are included throughout the text.
Aims to help students understand the physical processes and engineering aspects of a system's performance both under normal and abnormal conditions, and to design and use diagnostic or artificial devices meant to measure, improve, safeguard, or replace life functions. Softcover. DLC: Bioengineering.
About the Author(s)
S. A. Berger is at University of California, Berkeley. E. W. Goldsmith is at University of California, Berkeley.CUSTOMER REVIEWS
A student who was required to work through the whole book, March 14, 2000
This textbook is disconnected and poorly organized. The authors of each chapter are so absorbed in their own work that they don't seem to remember that the text is supposed to be for a multidisciplinary audience. The problem sets are hit or miss, and in some cases the solutions are not supported by the text (if you relied on the text alone, you couldn't solve the problems). The biomechanics and biomaterials chapters are good, but the imaging, fluids and mass transfer chapters are lacking. If you want a good, broad bioengineering text, you should look for the Ratner book instead.
Rating: not rated | Added on: 29 Oct 2006
Rate this book: