Critic's Notebook; Shifting Perceptions of a Presidency
By MICHIKO KAKUTANI
Published: October 18, 1993
Presidential reputations are protean things, continually revised and annotated by shifting values and historical developments that vindicate or repudiate an individual President's decisions and world view. Among the many factors that both shape and reflect popular perceptions of a President are biographies, memoirs and historical accounts of an administration.
The second volume of Robert A. Caro's biography of Lyndon Johnson ("Means of Ascent," 1990) left readers with an image of Johnson not as an architect of civil rights legislation, but as a politician of "utter ruthlessness" who "stole" his 1948 Senate election. In contrast, David McCullough's affectionate 1992 portrait of Harry S. Truman ("Truman") served as the culmination of an ongoing process of rehabilitation, transforming an unpopular President (who left office with a 31 percent approval rating) into a kind of folk hero.
It is probably more than coincidence that the best-selling "Truman" arrived in bookstores in June of 1992, at the height of the Presidential campaign, and that George Bush soon traded in his former role model, Theodore Roosevelt -- who happened to be the subject of an earlier McCullough biography, "Mornings on Horseback" -- and began comparing himself to Harry Truman.
Bill Clinton also invoked the Truman mantle, as well as that of Franklin D. Roosevelt, but as newspaper, magazine and television accounts attest, he has most insistently cultivated comparisons to John F. Kennedy.
The 14-minute Bloodworth-Thomason film screened at the Democratic National Convention last year showed a teen-age Mr. Clinton shaking hands with President Kennedy at a 1963 Boys Nation reception, using the image twice as a kind of symbolic passing of the torch. The day before he was sworn in, Mr. Clinton made a pilgrimage to Arlington National Cemetery to lay roses on the grave of President Kennedy, and in his inaugural address he used self-consciously Kennedyesque language to call for public service and self-restraint. A recent speech on national service invoked Kennedy by name, praising his creation of the Peace Corps for changing "the way a generation of Americans look at themselves and the world."
Although such speeches by Mr. Clinton conjure up an image of the idealistic founder of the New Frontier, Kennedy's actual place in history remains open to debate. While books by former Kennedy associates -- Arthur M. Schlesigner Jr. and Theodore C. Sorensen -- attempted to cement the Camelot myth, later volumes by historians like Garry Wills and Thomas C. Reeves provided decidedly less flattering portraits of Kennedy as a manipulator obsessed with image.
The latest book about Kennedy -- "President Kennedy: Profile of Power" by the political journalist Richard Reeves (Simon & Schuster) -- draws a portrait of him as a highly pragmatic politician who was intelligent, disorganized and careless. It is less a full-fledged biography of Kennedy than a study of his Presidency, and it unwittingly sheds new light on Kennedy's young emulator, William Jefferson Clinton.
Although Mr. Clinton appears only once in the book (and in a footnote, no less), it's hard for anyone who has read about his Presidency or followed it on television to finish "Profile of Power" without drawing comparisons, and comparisons that tend to have less to do with vision than with circumstance, temperament and managerial style. These inadvertent parallels are not always flattering; indeed, they sometimes leave the reader wondering why Mr. Clinton has chosen to make Kennedy such a favorite role model.
To begin with, there are the obvious similarities of youth and qualified popularity. Although both men were highly skilled politicians and both were hailed as avatars of a new generation, they were both elected with less than 50 percent of the vote and no guarantee of a Congressional majority for their legislation.
Kennedy entered office almost totally focused on foreign policy, and found himself forced by circumstance -- namely, the rising civil rights movement -- to deal with domestic issues. Mr. Clinton entered office almost totally focused on domestic issues and has found himself forced -- by developments in Bosnia, Somalia and the former Soviet Union -- to deal with foreign policy.
In the early months of their Presidencies, both Kennedy and Mr. Clinton were needled by the press about the slow pace of their appointments. Both made close family members -- Robert F. Kennedy and Hillary Rodham Clinton, respectively -- trusted Administration confidants. And both got off to a rocky start with the military: Kennedy losing its respect after his embarrassing summit with the Soviet leader Nikita S. Khrushchev in 1961; Mr. Clinton starting off with scepticism because he had not served in Vietnam.
During their first months in office, both Kennedy and Mr. Clinton struggled with disorder resulting from their White House management styles. According to Mr. Reeves's book, President Kennedy described his White House organization as a wheel with many spokes and himself at "the vital center." Nearly the same words were used last January by a Democratic Party official who told Time magazine that the Clinton White House "has been structured as spokes of a wheel leading into the President."