Summary: Jesus used the opportunity of the death of his friend Lazarus to teach the important lesson that Faith is the key.
Series: It Took a Miracle
FAITH IS THE KEY
INTRODUCTION (Read 11:1-15)
There has always only one way to be in Right Relationship with God and that way is faith. Long before the Law was given to the Israelite people, even before there was a peopleof God the Scripture teaches us that “Abraham believed God and it was accounted to him for righteousness.” Our relationship with God is not based on works but on our belief. Therefore,
The real questions that each of us must answer in our hearts are these:
- Do I really believe that Jesus is who He says He is?
- Do I really believe that Jesus can do what He says He can do?
Jesus used the opportunity of the death of his friend Lazarus to teach the important lesson that Faith is the key.
FAITH IS THE KEY....
I. FAITH IS THE KEY FOR UNDERSTANDING THE PERSON OF JESUS (11:17-27)
A. Jesus is the Christ/Messiah
“The anointed one” one that is blessed, empowered and commissioned
(Luke 4:18-19 (quickview) )(Isa 61:1-2)The Spirit of the Lord is upon Me because he has anointed Me to preach the gospel to the poor, He has sent Me to heal the brokenhearted, to preach deliverance to the captives and recovery sight to the blind, to set at liberty those who are oppressed and to preach the acceptable year of the Lord.
The Jews believed that God would send a Messiah to lead His people, but they saw this Messiah as a great earthly king, a man just like them with the hand of God upon them. What they did not understand that the “anointed one” would be sent directly from heaven as the Son of God.
B. Jesus is the Son of God
To believe that Jesus was the Son of God was a bold step of faith. To be the Son of God, then He must have the divine attributes of God (all-holy, all-knowing, all-powerful). To have the divine attributes of God, then He must be God. This is heresy and blasphemy to the Jewish leaders who believed there is only one God, but had no understanding of the Triune Character of God.
Yet, it is obvious that believing that Jesus is the Christ and the Son of God as Martha admitted is not enough. There is something else we must understand by faith. That...
C. Jesus is the Resurrection and the Life
When Jesus refers to Himself as the Resurrection and the Life He is using a two-fold expression. Jesus is proclaiming that He alone is the Giver of Life since He is life Himself as He explains again in (John 14:4 (quickview) ) “I am the Way, the Truth and the Life and no one can come the Father but through Me.” But He wants us to understand that before we can inherit Life, we must first overcome a critical hurdle that faces all mankind: Death.
The Word of God clearly teaches that “all have sinned”. Is there one here today that has never sinned: never told a lie, never taken something not yours, never said a harsh word to another, never disobeyed parents? Also, the Word teaches that “the wages of sin is death.” Therefore, it also teaches, “It is appointed unto man once to die, and after that the judgement.” We all have an appointment with death!
Therefore, before we can receive eternal life, we must overcome the penalty of death. Only through Jesus can we overcome death. This is why He describes Himself as the Resurrection. Jesus is not only the Giver of Life but He is also the Overcomer of Death.