World Book is the leader when it comes to affordable, comprehensive encyclopedias, and is committed to providing timely, thorough and accurate information for its readers. More than a quarter of World Book
encyclopedia content is updated each year - much more than any other encyclopedia in publication.
In all of World Book encyclopedias and publications, a wide variety of visual aids clarifies meaning and reinforces learning. Photographs, drawings, paintings, maps, diagrams, charts, and graphs make information come alive. Not all encyclopedias are the same ~ try World Book encyclopedias
and experience the difference.
World Book Encyclopedia
is an outstanding, beautifully illustrated, current general reference source for all age levels. The best encyclopedia is the one that gets used - and World Book has expended much effort studying the habits of readers, school curricula, and patterns of classroom use to ensure that this encyclopedia is one that will indeed be used.
For over 80 years, World Book
has been committed to publishing encyclopedias and references that meet the highest standards of editorial excellence while keeping pace with the technological developments that define the computer age. Today you can order, or simply peruse, all of the World Book publications online, at the World Book website
World Book's commitment to providing accurate, lively and content-rich articles has culminated in the publication of the number-one selling print encyclopedia in the world, World Book
, and market leading electronic products such as World Book Multimedia Encyclopedia and World Book Online. Recent World Book publications include World Book Student Discovery Encyclopedia, a new Childcraft-The How and Why Library, and Animals of the World.
At World Book website you can discover the whole range of World Book publications, from activity books and CD/DVD products to encyclopedias, general reference books, science books, history reference books, Spanish language encyclopedias and other Spanish language reference books, plus lots more besides. For affordable, quality
reference books and encyclopedia, World Book website
is the only stop you'll ever need!