Scientists are worried about bees. More specifically, they are worried about Colony Collapse Disorder, rapidly declining bee populations, and exactly what is causing this to happen. Most recently scientists have discovered that a mix of pesticides and fungicides can suppress a bee’s immune system, meaning they are much more susceptible to infection leading to death.
There’s still a lot to learn about bees, though, which is difficult when you consider their size, the fact they fly everywhere very quickly, and it’s not easy to pick out just a few bees to track from a large colony. So scientists at the University of Tasmania working with CSIRO have decided to go big and use the latest sensor technology to help them better understand the behavior of thousands of bees.
An RFID sensor measuring 2.5mm2 has been attached with glue to the back of around 5,000 honey bees in Hobart, Tasmania. In order for that to work, shaving the area of the bee where the sensor would sit was necessary in some cases. Thankfully the bee was asleep during the process, and the sensor is small and light enough that they likely won’t notice it is there.
With the sensors attached, checkpoints can be setup around the area where the bees travel and pollinate in order to create a three-dimensional map of their movements. It helps that they always return to the same colony and work on a regular and predictable schedule. If that changes, the data will show it and the scientists can figure out a possible cause.
As well as helping to figure out what environmental changes can upset bees and potentially cause them to die, the data gathered will help farmers tweak their growing methods in order to better take advantage of pollination. It should also clue bee keepers in to what kind of environment/layouts bees enjoy the most and allow colonies to thrive.
The use of these sensors is not only a trial for the bees, but for the tech, too. If the tracking system works as well as predicted, the sensors are set to be further shrunk to just 1mm2 and attached to very small insects. Mosquitoes and fruit flies are both on the list for future study.