Rubber Bass Fish Toy
The Rubber Bass Fish Toy is great for all ages! Use in the place of a ball for any game and it changes the tone of the game. Kids love it.
A stuffed latex 14” rubber bass fish toy with hand-painted, soft squishy features. He could replace your teddy bear.
Flying Fish- Using the Rubber Bass Fish Toy
-Bath towels or pillowcases (one for every 2 players
- Rubber Bass Fish Toy (at least one per player - the more the better)
- Large bucket (a large hula hoop will work)
How to play:
Players will work with a partner. Each set of partners will have a
net (bath towels/pillowcase).
Arrange players in pairs so that they are in a line formation
throughout the gymnasium. Use as much of the gym as possible,
as the players will be tossing the fish from net to net following a
predetermined pattern. (See diagram below).
The leader will start the activity by tossing a fish to the first set
of partners (pair #1). Pair #1 must catch the fish in the net and
then toss the fish to the next set of partners. Partner sets
continue to catch and toss the fish until the last set of partners
receives the fish. The last pair of partners must use the net to
toss the fish into a large bucket. Each fish that makes it into the
bucket scores a point. If the fish is dropped at any time, it is out
of the game (the "one that got away" syndrome).
Practice the pattern a few times. After the players understand
the pattern, the instructor will continually toss fish to the first pair
of players. The less time allowed between fish, the more
exciting and challenging the game becomes.
At the end of the game, count the number of fish that have ended
up in the bucket.
Skill and concept practice:
Prior to playing the game, allow the players to work in small
groups of four. They should practice tossing and catching the
rubber fish with the net. Discuss the importance of tracking the
object, moving to the object, and using appropriate force.
Give the players a time limit in which to complete the game.
Arrange the player pairs in a scattered formation so that it is
more difficult to remember the pattern, and toss and catch the
fish. Or, increase the distance between the student pairs.
Game Idea sheet included with order.