This preview has intentionally blurred sections. Sign up to view the full version.View Full Document
Unformatted text preview: 21) Which of the following best illustrates the relationship between entities and attributes? A) the entity CUSTOMER with the attribute PRODUCT B) the entity CUSTOMER with the attribute PURCHASE C) the entity PRODUCT with the attribute PURCHASE D) the entity PRODUCT with the attribute CUSTOMER Page Ref 210 22) Which of the following is not one of the main problems with a traditional file environment? A) data inconsistency B) program-data independence C) lack of flexibility in creating ad-hoc reports D) poor security Page Ref 211 23) A DBMS reduces data redundancy and inconsistency by A) enforcing referential integrity. B) uncoupling program and data. C) utilizing a data dictionary. D) minimizing isolated files with repeated data. Page Ref 213 24) A characteristic or quality describing an entity is called a(n) A) field. B) tuple. C) key field. D) attribute. Page Ref 210 25) Which of the following non-digital data storage items is most similar to a database? A) library card catalog B) cash register receipt C) doctor's office invoice D) list of sales totals on a spreadsheet Page Ref 210-211 26) The confusion created by ________ makes it difficult for companies to create customer relationship management, supply chain management, or enterprise systems that integrate data from different sources. A) batch processing B) data redundancy C) data independence D) online processing Page Ref 211 27) Duplicate data in multiple data files is called data ________. A) redundancy B) repetition C) independence D) partitions Page Ref 211 28) A DBMS makes the A) physical database available for different logical views. B) logical database available for different analytical views. C) physical database available for different analytical views. D) logical database available for different physical views. Page Ref 212 29) The logical view A) shows how data are organized and structured on the storage media. B) presents an entry screen to the user. C) allows the creation of supplementary reports. D) presents data as they would be perceived by end users. Page Ref 212 30) DBMS for midrange computers include all of the following EXCEPT A) DB2. B) Oracle. C) Microsoft SQL Server. D) Microsoft Access. Page Ref 213 31) The type of logical database model that treats data as if they were stored in two-dimensional tables is the A) OODBMS. B) pre-digital DBMS. C) relational DBMS. D) hierarchical DBMS. Page Ref 213 32) Oracle Database Lite is a(n) A) DBMS for small handheld computing devices. B) Internet DBMS. C) mainframe relational DBMS. D) DBMS for midrange computers. Page Ref 213 33) Microsoft SQL Server is a(n) A) DBMS for small handheld computing devices. B) Internet DBMS. C) desktop relational DBMS....
View Full Document
This note was uploaded on 05/02/2012 for the course MISM 3301 taught by Professor Curtisfloyd during the Spring '08 term at Dallas Baptist.
- Spring '08