Commonly used terms for the canning industry in regards to seam specifications, seamers and change parts.
Notice Dixie seam rolls interlock with the chuck to ensure proper alignment.
Seam dimensions and profiles vary based on can type, diameter, metal/material thickness, manufacturers design and specifications. Before shipment, your Dixie Seamer is tested using cans and tops which you furnish.
Double Seam —
n. A hermetic seal or seam formed by interlocking the edges (flanges) of both the cover (lid or end) and body of a can.
v. To attach a cover to a can body by a method in which five (5) thicknesses of plate are interlocked or folded and pressed firmly together. (See Double Seam Formation, 1.010)
Double Seamer —
A machine or device used for forming a hermetic seal between a can cover and a can body. Also called a seamer, sealer, or can closing machine.
Same as lid or end.
First Operation —
The initial step in the formation of a double seam wherein the cover flange is fed into the concave profile of a seam roll which causes the cover flange to be partially rolled up and under the flange of the can body.
Second Operation —
The last step in the formation of a double seam wherein the partially formed seam is further compressed and flattened against the side of the container body, completing the hermetic seal.
Change Parts —
The chuck, base plate, and seam rolls which are required for forming the seam on a specific can and end. Different change parts are required when changing can sizes and/or styles.
A seamer part machined to fit snugly into the recessed area or countersink of the can cover; a chuck centers the cover on the can body and acts as an anvil against which the double seam is formed. Dixie chucks are custom fabricated to fit your lid per samples you submit with your order.
Base Plate —
A seamer part (platform) on which the can is supported during the seaming operation; its purpose is to provide proper pressure when raised into position and to provide a rotating base. Dixie base plates are custom fabricated to fit your container per samples you submit with your order.
Seam Roll —
A seamer part machined with a concave profile into which the cover flange is fed during the seaming process thereby causing it to be rolled under the flange of the can body. A first and second operation seam roll are required, with the profile contour of the second operation seam roll being more shallow to allow final compression of the seam. Seam roll profiles vary based on can and end configurations and manufacturer’s recommendations.