One Step At a Time
Walking is a common activity. We do it so often, we rarely think about our steps unless we are on stairs or uneven surfaces. Because we have done it so often, we are not fearful of going too fast, falling “forward” due to a sudden stop, being thrust backward due to too great an acceleration, or getting dizzy from the movement of each step.
Historically, men were not found walking for exercise as much as out of necessity. Before the days of so many cars, cycles, busses, trains, or airplanes, walking great distances was the norm. Because there was no concept of modern transportation a couple of centuries ago, trips took longer and each day’s steps would gradually move the traveler closer to their destination. The “snail’s pace” of that era seems terribly foreign to this culture of rapid transit.
One of the great privileges of walking with someone is that we can share conversations, laugh at life’s comical moments, discuss matters of concern, or just catch up on life’s events. Unless two are walking together, they will not have that privilege. “Can two walk together, unless they are in agreement?” Amos 3:3.
The lessons learned by walking teach us principles for living. Great achievements are made by taking single steps daily toward the goal. Education begins with kindergarten’s simplicity and may not end even after a Ph.D from a prestigious university in a very complex scientific field. Each decision, each attempt, and even each failure are helping us become what we hope to be.
That life process of taking a “step at a time” has often been the topic of reflection. The elevator to success is out of order. You’ll have to use the stairs… one step at a time. Joe Girard. Habit is habit, and not to be flung out of the window by any man, but coaxed down-stairs one step at a time. Mark Twain. Have fun doing whatever it is that you desire to accomplish. Learn it one step at a time, emphasizing the fundamentals, and do it because you love it, not because it’s work. Paul Westphal. Nothing happens without focus. Don’t try to do everything at once. Take it one step at a time. Dave Ramsey. We don’t become heroes overnight. – One step at a time, eventually discovering we have the strength to stare it down. Eleanor Roosevelt.
Once we learn to be content with simple, daily, short steps of a process, it will permeate all that we do.
Two farmers were talking about their livestock when a pig walked by them that had a wooden leg. One farmer was amazed and said, “Is that your pig? Why does he have a wooden leg?”
The other farmer smiled and said, “That pig is my best friend! He saved my life.”
The first farmer said, “What do you mean?”
“Well, he woke me up once when the house was on fire. And another time my tractor fell on me. That pig dug me out and saved my life! He is my best friend.”
The first farmer was puzzled and then asked, “Well, why does that pig have a wooden leg?”
The other farmer smiled and said, “Shoot, a good pig like that…..you don’t want to eat him all at once! Do it very slowly…just one part at a time” (Copied).