This exhibition showcases the development of the Social Democratic Party of Germany (SPD). It traces its origins from the 19th century, describes its social, political and philosophical milieus, chronicles its transformation from a workers party to a "people's party" as well as its continuing adaptation and actualization of the values and ideas of social democracy.
The Industrial Revolution in the middle of the 19th century accelerated the emergence of a new social class, the industrial workers. In reaction to this development, Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels published the "Communist Manifesto". Workers' associations and social democratic parties were organized as early as 1848 and 1863, respectively. Social democracy gained in strength and, in 1891, the "Sozialdemokratische Partei Deutschlands" (SPD) was founded.
The following years saw the SPD confront a series of challenges. The World War I, the 1918 Revolution, and the foundation of the first German Republic culminated in the election of SPD chairman Friedrich Ebert as the first democratically elected German president in 1918. After his death in 1925, the Friedrich Ebert Stiftung was founded to financially support young students from the working class who upheld Social Democratic values.
The SPD has preserved its identity, and the party platform continued to adapt to changing social conditions. But the basic values have always remained unchanged: Freedom, Social Justice and Solidarity.
The exhibition is an opportunity to become acquainted with social democracy in Germany. It consist panels in English, Singhalese and Tamil - with various illustrations, photos, charts, and texts - that illustrate the concise chronology of the SPD's development. Each panel highlights the defining movements of the SPD and the ways by which the party has shaped the German nation.
The Sri Lankan Experience
The relevance of social democracy in Sri Lanka will be shown in different docking stations. The similarities and differences between the German and Sri Lankan experiences will be highlighted and visitors will find the relevance of such themes to the Sri Lankan political discourse. An important present day question is whether social democratic values will present any solutions in a post war Sri Lanka? We invite you to come and explore possible solutions yourself. Visitors can view the exhibition in a guided walkthrough or by themselves by reading and appraising the panels.
From the 25th to the 27th of August 2009
At the National Art Gallery
A collaborative effort by
The Friedrich Ebert Stiftung(FES) & The Colombo School of Politics (CSP)