Wednesday, March 6, 2013
Monach Butterflies by Diana and Julio
1- The cycle is first the egg second the larvae then the pupa and finally a butterfly. Like all insects, the monarch has six legs, but uses the four hindlegs as it carries its two front legs against its body. The eggs are creamy white and later turn pale yellow. They are elongated and subconical, with about 23 longitudinal ridges and many fine traverse lines.A single egg weighs about 0.46 mg (0.0071 gr), and measures about 1.2 mm (47 mils) high and 0.9 mm (35 mils) wide. 2- They it many things the most things that are eaten by the butterflies is the nectar and : Apocynum cannabinum - Indian hemp Asclepias californica - California milkweed Asclepias incarnata - swamp milkweed Asclepias syriaca - common milkweed Asclepias tuberosa - butterfly weed Aster sp. - asters Cirsium sp. - thistles Daucus carota - wild carrot Dipsacus sylvestris - teasel Erigeron canadensis - horseweed Eupatorium maculatum - spotted joe-pye weed Eupatorium perfoliatum - common boneset Hesperis matronalis - dame's rocket Medicago sativa - alfalfa Solidago sp. - goldenrod Syringa vulgaris - lilac Trifolium pratense - red clover Vernonia altissima - tall ironweed 3- They migrate because the air transport the cold and the butterflies died. And the They migrate of Canada to united estates and then Mexico. Monarchs are especially noted for their lengthy annual migration. In North America, they make massive southward migrations starting in August until the first frost. A northward migration takes place in the spring. The monarch is the only butterfly that migrates both north and south as the birds do on a regular basis, but no single individual makes the entire round trip. Female monarchs deposit eggs for the next generation during these migrations. 4- Their principal enemies. Although monarchs feed on milkweed, variations in the quantity of cardiac glycosides exist between species, individuals, and even parts of the host plant. The levels of toxins in adult monarchs reflect the levels in their host plants. This means some monarchs are not foul-tasting, but are Batesian or automimics. Some species of predators have learned to measure the toxins by taste and reject butterflies with high cardiac glycosides contents, eating only the ones with low contents. In the butterfly, the cardiac glycosides are concentrated in the abdomen and wings. Some species of predators differentiate these parts and consume only the most palatable ones.Bird predators include brown thrashers, grackles, robins, cardinals, sparrows, scrub jays and pinyon jays. 5- They are called Monarch Buterfflies because Monarch means King, or Queen. The early North American settlers called them King Billys, after William of Orange, who became the English King in 1689. 6- Is very magic and very big the color is orange and the female have more black than the male,the female butterfly is more big than the male . 7-The persistence of the monarch butterfly’s spectacular and unique migratory phenomenon is dependent on the conservation of habitats in Canada, the United States, and Mexico. No species better symbolizes the ecological links among the three countries. Many government agencies, organizations, and individuals across Canada are working on projects to conserve monarch habitats and the migration phenomenon. 8-They make massive southward migrations starting in August until the first frost. A northward migration takes place in the spring the migration end in October. 9- A sanctuary is a place that are protected by the police or the people Some examples are the sanctuaries of Canada ,United States and Mexico. 10-By the end of October, the population east of the Rocky Mountains migrates to the sanctuaries of the Mariposa Monarca Biosphere Reserve within the Trans-Mexican Volcanic Belt pine-oak forests in the Mexican states of Michoacán and México. The western population overwinters in various sites in central coastal and southern California, United States, notably in Pacific Grove, Santa Cruz, and Grover Beach. 11- The problems are that in the migration more 10,000 died the 14% died because the birds eat the butterflies and ones disappear because they lost in the migration. 12-Other animals that migrate are birds, frogs,fishes,and deer.
Posted by Jules Verne 7th grade students at 5:52 PM