Adults with learning disabilities are 10 times more likely to have serious sight problems than other people. Yet, fewer than one in 25 adults with learning disabilities in England have access to eye health services designed for their needs. As a result, thousands of people may be missing out on simple and low-cost treatment that could transform their lives.
Sight problems are difficult for anyone. But for adults with learning disabilities, loss of vision can be particularly difficult. Many do not know they have a sight problem or, even if they do, are not able to tell other people about it. It does not always occur to their friends, relatives and supporters to wonder whether they have problems with their vision.
Yet, around six in 10 people with learning disabilities are short-sighted, long-sighted or astigmatic, and need help to see. Many need specialist support to make sure they can access NHS sight tests and, receive suitable glasses if they have a vision problem.
Diagnosing sight problems in adults with learning disabilities can be more difficult than it is with other patients. Patients often need longer than the allowed standard sight test to become familiar with new surroundings, equipment and people. This is a challenge when most optometrists have busy schedules and little room for flexibility.
In recognition of this problem, some clinical commissioning groups (CCGs) have now introduced a different way of providing eye health services for learning disabled adults. These groups have commissioned services for people with learning disabilities that are designed to build patients' confidence, help them relax and ensure the tests are effective without being stressful.
Appointments are much longer than the standard eye test – up to 45 minutes – giving enough time for practitioners to explain procedures and equipment to both the patient and supporters.
Sometimes patients visit the practice in advance to become familiar with the environment, and repeat visits are encouraged if procedures cannot be completed during the appointment. Easy-read materials designed by people with learning disabilities are sometimes provided, which explain how these services work.
The final stage can include a post-test feedback form, designed to make sure important information is passed on to others who need it. Supporters and GPs receive the information and can pass this on to other healthcare professionals providing care to the patient later on.
These services have changed people's lives. One man with a profound learning disability, who was seen by an optometrist in the Bromley, Bexley and Greenwich service in London, had been unable to see further than a few inches since childhood – but this remained undiagnosed as he wouldn't lift his head up and always faced downwards at his wheelchair's tray. As a result of the new service he was prescribed glasses, and for the first time lifted his head to interact with the world around him. Tackling sight problems also helps reduce levels of challenging behaviour in people who become frustrated as their sight deteriorates.
Yet these tailored services are available in just four places – all of them in London, through CCGs in Bexley, Merton, Sutton, Barking and Dagenham, and Tower Hamlets. This means that, of the 800,000 adults with learning disabilities in England, fewer than 30,000 have access to local eye health services designed specifically for their needs.
The newest service, currently being launched, will operate across Kensington and Chelsea, Westminster, and Hammersmith and Fulham. It will be run as a pilot, established in collaboration by charities and health professionals, including SeeAbility and the Local Optical Committee Support Unit. This pilot, funded by the central (local optical committee) fund aims to show commissioners how these services can transform lives and meet a need that is too often neglected.
These inclusive services provide the standards of eye care that most people take for granted. They should be available to everyone who needs them – not just the lucky few who live in the right places.
Katrina Venerus is managing director of the Local Optical Committee Support Unit
Why not join our social care community? Becoming a member of the Guardian Social Care Network means you get sent weekly email updates on policy and best practice in the sector, as well as exclusive offers. You can sign up for free here.