Xylitol Green Tea Gum
• Promotes oral health.
• Helps freshen breath.
Xylitol Gum freshens breath, cleans teeth and promotes dental health with all of the flavor and none of the harmful effects of sugar-laden gum . Chewing gum after a meal stimulates the production of saliva, which washes the teeth and neutralizes harmful acid produced by bacteria.
Regular use of xylitol has been shown to help reduce dental plaque - the first stage of cavity development, tartar formation and tooth staining - and promote better oral health.
A natural compound, xylitol looks and tastes like sugar. It is found naturally in many common fruits and vegetables, and it is even produced by our bodies during metabolism. Xylitol is as sweet as sugar, yet it carries none of the health concerns of artificial sweeteners, making it completely safe for both children and adults. And it may actually help improve the health of your teeth!
How it Works
Chewing Nature’s Sweet Life Gum can help reduce cavities. Chewing gum after a meal stimulates the production of saliva, which washes the teeth and neutralizes harmful acid produced by bacteria. Regular use of xylitol has been shown to help reduce dental plaque—the first stage of cavity development, tartar formation and tooth staining—and promote better oral health.
Unlike most sugar molecules, which have a six-carbon “hexose” unit, xylitol is a five-carbon “pentitol” sugar. Thanks to its distinctive structure, bacteria cannot utilize xylitol for energy. Its chemical configuration also inhibits the body’s ability to fully metabolize it, making it the perfect sweetener for those concerned with blood sugar balance.
Xylitol also has been shown to improve dental health. Decades of scientific research and over 1,500 papers have confirmed it. Lactic acid, the most damaging acid for your teeth, is formed by the fermentation of sugar by bacteria. Bacteria cannot ferment xylitol, which reduces the formation of tooth-destroying acid and promotes an inhospitable environment for unwanted microorganisms.
Nature's Sweet Life® Xylitol Gum contains xylitol, gum base, natural flavor from peppermint oil, spearmint oil, cinnamon oil or green tea (natural flavor), vegetable glycerin, gum arabic, soy lecithin and beeswax.
Chew after or between meals to freshen breath and promote oral health.
CAUTION: This product and other products containing xylitol must not be given to pets.
Product was successfully added to your shopping cart.
huston we have a problem