About identical and fraternal twins
Twins can either be identical or fraternal. Identical twins or monozygotic twins are conceived when a single sperm cell fertilises an ovum. The ovum then splits forming two individuals with identical copies of DNA. Non identical twins (dizygotic twins) are conceived when 2 sperm cells fertilise two ovums resulting in two individuals with different DNA profiles. To be noted that non identical twins can have different fathers; although this is rare, this can occur and is known as heteropaternal superfecundation. To learn more about the difference between identical and fraternal twins, visit this page.
Results and cost of a twin DNA test
The twin DNA test is an extremely accurate test and will confirm whether the tested twins are identical or fraternal. A twin zygosity test costs £139.00 for testing both twins . The cost for any additional siblings (for triplets, quadruplets, etc.) is £70.00 per person. Results are available within 5-7 working days from the arrival of the samples at our labs.
Note: We can only guarantee standard result turnaround time when testing takes place solely using oral swab samples. Using a discreet sample for your test may lead to an increase in turnaround time.
Real client testimonial:
“Everyone always asked whether my girls were identical. I always said no, and used to get the reply back, “are you sure”. Now i have my answer. Thank you very much.” Australia, 22nd April 2015
How does the test work?
Identical twins (monozygotic twins) will share the exact same DNA profile; fraternal twins (dizygotic twins) will not. A twin DNA test is able to confirm whether the twins tested share the same DNA profiles or not and thus, confirm whether they are identical or fraternal
DNA sampling is done by means of an oral swab which is rubbed inside the mouth of both twins for 10 seconds. Please refer to our information on the DNA testing kit and sample collection to understand more. At EasyDNA the samples are analysed using our state-of-the-art genetic identification systems that analyse 21 different genetic markers. The twin DNA test results guarantee minimum probabilities in excess of 99.99%.