Send the link below via email or IMCopy
Present to your audienceStart remote presentation
- Invited audience members will follow you as you navigate and present
- People invited to a presentation do not need a Prezi account
- This link expires 10 minutes after you close the presentation
- A maximum of 30 users can follow your presentation
- Learn more about this feature in our knowledge base article
Do you really want to delete this prezi?
Neither you, nor the coeditors you shared it with will be able to recover it again.
Make your likes visible on Facebook?
You can change this under Settings & Account at any time.
Centennial District Math Vision
Transcript of Centennial District Math Vision
Teachers support students to solve
cognitively demanding tasks
Press students to provide
evidence for their reasoning
between their own and their peers’ solutions
whole-class discussions in
which they build on students’ contributions to achieve their
for students’ learning
Learning opportunities are
Every student is a capable problem solver who uses mathematics to communicate and make sense of the world.
with vocabulary and learning targets are used by teachers to guide instruction.
guide teacher decisions about instructional time and intervention.
that are aligned to Content and Practice Standards are student-, teacher-, and family-friendly and are thoughtfully implemented in every classroom.
Teachers access an aligned bank of cognitively demanding
that promote reasoning and problem solving.
Teachers understand and proficiently apply the eight NCTM
Mathematical Teaching Practices
Curriculum is implemented in a way that
and cognitive demand.
tools and technology
are purposefully and thoughtfully integrated into classroom instruction.
for struggling students is flexible, available, and equitable.
coherent assessment system
is used that includes screeners, diagnostic, formative, interim, and summative assessments.
align to the Content and Practice standards
and maintain their rigor and cognitive demand.
and are supported by
quality instructional materials
are used collaboratively by teachers, students and parents to provide
for teaching and learning.
Ongoing mathematics professional development is a
in all buildings.
Quality PD increases educator understanding and application of
Student mathematical practices
Math Teaching Practices
to focus learning.
Use and connect mathematical
Facilitate meaningful mathematical
in learning mathematics.
Elicit and use
evidence of student thinking
Mathematical Teaching Practices
protected PLC time
to discuss/rehearse/adapt math teaching and learning
practices introduced in PD
: discussing different solution strategies to math tasks, analyzing student work
Supported by the presence of
accomplished teacher leader
Instructional coaches supporting math are
present in every building
by teachers and principals as collaborative partners.
PD, PLCs, and classroom practice.
with teachers for reflection, collaborative planning, mentoring, and coaching is
valued and protected
Administrator feedback to teachers is
tied to practices
emphasized in PD.
Administrators take a
and collaborate with teachers to lay out clear paths toward growth.
between strong/weak inquiry-based lessons, high/low cognitive demand tasks.
Teachers have a
and view themselves as capable mathematics teachers and learners.
/mutual accountability for teacher and student growth.
Teachers have a
high level of trust
and feel safe seeking support.
Opportunities are provided for
Coaches are skilled at
and supporting teachers' instructional practice.
high quality PD
that is sustained and embedded in
Coaches collaborate with other coaches and
receive PD and scaffolding
from district math specialists and others.
strong grasp of math
teaching, content and practice standards and see the
provide time and structure
for PD, PLCs, and coaching.
Hold all teachers
for teaching practices and provide
Collaborate across schools to develop
Leadership is distributed
among principals coaches, teachers, and district leaders.
District leaders share
common goals, vision, and expectations
of teachers, principals and students.
and focus on facilitating growth, not enforcing compliance.
provide support and resources
for systemic implementation of effective math teaching.
conversations about equity
in math, opportunities for CI/SPED/ELL/TAG and families/community members to collaborate on supporting every student.
and acknowledge and celebrate the work being done.
are all connected
and mutually supportive of
Centennial School District
Vision for Mathematics
Developed May 2014 by Karen Prigodich, Cheryl Williamson, Jim Mangan Sarah Schmidt, Kelsie Briggs, Jenn Young, Mary Shortino-Buck
Cobb, P., & Jackson, K. (2011). Towards an empirically grounded theory of action for improving the quality of mathematics teaching at scale.
Mathematics Teacher Education & Development
, 13(2), 6–33.
It's TIME: A Leadership Framework for Common Core Mathematics.
Solution Tree: Bloomington, IN.
NCTM (2014). Principles to Actions: Ensuring Mathematical Success for All. Reston, VA.
Systemic Thoughts & Actions
Shifts in Beliefs and Mindsets