1Section 4: Erosion Preview Key Ideas Erosion Soil Erosion Soil ConservationGravity and ErosionErosion and Landforms
2Key Ideas Define erosion, and list four agents of erosion. Identify four farming methods that conserve soil.Discuss two ways that gravity contributes to erosion.Describe the three major landforms shaped by weathering and erosion.
3ErosionWhen rock weathers, the resulting rock particles do not always stay near the parent rock.Various forces may move weathered fragments of rock away from where the weathering occurred.erosion a process in which the materials of Earth’s surface are loosened, dissolved, or worn away and transported from one place to another by a natural agent, such as wind, water, ice, or gravityWater can move weathered rock in several different ways, including by ocean waves and currents, by streams and runoff, and by the movements of groundwater.
4Soil ErosionOrdinarily, new soil forms about as fast as existing soil erodes.Some forms of land use and unusual climactic conditions can upset this natural balance.Soil erosion is considered by some scientists to be the greatest environmental problem that faces the world today.This erosion prevents some countries from growing the crops needed to prevent widespread famine.
5Soil Erosion, continued The image below shows a map of soil vulnerability worldwide to erosion by water.
6Soil Erosion, continued Gullying and Sheet ErosionOne farming technique that can accelerate soil erosion is the improper plowing of furrows, or long, narrow rows.Furrows that are plowed up and down slopes allow water to run swiftly over soil. As soil is washed away with each rainfall, the furrows becomes larger and form small gullies.Eventually land that is plowed in this way can become covered with deep gullies.This type of accelerated soil erosion is called gullying.
7Soil Erosion, continued Gullying and Sheet Erosion, continuedAnother type of soil erosion strips away parallel layers of top soil. Eventually, erosion can expose the surface of the subsoil.sheet erosion the process by which water flows over a layer of soil and removes the topsoilSheet erosion may occur where continuous rainfall washes away layers of the topsoil.Wind also can cause sheet erosion during unusually dry periods.
8Soil Erosion, continued Results of Soil ErosionConstant erosion reduces the fertility of the soil by removing the A horizon, which contains the fertile humus.The B horizon, which does not contain much organic matter, is difficult to farm because it is much less fertile than the A horizon.Without plants, the B horizon has nothing to protect it from further erosion.So, within a few years, all the soil layers could be removed by continuous erosion.
9Soil ConservationHuman activities, including certain farming and grazing techniques and construction projects, can also increase the rate of erosion.This land clearing removes protective ground cover plants and accelerates topsoil erosions.In some areas, such as deserts and mountainous regions, it may take hundreds or thousands of years for the topsoil to be replenished.Rapid, destructive soil erosion can be prevented by soil conservation methods.Some land development projects are leaving trees and vegetation in place whenever possible. Other projects are planting cover plants to hold the topsoil in place.Farmers are also looking for new ways to minimize soil erosion and thus preserve fertile topsoil.
10Soil Conservation, continued Contour PlowingFarmers in countries around the world use planting techniques to reduce soil erosion.In one method, called contour plowing, soil is plowed in curved bands that follow the contour, or shape of the land.This method of planting prevents water from flowing directly down slopes, so the method prevents gullying.
11Soil Conservation, continued Strip-CroppingIn strip-cropping, crops are planted in alternating bands.A crop planted in rows may be planted in one band, and another crop that fully covers the surface of the land will be planted next to it.The cover crop protects the soil by slowing the runoff of rainwater.Strip-cropping is often combined with contour plowing. The combination of these two methods can reduce soil erosion by 75%.
12Soil Conservation, continued TerracingThe construction of steplike ridges that follow the contours of a sloped field is called terracing.Terraces, especially those used for growing rice in Asia, prevent or slow the downslope movement of water and thus prevent rapid erosion.
13Soil Conservation, continued Crop RotationIn crop rotation, farmers plant one type of crop one year and a different type of crop the next.For example, a farmer might plant a crop that will be harvested one year, and then plant a cover crop the next year. The cover crop does not get harvested. It helps to slow runoff and hold the soil in place.The main purpose of other types of crop rotation is to help maintain soil fertility.
14Gravity and ErosionGravity causes rock fragments to move down a slope.mass movement the movement of a large mass of sediment or a section of land down a slopeSome mass movements occur rapidly, and others occur very slowly.
15Gravity and Erosion, continued Rockfalls and LandslidesThe most dramatic and destructive mass movements occur rapidly.The fall of rock from a steep cliff is called a rockfall. A rockfall is the fastest kind of mass movement.When masses of loose rock combined with soil suddenly fall down a slope, the event is called a landslide.Heavy rainfall, spring thaws, volcanic eruptions, and earthquakes can trigger landslides.
16Gravity and Erosion, continued Mudflows and SlumpsThe rapid movement of a large amount of mud creates a mudflow.Mudflows occur in dry, mountainous regions during sudden, heavy rainfall or as a result of volcanic eruptions.Mud churns and tumbles as it moves down slopes and through valleys, and it frequently spreads out in a large fan shape at the base of the slope.
17Gravity and Erosion, continued Mudflows and Slumps, continuedSometimes, a large block of soil and rock becomes unstable and moves downhill in one piece.The block of soil then slides along the curved slope of the surface. This type of movement is called a slump.Slumping occurs along very steep slopes. Saturation by water and loss of friction within underlying rock causes loose soil to slip downhill over the solid rock.
18Gravity and Erosion, continued Solifluctionsolifluction the slow, downslope flow of soil saturated with water in areas surrounding glaciers at high elevationsSolifluction occurs in arctic and mountainous climates where the subsoil is permanently frozen. In the spring and summer, only the top layer of soil thaws. The surface layer becomes muddy and slowly flows down.Solifluction can also occur in warmer regions, where the subsoil consists of hard clay, which acts like the frozen subsoil in arctic climates by forming a waterproof barrier.
19Gravity and Erosion, continued Creepcreep the slow downhill movement of weathered rock materialSoil creep moves the most soil of all types of mass movements. But creep may go unnoticed unless buildings, fences, or other surface objects move along with the soil.Many factors contribute to soil creep.As rock fragments accumulate at the base of a slope, they form piles called talus.
20Erosion and Landforms landforms a physical feature of Earth’s surface. There are three major landforms that are shaped by weathering and erosion: mountains, plains, and plateaus.Minor landforms include hills, valleys, and dunes.All landforms are subject to two opposing processes.One process bends, breaks and lifts Earth’s crust and thus creates elevated, or uplifted, landforms.The other process is weathering and erosion, which wears down land surfaces.
21Erosion and Landforms, continued Erosion of MountainsDuring the early stages in the history of a mountain, the mountain undergoes uplift.When the forces stop uplifting the mountain, weathering and erosion wear down the rugged peaks to rounded peaks and gentle slopes.Over millions of years, mountains that are not being uplifted become low, featureless surfaces. These areas are called peneplains, which means “almost flat.”
22Erosion of Plains and Plateaus A plain is a relatively flat landform near sea level. A plateau is a broad, flat landform that has a high elevation.A plateau is subject to much more erosion than a plain.The effect of weathering and erosion on a plateau depends on the climate and the composition and structure of the rock.In dry climates, resistant rock produces plateaus that have flat tops.In areas that have wet climates, humidity and precipitation weather landforms into round shapes.Erosion may dissect a plateau into smaller, tablelike areas called mesas. Mesas ultimately erode into small, narrow-topped formations called buttes.