With the New Year right around the corner, you’ve probably started thinking about your resolutions for 2015. You may be committing to save more money, land a better job or lose some weight. According to dentist Columbia Dr. Gregory Wych, many of his patients make resolutions about committing to a healthier lifestyle in the coming year.
But did you know that of the number of Americans who make New Year’s resolutions, only 8% of them stick to them? We have an idea for a resolution that should be easy to keep.
Make a New Year’s resolution to improve your dental health!
Try these tips from your dentist Columbia for a brighter, healthier smile in 2015:
Eat More Fruits and Vegetables
Eating right is vital to your dental health. A poor diet can affect your whole immune system and leave you vulnerable to many common oral disorders. Fruits, vegetables, beans and nuts contain nutrients that strengthen your body’s immune system and help shield your teeth and gums.
Among other things, tobacco can put you at risk for discolored teeth, cavities, gum disease, gum recession and throat, lung and oral cancer. Smokers are two times as likely to lose their teeth as people who don’t light up, but after you quit, the risk plummets.
Limit Your Alcohol Consumption
Studies show that people who consume excessive amounts of alcohol also experience receding gums.
Brush Twice a Day and Floss Once a Day
Brushing and flossing are each equally important for good oral health, as they protect your teeth from gum disease and decay. According to your dentist Columbia, only flossing can remove the plaque that forms between your teeth and gums, where decay and gum disease often begins.
See Your Dentist Columbia for Regular Checkups
By visiting your dentist Columbia at least twice per year, you can prevent most dental problems before they cause pain or require more treatment. Regularly scheduled visits also allow your dentist to monitor your oral health and provide a dental health routine to address any areas of concern.
For 2015, why not resolve to improve your dental health by improving your diet, quitting smoking and improving your oral hygiene habits? Both your teeth and your body will thank you for it!
All of us here at your dentist Columbia Dr. Gregory Wych’s office want to wish you and yours a healthy and prosperous New Year!