JHARSA, INDIA — Desperate food shortages in India 20 years ago have blossomed into record crops and overflowing silos today.
But not far from New Delhi, on the tiny plot of a 60-year-old farmer named Gandhi, there are few signs of this country`s green revolution.
The family patriarch, Gandhi struggles to grow enough grain and vegetables to feed the 60 relatives living on his 2-acre farm. The well is dry for six months of every year, and frequent power failures close down irrigation pumps.
Last year, the Gandhis lost one of two crops because crucial rain didn`t fall during the growing season. Much of the land is hard and cracked. Family members go off to work as laborers to earn money for food.
``What green revolution? We aren`t able to fill up our stomachs,`` said the balding farmer recently as he took shelter from the burning sun under a spreading banyan tree. ``It is very difficult for us to eke out a living. Here, we are at the whims of the land.``
India lives with an agricultural paradox. In the past, food was imported to stave off famine. But since the mid-1960s, successive rich harvests have swollen government grain stocks, and India has become self-sufficient in food. Grain is so plentiful that small amounts have been exported.
Yet 40 percent of the country`s 750 million people remain underfed, according to government estimates. Plenty abounds in the irrigated breadbasket states of Punjab, Haryana and Uttar Pradesh. But large pockets of rural poverty remain, and farmers in nine states are confronted with severe drought and famine. High-priced agricultural programs have put surplus food out of the affordable reach of many of the poor.
``There are an awful lot of people in a desperate situation,`` said a Western agriculture expert in New Delhi.
As government officials frantically search for ways to dispose of the surplus and get food to needy areas, stockpiles keep growing. Stocks in government granaries have almost doubled in the last two years to 30 million tons, valued at $5.4 billion. The government spends $500 million yearly in storage charges.
Some economists say the best way to cut the surplus is to export. India has signed contracts to sell more than 800,000 tons of wheat to the Soviet Union, Eastern Europe and drought-stricken Africa, and barter deals with other countries may be in the offing.
In the wake of the Chernobyl nuclear disaster, India was mentioned as a possible source to help the Soviet Union replace damaged food stocks. While the situation is not as dire as some early predictions, the Soviet Union, which is aiming to diversify its grain purchases away from the United States, still could be a good market for Indian grain.
India could produce about 5 million tons for export, officials estimate. However, quality would have to be upgraded. And hefty subsidies would be needed to make India`s high-cost grain competitive on the glutted world market.
``We don`t know what to do with all this wheat,`` said B.M. Bhatia, an agricultural analyst with the Center for Policy Research, a New Delhi think tank. ``We have to find a market.``
The thought of exporting food while Indians are undernourished appalls many here. Indeed, Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi has insisted that grain would not be shipped elsewhere unless the hungry were fed. Still, the government hesitates to give away food. Grain is costly to produce because of huge subsidies and loans to farmers. Handouts would discourage people from working, officials say.
The government disposes of a small part of its stocks through a $1-billion-a-year antipoverty, food-for-work program. About 40 percent of the wages are paid in subsidized grain. Critics say the program is inadequate in meeting widespread poverty and undernourishment.
Some economists have urged the government to abandon its highly subsidized, socialist agriculture policies. The government guarantees farmers a minimum price for wheat and rice and then sells the grain through a network of ration shops at subsidized prices. This year, the tab for the food subsidies will top $1 billion.
Scaling back such a program in India faces opposition from a powerful agriculture lobby. Government bureaucrats, who critics charge have boosted the program`s cost through mismanagement and corruption, also are an obstacle.
Agricultural experts here hope to spur production by introducing drought- resistant crops, new water-management techniques and low-cost farming technologies. These measures could reduce the need for expensive irrigation systems and fertilizers.
Still, progress has been slow. And many farmers complain bitterly that most government assistance has gone to large landowners in India`s most productive regions.
``A person who is small doesn`t have any value at all,`` says Gandhi the farmer. ``We are poor. We are poor. We will always be poor.``