Everything students need to give a successful sales speech!
No prep required! Just press print!
Sales Speech Vocabulary:
The vocabulary terms include 14 words that relate to the sale and marketing of a product. A worksheet listing each word is included for students to write the definition. A master list of words and definitions is also included for teacher use.
Vocabulary X-Word Puzzle:
A x-word puzzle is included for students to practice using the sales and marketing terms. An answer key is provided for easy grading or use with a substitute teacher.
The vocabulary assessment includes matching and multiple choice questions to ensure student mastery of the vocabulary terms. An answer key is provided for the assessment to make grading easier.
Sales Speech Introduction:
Students brainstorm possible products they could sell to the class by completing a bubble map. After completing the brainstorming activity, students answer thought provoking questions for three of the products from their bubble map. The goal of the introductory activity is for students to select the best possible product for them to sell to the class.
Sales Speech Survey:
After selecting the product they will sell to the class, students complete a product survey. The survey contains five product related questions with space for three people to be interviewed.
The commercial analysis gives students a chance to analyze real world marketing techniques. The goal is for students to view a television commercial and answer questions that will help guide them in preparing for their sales speech.
The tree map outlines the purpose and highlights key points for giving a sales speech. Two copies of the tree map template are provided- a completed map for the teacher and a blank template for the students.
Sales Speech Outline:
The sales speech outline gives students a framework for writing their speech. The introduction, body, and conclusion of the speech are broken down to incorporate everything students need to give a successful sales speech.
Sales Speech Rubrics:
The rubrics provided cover general and specific criteria related to giving a sales speech. The rubrics provide students with clear expectations for preparing and giving their speech.
Additional Public Speaking Resources:
Introduction to Speech Writing- Text, Outline, and Practice
Public Speaking Vocabulary- A Complete Unit
Public Speaking: Voice and Gestures- Practice, Text, and Activities!
Stage Fright Handout and Questions
200 Inspirational Quotes- Quote of the Day, Bell Ringers, Journal Prompts, etc.
Speech of Introduction- Practice speaking from notecards- Student Introductions
Listening Skills- Graphic Organizer, Listening Survey, Activity, and Assessment
Pet Peeve Speech- Complete lesson plan with example speech outline!
Storybook Speech- Oral interpretation of a children's book
Award Speech- Presenting and receiving an award
Get the ENTIRE Public Speaking Unit for 30% off!
Public Speaking Curriculum Bundle- Complete Unit!
TpT Purchase Credit:
Each time you provide feedback for a purchase, TpT will award you credits that lower the cost of future purchases. You can find the feedback button beside each purchase on your “My Purchases” page. Feedback can also be used to share successes in the classroom and creative ideas for using the resources purchased.
Want a FREE resource each month? Click on the green star to follow Literacy in Focus, and you will be sent the monthly freebie!
©Literacy In Focus