David works worldwide in the creative industries as a keynote speaker, business adviser, trainer and author.
The ‘creative industries’ is also referred to as the ‘creative and cultural industries‘ or the ‘creative and digital industries‘ or the ‘creative industry‘ within the ‘creative economy‘. Most recently they have been called the ‘Orange Economy‘ (La Economía Naranja) in Latin America and the Caribbean
The terminology can be confusing!
Broadly speaking, the term ‘creative industries’ refers to a range of economic activities that are concerned with the generation and commercialisation of creativity, ideas, knowledge and information.
The ‘creative industries’ in a nutshell…
The term ‘creative industries’ describes businesses with creativity at their heart – for example design, music, publishing, architecture, film and video, crafts, visual arts, fashion, TV and radio, advertising, literature, computer games and the performing arts.
The creative industries definition from the UK Government’s Department for Culture, Media and Sport (DCMS) is: ‘Those industries which have their origin in individual creativity, skill and talent and which have a potential for wealth and job creation through the generation and exploitation of intellectual property.’
There are thirteen sub-sectors under the term ‘creative industries’ and these are: advertising; architecture; the art and antiques market; crafts; design; designer fashion; film and video; interactive leisure software; music; the performing arts; publishing; software and computer games; and television and radio.
The term ‘cultural industries’ is also used by some agencies, though this term relates to a more specific range of industries and can be regarded as a subset of the creative industries. The cultural industries are defined by UNESCO as ‘industries that combine the creation, production and commercialisation of contents which are intangible and cultural in nature; these contents are typically protected by copyright and they can take the form of a good or a service.’
Increasingly, the term ‘Creative and Digital Industries’ is used in the UK because of the importance of digital content and online services within the creative sector of the economy.
The creative industries have the potential to regenerate economies and create jobs and wealth. An example of a project to help creative and digital industries businesses to grow is the Liverpool Creative Growth Initiative. See the Creative Regeneration article and video which provides details of this project.
The digital sector is one of the fastest growing industries in the UK and internationally.
Economic impact. According to DCMS research, the Creative Industries accounted for 8.2% of Gross Value Added (GVA) in 2001 in the UK and the sector grew by an average of 8% per annum between 1997 and 2001. Exports from the UK by the creative industries contributed £11.4 billion to the balance of trade in 2001. This equated to around 4.2% of all goods and services exported. Exports for the creative industries grew at around 15%per annum over the period of 1997-2001. In June 2002, creative employment totalled 1.9 million jobs and there were around 122,000 companies in the Creative Industry sectors on the Inter-Departmental Business Register (IDBR) in 2002.
According to the Financial Times, “a report from the (UK) Government’s Strategy Unit has concluded that the creative industries in London are now more important than financial services to the economy. Employment in the creative industries (including fashion, software design, publishing, architecture and antique dealing) has topped 525,000 and is still rising, compared to a mere 322,000 and falling in financial services.”
The UK Creative industries worth almost £10 million an hour to the economy. New figures published in January 2016 reveal that the UK’s Creative Industries are now worth £84.1 billion per year to the UK economy.
Read press release from the UK Government’s Department for Culture, Media & Sport (DCMS) and Ed Vaizey MP.
UK creative industries: Official UK Government Statistics. January 2016
– The Creative Economy was worth £133.3bn ($194bn USD) in 2014, accounting for 8.2 per cent of the UK economy.
– The GVA of the Creative Industries was 3.9 per cent of total UK GVA in 1997, but had increased to 5.2 per cent in 2014.
– GVA of the Creative Industries was £84.1bn in 2014 and accounted for 5.2 per cent of the UK economy.
– For four years running the Creative Industries have grown as a proportion of the total UK GVA.
– GVA of the Creative Industries increased by 8.9 per cent between 2013 and 2014. This compares to 4.6 per cent for the whole of the UK.
– The number of jobs in the Creative Industries (including both creative and support jobs), increased by 5.5 per cent between 2013 and 2014 to 1.8 million jobs.
– Total employment in the Creative Economy across the UK increased by 5.0 per cent between 2013 and 2014 (2.6 million to 2.8 million jobs), compared with a 2.1 per cent increase in the total number of jobs in the wider UK economy over the same period.
– The value of services exported by the UK Creative Industries in 2013 was £17.9bn, a 3.5 per cent increase compared with 2012.
– Exports of services from the Creative Industries accounted for 8.7 per cent of total exports of services for the UK in 2013.
This astounding figure is achieved by creative businesses, most of which are small or medium sized enterprises (SMEs) and in reality are very small or ‘micro-enterprises’, including individual practitioners. The British Council points out that this scenario is typical internationally and works to support international co-operation since creative businesses move more quickly to international markets than many other forms of enterprise, often using the Internet.
The creative industries are the only sector which has been identified as a priority area by all of the countries and regions of the UK. This is reflected by the number of agencies supporting the creative sector, such as Vision+Media, CIDA (Creative Industries Development Agency), Inspiral, CrISP (Creative Industries Support Project), CIDA (Cultural Industries Development Agency) in London, and Creative Kernow. The first of these to be established in the late 1990’s was Merseyside ACME (Arts, Culture and Media Enterprises).
Internationally, the creative industries are one of the fastest growing sectors in OECD economies, employing on average 3-5% of the workforce according to the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development. The global value of creative industries was expected to increase in the years from 2000 to 2005 from US$ 831 billion to US$ 1.3 trillion, a compound annual growth of over 7%.
UNESCO. The United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organisation works through its Global Alliance for Cultural Diversity and Creative Cities Network to strengthen cultural industries internationally by encouraging knowledge-sharing, capacity building, good practice and mentoring between its members. The Global Alliance promotes cultural diversity by strengthening the capacity of cultural industries to produce and distribute goods and services and help them gain access to national and international markets.
UNCTAD. The United Nations Conference on Trade and Development has introduced the topic of the “creative economy” in the world economic and development agenda. The creative economy is an emerging concept dealing with the interface between creativity, culture, economics and technology in a contemporary world dominated by images, sounds, texts and symbols.Today, the creative industries are among the most dynamic sectors in the world economy providing new opportunities for developing countries to leapfrog into emerging high-growth areas of the world economy. In implementing its mandate, UNCTAD has been proactive in promoting international action in the area of the creative industries, and hence, the creative economy, emphasizing their development dimension.The creative industries are at the crossroads of the arts, culture, business and technology. All these activities are intensive in creative skills and can generate income through trade and intellectual property rights.
David Parrish is a British expert in the creative industries. He works world-wide as a Management Consultant, Trainer, Business Adviser, Coach, Mentor, Speaker and Writer. He specialises in the creative industries, the creative and digital sector, the creative and cultural industries, working especially with design, media and technology businesses.
He works internationally as a British Creative Industries expert. David is a Creative Business Consultant, Creative Industry expert, Marketing Adviser, Creative Business Trainer, Creative and Digital Business Adviser, Design, Media and Technology Consultant, Leadership Consultant, Creative Industries writer, Creative Marketing Consultant, Keynote Speaker, Lecturer, Creativity Consultant, Mentor, Coach, TEDx speaker and Creative Economy Speaker.
David is the author of two creative industries books, a creative industries guide, and numerous articles, tools and resources to help creative entrepreneurs become even more successful in the creative industries worldwide.
Due to his commitment to helping creative entrepreneurs worldwide to become even more successful, David has worked in 50+ countries around the world. He has been described as a creative industries guru (see testimonials).
“Crucially, it is not a compromise between creativity and business – it’s a matter of getting the best of both worlds.”
– David Parrish, “British guru in the creative enterprise sphere”,
quoted online alongside Richard Branson, Madonna, Felix Dennis and Edward de Bono.
David has worked with the British Council Creative Economy Unit and the British Council internationally in Azerbaijan, Belarus, Brazil, Chile, China, Georgia, Lithuania, the Philippines, Taiwan, Ukraine, Vietnam and Zimbabwe.
He has been commissioned to deliver creative business training workshops by the British Council Creative Economy Unit and has worked with British Council offices in various countries around the world on projects to help creative and cultural enterprises.
He is listed on the British Council Creative Economy Unit website as one of the inspiring people with whom the British Council has worked in promoting the UK’s creative industries and creative entrepreneurship world-wide:
“David was an inspiring guest speaker at the launch of the Creative Entrepreneurs Network in Beijing. As an experienced creative entrepreneur, business adviser and author of T-Shirts and Suits he was an ideal speaker for our network of creative entrepreneurs.”
– Liang Junhong. British Council Beijing. China.
David can work in the following countries as a keynote speaker, creative business training workshop facilitator, business adviser, management consultant, creative industries expert and writer:
Afghanistan, Aland Islands (Finland), Albania, Algeria, American Samoa (USA), Andorra, Angola, Anguilla (UK), Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Aruba (Netherlands), Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bermuda (UK), Bhutan, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, British Virgin Islands (UK), Brunei, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burma, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Cape Verde, Caribbean Netherlands (Netherlands), Cayman Islands (UK), Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Christmas Island (Australia), Cocos (Keeling) Islands (Australia), Colombia, Comoros, Cook Islands (NZ), Costa Rica, Croatia, Cuba, Curacao (Netherlands), Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Falkland Islands (UK), Faroe Islands (Denmark), Federated States of Micronesia, Fiji, Finland, France, French Guiana (France), French Polynesia (France), Gabon, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Gibraltar (UK), Greece, Greenland (Denmark), Grenada, Guadeloupe (France), Guam (USA), Guatemala, Guernsey (UK), Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hong Kong (China), Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Ireland, Isle of Man (UK), Israel, Italy, Ivory Coast, Jamaica, Japan, Jersey (UK), Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kosovo, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Laos, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Macau (China), Macedonia, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands, Martinique (France), Mauritania, Mauritius, Mayotte (France), Mexico, Moldova, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Montserrat (UK), Morocco, Mozambique, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Netherlands, New Caledonia (France), New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Niue (NZ), Norfolk Island (Australia), North Korea, Northern Mariana Islands (USA), Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Palau, Palestine, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Pitcairn Islands (UK), Poland, Portugal, Puerto Rico, Qatar, Republic of the Congo, Reunion (France), Romania, Russia, Rwanda, Saint Barthelemy (France), Saint Helena, Ascension and Tristan da Cunha (UK), Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Martin (France), Saint Pierre and Miquelon (France), Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tom and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Sint Maarten (Netherlands), Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, South Korea, South Sudan, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Svalbard and Jan Mayen (Norway), Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Syria, Taiwan, Tajikistan, Tanzania, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tokelau (NZ), Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Turks and Caicos Islands (UK), Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom, United States, United States Virgin Islands (USA), Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Vatican City, Venezuela, Vietnam, Wallis and Futuna (France), Western Sahara, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe.