As with all living things, some plants are compatible with others and some plants are not compatible. Compatible plants typically provide some benefit to the plants they are grown alongside of. For example, one plant may attract insects that benefit the other. The root systems of some plants also work well together. In some cases, compatibility is based on experience and folklore. There is no scientific research that supports many companion plantings, according to the Cornell Cooperative Extension. But at worse you'll have variety in your garden, so try these combinations and see what results you get.
Calendula and French marigolds may provide some protection to tomatoes in the garden. Calendula, also known as pot marigold, typically repels insects, such as hornworms, that harm tomatoes. French marigolds also provide protection against hornworms and insects such as whiteflies. Tomato plants help rose bushes as well. Growing a tomato near roses protects the rose bush from black spot, a fungal infection. Tomato leaves contain a chemical that acts as an insecticide, according to Louise Riotte in "Mother Earth News."
Plenty of herbs are compatible with tomato plants. The classic combination of tomato and basil works on the plate and in the garden. Basil is thought to keep mosquitoes and flies away from the tomato plant, according to the Cass County Extension of North Dakota State University. It is not scientifically proven, but basil may also improve the taste of the fruit of a tomato plant and help the plant grow better. The only way to test is to try planting basil near tomatoes in the garden. Other herbs that grow well beside tomato plants include chives, parsley and bee balm.
Several vegetables are compatible with tomatoes in the garden. Carrots and asparagus are both compatible with tomatoes, as are cucumbers and members of the allium family, such as garlic and onions. Tomato plants deter the asparagus beetle, even though the plants are usually growing in the garden at different times of the year. Asparagus emerges in early spring, while tomato grows later in the season. Garlic bulbs planted next to tomato plants repel red spider mites, according to Riotte.
Some plants cause harm to tomatoes when they are planted nearby. Potatoes and tomatoes are members of the same family, the nightshade family. They are susceptible to the same illnesses and infections and should be kept far apart in the garden. Corn is another plant that is not compatible with tomatoes, as a worm attacks both plants. Cabbage crops tends to stunt the growth of tomatoes as well. Members of the cabbage family, such as broccoli and kale, need a lot of nutrition from the soil. They consume all the nutritents, leaving none for the tomatoes.
- Hemera Technologies/AbleStock.com/Getty Images