"When do you sleep?" Lutz Children's Museum science program educator Torey Dake asked a group of kids at Mary Cheney Library on July 30. She was there to talk about diurnal and nocturnal animals, and the differences in behaviors of the two animal groups.
During the interactive presentation that featured live animals, Dake and the children talked about why some animals sleep at night, like humans do, and why some would sleep during the day.
"If an animal is awake during the day, it might mean they need the sunlight to help see their food," Dake said about diurnal animals.
She then asked for some examples of animals that are awake at night, and the kids called out answers like crickets, raccoons and owls. They also called out that animals would be able to sneak up on their prey at night, which led to a discussion about night vision and how senses can help night-living animals navigate their world in the dark.
Dake brought along a couple animals from the Lutz Museum. After guessing what might be inside the small carrying case, out came a tiny hedgehog named Raspberry. Raspberry is an African pygmy hedgehog that weighs just about a half pound, compared to normal hedgehogs that weight about a pound. Dake talked about defensive characteristics like her many spikes that are made of hair and fur. "She might be a nighttime snack for predators, so she can curl up into a ball and puff her spikes up to get a hunter on the nose," Dake said. She brought Raspberry around so everybody could pet her from head to tail, if they wanted.
Dake also brought a skull replica of a Bard owl and pointed out the large eye sockets, briefly describing how the eye is not round like humans, but oval-shaped to hold more cones and rods, for keen night vision. She talked about the owl's head rotation being 270 degrees, because its eyes don't move.
She brought a rubber bat for demonstration and talked about how bats live during the night and use a sense of hearing to get around. "It's called 'echolocation,' which means that bats use sound that travels in the air and bounces of the nearest surface." She brought up touch and smell as other ways animals are able to get around and eat in the dark. As an example, she brought a ferret named Pepe that has an amazing sense of smell and uses its whiskers to feel and sense where it is.
Dake closed by getting the children into a large circle and placing Pepe in the center, where he was able to walk around.
The "Fizz! Boom! Read!" summer program continues with "Animal Protection - Shells & Spikes" on Aug. 20. To register, or for more information, visit library.townofmanchester.org or call 860-645-0577.