The physician responses provided the data necessary to construct sociomatrices that were used for analysis and in developing sociograms
(a two-dimensional diagram for displaying the relations among actors within the network as depicted in Figure 1).
of the information network reveals the important role played by contractors in providing the information regarding the labour market in Goa.
By using graph theory, a sociogram
can be developed that represents the network of relationships among group members and can be analyzed by using the methods and techniques of social network analysis (Cartwright & Harary, 1977).
Table 1 summarizes the descriptive statistics for cohesion, sociogram
variables, and efficacy levels as reported by individual players, teammates and coaches.
An actor's degree can be calculated by adding the number of links between that actor and the other actors in a sociogram
, or by adding the values within a row or column of an adjacency matrix.
Students represented and evaluated their performances by constructing a sociogram
that charted, in diagrammatical format, the entire set of discursive engagements and outcomes.
are graphs of networks with points representing agents and lines representing relationships.
Figure 2 summarizes the children's peer groupings in a sociogram
The selection of friends and acquaintances was made on the basis of a sociogram
that presented cartoon faces with messages in balloon-like clouds coming from the cartoon faces such as "I know ______ the best" and "I know ______ the least.
Thirty-eight 9- to 12-year-old children with LD were compared with a sample of children without LD matched on gender and general education classroom placement using a composite positive and negative nomination sociogram
(Coie & Kupersmidt, 1983) and a Social Behavior Nomination Scale adapted from Dodge (1983).
The session begins with the client revealing a previously created sociogram
, representing family and other significant people in his/her life.
A Wolf Pack Sociogram
," in Wolves of the World, edited by Fred H.