The Second Sun
A study shows that there was a second sun (star) in the solar system used to orbit in the asteroid belt, between Mars and Jupiter, around 200 million years ago.
Published: January 15, 2014
Observations have shown that the source of the material that makes up debris disks is a companion star. So if there were no companion star (second sun) in the solar system, the asteroid belt wouldn't have existed!
The Earth 200 million years ago: 2 suns, one sun sets and the other sun immediately rises
QUOTE: "according to oxygen isotope records, early Earth surface temperatures could have been as high as 45 – 85 degrees C!" -- On the other hand, it is said that the early Sun was cool, giving only about 70% of solar heat, or even less. What was the source of that extra heat?
Mars is red because it is full of rust. The only confirmed source of rust is dying stars; so it must have got it from a dying star. The closer the inner planet to the asteroid belt, the more rust it has on its surface, and because Mars is the closest planet to the asteroid belt, it has rust more than any other planet.
What happened to the atmosphere of Mars?
But how this can happen: "a process that is thought to be driven by interactions
with the solar wind."
Note that the so called -- solar wind -- isn't wind at all, but a solar radiation of charged particles.
Because of this unexplained phenomenon, some scientists think that the solar wind of the existing sun was much stronger in the past. If this was the case, it would have affected the atmosphere of Earth much more than Mars', and for the simple reason: Earth is much closer to the sun than Mars.
The planet Jupiter is still in a gas form because it is far away from the sun; but why are the moons of Jupiter very much similar to terrestrial planets? The moon of Jupiter Io has over 400 "active" volcanoes! These moons were originally planets of the second sun.
The solar system might have been in this layout in the beginning when the second sun was fully functioning. The two stars orbit each other around a common center of mass. The gas giants orbit the two stars; Jupiter and Saturn were very far away from their current position; and they kept moving inward as the second sun loses mass.
The Permian – Triassic extinction event that took place around 250 million years ago is the worst and longest lasting disaster to ever hit the earth. It wiped out almost all life on earth, including insects. It took the earth about 30 million years to recover. This event was caused by the dying second sun.
Isotopes found in some Permian-Triassic rocks point to space as the source of the extinction!
When the second sun entered its final period of life, it started firing neutron and gamma rays at the earth and tore it apart, as well as the other inner planets, creating open areas and trenches in the crust, all the way down to the mantle. And via these open areas and trenches, asteroids and meteoroids from the second sun have gone into the earth's mantle, caused the sea floor to form and mountains to rise; plus the lowlands and mountains on the other inner planets. As a result, all inner planets have expanded. And because of the water on Earth, continental drift started.
The above picture shows the orbit of a metal (iron) asteroid in the main asteroid belt, called, Psyche. It is almost in the middle of the belt. It has a diameter of about 250 km. It has "not" been visited or investigated yet. It could be the inner core of the second sun or a major part of it.