To improve the steam process the first thing we do is replace the cooling tower. The exit steam at 140oC goes down one leg of a double helical heat exchanger.
Up he other leg, we pass low pressure Canto gas – ammonia is cheap and efficient. We then pressurise the gas, and use is to boil off water – 120oC at 4 atmospheres.
It then goes into a super heat chamber, where is meets half the gas, whose pressure we have doubled again. It heats the gas to 1340oC. At this stage we introduce heat in needed.
As the gas passes through the turbine hall it does Molecular Nuclear Fusion.
1 H2O+TU ->He2++O2-+E2+X-ray
This is why we take out heat – but the steam heats up by 10oC – and we get the emission of X-ray radiation.
Titanium does face centred cubic Molecular Nuclear Fusion, Sickle does not. But Ni allows us to run the steam cycle at higher temperature. So we should Ti plate the entry side of the turbine blades, as Ti is still solid, but has little bulk strength at 1400oC.
I am a materials engineer, and the solution is simple! Replace the metal: I used to have a job at Inco, making turbine blades. But the mine the oxides – which tend to be ceramics.
See https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ultra-high-temperature_ceramics#Synthesis_of_diboride_.28Zr.2C_Hf.2C_Ti.29_UHTCs , and focus on Processing of UHTCs and the addition of SiC
So we use the pottery art, to make ceramic blades – we leave air gaps, to increase strength and reduce weight.
We fire them to biscuit level, then stone fire them. We mount them on a ceramic blade holder – simple science. We redesign the turbine, to be surrounded by ceramics, before we get to the natal shell.
All this is known science. This all reduces Fossil Fuels burn by a factor of 9 – for the same power. Utilising 2% of the generated power. No more wasteful cooling tower.
But we can replace the Fossil Fuels burn all together. We use a steam plasma to do Molecular Nuclear Fusion.
Every lightening bolt is a 1.5km partial steam plasma – that makes 5 tonnes of He, every 3 minutes around the world.
So1, with E2 at 2.5x1030 W. Geographers have written academic papers about lightening making He ions, and emitting X-rays. The negative charge ends up on the ozone – for by the creation of the surplus O2-, with oxygen from the air.
2 H2O+O2+TU ->He2++O32-+E2+X-ray E2=2.5x1030 W
How to use? We fire up a 1m x0.5cm steam plasma in a tube. A get a constant 1.6 MW off 0.002cc of regular water a year.
We use the electrics from a fluorescent light – and one the plasma is established, it will self sustain at 4 atmospheres – using very, very little regular water. We can use desalinated, to avoid the inclusion of salts.
So a gas or oil burn releases 45 kW/m. A diesel burn up to 90 kW. We are talking about a free energy system, 25 times as energetic.
So we just replace the oil or gas burners, with plasma tubes at the next annual shut down. We can fire up and manufacture the tubes in the maintenance work shop. Which was where I was summer 1983.
So now we do not have any Fossil Fuels burn. We do not use metal blades. Instead we use TiB2 which melts at 3225oC.
We can run the steam cycle at 3000oC – as opposed to only 1500oC today. The ceramic production techniques are basically the potters art.
We include C fibres, to avoid thermal shock events. So no oil or gas burn. And effectively no fuelling cost. Diagram from my degree in the 1980s.