The deadly venom from the red scorpion is said to have anti-inflammatory and anti-tumor properties, and is currently being researched as a possible tool in curing or aiding in the combat against cancer. However, you probably don’t want to take the venom directly from the source yourself, as it will almost certainly result in death. Red scorpions exist commonly in the Americas, but are rarely ever seen. California, Arizona, Texas and other dry states are more likely to see or come into contact with them.
The red scorpion has a comparably larger stinger to other similar insects of their class, but in general, they are one of the smallest species currently known. They are red in color and take the form of a well-known scorpion shape: with the stinger curled over its back and a hard, glossy shell which protects it from attack.
Red scorpions are nocturnal and can be found wherever their food sources live. These creatures like to feast on spiders, centipedes, caterpillars and other small insects are available in areas which have a dry, loose soil, such as desserts. For this reason, a particularly dry, inhospitable garden may become a nesting ground for the red scorpion.
Red Scorpion Identification
You can easily distinguish this variety of scorpion by its traditional appearance. It has a small, shelled body and large protruding stinger common to all scorpions. This type of scorpion is unlike others in one way, as is has a dark, yet translucent, red shell and is much smaller than in size. A red scorpion typically only grows to a few inches long but pack a mean punch when they attack.
On the off chance you do see one of these creatures, it is advised to stay back and call for help. The red scorpion has a nasty sting which can paralyze and kill a fully grown adult within a few hours and cause considerable pain. This risk is increased in the presence of children, whose smaller frames are less adequately prepared to fight the venom and may accelerate the times or damage incurred. The pain from the sting will be almost immediate but often the perpetrator has already fled by the time you notice.
Red Scorpion Habitat
A red scorpion feeds on other small insects, spiders, mites and even other scorpions that may not always be smaller than them. They are predatory by nature and their habitat is largely established by their food source but they have been known to survive on as little as one meal per year. They enjoy warm, even hot, climates with dry, loose soil in which they can burrow.
Once they find somewhere that has a thriving insect population, a red scorpion will create nests. These nests also facilitate reproduction and resting zones and are preferred to be built in lose soil but may also be built into tree bark. These multi-functional chambers are built underground and may also be used to bait larger animals, who follow the scorpion into its burrow. Once there, it may become curious as to what is inside. The red scorpion will take this opportunity to strike and disarm its prey, human or otherwise.
Red Scorpion Life Cycle
Reproduction for the red scorpion is a combination of courtship and mating. The courtship is led by the male, who initiates a dance with the female by holding “hands” (or claws) together. They circle one another until the male has successfully deposited his sperm. The courtship may also contain a similar kissing method seen in humans, and juddering motions, which is how the males deposits their sperm. The male will quickly retreat, as females are very well known for their sexual cannibalism, and will try to eat their partner afterward.
Unlike other closely related species, the red scorpion does not produce eggs, but rather the female will give birth one at a time to several young who emerge in their entirety from her womb. They will then rest and travel on the mother’s back for a period of up to three months before seeking their own independence.
The young will go through several instar phases in which it sheds to accommodate its growth. Each stage requires a meal. Once this process is complete, red scorpions are considered sexually mature and independent. They will usually never see their mother again once they leave. Scorpions will usually go on to live for several years and females may mate up to five times during their lifetime.
Red Scorpion and Humans
The red scorpion and humans have had an interesting life together. While commonly feared by many for their dangerous persona, Asian countries may fry these delicacies and eat them. Scientists have carried out tests in which scorpions were frozen, only to thaw and return to life; proving their resilience. These creatures take the name of one of the twelve horoscopes, and they’ve been featured in many movies and are well known throughout history and in mythology.
Red Scorpion Control
Once you have identified a red scorpion nest, it is important to section off the area and prevent people and animals from going near the nest. Pets and children may become curious if they suspect a sighting, and more often than not, this predator will strike and sting at a moment’s notice.
Professional assistance is always advised in the case of poisonous or dangerous animals, and this species is no exception. The red scorpion are usually affected by insecticides and pesticides, though these will not kill them.
Red scorpion prevention may also be recommended in areas which have a warm, dry climate. In these homes, watering your plants and yard will prevent loose soil and areas in which these insects would nest. Other preventive measures can include covering windows and doors, ensuring tight fits at seals or points of entry to prevent them from coming inside and regularly maintaining the home and garden with a keen eye for signs of damage or existence.
Red Scorpion Entomology
There are over 2,000 known types of scorpions, while only 111 are considered extinct. The red scorpion is closely related to spiders and mites, which are also nocturnal and predatory by nature. Research has shown that scorpions have lived on earth for more than 200,000 years, making them significant by evolutionary standards. The red scorpion exist largely in warm, humid countries such as America, South America and are a resistant creature.
The red scorpion belongs to the animalia kingdom, under the arthropda phylum. They are classed as arachnids, but belong largely to the dromopoda subclass. They have their own order, the scorpiones, which accommodates the wide fluctuation in characteristic changes between this species.