Automobile accidents are unavoidable in today’s society and while you can decrease your chances of being in an accident through defensive driving and other preventative measures, statistics show that every driver will be in some type of accident once every 7 years. So what should you do when an accident occurs? First, it is imperative that you follow some basic guidelines to insure you get all the necessary information and document the accident properly. This is often much harder than expected because the adrenaline response kicks in as part of our “flight or fight” response. Immediately after an accident, adrenaline usually skyrockets and impairs important brain functions such as reasoning and decision making.
After you attend to the details of the accident and any immediate medical concerns, your body may begin to experience a variety of symptoms that were not immediately apparent because of the initial adrenaline rush. There is a huge range of possible injury from none to death, but contusions, abrasions and particularly soft tissue injuries are by far the most common. Even if you were evaluated in the emergency room and told “nothing is wrong”, emergency evaluations focus on fractures, dislocations, internal organ injury and other life-threatening conditions, not the typical soft tissue injuries that often feel worse over the next few days or weeks. A progression of symptoms occur in part because of the swelling and inflammation that develop in the injured “soft tissues” over a period of hours, or even days, following the accident.
So what causes this swelling and inflammation associated with “soft tissue injury”? Soft tissue injury happens when muscle, ligaments, discs, tendons, joint capsules and other “soft tissues” are stretched beyond their normal position and limit. Without an prior awareness of the collision, the accident happens so quickly that your nervous system usually cannot respond fast enough to prevent your head, neck and body from moving beyond normal positions; this causes what doctors call “sprain” or “strain” injury, depending upon the type of tissue involved. The severity of injury is proportional to the “acceleration differential” that develops between your body and the vehicle when the accident occurs. That’s why higher speed accidents typically result in more severe injury but other factors such as road conditions, head position, seat belts, air bag inflation or even the amount of property damage can alter the ‘acceleration differential’ of the occupant. The most important component of preventing or minimizing injury is an ‘awareness’ of the collision before impact, but even seemingly minor accidents with little or no property damage can result in injury under the right circumstances. This is explained by the Laws of Conservation of Energy and Physics.
In summary, automobile accidents are essentially unavoidable in today’s society. Make sure the accident is documented properly and you exchange the appropriate information of all parties involved. Immediate symptoms may not be present so it is always appropriate to have at least a screening examination after any accident. Such as examination should be performed by a chiropractic doctor or someone similarly qualified to evaluate range of motion, joint function and potential impact on future spinal health because symptoms are not always immediately present. LifeSource Health Partners provides such a screening examination at no charge as a community service to increase awareness and understanding of what happens in a car accident and how it relates to future health and quality of life.
Recovering from a whiplash injury can be difficult. If you have ever experienced whiplash, you know how painful and disabling it can be……. headaches, neck pain, painful movement, muscle spasms, numbness and the list goes on. If you are seeking Denver whiplash treatment Denver, we offer a free 30 minute massage and screening examination to relieve pain and determine if additional treatment is indicated.
The term “whiplash” describes a sudden, unexpected movement of the head and neck. The extreme forward and back motion causes a whip-like movement of the neck. You know that “cracking” sound from a whip……whiplash does the same thing to your neck, spine, nerves and muscles. If there is no “awareness” before the incident, as often occurs in rear-end automobile collisions, the effects are magnified.
This whipping often causes stretching and even tearing of the various soft tissues in the neck, resulting in disc injuries, ligament tears, muscle strains and possibly even nerve injury. The medical terms for injuries of this nature are sprains or strains…… sprains involve injury to the joints and ligaments while strains affect the muscles. Injured tissues heal with scar tissue through a process called the “fibrosis of repair” which sounds painful all by itself!
Whiplash injury takes only seconds to occur, but the effects can linger for weeks, months and even years! This is why prompt evaluation by a whiplash specialist is critical! Whiplash can occur during sports, from an unexpected fall, automobile accidents and even amusement park rides like roller coasters. While the symptoms may improve with time, it is critical to receive proper treatment to not only restore normal function, but also to prevent chronic and future problems. We specialize in whiplash in Lesions and use a multidisciplinary approach including a medical doctor (physiatrist), chiropractor, massage therapist, acupuncturist and MedX spinal rehabilitation program. Our goal is to help you resume your normal activities as quickly as possible by using natural and conservative treatment; the best in town, only considers injections and surgery when absolutely necessary.
Whiplash chiropractic Denver, whiplash chiropractor Denver, Denver whiplash injury
Dr. Croft has studied whiplash injuries extensively and developed specific treatment protocols we follow to maximize recovery. The following research studies are just a few examples that have established the effectiveness of chiropractic and natural treatments in the treatment of whiplash injuries.
In summary, every injury and patient is unique, but early assessment and treatment is always important. Start feeling better today with customized Attention! Call (303) 934-3600 to schedule your free 30 minute massage and injury assessment.
Whiplash and accident injury recovery Denver
Have you ever experienced whiplash? Do you know how it occurs and why it is so painful? Do you know what constitutes the best whiplash treatment in Lakewood CO and how to keep whiplash from becoming a chronic problem? We will discuss all these questions and a few more in this article.
The term “whiplash” comes from a sudden and usually unexpected movement of the head. The forward and back motion often causes a whip-like movement of the neck and upper back. You’re familiar with the “crack” from a whip and how forceful that can be……whiplash does the same thing to your neck and spine. If there is no “awareness” of the impending event, the effects are magnified, as often occurs in rear-end automobile collisions.
This causes stretching and sometimes “tearing” of the delicate soft tissues in the neck, which result in disc injuries, ligament tears, muscle strains and all sorts of “soft tissue injury.” In medical jargon these are sprain and strain injuries……strains affect the muscle and contractile tissues while sprains involve the joints and ligament tissues. These tissues heal with scar tissue through a process called “the fibrosis of repair”…..doesn’t that sounds painful all by itself?
While the event may take only seconds to occur, the effects can linger for days, weeks months and even years! Whiplash can occur in sports, from an unexpected fall, automobile accidents and even amusement park rides like roller coasters. The greater the force and speed, the more likely tissues will be “over-stretched” and the greater the injury. While the symptoms may improve with time, it is critical to receive proper treatment to not only restore normal function, but also to prevent chronic and future problems. We believe our auto injury program is the best whiplash treatment in Lakewood CO because we utilize chiropractic, massage, acupuncture and MedX spinal rehabilitation all supervised by a board certified medical doctor specializing in physical medicine. Our goal is to return you to optimal function as quickly as possible by using natural and conservative treatments.
According to Arthur C. Croft, D.C., Director of the Spine Research Institute, there are approximately 3 million whiplash injuries in the United States every year. Nearly 1 of 15 American adults suffer with the debilitating pain and effects of whiplash injury. Dr. Croft has studied whiplash injuries extensively and developed specific treatment protocols to maximize the possibility of recovery. There are several research studies that have established the effectiveness of chiropractic in treating whiplash injuries.
Every injury and patient is unique and has to be evaluated and treated individually. That is one of the basic principles in our Patient Promise, available on our website. In addition, there are established medical protocols if you desire the “best whiplash treatment in Lakewood CO.” Call now to schedule your appointment or free injury assessment!