the sound or sounds uttered through the mouth of living creatures, especially of human beings in speaking, shouting, singing, etc.
the faculty or power of uttering sounds through the mouth by the controlled expulsion of air; speech:
to lose one’s voice.
a range of such sounds distinctive to one person, or to a type of person or animal:
Her voice is commanding.
the condition or effectiveness of the voice for speaking or singing:
to be in poor voice.
a sound likened to or resembling vocal utterance:
the voice of the wind.
something likened to speech as conveying impressions to the mind:
the voice of nature.
expression in spoken or written words, or by other means:
to give voice to one’s disapproval by a letter.
the right to present and receive consideration of one’s desires or opinions:
We were given no voice in the election.
an expressed opinion or choice:
a voice for compromise.
an expressed will or desire:
the voice of the people.
expressed wish or injunction:
obedient to the voice of God.
the person or other agency through which something is expressed or revealed:
a warning that proved to be the voice of prophecy.
one of our best voices.
a voice part:
a score for piano and voice.
Phonetics. the audible result of phonation and resonance.
the finer regulation, as of intensity and color, in tuning, especially of a piano or organ.
verb (used with object), voiced, voicing.
to give utterance or expression to; declare; proclaim:
to voice one’s discontent.
to utter with the voice.
Phonetics. to pronounce with glottal vibration.
to interpret from sign language into spoken language.
Computers. of or relating to the use of human or synthesized speech:
voice-data entry; voice output.
Telecommunications. of or relating to the transmission of speech or data over media designed for the transmission of speech:
voice-grade channel; voice-data network.
the still, small voice, the conscience:
He was only occasionally troubled by the still, small voice.
with one voice, in accord; unanimously:
They arose and with one voice acclaimed the new president.
the sound made by the vibration of the vocal cords, esp when modified by the resonant effect of the tongue and mouth See also speech related adjective vocal
the natural and distinctive tone of the speech sounds characteristic of a particular person: nobody could mistake his voice
the condition, quality, effectiveness, or tone of such sounds: a hysterical voice
the musical sound of a singing voice, with respect to its quality or tone: she has a lovely voice
the ability to speak, sing, etc: he has lost his voice
a sound resembling or suggestive of vocal utterance: the voice of the sea, the voice of hard experience
written or spoken expression, as of feeling, opinion, etc (esp in the phrase give voice to)
a stated choice, wish, or opinion or the power or right to have an opinion heard and considered: to give someone a voice in a decision
an agency through which is communicated another’s purpose, policy, etc: such groups are the voice of our enemies
(phonetics) the sound characterizing the articulation of several speech sounds, including all vowels or sonants, that is produced when the vocal cords make loose contact with each other and are set in vibration by the breath as it forces its way through the glottis
(grammar) a category of the verb or verbal inflections that expresses whether the relation between the subject and the verb is that of agent and action, action and recipient, or some other relation See active (sense 5), passive (sense 5), middle (sense 5)
(foll by of) (obsolete) fame; renown
in voice, in a condition to sing or speak well
out of voice, with the voice temporarily in a poor condition, esp for singing
with one voice, unanimously
to utter in words; give expression to: to voice a complaint
to articulate (a speech sound) with voice
(music) to adjust (a wind instrument or organ pipe) so that it conforms to the correct standards of tone colour, pitch, etc
to provide the voice for (a puppet or cartoon character) in an animated film
late 13c., “sound made by the human mouth,” from Old French voiz, from Latin vocem (nominative vox) “voice, sound, utterance, cry, call, speech, sentence, language, word,” related to vocare “to call,” from PIE root *wekw- “give vocal utterance, speak” (cf. Sanskrit vakti “speaks, says,” vacas- “word;” Avestan vac- “speak, say;” Greek eipon (aorist) “spoke, said,” epos “word;” Old Prussian wackis “cry;” German er-wähnen “to mention”).
Replaced Old English stefn. Meaning “ability in a singer” is first attested c.1600. Meaning “expression of feeling, etc.” (in reference to groups of people, etc., e.g. Voice of America) is recorded from late 14c.
“to express” (a feeling, opinion, etc.), c.1600, from voice (n.). Related: Voiced; voicing.
The sound made by air passing out through the larynx and upper respiratory tract and produced by the vibration of the vocal organs.
[out-voht] /ˌaʊtˈvoʊt/ verb (used with object), outvoted, outvoting. 1. to outdo or defeat in : The rural districts outvoted the urban districts. The measure was outvoted by the farmers. /ˌaʊtˈvəʊt/ verb 1. (transitive) to defeat by a majority of votes
[vahy] /vaɪ/ verb (used without object), vied, vying. 1. to strive in competition or rivalry with another; contend for superiority: Swimmers from many nations were vying for the title. verb (used with object), vied, vying. 2. Archaic. to put forward in competition or rivalry. 3. Obsolete. to stake in card playing. /vaɪ/ verb vies, vying, […]
[out-weyt] /ˌaʊtˈweɪt/ verb (used with object) 1. to surpass in or expecting; longer than. 2. Archaic. to lie in ambush longer than.
[out-wawk] /ˌaʊtˈwɔk/ verb (used with object) 1. to outdo in ; faster or farther than. 2. to beyond: to outwalk the lights of the city.