Conductors and instrumentalists should click the magic button!
to Home Page
AND DIFFERENT GENRES OF MUSIC
Composition and Piano Lessons
Piano Music Notes
Music Writing Software
Music to Films
THE RECORDING ROOM
Sound Recording Studios
Music with Depth
music? Why do composers write for this genre? What exactly is
a hotdog made out of? Important questions… intelligent questions.
Now here are the answers.
music was originally a term categorizing music that did not
belong in a large concert hall, theatre or church. The term has
now taken on a different meaning in that it includes music of all
combinations of instruments except:
• orchestral music;
a solo instrument with accompaniment.
Excluding solo instruments
with accompaniment is a little confusing considering duet sonatas
(for example, a sonata for violin and piano) are included
in the chamber music category. The difference is that these types
of sonatas give equally important rolls to both instruments involved
in the composition, as opposed to a solo work with a simple accompaniment.
combinations of chamber music include:
Why do composers write for these combinations
of instruments? Once again, economics play a roll, as it is easier
on the pocket book to hire fewer musicians. Chamber concerts involve
less hiring than orchestral, choral
or theatrical productions. Aesthetically, different flavours can
be achieved with different combinations of instruments. Few informed
musicians would argue that the string quartet is one of the most
intimate and expressive genres in the history
. One needs look no further than some of the late works
of Beethoven to see the in-depth, forward-thinking music that is
possible with this instrumental combination.
a marketing standpoint, a good piece of chamber music, once accepted
as a standard piece in a group’s repertoire, gets a lot of
repeat performances. Repeat performances are a dream come true for
a final note, variety makes life interesting. Although there have
been great composers that have written mainly for one instrument
(Chopin, for example), the majority of composers find it fun delving
into different instrumental combinations. One tends to meet more
musicians that way and make more contacts, which is important socially
the way, going back to one of the questions in paragraph one, I
don’t know what ingredients go into a hotdog. Even when a
package includes ingredients, I don’t really understand what
I’m reading. I guess a good hotdog and good melody have something
in common. When they’re good, you don’t really care
all that much about the ingredients.
here for Ready, Set, Compose!, the ultimate resource
book for keyboard improvisers, composers and pianists.
here for our exciting new piece of the month!