Module 2 Maintenance Questions
The Examiner will ask several questions from the list below at the start of your Module 2 Test. You must show a good understanding of each question. The examiner will ask you to DEMONSTRATE one question and EXPLAIN another. This will require you to get “hands-on” with the motorcycle for one of the questions.
Q1: Identify where you would check the engine oil level and tell me how you would check that the engine has sufficient oil.
A1: Identify where to check level, ie dipstick or sight glass. Explain that the bikes engine must be cold and the bike itself must be on level ground. For dipstick, remove dipstick and wipe clean, return and remove again to check oil level against max/min marks. For sight glass, ensure glass is clean when checking.
Q2: Show me how you would check that the horn is working on this machine (off road only).
A2:Check is carried out by using control (turn on ignition if necessary).
Q3: Identify where the brake fluid reservoir is and tell me how you would check that you have a safe level of hydraulic fluid.
A3: Identify reservoir, check level against high/low markings.
Q4: Tell me how you would check that the lights & brake lights and reflectors are clean and working.
A4: Operate switch (turn on ignition if necessary), identify reflectors. Check visually for cleanliness and operation.
Q5: Show me how you would check that the brake lights are working
A5:Operate brake, place hand over light or make use of reflections in windows, garage doors etc, or ask someone to help.
Q6: Tell me how you would check the condition of the chain on this machine.
A6: Check for chain wear, correct tension and rear wheel alignment. Tension should be adjusted as specified in the machine handbook. Drive chain should be lubricated to ensure that excessive wear does not take place.
Q7: Show me what checks you would make on the steering movement before using the machine.
A7: Handlebars should be free to move smoothly from full left lock to full right lock without any control cables being stretched, trapped or pinched and without any snagging between moving and fixed parts.
Q8: Tell me how you would check your tyres to ensure that they are correctly inflated, have sufficient tread depth and that their general condition is safe to use on the road.
A8: Correct tyre pressure settings can be found in the owner’s manual. Pressures should be checked using a reliable gauge. Tread depth must be at least 1mm deep, forming a continuous band at least ¾ of the breadth of the tread and all the way around. There should be no lumps, bulges or tears.
Q9: Show me how you would check the operation of the front brake on this machine.
A9: Wheel the machine forward and apply the front brake.
Q10: Show me how you would check the operation of the brakes on this machine.
A10: Check for excessive travel on the brake lever and the brake pedal and for unusual play or sponginess.
Q11: Show me how you would check the operation of the engine cut out switch.
A11: Operate switch. Without the engine being started.
Q12: Show me how you would switch on the rear fog light and explain when you would use it (if fitted)
A12: Operate switch ( turn on ignition and dipped headligths if necessary). Check warning light is on, Explain use.
Q13: Show me how you switch your headlight from dipped to main beam.
A13: Operate switch (with ignition on if necessary), check with main beam warning light.
The Examiner will ask one question from the list below at the start of your Module 2 Test. You must show a good understanding of each question.
Q1: Advice you would give a pillion passenger?
Make sure they are wearing the correct clothing including an approved safety helmet.
Make sure they sit on the bike astride, facing forwards with their feet on the foot pegs at all times.
Tell them were to hold. Either to the rider or the grab rail.
Don’t fidget about.
Lean with the rider and the bike into the corners.
Don’t do any arm signals.
Don’t look over my shoulder.
Q2: What changes would you make to the bike if you were taking a pillion passenger?
Increase the tyre pressures according to the manufacturer’s advice (owner’s manual).
Adjust the suspension according to the manufacturer’s advice (owner’s manual).
Fold the foot pegs down.
Adjust the headlights according to the manufacturer’s advice (owner’s manual).
Adjust the mirrors up, as the back will squat down.
Q3: How is the extra weight on the back going to affect the handling?
Acceleration is going to be affected
On more powerful bikes the front could go very light.
Deceleration is affected.
Stopping distances are going to increase.
Cornering is going to be affected.
Centre of gravity is higher therefore it is wise to go into corners slower.
Front wheel is going to be lighter. Therefore it will feel a little bit vague.
Q4: What would affect your balance?
Poorly maintained machine.