Growing up the daughter of a fireman, I learned from an early age the importance of fire safety and some practical fire safety tips that all members of a family should know. What I didn't realize until later in life was that most of my friends didn't grow up practicing regular fire drills, hadn't taken a CPR class, and didn't know how to spot potential danger fire hazards. But the reality is that taking the time to learn and practice some very easy and simple fire prevention tips can save lives.
Regularly check for household fire hazards. A little fire prevention goes a long way in preventing the unthinkable, so get in the habit of looking around the house for potential fire hazards. For example, I routinely let the lint build up in the lint trap in my dryer, which is a major fire hazard and easily preventable. It's also important to do things like check older electrical wiring and to keep lighters out of reach of children.
Install and test smoke detectors. Smoke detectors are the first line of defense in fire safety, but in order to be effective, they have work. Once you've installed a smoke detector in every room of your house, get in the routine of changing the smoke detectors batteries when changing your clocks for daylight savings time.
Practice family fire drills. Some of my earliest memories are of practicing family fire drills at my house. My parents made sure that if there was a fire, I knew how to get out of the house and to meet at our designated safe spot down the street. They made sure I knew that no matter how scared I was, I wasn't allowed to hide under my bed or in my closet. I wasn't allowed to bring toys, I wasn't allowed to grab my pets, and I wasn't supposed to go look for my parents or brother. I was simply supposed to get outside.
It's critical to have these conversations with children and to practice these routines, so that if a fire occurs, everyone knows what to do. It's also good for adults to know and practice their own responsibilities should a fire occur.
Don't forget the pets. A discussion about practical family safety tips should include a discussion on how to handle pets in an emergency. When practicing the family fire drill, an adult should assume responsibility for the pets, safety permitting. Keep leashes and carriers readily available. Also, a local vet or pet store can provide you with a sticker to place on your front door that says something like "Fireman, Please Save My Pets". Should a fire break out when you're not home, the sticker will alert to fire department that there are pets in the house.
Most of us will probably never experience a fire in our homes. But if the unthinkable occurs, you'll be glad you took the time to follow some of these easy family fire safety tips.
How do you practice fire safety in your house? Tell us below in the comments section