Flu, Chlorella, and Spirulina
There are some simple things you can do to protect yourself
and your family from the flu.
Strengthen your Immune System.
Cover your coughs and sneezes.
Wash your hands with soap.
The single best way to prevent the flu, is having a strong
defense system. A strong immune system that
is capable of defending your cells from the flu virus. Although the CDC claims, the single best way
to defend yourself from the flu is the flu vaccination, it is impossible to
determine what flu virus you will come in contact with. It is also impossible to know, if this year’s
vaccination is designed for that specific flu, because there are many different
types of the virus. Even if the flu
vaccination is designed for the correct virus, it has less effectiveness with
individuals who have a weak immune system, and does not work the same for
everybody. Whether you decide to get the
flu vaccination or not, the single best defense for the flu this year, and
every year is to build a strong, healthy immune system. Be proactive.
What you can do to build a strong immune system?
You can think of your immune system like your national
defense system. In order for your
national defense to be strong and ready for battle it needs these key
A Strong Supply of Resources
Strong Supply of Resources:
In order for your cells to mount a strong attack against the
flu, it is important they are getting the highest quality and ample amounts of
whole food resources. These resources
are the nutrients you consume in your daily diet, giving your cells the
ammunition and energy, to go to battle and win the continual fight against
microscopic enemies. A simple, easy, and
quick way to get these resources into your daily diet, is by consuming organic chlorella and organic spirulina, types of whole food algae. Both have been shown in Scientific Studies to
help stimulate and boost the immune system.
In order for your immune system to stay strong, it needs
regular tests to stay ready for battle.
“If you don’t use it, you lose it.”
The best thing to do during a test to your defense system, is to support
it with proper hydration, plenty of sleep, and providing it with real whole
In all wars, it is important that you support
your soldiers. Therefore, the single
best way to defend yourself and your family from the countless enemies, is to
develop a strong unwavering defense system, by supporting your soldiers, your