We all know that vitamins and minerals play an important role in maintaining our health and well being. There are 13 vitamins that our body requires to fight diseases and to function properly. Vitamin B has 8 different types of vitamins. One of them, vitamin B3 is also known as niacin or nicotinic acid.
Niacin is one of the most important vitamins in the vitamin B family. Vitamin B3 is one of the more stable water-soluble vitamins and is minimally susceptible to damage by air, light, and heat.
Niacin is very important to our well-being, it assists metabolism, digestion, energy production, improved blood circulation, it can help lower high cholesterol and is vital to a healthy nervous system, alleviating nervousness, mental disorders and suicidal tendencies, it enhances insulin secretion and has been reported to benefit new cases of diabetes.
Severe deficiencies can bring about symptoms of Pellagra ( rare nowadays). Milder deficiencies are common such as fatigue, indigestion, bad breath, arthritis, headaches, high cholesterol. Niacin has been used to successfully treat clinical depression and schizophrenia.
If you are pregnant, have diabetes, glaucoma, gout, liver disease or peptic ulcers use niacin supplements with caution they may elevate blood sugar levels and cause liver damage if taken for long periods. You are best to use natural sources.
Natural Sources include asparagus, cabbage, cauliflower, courgettes, chicken, mackerel, mushrooms, salmon, spirulina, squash, sunflower seeds, tomatoes, tuna, turkey, whole wheat, almonds, seeds, beans, green leafy vegetables, carrots, turnips and celery.
Steam and eat the floret heads and juice the main stem as it’s where you’ll find all the nutrients. Hugely powerful vegetable and used at the Hippocrates Institute to help fight cancer. Great to eat as sprouts too!
Broccoli evolved from a wild cabbage plant on the continent of Europe. Indications point to the vegetable being known 2,000 years ago. Since the Roman Empire broccoli has been considered a valuable food among the Italians, it was brought to England by the sculptor Peter Sheemakers although the exact year is not known he was born in 1691 and died in 1781 so sometime between those dates.
Vitamins, minerals and extras
B1, B2, B3, B5, B6 B9 C, K, E, beta-carotene, folic acid, Calcium, iron, phosphorus, potassium, sulphur, magnesium, zinc, selenium, sodium, copper, chorine, chromium The phytonutrients and anti-oxidants in broccoli help boost our defense mechanisms and stimulates production of antibodies to fight cancer. The vitamin K and calcium – help keep bones strong and reduce the risk of osteoporosis. The high levels of vitamin C. can improve energy. Tryptophan gives the feel good factor
High blood pressure; liver problems; constipation, birth defects; digestive system problems; eye disorders; stomach disorders; reducing tumors; heart disease, and cataracts while promoting a strong immune system and supporting optimal gastrointestinal function. Is antiviral, antibacterial and anti cancer. The high amount of Vitamin C content aids iron absorption, prevents cataracts and helps with common colds as an antihistamine. Rich fibre content enhance GI tract and helps reduce cholesterol levels. Helps prevent and control other conditions including Alzheimer’s, diabetes, arthritis and the ageing process, asthma, migraine, varicose veins, chrons, celiac, diverticulitis, IBS, sun damage by helping skin to detoxify and repair itself, COPD, SAD and depression.
For those who suffer from kidney problems ( stones etc ) it would be advisable to limit the amount of Broccoli consumed due to it’s moderate amount of oxalates.
Juice or smoothie?
Juice. Broccoli has got a spicy taste to it when juiced, so only use a small amount and mix with plenty of other ingredients.
You can juice the stem, have the florets raw in your salad or lightly stem, however you eat it – it is delicious so enjoy!
According to a study conducted by researchers from the University of Liverpool in collaboration with Scottish and Swedish researchers, Extracts from broccoli and plantain may help boost the stomach’s defences against infection,
A study conducted by researchers from the Institute of Food at Norwich in the United Kingdom, found that a chemical naturally occurring in broccoli may actually block the development of tumors in people with a certain genetic trait.
Bananas are the perfect snack, they come in their own handy wrapper and they are well known as one of the greatest sources of natural energy. Bananas are often eaten pre or post exercise as they are a terrific source of sodium and surprisingly contain 84% water. Eat greener bananas for quicker release energy and browner bananas for slower release energy
Vitamins, minerals and extras
A, B1, B2, B3, B6, C, E, K, Beta-carotene, Folate, Potassium, Magnesium, Calcium, Sodium, Phosphorus, Selenium, Chromium, Manganese, and small amounts of Copper, Iodine, Iron.
They contain sucrose, fructose and glucose which provide an instant energy boost as well as a sustained and controlled release of blood sugar; Great for the immune booster; Staving off symptoms of PMS; Helping lower cholesterol, and blood pressure, great for the stomach; They are also a fantastic source of amino acids, the building bricks of protein.
Eating bananas can help with constipation, relief of heartburn, morning sickness, stomach ulcers and cut the risk of strokes.
The Tryptophan in bananas can help improve mood, the Potassium has been found to assist students by making them more alert.
If you have a latex allergy, it may be wise to stay away from bananas. or ensure you only buy organic.
Juice or smoothie?
WARNING – Bananas do not juice! Bananas add thickness and fibre to smoothies
If you have some bananas that are looking a little brown, peal them and pop them in the freezer. Next time you make a smoothie add the frozen banana straight into the blender or eat them as a gorgeous natural ice cream!
For mosquito bites – rub the affected area with the underside of the banana skin.
For warts – take a small piece of banana, place underside on wart and secure with a plaster.
Run out of boot polish, try this, rub the inside of the banana skin directly onto the shoe – polish with a dry cloth.
A study published in the Archives of Internal Medicine also confirms that eating high fiber foods, such as bananas, helps prevent heart disease. Almost 10,000 American adults participated in this study and were followed for 19 years. People eating the most fiber, 21 grams per day, had 12% less coronary heart disease (CHD) and 11% less cardiovascular disease (CVD) compared to those eating the least, 5 grams daily. Those eating the most water-soluble dietary fiber fared even better with a 15% reduction in risk of CHD and a 10% risk reduction in CVD.
Data reported in a study published in the Archives of Ophthalmology indicates that eating 3 or more servings of fruit per day may lower your risk of age-related macular degeneration (ARMD), the primary cause of vision loss in older adults, by 36%, compared to persons who consume less than 1.5 servings of fruit daily.
In this study, which involved over over 100,000 women and men, researchers evaluated the effect of study participants’ consumption of fruits; vegetables; the antioxidant vitamins A, C, and E; and carotenoids on the development of early ARMD or neovascular ARMD, a more severe form of the illness associated with vision loss. Food intake information was collected periodically for up to 18 years for women and 12 years for men.