Standard C: The online teacher plans, designs, and incorporates strategies to encourage active learning, application, interaction, participation, and collaboration in the online environment.
Standard E: The online teacher models, guides, and encourages legal, ethical, and safe behavior related to technology use.
Standard J: The online teacher interacts in a professional, effective manner with colleagues, parents, and other members of the community to support students’ success.
Answer in a complete paragraph response: How has the Participate module prepared you to meet each standard listed above? Link to or provide specific examples from your work in Participate. What strategies will you take away from the Participate module and apply to your teaching? What lessons were most beneficial for you?
Standard C: The Participate module helped me to prepare to meet this standard specifically because of Section 2: Digital Resource and Section 3: Civility. The specific lesson that I will apply to my online teach is the Participate 2- Collecting Reputable Digital Resources. This lesson specifically support the the standard because it allowed me to find all the great resources out there for teaching with digital tools and provided a time/space for me to think of how to incorporate and infuse them into my current teaching.
Standard E The Participate module helped me prepare to meet this standard specifically because of Section 3: Civility and Section 4: Vigilance. The specific lesson that I will apply to my online teaching is the Participate 3- Digital Resources and Netiquette. The lesson specifically supports the standard and has allowed me to create an introductory lesson for my students. I do believe making a whole group conscious effort will prevent poor digital citizenship among st students. This lesson also allowed me to better understand the proper online usage.
Standard J: The Participate module helped me prepare to meet this standard specifically because of Section 1: Citizenship . The specific lesson that I will apply to my online teaching is the Participate 1 – Joining a DLC. This lesson specifically supports the standards and has allowed me to actually join other DLC. I have already seen results from joining DLC – I have gotten some great lessons and ideas for use of digital tools!