Did you know that if you drop a spoon, someone will kiss you soon? Did you ever hear that three spiders crawling on the wall are a sign you will soon hear of a death? Or did you know that if rabbits play in a dusty road, rain is on its way? These beliefs are folk customs found in North America. Discover more, including: ways to predict the future weather lore good luck superstitions. Folklore is shared through customs and traditions. These are patterns that shape our lives. Even in todays world, we still depend on these old ways to make sense out of life.
Did you know that todays jolly Santa Claus was originally a Catholic bishop? Or that Santa Claus is connected to Saturn, an ancient Roman god? Or that in some places, Santa rides a camel? Christmas is a holiday of light and giving, and Santa Claus has become a traditional symbol for the seasons deepest meanings. Learn more about: Santa the Christ Child Christmas animals the Wise Men Christmas plants Christmas songs and cards. Across North America, Christmas is an occasion for love and joy and celebration. Discover the traditions and folklore that make this holiday so special.
Does your family have a favorite holiday meal? What are your birthday traditions? Do the older people in your family tell stories about their childhood and what life was like when they were young? All these are parts of family folklore. Tell Me a Story will help you better understand: what family is. the ways the generations are linked together. how families relate to each other. how families pass along a heritage for the future. We get strength from our familys pastand this sort of folklore also gives us hope for the future.
Do you know who started the first volunteer fire company in the United States? Do you know who the first woman firefighter was? Or did you know that firefighters trace their heritage back to the knights of the Crusades? Sirens and Smoke is full of stories of bravery and tradition. Youll read about: the brave guards who fought fire in ancient Greek and Roman communities. the long-ago firefighters who battled the great fires that swept through Europes big cities. the community spirit that grew in the New World. the African Americans and women who added their strengths to fighting fires. September 11, 2001, when firefighters demonstrated their heroism. Fire can be an enemybut down through the ages, firefighters have risked their lives to protect others against it. Their folklore reveals a long tradition of courage.
A patchwork quilt . . . a handmade mandolin . . . a rag doll . . . a wooden chairall these things are examples of folk arts and crafts. They are useful objects that are also beautiful. Learn about various kinds of folk art, including: furniture toys religious objects musical instruments quilts, clothes, and other fabric arts. In folk traditions, art is a part of everyday life. And people still enjoy folk art today.
You may turn on the CD player or the radio when you want to hear musicbut once, in the days before modern technology, music was enjoyed whenever groups of people got together. You probably know some folk songs, a song that was passed along from person to person. Learn about: types of folk songs folk instruments folk musics European and African roots Cajun music the music of Appalachia Hispanic music todays folk music. Modern musicRock, Country, R&B, and moreis rooted deep in North Americas musical folklore. And folk music is still alive and well today.
Have you heard these common proverbs? Let sleeping dogs lie. Where theres smoke theres fire. You can lead a horse to water, but you cant make him drink. Or what about these riddles? What is black and white and red (read) all over? Why did the chicken cross the road? Why is 6 afraid of 7? Proverbs and riddles are tiny, bite-size pieces of folklore. They make us think. They tease our brains. They may make us laugh. But most of all, they tell us something about who we are and how we see the world.