A polarizing filter will initially inconspicuous gray, but look once through and turn it slowly in front of your eye, you see how reflections on glass surfaces, lacquered furniture and other shiny surfaces disappear and reappear. This is used in photography for striking images. You will discover the secret of the polarization filter.
The small polarizing filter basics
If you want to understand how the polarizing filter works, you need some knowledge of physics: light propagates as vibration is not about how the sound or a wave on the water surface, but like the waves in a long string, you quickly at one end move back and forth. You can move vertically, horizontally, or perform at any angle. In light of natural light sources also waves occur in every direction of oscillation. However, this changes when the light falls obliquely on reflective surfaces. The oscillating perpendicular to the surface portions of the light have a bigger reflected so that the light reflections consist of polarized light. The polarizing filter uses the reverse effect, let through by certain transparent materials only light with a certain level of vibration. When polarized light passes through the polarizing filter, it will therefore only be allowed to pass unhindered when the polarization planes of light and filter match.
Apply polarizing filters in photography right
With the polarizing filter on the lens reflex, such as the Canon EOS, however, can be avoided not only reflections. The scattered light in the atmosphere ensures that even a cloudless sky appears rather pale blue. The filter also acts in the atmosphere: Depending on the position of the sun and the viewing direction, the scattered light is more or less strongly polarized. With the polarizing filter therefore provide a stronger in your photos. The effect is strongest when the sunlight just coming from the side – but he also takes with altitude. Do not forget the Polarizer therefore especially in winter sports in the mountains.
Before you buy a polarizing filter, you should consider one more detail: light can be not only linearly polarized, as described previously, but also with a rotating polarization plane. Polarizer that polarize circularly, do not differ in their effect on the photograph. Linear polarized light, however, can interfere with the automatic functions of cameras that work with partially transparent mirrors. Various models from the Canon EOS-series can be found here.
The polarizing filter – a practical tool in many shooting situations
Clear Polarizer reflexes and provide expressive photos with bright colors. Note, however: The linear polarizing filter can irritate the sensors for autofocus and exposure. The circular polarizing filters are however on the safe side.