Cold sores are small and painful fluid-filled blisters. It is caused by the virus known as Herpes Simplex Virus (HSP). It is commonly known as fever blisters. It develops around the lip or around the mouth. Children under 5 are mostly likely to be ill from a primary infection.
Curing time averages anyplace from a few days to various weeks based upon on how and how quick the sores are handled, attempt some home remedies to quick cure.
Symptoms of Cold Sores :
- Reddish gums
- Swollen gums (gingitivis)
- Difficult in swallowing
- A high temperature and a head ache
- Blisters inside the mouth (stomatitis)
Causes of Cold Sores :
- Skin to skin contact such as kissing
- Emotion stress
- Tiredness/feeling runs down
- Strong sunlight on the lips
- An injury to the mouth or a dental procedure
Fact on home remedies:
There are numerous natural ways to heal cold sores. Let’s have a look at some simple and natural home remedies that make cold sores go away.
1. Ice pack
One of the fastest and simplest methods to heal cold sore pain is to use an ice pack. Ice will provide instant relief is the swelling.
Things required: Ice cubes
HSV thrives in wet, warm places which explain why cold sores around the mouth are so common. To stop the virus in its tracks, apply ice directly to the blemish.
2. Aloe Vera
The cooling and soothing aloe vera gel can be used to treat cold sores. It helps to soothe and reduce the pain, swelling and irritation especially around the mouth region. Many people who are experiencing frequent cold sores swear by aloe vera gel to dry up blisters and promote faster healing.
Things required: Aloe vera gel
Pour a small amount of aloe vera gel into the clear container and apply with a fresh cotton swab.
One of the most popular and commonly used home remedies for Herpes is lemon. Lemon is very effective when used during the start of Herpes outbreak.
Things required: Lemon
Cut lemon pieces into halves and place the open area directly on the sores.
4. Cold milk
Milk is known to be very good natural remedy for sores on body. It has soothing properties that provide relief from the pain and encourage heavily.
Things required: Milk
Soak a cotton ball in cold milk and apply on the affected region. Keep the compress in place for 10 minutes and rinse off.
5. Baking soda
Baking soda is known for its alkaline properties. This is an old home remedy used to treat cold sores and blisters.
Things required: Baking Soda
Take some baking soda and add water. Mix well to make a paste. Apply this paste on the infection. This will help dry up and heal the blisters.
Onions have properties that boost the immune system.
Things required: Onions
Take a silver of raw onions and put it into the cold sore. Hold it in place for few minutes. This remedy would accelerate the process of healing.
7. Pepper mint
Pepper mint is an anti-viral in nature and prevents cold sores. It has strong penetrative effects which attack the virus as soon as it comes into contact with it.
Things required: Pepper Mint
Consume 1 cup of pepper mint tea regularly to prevent the outbreaks of cold sores .If you don’t like the tea, consume it in capsule form. The dosage should be to capsules a day.
Honey is a natural home remedy for a lot of health problems and heals Herpes faster. Despite having high moisturizing and soothing properties, honey is also anti-viral in nature. This makes honey a natural agent to cure blisters and prevent the spread of infections.
Things required: Honey
Dab a small amount of honey on the affected region and leave over night.
9. Tea bags
The tannic acid present in the tea helps to check the growth of the virus.
Things required: Tea Bags
You can apply a cold and wet tea bag directly on the blisters especially if there has been acute swelling and inflammation. You can also apply warm tea bags. Application of the tea bags for at least 5-6 days should give you some relief against the pain and burning sensation.
10. Petroleum jelly
Ensure that you keep the cold sores covered at all times to protect it from exposure. Petroleum jelly provides a thick layer of protection and sometimes even prevents the infection from being passed to another person.
Things required: Petroleum Jelly
Apply a thin layer of petroleum jelly on the affected area and leave it for sometimes. This helps to subside the pain and the burning sensation completely.
If the bothersome blisters do show up, there are a decent number of home remedies for cold sores that may ease your discomfort and help diminish their appearance.
Garlic is normally anti-microbial and can be applied straight to cold sores to minimize swelling, speed recovery.
Things required: Garlic
Cut fresh garlic and keep a piece towards the cold sore until finally it stops painful. Alternatively, you may want to obtain an all-natural garlic juice like this one from Garlic Valley Farms, add a teaspoon of the juice into a little pan, and implement with a fresh cotton swab.
12. Oregano Oil
The organic oils in oregano are strongly anti-microbial, While it is one of the more highly-priced natural remedies on this record, use of oregano oil to cold sores can help to decrease swelling and enhance faster curing by eliminating the virus inside of the blisters.
Things required: Oregano Oil
Implement a couple of falls of oregano essential oil straight to cold sores using a q-tip and keep in mind to get rid of the applicator right after each use to protect against re-infection or distribute of the virus.
Lysine is an amino acid that some reports have shown to support treat and protect against cold sore breakouts by obstructing l-arginine, which is a different amino acid that is needed for viral growth.
Lysine-rich foods consist of fish, meat (chicken, lamb, beef), dairy items, mung bean sprouts, and beans.
Get a lysine health supplement, the quantity is usually 500-1000 mg every day obtained on an vacant stomach, the safe control of amino acid lysine is less than 3000 milligrams a day time, so don’t get any more than the suggested dosage.