Physical description Edit
Emplotuses are a species of omnivorous animals that live on the hottest part of the planet Venus called Veni. They’re a mixture of the traits of earth reptiles, mammals, and insects. It physically favors a reptile with it’s scaly skin and a mammal with it’s pointed beak, twelve legs, and a hump on top of it’s head. The one characteristic that comes from an insect is the wings on an Emplotus. Male Emplotuses gives live birth to their young, like female earth mammals do. They give brith to six offsprings once a year and breastfeed them.
Emplotuses are solitary animals after being taught how to hunt by their parents. In the beginning of every year, Emplotuses looks for a new mate during a special time called ‘cuffing season’. At this time of the year, female Emplotuses stops at an attractive male and lick his toes. If her taste buds are pleased, then she will create offsprings that year which will lead the males to get pregnant and not the females. These animals are matriarchal, and the females are in charge of the relationship.
On the home of Emplotuses, Venus, there are extremely hot temperatures. The surface is covered with clouds which causes it to be over 800 degrees farenheit. The average temperature on this planet is 864 degrees fahrenheit. These temperatures are caused by the thick dense clouds that cover Venus. This planet is dominated by volcanoes and is a rock-like place. Emplotuses lives in the high mountains of Venus meaning that they live closer to the surface which has a minimum average temperature of 870 degrees fahrenheit.
Physical Adaptations Edit
The physical traits of an Emplotus help it survive and its dry, desert habitat. These traits include their penetrating beaks that pierces through their prey for a lovely meal, their scaly skin that absorbs moisture and ahump that holds fat tissues to store water after a metabolic process. Also, Emplotuses have wings that help them soar through the air and twelve legs that help them move swiftly on land. These adaptations are most beneficial when escaping from predators. They’re the perfect fit for their environment.
Behavioral Adaptations Edit
As a reaction to their humid environment, Emplotuses are nocturnal. They are most active during the night when the temperature drops a little and becomes cooler. They also use echolocation while hunting during the dark hours of the night.