Recycling means using waste materials to manufacture new products. Materials like cans, glass, paper and textiles are valuable resources that can be used to make new products. Information is contained below on what can be recycled.
Bag for Life
We provide a number of recycling centres throughout the district for recycling glass, paper, textiles, oil, car batteries and cans.
- The bins are emptied on a four-weekly cycle with the grey bin and blue bin being lifted once a fortnight and brown every four weeks.
- We offer, free of charge at your request, blue bins in the following size; 240 litre (standard size bin) and 360 litre (large bin).
- We only offer, free of charge a brown bin in the standard 240ltr size.
- Any additional bins requested shall be provided within 10 working days.
- On your day of collection, please place your bin on the kerbside by 7.00am Monday to Friday or 6.00am on Saturday.
- Where can I recycle helps you to find out where you can recycle near to you
Safety concerns for household batteries
Members of the public are being urged not put their old batteries into household waste bins after it emerged that they can cause fire and even explosions if mixed with domestic waste.
The call to use recycling points comes in the wake of fires in household waste and recycling collection vehicles in England. The Health and Safety Executive has recently said: "There is a risk that batteries can cause fires when they are disposed of, particularly when mixed in with other domestic waste materials, for example, in the back of a refuse collection vehicle."
There have recently been two fires attributed to being caused by batteries placed in household refuse and recycling. In March, a collection vehicle for East Northamptonshire suffered a fire with fire crews identifying the cause of the fire as a nickel-cadmium battery.
Members of the public are being urged to safely dispose of batteries at designated recycling points. West Lothian Council provides collection arrangements for old batteries at each of its six Community Recycling Centres, and similar collection points can also be found in supermarkets and shops throughout West Lothian.
Further information on the potential hazards associated with unsafe disposal of portable batteries can be viewed on the website - Lets Recycle - Battery Recycling.
If your bin contains materials other than those listed, we will advise you by placing a sticker on the bin.
This bin shall not be uplifted along with the other recycling bins as it will contaminate the whole load. Contamination must be removed and placed in the grey bin.
Please remove any contamination and present your bin on the next collection day.
Households that continue to contaminate will be visited by the Councils Waste Services Officers who will offer advice on recycling.
If you have opted out of the recycling scheme and your bin is only emptied once a fortnight, it is not possible for you to have a larger bin as these are only for people that are part of the recycling scheme.
New 5p charge on carrier bags
The Scottish Parliament has passed legislation that will require all retailers (food and non-food) to charge a minimum of 5p for each single-use carrier bag (including paper, those made from some plant based materials and plastic), from 20 October 2014. The aim is to encourage bag re-use and reduce the visual impact of litter. For more information please visit the Carrier Bag Charge Scotland website.
You can get more details on how you can help recycle more from:
Zero Waste Scotland
Tel: 01786 433 930