Here is a fun activity to get students to stop using boring words and expand their vocabulary. This synonym activity has students write a "boring word" onto an ice cream cone and then synonyms are written on the ice cream scoops.
Why not have each student be responsible for a different word and then put them on a wall for a great wall display.
Below is a template for the ice cream cones. Just print them on colored paper or have your students color them.
If you would like more ideas for vocabulary activities visit my vocabulary activities page.
Here's a brand new game to help expand your students vocabulary, Greek and Latin Roots Go Fish.
The download includes two decks of cards, a handout for Greek and Latin roots, and directions on how to play the game. Learning Greek and Latin Roots can help students recognize patterns of meaning between words which will help them when they come across unfamiliar or new words.
This game will be available for free on this site until Monday. I release my new products for free to reward those who follow my blog or who like be on Facebook. You can do both on the top right of this page. The free give away is over you can now purchase this game for $2.00 by clicking the BUY NOW button below.
You can get these worksheets now on the new websites shop. If you need more ideas for vocabulary games visit my vocabulary games page.
Thank you for everyone who came by and downloaded the free vocabulary journal templates yesterday. It turned out to be the busiest day on this site yet. The free give away for the templates is over now, but you can purchase them by clicking on the BUY NOW button below. I've also included in this pack for new templates that weren't in the download yesterday. This new templates are to use to label vocabulary journal entries for academic vocabulary like Math, Science, Social Studies and Language Arts. Check out the new templates in the pictures below. You can get these worksheets now on the new websites shop.
To see more vocabulary activities that you can do with your students visit my Vocabulary Activities page.
Having students keep vocabulary journals is a great way for students to organize, learn, and review vocabulary words. The templates that I've created let students record there understanding of the word, mark their favorite words, define the vocabulary term in their own words, draw a picture, find synonyms and antonyms and finally write a sentence for the word. These will be available as a free download for today only so get yours quickly. Afterwards they will be available for purchase from this site. Get your free copy by clicking on one of the pictures below or the download link. I have free give-aways of my new products to reward those who subscribe to my blog or who like me on Facebook. You can do both on the sidebar to the right.
The free give away is over. You can get these worksheets now on the new websites shop.
Antonym bingo card
Here is a quick and easy way to get your students to expand their vocabulary and have them practice matching synonyms and antonyms. There are 8 game cards in this free download. I recommend putting the draw cards on different colored paper so that you can easily sort them. You can download the file by clicking below or on the picture. Enjoy!
You can find more vocabulary games on my vocabulary games page.
I've finally completed the 3rd grade version of Flyswatter Vocabulary. This game has 8 weeks worth of vocabulary words to use, along with blank templates to make more of your own. I've also added some graphic organizers to the pack. You can see previews of them in the pictures below. You can purchase this e-book for $3.00 by clicking on the buy now button below.
You can get these worksheets now on the new websites shop.
I found this idea while on Pinterest and thought that I would share it with you.
Have you ever thought of using Pictionary to review vocabulary words with your class. Its a great activity for your visual learners and games always make reviewing vocabulary words much more fun.
For this to be a really effective game, when you first introduce a word, have your student make a visual representation of the word. This way, when your students have to figure out a way to draw the word cluster, temperature, or prediction, they have already had practice making a drawing of the vocabulary term. They will then be able to better recognize other students attempts at representing that same vocabulary word.
The following is a set of steps that you could use to play Pictionary in your classroom.
For more great ideas to use as vocabulary games visit my vocabulary games page.
My Books on Amazon