The human nervous system is made up of neurons or nerve cells, and these nerve cells function with electrical impulses and chemical signaling. http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Neuron Our nervous system is very sensitive to our thoughts. Remember we said that a thought is an impulse of energy and intelligence. Due to energy it moves, and due to intelligence it takes a direction. Thoughts are basic to all other active levels of our life and everything we do – the level of speech, behaviour, intention, or action. Persons whose nervous systems can maintain tranquility, function much more efficiently than the ones who function with restlessness. Restlessness affects brain functioning, making us impulsive and causing wrong, erratic, or unwanted and antisocial behaviour. On the extreme level, this is the cause of criminal behaviour. That is why we were asked to “Be Still.” All we need is a few minutes of stillness morning and evening to make our day energetic, creative, peaceful, and productive, and our nights rejuvenating to mind and body. This prevents the accumulation of stress from day to day.
A nervous system that is functioning properly, will be able to allow energy to flow in the right way throughout the body. This will provide the proper quantity and quality of energy for the different organs and functions, and maintain perfect health. This is a natural law. The cells, functioning in the right way, will support proper levels of energy for the tissues, the organs and the entire body. The cells will also renew and repair themselves as needed, and the maintenance of perfect health is assured.
We see then, that we create our own energy. Pure thoughts are positive and they create the right energy which will be translated into chemical signals, which will become the building blocks for our moods, our behaviour and our life. They create bliss, happiness, joy and other positive emotions. When we experience the positive emotions, we are automatically more tolerant, altruistic, energetic, and creative. We live happier and more productive and peaceful lives. Our societies are more peaceful, and loving, and the light of God shines in our lives. Our environments are renewed. We intuitively know right from wrong, and we become stronger in right day by day and weaker in wrong. This is the basis of a peaceful society, which is the basis of a peaceful, powerful nation, the basis of a peaceful world.
We said before, that Natural Laws are laws of nature that keep the entire universe functioning in a proper and orderly way. Natural Laws keep the sun shining. Other natural laws keep the earth rotating on its axis, and the moon in its place for the proper lunar cycles on earth, ensuring proper seasons at the right times. This includes the proper functioning of our own bodies. http://www.maharishiayurvedaindia.com/ The violation of these natural laws creates resistance in the nervous system, and stress is the result.
When we make wrong choices, either from tiredness, exhaustion, negativity in any way, a stress is created in the nervous system. As habits are formed by repeated actions, we may keep doing the same thing over and over and make things worse. Example, we know that we are supposed to breathe fresh air, but for some reason or other, someone may start smoking. That smoke goes through the body in the same way as fresh air is supposed to, leaving nicotine and countless other toxins in every part of the body, in every cell. Nicotine is sticky and toxic, prevents the proper functioning of the lungs, brain and body as a whole. As like attracts like, the more nicotine in the body, the more the body craves it, the stronger the habit grows and an addiction is created. The nervous system functions better when it is rested, so if this person takes regular rest that is deep enough, or for example, if this person start the practice of Transcendental Meditation, the nervous system will try to eliminate the nicotine and restore the health of the body, freeing it from the addiction. http://www.t-m.org.uk/research/37.shtml
Another example is food. When one eats food that is not appropriate, or at the wrong time, example; just before going to sleep, the digestive system cannot digest and absorb it in the proper way. Toxins are created and the body stores it. We gain weight and feel the heaviness and apathy, lack of energy. The mind is dull, and thinking, focusing, and memory become difficult. This means that the body is not functioning as it should. Some natural law has been violated and part of the solution is to take rest and allow the body to restore balance.
When we are catching a cold, if we take rest, we automatically feel better. The cold goes away. Do we ask ourselves why and how the cold went away? We take it for granted. If we are tired and cannot go any further or cannot work anymore, we stop and go to rest or sleep. We wake up and feel much better. The mind is clearer, we can get back to work because we have more energy, memory is better, we are more tolerant and our ability to focus is better. These are everyday events. If we take deeper rest, the results are more dramatic.
Transcendental Meditation is deeper than just closed eyes rest and deeper than sleep. The best way to check this is by checking the consumption of Oxygen during the restful state. Several scientific studies have been conducted to check the consumption of Oxygen during Transcendental meditation. Transcendental Meditation is the meditation technique that has been the most researched to date. More than 600 scientific studies have been conducted at more than 250 independent research institutions and medical schools in more than 33 countries worldwide. It is a natural, effortless technique that allows the mind to settle down to deeper and deeper levels of rest and experience the state of silence, stillness within. After 15 to 20 minutes, we open the eyes and feel refreshed, happy, calm. http://www.sciencemag.org/content/167/3926/1751.short
Because of the deep rest experienced by the body and nervous system during the practice of Transcendental Meditation, the blood pressure normalizes after just a few months of regular daily practice for 15 to 20 minutes morning and evening. http://www.tmeducation.org/research-national-institutes-of-health
Diabetes also normalizes with the practice of Transcendental Meditation http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Fzb0H2emtyw
“AmericanCollegeof Cardiology Symposium Highlights
Research on TM and Cardiovascular Disease
Speakers highlighted research on the effects of the Transcendental Meditation technique on cardiovascular disease in a symposium entitled “Integrative Cardiology” during the annual meeting of theAmericanCollegeof Cardiology, which was attended by 30,000 cardiologists inAtlantafrom March 11 to 14, 2006. Speakers at the symposium, which was attended by over 300 people, included:
Robert Schneider, M.D., F.A.C.C., Director of the NIH-Funded Institute for Natural Medicine and Prevention atMaharishiUniversity of Management inFairfield,Iowa
Brian Olshansky, M.D., F.A.C.C., Professor and Director, Cardiac Electrophysiology, Department of Internal Medicine at the University of Iowa Carver College of Medicine and co-chair of the symposium
Noel Bairey Merz, M.D.,F.A.C.C., Director of the Women’s Heart Center and the Preventive and the Rehabilitative Cardiac Center at Cedars-Sinai Heart Institute in Los Angeles
O.T. Randall, M.D., Professor of Cardiology atHowardUniversitySchool of Medicine inWashington,DC.”
This study was done to show the effectiveness of The TM Technique for reducing heart disease, hypertension, stroke cholesterol, atherosclerosis and heart failure.
There is one sure way to know that one is stressed – one feels tired and restless or even pain. Stress in the body, in the Nervous System, inhibits the functioning of the brain, central nervous system, and other important parts of the body. When nervousness is felt, the stress has already become strong enough to affect the physical and prevent the body from functioning properly. In other words, an imbalance has been created, preparing the way for what we call illness. In a future article, we will discuss Ayurveda, an ancient system of Natural Medicine which was safeguarded inIndiafor more than six thousand years.
The greater the number of persons in any society who are stressed, tired and ill, the greater the possibility of having persons who malfunction mentally, because when stress intensifies in individual nervous systems, collective stress is created. This is when we see outbreaks of wrong-doing and criminal behaviour, accidents, hospitalizations and abuse of weaker persons, and random crime. People who understand this should take the responsibility to lessen the stress in their own nervous systems and lead the way in becoming more peaceful, creative and productive. When the mind is calm, clear and rested, we are able to grasp the many opportunities that our country has to offer, and live more lucrative lives. If we can reduce collective stress, the abuse of children and women that we see today would become a thing of the past. Criminal tendencies would be greatly reduced and the society would return to a state of peaceful, happy and productive living.
Natural Healing leads to a return to normal functioning of body, mind and spirit in a normal, natural way. When we take proper rest, the body normalized itself, and we enjoy better health. We should practice natural healing everyday through taking herbs, fresh pure air, pure organic food, wholesome and inspiring music, massages, wholesome activity of the senses. This includes our spiritual practices regardless of our religion, creed, race or belief and even the healthy interactions we have with the people we meet everyday.
This knowledge is not new, it is as old as time, but every so often, knowledge is lost and then comes the revival.
In the not too distant past, everyone believed that the earth was flat because this is what we seem to see with our eyes. Anyone who dared say that it was otherwise would suffer dire consequences. When the truth was finally accepted, the entire civilization advanced. People were then free to explore this truth in their own way. We seem to be going through a similar phase in modern times. We seem to use 5 -10% of our mental thinking potential and we leave the other 90 to 95% unused. This is the basis of all the wrong-doing we see in the world today. We can develop 100%, full mental potential or the state of Enlightenment which we look upon as so exotic. Know that it is our birthright, everyone of us. This is what natural healing leads to in a natural, spontaneous way. http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wXneA6hHLGc
Persons wanting to know more about Natural Healing and or Transcendental Meditation may contact me for more information. If one can eliminate the stress on the nervous system when non-communicable chronic diseases are present in the body, the illness becomes much easier for the medical doctors to treat, because stress is the basis of most illnesses.
Copyright 2012 Dominica News Online, DURAVISION INC. All Rights Reserved. This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten or distributed.