DISC stands for Dominance, Influence, Steadiness, and Conscientiousness and completing the assessment helps predict your behavior towards others and the everyday things you do.
The Disc personality test doesn’t measure intelligence or mental health, it tests your preferences, tendencies – your unique behavioral style. It will help you to build better relationships with the people around you, to work more effectively with each other, to resolve and prevent arguments in your team,…
Research shows that behavioral characteristics can be grouped into four personality styles. People with similar styles shows specific behavioral characteristics that are common to that style. The combination of the four personality styles makes a person unique.
Don’t forget that there is no right or wrong, everyone has their own strengths, weaknesses, and challenges. None of the profiles are better than the other, every personal style is unique!
Dominant types are ambitious and dominant. D-types are focused on results and challenges. They are assertive people who work fast, live fast and make decisions quickly and objectively. D-types have excellent communication skills and are very charismatic, they are often seen as leaders.
D’s are motivated by results, actions, and challenges.
Influence types are social and enjoy being around people. I- types are cheerful and optimistic. I’s are known to be warm and welcoming, and they are concerned about the feelings of others. Their openness and social awareness are considered charming to those who interact with them.I-types are motivated by recognition, fun, and popularity.
Steadiness types are patient and are happy to help others. S-types are gentle and open to new people and new surroundings, though they will need some time to adapt before opening up and showing their truly warm spirit. They are great listeners and motivators.
S-types are motivated by appreciation, good relationships, and tranquility.
Conscientious types are often seen as the introvert type. They usually prefer to work independently for long periods of focus work rather than multi-tasking. C-types are critical, objective and have a keen eye for detail, procedures, and quality. Usually, they are diplomatic in their dealings and are analytical thinkers.
C-types are motivated by quality and perfection.
In summary, the disc quadrants can be separated into halves. The dominance and conscientious types are more task-oriented while the influence and steadiness types are more people-oriented. The steadiness and conscientious types are more reserved versus the more active dominance and influence types.