Download and read online A Guide Through Narnia in PDF and EPUB A Guide Through Narnia was one of the first in-depth studies of C.S. Lewis's seven Chronicles of Narnia. The focus and organization of this revised and expanded edition is on why Lewis wrote the books as fairy tales, the best "Form" for his ideas. It is written for both students and scholars who want to expand their understanding of these popular classics. Chapters include: -Seeing Pictures: How the books were written, chronological summaries, publication history -Selecting the Ideal Form: Why Lewis chose the fairy tale form, fairy tale elements and style -Seeing Man as Hero: Child heroes -Stealing Past Dragons: Characteristics of religious fantasy, allegory and "supposition," Christian elements -Stepping Through the Door: Themes and effects of fantasy -Dictionary of Names and Places Martha C. Sammons is Professor of English at Wright State University.
Download and read online A Reader s Guide Through the Wardrobe in PDF and EPUB In this interactive, informative book, a Lewis scholar and a literary expert unlock the door to "The Lion, the Witch, and the Wardrobe."
Download and read online Inside Narnia in PDF and EPUB Presents an analysis of C.S. Lewis's "The Lion, the Witch, and the Wardrobe," covering such topics as symbols, hidden meanings, and missed details from each chapter.
Download and read online Planet Narnia in PDF and EPUB For over half a century, scholars have laboured to show that C. S. Lewis's famed but apparently disorganised Chronicles of Narnia have an underlying symbolic coherence, pointing to such possible unifying themes as the seven sacraments, the seven deadly sins, and the seven books of Spenser's Faerie Queene. None of these explanations has won general acceptance and the structure of Narnia's symbolism has remained a mystery. Michael Ward has finally solved the enigma. In Planet Narnia he demonstrates that medieval cosmology, a subject which fascinated Lewis throughout his life, provides the imaginative key to the seven novels. Drawing on the whole range of Lewis's writings (including previously unpublished drafts of the Chronicles), Ward reveals how the Narnia stories were designed to express the characteristics of the seven medieval planets - - Jupiter, Mars, Sol, Luna, Mercury, Venus, and Saturn - - planets which Lewis described as "spiritual symbols of permanent value" and "especially worthwhile in our own generation". Using these seven symbols, Lewis secretly constructed the Chronicles so that in each book the plot-line, the ornamental details, and, most important, the portrayal of the Christ-figure of Aslan, all serve to communicate the governing planetary personality. The cosmological theme of each Chronicle is what Lewis called 'the kappa element in romance', the atmospheric essence of a story, everywhere present but nowhere explicit. The reader inhabits this atmosphere and thus imaginatively gains conna?tre knowledge of the spiritual character which the tale was created to embody. Planet Narnia is a ground-breaking study that will provoke a major revaluation not only of the Chronicles, but of Lewis's whole literary and theological outlook. Ward uncovers a much subtler writer and thinker than has previously been recognized, whose central interests were hiddenness, immanence, and knowledge by acquaintance.
Download and read online Revisiting Narnia in PDF and EPUB ** COMPLETELY UNAUTHORIZED ** Theologians, psychologists, academics, feminists, and fantasists offer humor, insight, and fresh perspectives on the enchanting and beloved Chronicles of Narnia series. Such contributors as fantasists Sarah Zettel and Lawrence Watt-Evans, children's literature scholar Naomi Wood, and C. S. Lewis scholars Colin Duriez and Joseph Pearce discuss topics such as J. R. R. Tolkien and Middle Earth's influence on the conception of Narnia, the relevance of allegory for both Christians and non-Christians, the idea of divine providence in Narnia, and Narnia's influence on modern-day witchcraft. Fans of the wildly popular series will revel in the examination of all aspects of C. S. Lewis and his magical Narnia.
Download and read online Journey Into Narnia in PDF and EPUB Renowned C. S. Lewis scholar Kathryn Lindskoog has here expanded and updated her classic study of Lewis's Narnia series originally titled, "The Lion of Judah in Never-Never Land: The Theology of C.S. Lewis Expressed in his fantasies for Children." Now with the addition of a study guide, including a look at the chronological order of the series of the seven books, the "Journey into Narnia" is filled with abundant and fresh new background information that not only puts the series in its context but explains many of the English terms unfamiliar to the American reader. Ms. Lindskoog provides many Biblical parallels which illumine the plot. These concise insights and applications are designed for personal reading pleasure as well as being practical helpers for teachers, parents and ministers. When C. S. Lewis read the first draft of this manuscript, he commented, "You are in the center of the target everywhere. For one thing, you know my work better than anyone else I've met; certainly better than I do myself.... You (alone of the critics I've met) realize the connection or even the unity of all the books-scholarly, fantastic, theological-and make me appear a single author, not a man who impersonates half a dozen authors, which is what I seem to most. This wins really very high marks indeed." This important text of Lewis scholarship has been copied, widely used but never surpassed.
Download and read online C S Lewis and a Problem of Evil in PDF and EPUB C. S. Lewis was concerned about an aspect of the problem of evil he called subjectivism: the tendency of one's perspective to move towards self-referentialism and utilitarianism. In C. S. Lewis and a Problem of Evil, Jerry Root provides a holistic reading of Lewis by walking the reader through all of Lewis's published work as he argues Lewis's case against subjectivism. Furthermore, the book reveals that Lewis consistently employed fiction to make his case, as virtually all of his villains are portrayed as subjectivists. Lewis's warnings are prophetic; this book is not merely an exposition of Lewis, it is also a timely investigation into the problem of evil.
Download and read online A Family Guide to Narnia in PDF and EPUB This book serves as a simple and practical companion to The Chronicles of Narnia for those who want to discover its biblical and Christian roots and quickly locate the Scriptural references that abound in Lewis' work.
Download and read online The Chronicles of Narnia as Knightly Story in PDF and EPUB Essay from the year 2010 in the subject English - Literature, Works, , language: English, abstract: In their texts, The Chronicles of Narnia, the novel is full of elements of myth. Some of the concepts in the novel are borrowed from Greek Mythology, like the fauns, centaur, dryads, and minotaur, while giants, dwarfs are from the Norse mythology. Also, elements of Christianity are also seen in the novel, such as Aslan the lion, often compared to Jesus Christ. Apart from these, one can trace the various archetypal images, so strongly linked with the one very particular type of the story – that of the quest.
Download and read online Roar in PDF and EPUB Can You Tell Me How to Get to Narnia? You don’t actually have to journey all the way to Narnia to find everything you need to know in one spot (though you might want to anyway)! Roar! A Christian Family Guide to the Chronicles of Narnia is a beautiful volume that unveils a fun-filled world based on intriguing Bible insights for every Narniac! There’s something for everyone—from elementary aged children to their parents. Packed with fun activities, a “Narniac’s Creed,” tips on speaking like a British schoolboy, games, trivia, and more, it’s built on solid teaching: chapter by chapter discussion guides, conversation starters for parents and kids, and Bible parallels that will surprise even the most studious Christian. Now you can get the most out of Narnia—even if you don’t own a wardrobe! “Tell me more about Narnia!” Fans ages four to ninety-four just can’t get enough of C. S. Lewis’s timeless classic, The Chronicles of Narnia. That’s why Roar! takes your family on a one-of-a-kind adventure through every chapter in all seven books!* Peek inside to find: • Interactive features like “Wisdom for Narniacs,” “Kid Test,” “Let’s Talk About It,” “Grown-up Thoughts,” and “Try This at Home” • Helps for parents on big subjects including mythology, magic, violence, and life after death • Fun articles from “Oh, I Wish I Were a Dufflepud!” to “Creature Hall of Fame & Shame” • Indexes of creatures, characters, places, and Bible parallels • A glossary of difficult words • A memorable celebration of the Lord behind the Lion Story Behind the Book C.S. Lewis’ The Chronicles of Narnia have long captivated the hearts, souls, and imaginations of both youth and adults. This December, with the release of Disney’s The Lion, The Witch, and the Wardrobe, a craze among Christians and nonChristians is sure to erupt! Fans will be on the prowl for solid teaching to better understand this make-believe world that holds timeless gems of biblical insight. Now parents, kids, college students, and older Narniacs everywhere will find the answers they need in one convenient source. It’s unapologetically Christian, because that’s how C.S. Lewis was. And, true to form, not a tad of adventurous dust is left behind when readers embark on this exciting journey! From the Trade Paperback edition.
Download and read online C S Lewis in PDF and EPUB Examines the life and works of the British author and scholar, best known for his creation of "The Chronicles of Narnia" series.
Download and read online A Guide to Narnia in PDF and EPUB On December 9th 2005, millions will enter the world of Narnia for the first time. Narnia is a world of intrigue and wonder, created in the mind of the great Christian author, C.S. Lewis. Beneath the surface of the story lies His-story-- a beautiful mataphorical tale of Jesus Christ and God's plan for humanity. By learning the true meaning of this classic tale, our family's movie-going experience will surpass mere entertainment, becoming a life-lesson on the Catholic Faith. Released just in time for the highly-anticipated film, A Guide to Narnia is an indispensable resource that will take you deeper into the story and help you understand C.S. Lewis' original purpose in creating this enchanting series.
Download and read online Seven in PDF and EPUB
Download and read online Choice Books for College Libraries in PDF and EPUB
Download and read online World Authors 1900 1950 in PDF and EPUB Provides almost 2700 articles on twentieth-century authors from all over the world who wrote in English or whose works are available in English translation.