Constantly feel tired? Perhaps it might be a mitochondria problem. Our body is made up of trillions of cells — each one containing an energy “generator” called the mitochondria.
These mitochondria are the ones responsible for converting the food we eat into energy that “powers” our body.
However, stress and toxins from caused by our diet, environment and lifestyle may damage our mitochondria...
Impairing its ability to produce energy — causing some people to feel tired all the time.
PQQ (pyrroloquinoline quinone) is a mineral found in foods such as kiwifruit — and scientists have found that it may help the body to create new mitochondria.
A study performed by researchers at the University of California, Davis, found that within just eight weeks of taking PQQ...
The number of healthy mitochondria more than doubled.
Besides creating more mitochondria, PQQ has been studied to support memory retention, brain function, and better mood. In fact, there are over 175 published studies showing the immense health benefits of PQQ.
Meet inergyPLUS — an energy supplement that men & women worldwide love to add to their daily health regime when they need that extra energy “boost”. With 13 natural herbs & nutrients coming together in a synergistic blend, anyone can have a better shot at having long-lasting energy throughout the day.
After spending hundreds of hours & thousands of dollars reviewing scientific research papers, evaluating clinical human studies & sourcing for the highest quality ingredients...
We identified 3 key pillars for designing inergyPLUS – the all-natural energy supplement that thousands of people worldwide love and trust:
CoQ10 is a natural, vitamin-like compound that all cells need in order to make energy. To put it simply, our body can’t produce energy without CoQ10.
Unfortunately, CoQ10 levels in our body drop as we age. This is why as we grow older, we tend to feel tired more easily.
Recent studies indicate that daily oral intake of CoQ10 for 2 months can increase circulating blood levels of CoQ10 and significant improvement in overall energy levels.
Other proven health benefits include:
Support better heart function, soothe inflammation & block damage from toxins
Remember how each of our cells contains an energy generator called the mitochondria?
Well, scientists have found that taking PQQ helps the body to create new mitochondria and “repair” old ones.
A study performed by researchers at the University of California indicates that within just 8 short weeks of taking PQQ daily... the number of healthy mitochondria in the test subjects’ bodies more than doubled.
This naturally boosts energy levels so we can effortlessly go about our day... without feeling drained.
Other proven health benefits include:
Soothe inflammation, boost concentration & attention, and reduce cholesterol
ALCAR is an amino acid that also helps with energy production by stimulating the breakdown of fats into energy. But that’s not all it does.
It is also a powerful antioxidant that supports brain functions. This is why ALCAR is becoming popular as a brain enhancer supplement.
A study of 96 subjects who took ALCAR daily saw a significant boost to their physical and mental energy, as well as a boost in cognitive functions.
B vitamins are often called the “energy vitamins” because of their important roles in the body’s energy production.
A lack of B vitamins are often cause fatigue, irritability, poor concentration. If you constantly feel tired, there’s a good chance you’re not getting enough.
The surest way to increase energy production in the body is to ensure that the body is not lacking in any. This is why inergyPLUS also contains 7 essential vitamin Bs (for a full list of vitamin Bs, see ingredient label below).
This mushroom has been used in the East for many centuries for its amazing energy boosting ability. It only started gaining popularity in the West after eight Chinese female runners, who broke multiple world records, credited Cordyceps for their extraordinary success.
Today, many researchers believe Cordyceps to be the one of the most effective energy boosters.
Rhodiola is a natural herb that is best known for its amazing abilities to fight fatigue, manage stress levels and support both mental and physical performance.
Russian scientists have studied its benefits extensively for the past 70 years and have found that it may also support healthier brain function, improve sleep quality, and support reduction in fat.
EnXtra® is a trademarked, DNA-authenticated galanga (blue ginger) that provides fast, effective and safe energy.
It is the first and only natural stimulant-free ingredient that has been clinically proven to increase alertness and focus by 30% for up to 5 hours without crash.
When taken with caffeine, it amplifies and prolongs its benefits while also reducing crash and jitters.
Each bottle contains a 30-day supply (60 capsules). Take 2 capsules every morning with or without food. Customers have observed the best effects when they take 2 capsules immediately after waking.
Keto, Paleo & Vegan Friendly
Natural Ingredients, Non-GMO & Stimulant Free
GMP Facility Certfied
Based On Clinical Studies
Note: All reviews below are from actual paying customers. They have been authenticated and verified by Okendo, an independent third party reviewing company.
Just like you, these are ordinary people who simply want more energy and a healthier body. inergyPLUS helped them achieve this in the most natural way possible. All they did was take that first step. Now you can too:
Rest assured that all orders made on this page are one-time purchases. This means that you will not be charged again in the subsequent months. There will not be any recurring billing or hidden charges. When you are ready to reorder, you can purchase again from our website.
30 Day Supply
Instant Savings: $18
90 Day Supply
Instant Savings: $102
($99 for 3 Bottles)
Shipping worth $9.95 (2-7 Days)
180 Day Supply
Instant Savings: $223
($179 for 6 Bottles)
Shipping worth $9.95 (2-7 Days)
Here at Better Body Co, we make sure our customers love their product or we will refund 100% of their investment. We're so confident you'll enjoy inergyPLUS that we'll bear all the risk.
Free Expedited Shipping For 3 Bottles Or More (2-7 Days In The US)
No one likes waiting 21 days or more for their parcel. That's why we've given free expedited shipping on our dime, all so you get to try our products before the week ends.
90-Day, Empty Bottle, 100% Guarantee
Enjoy inergyPLUS for the next 90 days and if you don't love the experience, let us know and we'll make it right for you.
Risk-Free Returns & Shipping
Should you decide that you don't enjoy inergyPLUS, send it back to us and you'll get a full refund.
The blue ginger (or galangal) in inergyPLUS is world-renowned for its numerous health benefits such as effectively fighting inflammation and disease – such as heart disease.
Research suggest Vitamin Bs, ALCAR, PQQ & CoQ10 may naturally enhance the body’s ability to produce long-lasting energy.
With proper sleep, the herbal ingredients in inergyPLUS can support better cognitive function.
With better regulation of overall bodily functions, sleep quality may improve – ensuring better daily energy levels the next day.
Studies indicate Rhodiola may be able to fight fatigue and lower stress levels – which in turn improves overall mental and physical performance.
Cordyceps is a traditional Chinese herb that is known for its positive impact on skin elasticity, and other aging-related issues.
A combination of ALCAR & Galangal (blue ginger extract) supports against free radicals in the body.
Adding cordyceps to your diet may positively influence weight management.
An active nutrient (ALCAR) provides support to the body’s connective tissues, helping to maintain joint health and mobility.
* THESE STATEMENTS HAVE NOT BEEN EVALUATED BY THE FOOD AND DRUG ADMINISTRATION. THIS PRODUCT IS NOT INTENDED TO DIAGNOSE, TREAT, CURE OR PREVENT ANY DISEASE.
USERS' REVIEWS REFLECT THE OPINIONS OF THE INDIVIDUAL USER, NOT THE COMPANY. INDIVIDUALS’ EXPERIENCES MAY VARY. USERS’ COMMENTS ABOUT THE BENEFITS ATTRIBUTE TO BETTER BODY CO. PRODUCTS AND DO NOT NECESSARILY REFLECT THE VIEWS OF THE COMPANY.
DISCLAIMER – RESULTS MAY VARY FROM PERSON TO PERSON.
Click on the questions below to see the answers.
It contains: CoQ10, PQQ, Acetyl-L-carnitine, Rhodiola, Cordycep, Vitamin Bs, EnXtra
There's no caffeine in it. 100% caffeine-free and stimulant-free.
However, when taken with caffeine, it can act as an amplifier that enhances its positive effects while also reducing crashes associated with caffeine.
We're using all natural ingredients, so like most supplements you find on Amazon or the supermarket, they don't need an FDA approval. Our supplements are manufactured in a GMP-certified (Good Manufacturing Practices) facility in Colorado, US, and they go through a stringent quality check before they are sent out.
Our customers have been posting reviews of their experiences with our supplements, and they have seen positive results such as improved energy levels, better focus and attention and even some weight loss.
inergyPLUS contains all natural products that are stimulant free. It contains CoQ10 and PQQ which support the heart health. It also contains EnXtra, which has been proven to reduce the negative side effects of caffeine, such as elevated heart rate.
However, if you are on medication, in pregnancy, or suffer from any medical conditions, please inform your doctor your interest in taking inergyPLUS or any of our supplements.
inergyPLUS is best taken in the morning or before work. Avoid taking in the evening as it may affect sleep.
Some customers have reported taking twice daily, once in the morning and another in the early afternoon without any side effects.
However, avoid taking more than 2 servings within an 8-hour period.
Caffeine or other stimulant may give the illusion of giving you more energy by making you less tired. However, they have been known to have negative side effects like elevated heart rate, jitters and anxiety.
All the orders are a one-time purchase. This means that you won’t be “locked” into a monthly subscription.
Rest assured that you don’t need to commit to a monthly subscription. There are no recurring or hidden charges at all.
For a limited time, we offer free shipping for orders in the US & Canada.
We ship worldwide. For international orders, there is a shipping cost depending on the weight of the order.
We understand everyone needs assurances when it comes to shopping online.
This is why for even greater assurance, we also include PayPal's Buyer Protection with each purchase free-of-charge.
This means that Paypal will act as your "agent" and protect you in the event that you're not satisfied with your purchase, even to the extent of getting you your refund on your behalf.
But you never need to go to that extent with Paypal, because we honor every refund request. But just knowing that Paypal is there to protect you will give you a peace of mind.
With PayPal's Buyer Protection, you can rest assured that your purchase with us is covered for the entire purchase price and even your original shipping!
By having our own guarantee and PayPal's policy in place, we have removed all risks on our customers so that anyone can experience inergyPLUS's full benefits without worry.
All this without adding additional costs to your purchase!
You will receive an email receipt and confirmation from us in your email inbox. If you haven't, give it another 15 minutes. Do check your spam folder as well and whitelist firstname.lastname@example.org so that you can receive our emails.
And in the next 10 minutes or so, you will also be receiving a tracking reference number you can use to monitor your order.
Please disable your pop-up blocker and try again. It could be interfering with the order process.
Alternatively, you can contact us at:
Email us at Contact@betterbody.co
Drop us a Facebook message
Call us at +1-844-707-7730 (Mon to Fri, 10AM to 4PM CST)
These statements have not been evaluated by the Food and Drug Administration. This product is not intended to diagnose, treat, cure or prevent any diseases. The testimonials presented apply only to the individuals depicted, cannot be guaranteed, and should not be considered typical. Every testimonial on this website is from a real customer who used the product inergyPLUS, and/or nutrition advice listed on the website. No one was paid for a testimonial or endorsement. Results were self-reported by the customers. You should assume that any results shown in testimonials, advertisements, stories, blog posts, articles, forums or anywhere else on this site or our associated websites are not typical. Results may vary from person to person based on body and lifestyle. If you are on medication or suffer from medical conditions, please inform your doctor your interest in taking any of our supplements.