Meaning : Noble, Well Born, A short form of its root name Eugene, meaning 'well born' and 'noble'.,
Pronunciation : JEEN, JEEN , (JHIYN),
If you have information about this name, share it in the comments area below!
Additional information Gene:
Originally a short form of Eugene. Also a word meaning a basic biological form of heredity. Gene Tierney, actress. Gene Wilder, actor. Gene Kelly, actor/dancer.
Gene is derived from the masculine name Eugene which has the meaning ‘Noble’. In America, the pet form of Gene was adopted and used as a name in its own right, and is now popular for both boys and girls. American actors Gene Kelly and Gene Wilder bore this name.
Greek Meaning: The name Gene is a Greek baby name. In Greek the meaning of the name Gene is: Well born.
American Meaning: The name Gene is an American baby name. In American the meaning of the name Gene is: Well born.
English Meaning: The name Gene is an English baby name. In English the meaning of the name Gene is: Abbreviation of Eugene, meaning well-born. Famous bearers: American actors Gene Kelly and Gene Hackman.
Short form of EUGENE
Expression information Gene:
People with this name tend to be a powerful force to all whose lives they touch. They are capable, charismatic leaders who often undertake large endeavors with great success. They value truth, justice, and discipline, and may be quick-tempered with those who do not. If they fail to develop their potential, they may become impractical and rigid.
Soul information Gene:
People with this name have a deep inner desire to use their abilities in leadership, and to have personal independence. They would rather focus on large, important issues, and delegate the details.
Songs about Gene:
Gene Autry - Beulah
Gene Hackman - Robyn Hitchcock
Sweet Gene Vincent - Ian Dury
Who's Gene Autry? - Johnny Cash
Wiki information Gene:
A gene is the molecular unit of heredity of a living organism. It is used extensively by the scientific community as a name given to some stretches of deoxyribonucleic acids and ribonucleic acids that code for a polypeptide or for an RNA chain that...
Gene therapy is the use of DNA as a drug to treat disease by delivering therapeutic DNA into a patient's cells. The most common form of gene therapy involves using DNA that encodes a functional, therapeutic gene to replace a mutated gene. Other forms...