GEOG 1000 World Regional Geography (3L,3CR)[E][CS][G]:
An overview of the world’s major physical regions: the physical features, climates, and natural resources of each region, and how the people living in each region have adapted to, and are affected by, their physical environment.
GEOG 1010 Introduction to Physical Geography (3L,2LB,4CR)[E][SE]:
An introductory course that draws on many scientific fields to examine interactions between humans and their physical environment. Geology, meteorology, climatology, pedology, biology, and hydrology supply the background material, but the key word is interaction: how and why the weather affects our lives, food supply and soil formation, and where and how we can live within the limits imposed by the various environments of the earth. Because we live on the surface of the earth, the course will examine the major processes involved in shaping and landscape.
GEOG 1050 Introduction to Environmental and Natural Resources (3L,3CR):
Addresses the impact from natural and human interactions with the environment. Will discuss regional to global scales on issues such as: hazardous earth processes, human interaction with the environment, cultural and ethnic responses to the environment, minerals and energy extraction and use, land use and decision-making. The class will view both sides of environmental issues and approaches to environmental management.
GEOG 1080 Introduction to GPS and Maps (3L,3CR):
An introductory course in the use of GPS technology, maps and pre-GIS applications. The class was designed to compliment GEOL 2080 General Field Geology and for anyone interested in learning how to use a GPS hand-held unit in conjunction with all-topo digital mapping software and other map use.
GEOG 1100 Introduction to GIS (2L,4LB,4CR):
An introductory course in geographic information systems (GIS) and an accompanying laboratory session. The course will discuss different types of GIS and their capabilities; GIS data collection and input; GIS data types and basic mapping concepts. The laboratory session will introduce students to ArcView 8 software. (Cross-listed as ENTK 1505.)
GEOG 1110 Management and Implementation of GIS (2L,4LB,4CR):
This course addresses strategies for successful GIS management and implementation in an organization-wide context and is organized around three primary issues: implementation planning, data management, and GIS problem solving in the workforce. Prerequisite: GEOG 1100.
GEOG 2100 Advanced GIS (2L,4LB,4CR):
An advanced GIS course. The students will be split up into teams and will be given a case study from an outside client and solve the case study using GIS. At the end of the semester, the teams will present the solution to the client in a presentation. Prerequisite: GEOG 1100 and GEOG 1110 or concurrent enrollment in GEOG 1110.
GEOG 2150 Map Use and Analysis (3L,3CR):
Survey of the use of maps to communicate ideas and opinions about places, and the analysis and presentation of mapped data to solve spatial or geographic problems.
GEOG 2480 GIS Cooperative Work Experience (1-8CR) (Max. 8):
Students are afforded the opportunity to gain practical on-the-job experience in their specialties. The program coordinator and the student's employer will supervise the student. A minimum of 80 hours of on-the-job training represents one semester hour. Students must maintain 12 credit hours with at least a 2.0 GPA during the semester. Prerequisite: enrollment in GIS certificate, degree, or minor program; permission of the program director.
GEOG 2490 Topics: Subtitle (1-12CR) (Max. 12):
Investigations, discussions, and applications of current issues in GIS (Geographic Information Systems). Topics for consideration may include GIS applications to various fields such as business, law enforcement, public health, new software applications, as well as topics that may arise through local demand. Prerequisite: enrollment in GIS certificate, degree, or minor program; or permission of program director.