This doesn’t just apply to humans. It’s true for our canine and feline friends too. Yet most manufactured ‘little round dry pellets’ contain nutrient poor, and/or inappropriate ingredients in addition to inadequate levels of moisture that do not support optimal health.
How did we get to the point where we think that all it takes to feed our dogs and cats is the same scoop of ‘dry pet food’ every single day? If kidney diseases and urinary tract issues are common problems in the UAE and our climate is hot and humid, does it make sense to feed a type of pet food that puts your pet’s body in a constant state of dehydration? Did you know that drinking water from a bowl is not sufficient?
If you compare our dog’s and cat’s ‘Ancestral Diet’ to ‘modern’ typical pet foods, the differences are startling! Our pet’s Ancestors, wolves and wild cats depended largely upon high amounts of moisture found in their prey - fresh meat, organs and bone. The moisture levels of an Ancestral Diet were up to 78% moisture. That’s a lot of moisture! Now a days, dry pet foods contain 5-10% moisture, canned foods 40-60%, and raw food nutrition like Furchild contain 65-75% moisture on an as-fed basis.
Our pet’s digestion and urinary tract systems are a moisture intensive process. From the saliva in their mouths and gastric juices in their digestive tract, a high amount of moisture is needed to properly digest foods and aid the flow through the urinary tract to achieve an optimum pH environment. When digesting an entirely dry diet, our pet’s body will pull the needed moisture from other tissues and organs if necessary, leaving little moisture temporarily available for flushing toxins and general hydration. A chronic state of dehydration can lead to health problems including Kidney issues, Crystals and/or Stones, Feline Lower Urinary Tract Disease (FLUTD), Bloating, and more.
Plain and simple, drinking H20 from a bowl is not sufficient. Some pet parents think that soaking kibble in water before feeding would replace the moisture level found in fresh food diets, but this is not the case. In order to get the kibble back to the level of moisture found in whole prey, approximately 4 cups of water would need to be added for every 1 cup of dog food. Depending on the quality of kibble, it may or may not actually soak up the water. Cats would need to drink over 1 cup of water for every 10 lb of body weight to adequately digest their dry food diet. Since cats are not inclined to drink as much water from a bowl as dogs, due to their lower thirst levels from their Ancestral diet, they depend upon a high moisture diet more than dogs.
So, how do we ensure our pets are consuming the right amount of moisture and staying hydrated throughout the summer? It’s simple – in addition to controlling the air-conditioning in your home, feed a species-appropriate, high moisture diet! For adequate absorption and assimilation of ingredients, at least a portion of your pet’s meal should consist of two things:
As our own mother and grandparents would encourage us to eat a variety of fresh, healthy foods, we need to apply this commonsense to pets. If cost is of concern, consider feeding 50% or two meals a week of fresh, species appropriate nutrition, as much as you can reasonably afford.
While cats and dogs thrive on species appropriate diets with high moisture levels, they can be challenging for pet owners and veterinarians to find. But Furchild is changing that. Thankfully, they have made it simple and convenient to feed your beloved pets premium, raw meals needed to live full and vital lives.
Furchild is the first raw pet food company of it’s kind in Dubai and the Middle East Region. Not only do they provide the highest quality nutrition, they specialize in Monthly Plans for pets and deliver to your home across Dubai and other Emirates.
Try a Variety of Furchild’s Premium Meals for Dogs – 10 lb for AED 99.
Try a Variety of Furchild’s Premium Meals for Cats – 5 lb for AED 99.
*limited time offer.