Channelling capital, services, training, information and other inputs through the established traditional leaders of villages to benefit the whole of the communities. The assumption of this approach is that there is in every village a strong harmony of interests such that differences in the distribution of resources, skills and motivation can be ignored or easily overcome.
This approach was used extensively in India, starting from a pilot project at Mahewa in Etaweh District and developing into a part of India's national 5 year plans. From the initial pilot, blocks of 100 villages were incorporated into the project. Each group of 5 villages has a village level worker who is a liaison between village leadership and district level government schemes.
The established leadership is a stabilizing influence and their development will result in the development of the whole village.
The gap between traditional local land owners and the poor increases and the potential for violent conflict is enhanced.
The Encyclopedia of World Problems and Human Potential is a collaboration between UIA and Mankind 2000, started in 1972. It is the result of an ambitious effort to collect and present information on the problems with which humanity is confronted, as well as the challenges such problems pose to concept formation, values and development strategies. Problems included are those identified in international periodicals but especially in the documents of some 60,000 international non-profit organizations, profiled in the Yearbook of International Organizations.
The Encyclopedia includes problems which such groups choose to perceive and act upon, whether or not their existence is denied by others claiming greater expertise. Indeed such claims and counter-claims figure in many of the problem descriptions in order to reflect the often paralyzing dynamics of international debate. In the light of the interdependence demonstrated among world problems in every sector, emphasis is placed on the need for approaches which are sufficiently complex to encompass the factions, conflicts and rival worldviews that undermine collective initiative towards a promising future.
Non-profit, apolitical, independent, and non-governmental in nature, the UIA has been a pioneer in the research, monitoring and provision of information on international organizations, international associations and their global challenges since 1907.