It is often the case that the effects of environmental factors on plant metabolism
can only be vaguely characterized, because plant cells cannot be interrogated with the necessary precision, Ngele says.
Potassium participates in several biochemical reactions that are important and necessary to plant metabolism
(NurzyhskaWierdak et al., 2012; Araujo et al., 2014).
The uptake and accumulation of large amount of Na+ and Cl-ions by plants under saline conditions could upset the activities of various enzymes and plant metabolism
(Munns, 2002; De-lacerda et al., 2005).
He highlighted the key aspects of plant metabolism
which can be utilized as the targets of genetic engineering to develop new crops for saline lands.
He also talked about the key aspects of plant metabolism
which could be utilised as the targets of genetic engineering to develop new crops for saline land.
Plant biostimulants: physiological responses induced by protein hydrolyzed-based products and humic substances in plant metabolism
. Scientia Agricola 73:18-23.
Changes in plant metabolism
induced by Zn deficiency include effects on carbohydrates, proteins, auxins and damage to membrane integrity.
And it is working on much more ambitious changes to plant metabolism
than have been made before.
Many studies have proven that cysteine desulfurase (CysD), S-adenosyl-l-Met:l-Met S-methyltransferase (MMT) (Berken et al., 2002), serine acetyltransferase (SAT) (Van Hoewyk et al., 2008), and SeCys methyltransferase (SMT) were also the main genes for plant metabolism
and Se accumulation (Berken et al., 2002).
The increase in fruit size might be due to combined applications of zinc and boron because of their stimulatory effect on plant metabolism
.The above results in kinnow are in line with those of Khan, Malik, Saleem & Rajwana (2009).
Perturbation in plant metabolism
occurs when the plant is subjected to stress and, by dissecting the metabolic pathways involved, would provide an overview on what and how metabolic pathways are being regulated during stress.
According to Indi Khanna, CEO of Tea'n Teas in Coonor, South India, this is due to the plant metabolism
, which he explained as follows, "After the first flush the bushes, on account of the trauma of that first pluck, react by sending the starches downwards in a manner similar to the winter dormancy.