The How We Respond project launched from AAAS includes a report and multimedia stories that highlight the ways U.S. communities are actively and effectively responding to climate change, in particular at the local, state and regional levels, and the critical role of science and scientists in their response. Section members Emily Cloyd (AAAS) and Kika TuffRead more about Member Highlight: Emily Cloyd & Kika Tuff part of team launching AAAS’s new How We Respond projcet[…]
C&E Section Member Nyeema Harris is a wildlife ecologist at the University of Michigan. Harris and her colleagues recently published a paper on their camera study in West Africa in Conservation Letters. Harris’s camera survey documented human pressures on mammals in protected areas. It is the first wildlife camera survey in the West African countriesRead more about Member Highlight: Surprising results of Nyeema Harris’s camera trap surveys in West Africa are featured by UMichigan[…]
From the incomparable writer, Maria Popova, and her wide-ranging, powerful Brain Pickings site, comes a brief, thought-provoking “taxonomy” of the three levels of good science writing. Don’t stop at this article – her site is a treasure trove of big ideas, compelling quotations from science writers renown and obscure, and more.
In this article in the journal Natural Sciences Education, faculty from Kansas State University describe a watercolor training assignment that enhanced undergraduate ornithology students’ ability to identify several species of waterfowl.
LSU’s Science Communication Specialist, Dr. Paige Jarreau, shares advice about using social media in the classroom. Excerpt: “In college classrooms, faculty of all fields try to find new ways to engage students and help them gain more experience communicating in the science world. Some of them turn to social media. Science Communication Specialist for LSU CollegeRead more about Resource of the Week: Utilizing Social Media in the Classroom[…]
Excerpts from www.tolerance.org: “Our mission is to help teachers and schools educate children and youth to be active participants in a diverse democracy.” Free resources include: Workshops Trainings Facilitator Guides Self-Guided Learning Webinars Podcasts “Teaching Tolerance provides free resources to educators—teachers, administrators, counselors and other practitioners—who work with children from kindergarten through high school. Educators useRead more about Resource of the Week: Teaching Tolerance, a project of the Southern Poverty Law Center[…]
A thought-provoking take on the synergy between activism and technical proficiency from theoretical physicist Dr. Chanda Prescod-Weinstein. Spoiler alert, she writes, “While often necessary, [activism] is not a substitute for technical proficiency. Dr. Prescod-Weinstein is an American cosmologist, science writer and equality activist based at the University of New Hampshire. In addition to major work with NASA,Read more about Resource of the Week: A Provocative Take on Work-Life Balance & Grad School Activism[…]
In recognition of #NationalIndigenousPeoplesDay, we’re sharing this Decolonising STEM Reading List from theoretical physicist Dr. Chanda Prescod-Weinstein provides a powerful, necessary deep-look into the history and current practices of science and the relationship of science to oppression, colonialism, and more. Dr. Prescod-Weinstein recommends starting your reading with “Making Meaning of ‘Decolonizing’” to fully understand the contextRead more about Resource of the Week: Decolonising STEM Reading List from Dr. Chanda Prescod-Weinstein[…]
Extensive resources are available from the University of Michigan’s National Center for Institutional Diversity. NCID’s mission is: “We aim to create a more equitable and inclusive society through the production, catalyzation, and elevation of diversity scholarship.” See their website and Twitter feed to connect.
It is Pride Month! Here are a few resources on representation, inclusion, and intersectionality with science. Stay tuned for more in our Resource of the Week series*, as the month progresses. As always, we’d love to hear your recommendations on additional resources to share in the series. LGBTQ+ STEM DAY “LGBTQ+ people in science, technology,Read more about Resource of the Week: #SciComm & #PrideMonth[…]