To keep you safe, Bert von Rosen and Bill Ridley put a commercial-sized firework into its launching tube upside down and fired it off.
It shattered the launching tube, called a mortar, in a potentially dangerous way. Mission accomplished.
The two scientists work for Natural Resources Canada, and they run an explosives testing lab in the wooded area west of Bell’s Corners off Timm Drive, far from people.
They test samples of many products: mining explosives, ammunition, and a lot of different types and sizes of fireworks.
The mining explosives — TNT and others — tend to be pretty stable. An accidental spark or jolt won’t set them off. Fireworks, though, are another story.
You’re familiar already with consumer fireworks. The commercial shells that you will see exploding over Parliament Hill are far, far bigger, and they launch differently.
Commercial fireworks can be up to 40 inches in diameter in Japan. (That’s about a metre, but fireworks are measured in inches.)
You won’t see anything like that in Canada. Shells used on Parliament Hill usually range from two inches (five centimetres) to about 12 inches (30 cm). And it’s the job of the Canmet explosives lab to open up some of these and analyze the structure and chemical composition.
“What we’re looking for primarily is that the fireworks have been made according to the manufacturer’s specifications,” and also checking that they meet Canadian rules, Ridley said this week.
The lab analyzes whether they are constructed the right way, whether they contain the correct amount of “energetic material,” and whether labelling is appropriate.
Sometimes they fire off samples “to make sure that they’re safe to use, that they fire up into the air when they’re supposed to, that things don’t fall over … that they fire in the direction they’re supposed to,” von Rosen said.
“We want to make sure they’re safe, that they’re not too sensitive to handle, that they won’t suddenly go off when somebody drops one.”
“There are times we find fireworks that exceed the explosive content limits for that type off article,” Ridley said. If there is too much “lift charge” — the material that shoots the display high in the air — it could all explode inside the mortar.
“A shell is very hazardous to take apart,” Ridley says. “A five-inch diameter shell could have about a kilogram of pyrotechnic material inside.” The friction involved in cutting can set off an explosion accidentally, so they operate the cutter remotely.
“We also X-ray them” to look without touching.
They wear safety glasses and face shields when handling these explosives, with Nomex clothes for fire protection, and beyond that they prefer cotton clothing. In this lab, static cling is not just a fashion problem.
They even have a bomb suit, but it’s hot and heavy and not much fun to wear.
“We’ve had malfunctions,” Ridley said. “Things that didn’t behave the way they were supposed to. Things like fireworks toppling over, firing effects toward people.”
“We’ve deliberately made things go wrong too,” von Rosen said. That is why they put the shell into the mortar upside down, “to see what would happen to the mortar, and then is the mortar a hazard to the crowd?”
Yes, as it turned out. “Sometimes they (mortars) come apart. They fly apart in little pieces, and that’s what we are trying to avoid.”
Their research has looked at another possible hazard. Mortars are lined up in racks, side by side, in commercial shows. “If (one shell) goes off accidentally, we don’t want the other ones in the rack leaning over and aiming at the crowd because the next shots would go into the crowd,” von Rosen said.
Anyone interested in the chemistry and mechanical aspects of modern fireworks can look at the website of Imperial College London, which has an illustrated overview of how fireworks function.
The Public Health Agency of Canada says that between April 1, 2011, and May 24, 2019, there were 122 reported cases of unintentional injuries related to fireworks and other similar products, as reported by a selection of 19 major hospital emergency departments. This is not the total of all injuries across the country, but it shows some patterns:
• Of these, 32 per cent happened on or close to Victoria Day or Canada Day;
• Overall, 64.8% of the patients injured were male;
• The most common, severe type of injuries were burns (71 cases), followed by eye injuries (19 cases);
• About 37 per cent of injuries affected the head or face (including eyes), while 32 per cent affected the hands.
Past studies have shown that many injuries happen when a person is holding a firework as it goes off.
ALSO IN THE NEWS: