Teaching the concept of time to young children has always had the stigma of a challenging endeavor. However, by using a variety of hands-on resources and visual reminders, the challenge can be made more enjoyable for both the teacher and students. Check out some of our amazing ideas and time resources in this blog.
1. Block Clock
Use LEGO, Duplo or cheap blocks to show the five minutes between each number on the face of a clock. Creating the face on a large piece of paper allows for the numbers to be written and a hands-on activity is created. Have kids create their own clock in small groups. Alternatively, create it as a whole class and then have students create different times on the clock.
2. Paper Plate Clock
Use our 12 Hour Clock Template to create a paper plate clock with a split pin holding it all together. A great hands-on activity that children can use again and again. Children can use their paper plate clock as a visual reminder to help when completing other time related activities.
3. Polygon Puzzle
Something for the older kids, when learning about 12 hour and 24 hour time, use this fun polygon puzzle! Print out our Polygon Puzzle on coloured paper and laminate for an activity you can use again and again!
4. Time Dominoes
Use our Time Dominoes in small groups or as a whole class activity. Students need to match the correct analogue time with its digital version. This domino activity is also available in five minute intervals.
5. Classroom Clock Flower Display
A cute visual reminder for children when reading the time. Print, laminate and use our Flower Display around your classroom clock.
6. Time Number Line
Print, cut and laminate our time number line. A great visual guide when teaching about time and working with intervals. The number line shows times from 11:45 – 1:10, which can be used when adding or subtracting any time intervals.
7. Time Bingo
Bingo is always a favourite activity in the classroom. We have a range of time bingo cards suited to the needs of your students.
8. Create a Watch
Using cardboard and a split pin, have students create their very own watch they can wear in class. You may like to laminate each piece to make sure it lasts a little longer. They can move the hands on their own watch to create different times. So much fun!
9. Digital Clock Template
Print and laminate our Digital Clock Template. Use velcro dots to easily change the numbers and time on the clock.
10. Telling the Time Poster
Print our Telling the Time Poster on A3 and laminate for a simple visual reminder of how to tell the time.