“Whether they're growing in terms of revenue, I'm not so sure.”
On your lunch break at work, you're talking with a coworker about one of your company's competitors which is hiring a lot of new employees. Your coworker is worried about this competitor, but you aren't. You've just said "They've certainly added a lot of staff recently." This is how you continue this thought.
Whether they're growing in terms of revenue, I'm not so sure.
Use this phrase to express doubt about something you just said. For example:
I'm applying to Harvard and Stanford. Whether I'll get in or not, I don't know.
That's a standard legal tactic. Now, whether it will work in this particular case, we don't know.
When a company is making more money, adding more employees, or gaining more customers, you can say that it's "growing".
The phrase "in terms of" explains what standard you're measuring something on. In this example:
...the speaker wonders whether the competitor is "growing in terms of revenue". A company can grow in several ways, including revenue, profits, number of employees, number of stores, and in other ways. The phrase "in terms of revenue" explains how you're measuring the growth.
Other examples include:
A woman wants a guy who she can click with in terms of her interests & hobbies.
Where do you see yourself in 5 years in terms of your career?
"Revenue" is the money that a company or a person makes from its customers. When you're talking about money, there are several terms that all have different meanings:
- Revenue is the money that a business gets from sales, or from investments.
- Income is also money that a company makes. This word is also used to describe the amount of money that an individual person makes.
- Profit is the amount of money that is left after a company pays for its employees, materials, rent, and other costs.
There are much more technical definitions for each of these terms that accountants and business executives need to learn, but these definitions will work for most people.
You can use either "revenue" as an uncountable noun, or "revenues":
Revenues are pretty good this quarter.
This is an expression for showing your doubt. If you think something might not be true, but you don't have strong proof yet, you can say "I'm not so sure."