Neuroscientists have effectively wiped a memory from rat brains, only to revive it again by manipulating synapses. The work could contribute to our understanding of Alzheimer's disease, and potentially help devise a reversal process for the memory loss and synapse degeneration it causes.
It had been suspected that memories are encoded in the brain through the weakening and strengthening of synapses, the side effects of other processes that go on during the memory-forming mechanism. This kind of synapse modification is known as long-term depression (LTD, weakening) and long-term potentiation (LTP, strengthening). The latter can be instigated using high-frequency stimulation of the synapses using various methods, and the former is instigated using a very low-rate of stimulation over long periods.
Demonstrating how this affects memory, however, has been a challenge. A team from the University of California, San Diego School of Medicine decided the answer was fear. It's something we know how to instil in rats, being at the heart of many training experiments with the rodents. But rather than training the rats to associate food, or bells or locations with fear, the team trained it to associate fear with optogenetic stimulation -- the process of stimulating nerves in the brain using light, in this case the nerve cells associated with the amygdala, which in turn is associated with fear.
This was achieved by implanting an optic fibre in the region of the amygdala and shocking the rat's foot while simultaneously administering light to the nerve. From then on, stimulating the nerve using light caused the rat to recall the memory and express fear. Other rats received only optical nerve simulation. These, and the first group, had slices of their amygdala tested for chemical changes, which did indeed showed a strengthening of the related synapses after fear conditioning in those that received the optical stimulation.
This in itself, the authors write in Nature, proves there is a correlation between brain synapses and memory. However, they went further.
They considered that those nerves that had been altered only had to have those manipulations reversed for the memory to also be reversed. And so the team decided to administer LTD, using a low frequency dose of optical stimulation over a longer period. One day after this was delivered, the rats did not respond to optical nerve stimulation by expressing fear. They appeared, for all intents and purposes, to no longer associate the optical stimulation with fear, and thus have no memory of it.
Other factors could be used to explain this outcome. However, incredibly the researchers were able to once again reinstate the original memory -- or at least the assocaition of optical simulation with fear and pain. This was achieved by again delivering a dose of LTP -- high frequency pulses of optical stimulation. Again, the rats began to exhibit fear behaviours when the synapses associated with the amygdala were targeted with optics. The whole process was repeated again, proving how resilient the memory forming and losing function is -- the rats lost their memory again, and regained it again. "We can form a memory, erase that memory and we can reactivate it, at will, by applying a stimulus that selectively strengthens or weakens synaptic connections," commented Roberto Malinow, professor of neurosciences and an author on the study.
He believes that amyloid-beta peptides, which have a key role in producing the amyloid plaques exhibited in the brains of Alzheimer patients, affect the synapses in a very similar way to how the low-frequency stimulation exhibited in their paper does. "Since our work shows we can reverse the processes that weaken synapses, we could potentially counteract some of the beta amyloid's effects in Alzheimer's patients."