Meier B. and Albignac R., 1991. Rediscovery of Allocebus trichotis Guenther 1875 (Primates) in northeast Madagascar. Folia Primatologica 56: 57-63.
 Andriaholinirina N., Baden A., Blanco M., Chikhi L., Cooke A., Davies N., Dolch R., Donati G., Ganzhorn J., Golden C., Groeneveld L.F., Hapke A., Irwin M., Johnson S., Kappeler P., King T., Lewis R., Louis E.E., Markolf M., Mass V., Mittermeier R.A., Nichols R., Patel E., Rabarivola C.J., Raharivololona B., Rajaobelina S., Rakotoarisoa G., Rakotomanga B., Rakotonanahary J., Rakotondrainibe H., Rakotondratsimba G., Rakotondratsimba M., Rakotonirina L., Ralainasolo F.B., Ralison J., Ramahaleo T., Ranaivoarisoa J.F., Randrianahaleo S.I., Randrianambinina B., Randrianarimanana L., Randrianasolo H., Randriatahina G., Rasamimananana H., Rasolofoharivelo T., Rasoloharijaona S., Ratelolahy F., Ratsimbazafy J., Ratsimbazafy N., Razafindraibe H., Razafindramanana J., Rowe N., Salmona J., Seiler M., Volampeno S., Wright P., Youssouf J., Zaonarivelo J. and Zaramody A., 2014. Allocebus trichotis. The IUCN Red List of Threatened Species. Version 2015.1. Downloaded on 04 June 2015.
 Biebouw K., Bearder S. and Nekaris A., 2009. Tree hole utilisation by the hairy-eared dwarf lemur (Allocebus trichotis) in Analamazaotra Special Reserve. Folia Primatologia 80: 89-103.
Illustration by Joseph Wolf & Joseph Smit, 1875. Proceedings of the Zoological Society of London. Public Domain.
Page Last Updated: 13 November 2016
Allocebus trichotis | Hairy-eared Dwarf Lemur
Allocebus trichotis is a monotypic species (no subspecies).
IUCN Conservation Status
The Hairy-eared Dwarf Lemur was once considered to be close to extinction until it was rediscovered in 1989 . It is currently only known from small, fragmented populations which continue to be threatened by hunting and habitat destruction .
Seeing this Species
Like some of the mouse lemurs (Microcebus), the dwarf lemurs (Cheirogaleus), the Pale Fork-crowned Lemur and the Aye-aye in Madagascar, the nocturnal Hairy-eared Dwarf Lemur makes use of tree holes as sleeping sites during the day [see 3]. This species can be seen at several national parks and special reserves in Madagascar, including:
Eleven species of lemurs can be found in this national park located in northeastern Madagascar.
Overlapping species: Aye-aye, Eastern Lesser Bamboo Lemur, Eastern Woolly Lemur, Greater Dwarf Lemur, Masoala Fork-crowned Lemur, Red-bellied Lemur, Rufous Mouse Lemur, Silky Sifaka, Weasel Sportive Lemur, White-fronted Brown Lemur
Anjanaharibe-Sud Special Reserve
Just like the Marojejy National Park, the Anjanaharibe-Sud Special Reserve is also home to 11 species of lemurs of which nine are found in both places; while the national park has the Masoala Fork-crowned Lemur, the special reserve has the Indri.
Overlapping species: Aye-aye, Eastern Lesser Bamboo Lemur, Eastern Woolly Lemur, Greater Dwarf Lemur, Indri, Red-bellied Lemur, Rufous Mouse Lemur, Silky Sifaka, Weasel Sportive Lemur, White-fronted Brown Lemur
Masoala National Park
This national park in northeastern Madagascar is known to be one of the best places to see the Aye-aye. It houses a total of 10 species of lemurs.
Overlapping species: Aye-aye, Eastern Woolly Lemur, Gray Mouse Lemur, Greater Dwarf Lemur, Masoala Fork-crowned Lemur, Masoala Sportive Lemur, Masoala Woolly Lemur, Red Ruffed Lemur, White-fronted Brown Lemur
Mananara-Nord National Park
Thirteen species of lemurs can be found in this national park.
Overlapping species: Aye-aye, Indri
Zahamena Strict Nature Reserve and National Park
Analamazaotra Special Reserve
Forêt de Vohidrazana
Forêt de Vohidrazana
Marotandrano Special Reserve
Ambatovy Classified Forest