Home Remedies To Cure Asthma 100% Natural Way. In addition, Difficulty and wheezing when breathing, coughing mainly at night. Perhaps these symptoms are familiar to you, as we are talking about one of the most recurrent diseases in the world: Asthma . the Asthma is a chronic disease that occurs due to the inflammation of the airways, which end up causing narrowing and breathing difficulties.
There are several factors that can trigger the attacks of Asthma , such as mites, pollen, fungus, exposure to animals, among others. In today’s video we will show some home remedies to treat asthma and alleviate its symptoms.
Symptoms of Asthma:
Most people with Asthma get long periods without symptoms, at intervals with the attacks when exposed to some agent.
However, some people have respiratory deficiency almost chronically, with some more severe episodes in certain periods.
Asthma attacks can last for minutes to days and can become dangerous if the airflow is too restricted.
Cough with or without sputum production (mucus)
Extend the skin between the ribs during breathing (intercostal retractions)
Respiratory failure that worsens with exercise or activity.
Breathing breath that:
Comes in episodes with intercalated periods without symptoms
It may be worse at night or early in the morning
Can disappear by itself
Improvement when using drugs that open the airways (bronchodilators)
It gets worse when you breathe cold air
Worsening with exercise
It worsens with heartburn (reflux)
Usually it starts abruptly.
Lips and face of bluish color
Decreased level of agility, such as severe drowsiness or confusion, during a
Extreme difficulty breathing
Serious anxiety due to respiratory failure
Other symptoms that may occur with this disease:
Abnormal breathing pattern
Pain in chest
Causes of Asthma:
No one knows exactly what causes Asthma , since each person has a sensitivity to different triggers.
That way, it is important to understand what causes your Asthma attacks and try to reduce exposure to these agents or seek more appropriate treatments. Here are the most common triggers of Asthma :
Substances and Agents Allergens:
About 80% of people with Asthma experience seizures when exposed to airborne substances such as dust mites and dust, pollution, pollen, mold, animal hair, cigarette smoke and insect particles.
Chemicals such as paint, disinfectants and cleaning products can also trigger a crisis.
When aspirated, these agents can irritate the bronchi, leading to a crisis. Viral infections, such as the common cold or the flu, are also important causes for triggering an Asthma crisis .
Home Remedies To Cure Asthma:
The ginger is an excellent remedy for asthma because it reduces the inflammation in the airways and prevents the contraction of them, making breathing easier. You can consume the ginger by adding a spoonful of ground ginger in a glass and a half of water.
Another way is to consume it is through tea. Take one inch of ginger and cut into small pieces. Put the ginger in a saucepan with boiling water and let it taste for 5 minutes. Drink the tea as soon as it cools.
The mustard oil is one of the most effective natural remedies to stop the crisis Asthma . It is important to emphasize that the oil we are talking about is that greasy, obtained through the pressing of the mustard seeds (different from the essential oil).
Massage the warm mustard oil with a little salt into the chest and back several times a day until relief of symptoms.
The Eucalyptus oil contains eucalyptol, a liquid widely used in medicines for asthma , because of its decongestant properties.
Research has shown that this oil is effective in breaking down accumulated mucus in the airways.
A good way to use eucalyptus oil to treat Asthma symptoms is through inhalation. Put two or three drops of eucalyptus oil in a pan with boiling water.
When it begins to evaporate, inhale this vapor with deep breath, to accelerate its effect.
This may be new to you, but coffee can be a great ally for people suffering from respiratory problems.
The reason is simple: caffeine is a bronchodilator, which releases the airways into the lungs, alleviating the symptoms of asthma .
The stronger the coffee , the better for this purpose. If you do not like coffee , some teas like black tea and white are great alternatives.