e-books in Object-Oriented Programming category
by Dung Nguyen, Stephen Wong - Rice University , 2008
From the table of contents: Introduction - Objects and Classes; Polymorphism in Action; Immutable List Structure; Mutable Data Structures; Restricted Access Containers; GUI Programming; Labs; Resources - Java Syntax Primer.
by Rudolf Pecinovsky - Eva & Tomas Bruckner Publishing , 2013
The whole textbook is designed as a record of the dialogue of the author with his daughter who wants to learn programming. The author endeavors not to explain the Java programming language to the readers, but to teach them real programming.
by Sharam Hekmat - PragSoft Corporation , 2006
UML Process is a defined process for developing software systems using object technology. The purpose of this document is to define the UML Process at a level that is suitable for practitioners who have had no prior exposure to a similar process.
by Matthias Felleisen, et al. , 2011
The authors put classes and the design of classes into the center of their approach. In this volume, they show students how object-oriented programming languages such as C# and Java support this effort with syntactic constructs.
by Craig Larman - Prentice Hall , 2004
This is a lucid and practical introduction to thinking and designing with objects, and creating systems that are well crafted, robust, and maintainable. Developers and students will learn object-oriented analysis and design through case studies.
by Axel-Tobias Schreiner , 1999
In this book, we are going to use ANSI-C to discover how object-oriented programming is done, what its techniques are, why they help us solve bigger problems, and how we harness generality and program to catch mistakes earlier.
by T. Reenskaug, P. Wold, O.A. Lehne - Prentice Hall , 1996
The main theme of this book is to describe complex phenomena as structures of interacting objects. This is the authoritative account of the OOram methodology for software analysis, design, development, maintenance, and reuse.
by S. Demeyer, S. Ducasse, O. Nierstrasz - Elsevier Science , 2008
This book collects and distills successful techniques in planning a reengineering project, reverse-engineering, problem detection, migration strategies and software redesign. It is full of practical, hands-on reengineering knowledge and expertise.
by Dennis deChampeaux, Doug Lea, Penelope Faure - Addison-Wesley , 1993
With this book, software engineers, project managers, and tool builders will better understand the role of analysis and design in the object-oriented (OO) software development process. The emphasis is on development principles and implementation.
by Kim Waldén, Jean-Marc Nerson - Prentice Hall , 1994
This book shows how a set of object-oriented abstractions can be applied throughout the software construction process, based on three major ideas: seamlessness, reversibility, and contracting. Intended for software professionals and students.
by Steven F. Lott , 2009
The intent of this book is to help the beginning designer by giving them a sequence of interesting and moderately complex exercises in OO design. This book can also help managers develop a level of comfort with the process of OO software development.
by Karl Lieberherr - Pws Pub Co , 1996
This book presents a methodology for adaptive programming in any object-oriented language. Lieberherr's method provides a new approach to OO program design that goes beyond object encapsulation to achieve more flexible interactions among objects.
by Nierstrasz, Sichritzis - Prentice Hall PTR , 1995
The book looks at a range of issues, from programming languages and systems through to tools, frameworks and methods. Chapters are self-contained, with the development of ideas moving from programming language design to environments and applications.
by Thomas Kühne - Verlag Dr. Kovac , 1999
The author promotes the thesis that design patterns inspired by functional programming concepts can advance object-oriented design. The book integrates the areas of object-orientation, functional programming, design patterns, and language design.