[permalink] [id link]
The British Mandate of Palestine also came to an end with the creation of Israel on the day of British withdrawal.
Some Related Sentences
British and Mandate
* 1929 – The 1929 Palestine riots break out in the British Mandate of Palestine between Arabs and Jews and continue until the end of the month.
* 1929 – Hebron Massacre during the 1929 Palestine riots: Arab attack on the Jewish community in Hebron in the British Mandate of Palestine, continuing until the next day, resulted in the death of 65-68 Jews and the remaining Jews being forced to leave the city.
During the Anglo-Iraqi War, some of the units located in the British Mandate of Palestine were sent to Iraq and drove Fordson armored cars.
Under Israeli law, inherited from British Mandate municipal law, the possibility of creating a municipal borough exists.
In addition to granting independence to India and handing back the Palestinian Mandate to the United Nations, the British government decided to withdraw from both Greece and nearby Turkey.
While Israeli law is undergoing codification, its basic principles are inherited from the law of the British Mandate of Palestine and thus resemble those of British and American law, namely: the role of courts in creating the body of law and the authority of the supreme court in reviewing and if necessary overturning legislative and executive decisions, as well as employing the adversarial system.
Armed Arab volunteers during the 1947 – 1948 Civil War in Mandatory Palestine | 1947-1948 civil war in the British Mandate of Palestine
The cladding of red marble applied to the Aedicule by Komminos has deteriorated badly and is detaching from the underlying structure ; since 1947 it has been held in place with an exterior scaffolding of iron girders installed by the British Mandate.
* 1948 – The United Nations passes General Assembly Resolution 194, which established and defined the role of the United Nations Conciliation Commission as an organization to facilitate peace in the British Mandate for Palestine.
The British Mandate ( in effect, British rule ) of Palestine, including the Balfour Declaration, was confirmed by the League of Nations in 1922 and came into effect in 1923.
From 1920, the Va ' ad Leumi ( or Jewish National Council, or JNC ) was the main institution of the Jewish community (" Yishuv ") within the British Mandate of Palestine.
Most of the revenue raised by the Mandate came from the Jewish minority but was spent on funding the British administration.
During the whole interwar period, the British, appealing to the terms of the Mandate, rejected the principle of majority rule or any other measure that would give the Arab majority control over the government of Palestine.
In the Report of the Committee dated 3 September 1947 to the UN General Assembly, the majority of the Committee in Chapter VI proposed a plan to replace the British Mandate with " an independent Arab State, an independent Jewish State, and the City of Jerusalem " ..., the last to be under " an International Trusteeship System ".
The plan was to replace the British Mandate with " Independent Arab and Jewish States " and a " Special International Regime for the City of Jerusalem administered by the United Nations ".
Concerned that partition would severely damage Anglo-Arab relations, Britain refused to cooperate with the UN, denying the UN access to Palestine during the period between the adoption of Resolution 181 ( II ) and the termination of the British Mandate.
The majority of Palestinian Arab hopes lay with the Arab Legion of Transjordan's monarch, King Abdullah I, but he had no intention of creating a Palestinian Arab-run state, since he hoped to annex as much of the territory of the British Mandate for Palestine as he could.
On May 14, 1948, on the day in which the British Mandate over Palestine expired, the Jewish People's Council gathered at the Tel Aviv Museum, and approved a proclamation declaring the establishment of a Jewish state in Eretz Israel, to be known as the State of Israel.
The Arab states marched their forces into what had, until the previous day, been the British Mandate for Palestine.
The Israeli Declaration of Independence (, Hakhrazat HaAtzma ' ut or Megilat HaAtzma ' ut ), was made on 14 May 1948 ( 5 Iyar 5708 ), the day before the British Mandate was due to expire.
British and Palestine
The British wrested control of the city from the Ottomans during World War I and it was to be included in an international zone under the 1947 United Nations Partition Plan for Palestine.
In 1799, British ships harassed Bonaparte's army as it marched east and north through Palestine, and played a crucial part in Bonaparte's defeat at the Siege of Acre, when the barges carrying the siege train were captured and the French storming parties were bombarded by British ships anchored offshore.
During the first meeting between Weizmann and Balfour in 1906, Balfour asked what Weizmann's objections were to the idea of a Jewish homeland in Uganda, ( the Uganda Protectorate in East Africa in the British Uganda Programme ), rather than in Palestine.
Two months after Britain's declaration of war on the Ottoman Empire in November 1914, Zionist British cabinet member Herbert Samuel circulated a memorandum entitled The Future of Palestine to his cabinet colleagues.
The memoradum stated that " I am assured that the solution of the problem of Palestine which would be much the most welcome to the leaders and supporters of the Zionist movement throughout the world would be the annexation of the country to the British Empire ".
William Reginald Hall, British Director of Naval Intelligence criticized the agreement on the basis that " the Jews have a strong material, and a very strong political, interest in the future of the country " and that " in the Brown area the question of Zionism, and also of British control of all Palestine railways, in the interest of Egypt, have to be considered ".
I do not attach undue importance to this movement, but it is increasingly difficult to meet the argument that it is unfair to ask the British taxpayer, already overwhelmed with taxation, to bear the cost of imposing on Palestine an unpopular policy.
In the Middle East, during the Sinai and Palestine Campaign mounted forces ( British, Indian, Ottoman, Australian, Arab and New Zealand ) retained an important strategic role both as mounted infantry and cavalry.
British and also
Besides helping to prevent the movement of the British to the west, Valley Forge also obstructed the trade between Howe's forces and the farmers, thus threatening the vital subsistence of the redcoats and rendering their foraging to obtain necessary supplies extremely hazardous.
I know that I myself felt that it was a mortal shame for a man to be torn open by a British musket ball, as Isaac had been, yet I also felt relieved and lucky that it had been him and not myself.
Her young British lawyer, James Dunlop, pleaded that she was sorely needed at her Portland home by her widowed mother, 80, her maiden aunt, also 80 and bedridden for 20 years, and her uncle, 76, who once ran a candy shop.
Seward's initial reaction to the Trent affair, however, was too bellicose, so Lincoln also turned to Senator Charles Sumner, the chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee and an expert in British diplomacy.
In other countries ( and in some, particularly smaller, British and North American universities ), anthropologists have also found themselves institutionally linked with scholars of folklore, museum studies, human geography, sociology, social relations, ethnic studies, cultural studies, and social work.
Persons who from having been born within British territory are British subjects, but who at birth became under the law of any foreign state subjects of such state, and also persons who though born abroad are British subjects by reason of parentage, may by declarations of alienage get rid of British nationality.
Not only was his Belgian nationality interesting because of Belgium's occupation by Germany ( which provided a valid explanation of why such a skilled detective would be out of work and available to solve mysteries at an English country house ), but also at the time of Christie's writing, it was considered patriotic to express sympathy with the Belgians, since the invasion of their country had constituted Britain's casus belli for entering World War I, and British wartime propaganda emphasized the " Rape of Belgium ".
The British also negotiated the safe return of Hasan Ali Shah to Persia, which was in accordance with his own wish.
Africa was also set on its course to decolonization, swept by what Harold Macmillan, the then British Prime Minister, aptly termed the " wind of change ".
He also wrote controversial criticisms of the British class structure which seemed to conflict with his promotion of Anglo-American friendship.
Nonetheless Canadian English also features many British English items and is often described as a unique blend of the two larger varieties alongside several distinctive Canadianisms.
While the earlier settlers were primarily of British ancestry, the newer settlers also consisted of Germans, Irish, and African-Americans.
Along with the Bill of Rights 1689, it remains today one of the main constitutional laws governing the succession to not only the throne of the United Kingdom, but, following British colonialism, the resultant doctrine of reception, and independence, also to those of the other Commonwealth realms, whether by willing deference to the act as a British statute or as a patriated part of the particular realm's constitution.
The Irish Free State, whose consent to the Abdication Act was also required, neither gave it nor allowed the British legislation to take effect in the Free State's jurisdiction ; instead, the Irish parliament passed its own Act — the Executive Authority ( External Relations ) Act — the day after the Declaration of Abdication Act took force elsewhere, meaning Edward VIII, for one day, remained King of Ireland while George VI was king of all the other realms.
First: it " mandates that whoever is the sovereign of the United Kingdom is also, by virtue of this external fact, sovereign of Australia "; accordingly, changes to British succession laws would have no effect on Australian law, but if the British amendment changed the sovereign, then the new sovereign of the United Kingdom would automatically become the new sovereign of Australia.
British, German, Jewish, and other immigrants also settled in Argentina, all bringing their styles of cooking and favorite foods with them.
English cultural influence ( reinforced at the end of the 19th century and beginnings of the 20th by British contacts with the Far East ) has also made the consumption of tea very common.
The Porvoo Common Statement ( 1996 ), agreed to by the Anglican churches of the British Isles and most of the Lutheran churches of Scandinavia and the Baltic, also stated that " the continuity signified in the consecration of a bishop to episcopal ministry cannot be divorced from the continuity of life and witness of the diocese to which he is called.
British and American forces also deployed vehicles designed for a close support role, but these were conventional tanks whose only significant modification was the replacement of the main gun with a howitzer.