Originally bred to hunt pheasant and quail, Gordon Setters are still fine hunting companions and field trial competitors.
There are TOP 10 interesting facts about Gordon Setter.
Written records originate in the early 1600s when setting dogs of exceptional endurance were described. This type of dog was of Scottish origin, and was bred as a one-man gundog. The word "Setters" was used because these dogs were known to "set" when they had the prey in site. The set was a semi-seated position.
2) Incredible Memory
Gordon Setter has an incredible long-term memory? The memory of a Gordon Setter is so powerful that once trained to do something, they are guaranteed to remember it for a long time. This characteristic is likely what has made the Gordon Setter such a skilled bird hunter. On the downside, teaching your Gordon Setter bad habits means that they will be incredibly difficult to break.
3) Largest Setter
The Gordon Setter is the heaviest and largest of the setters (the other three being the Irish Setter, the Irish Red and White Setter and the English Setter). These dogs are known for their stamina and intelligence.
Gordon Setters are athletic hunting dogs who need plenty of exercise to vent their energy. Otherwise they will become rambunctious and bored, which they usually express by destructive chewing.
5) Puppy Nature
Gordon Setter is a puppy at heart. That's true; often times a fully grown Gordon Setter will be mistaken for a puppy because of their playful nature. Since the Gordon Setter has a longer than normal childhood, they get to relish in the playfulness and high-energy affection of their owners for much longer. These are confident dogs that are obedient but also playfully mischievous once they've become totally comfortable with their owners.
6) Part of Family
Gordon Setters are devoted to their family and need a great deal of companionship. If you leave them alone too much during the day, they may express their unhappiness through destructive chewing and barking.
All of the setter breeds can be obstinate and manipulative. You must show them, through absolute consistency, that you mean what you say.
The Gordon Setter is a medium to large sized breed with a sturdy frame. It has a small, long head; oval shaped eyes which are medium in size and dark brown in color; low set ears which are folded towards the end and carried close to the head; a black nose with flared nostrils; a long muzzle which is not pointed; taut lips with teeth which meet in scissors bite or level bite. This breed has a high set, medium length tail. The tail is strong at the base and tapers to a point. It is carried horizontally, at or below the level of the back. It has medium length, strong legs with catlike feet. It has a long, soft and glossy coat which can either be straight or slightly wavy. The color of the coat can be a combination of black and tan.
To keep their silky coat free of mats, Gordon Setters require regular brushing, and also clipping and trimming every few months. And they do shed quite a bit.
10) Around Strangers
It is great with children and works well as a companion breed. It is also good with other dogs as well as other pets, including cats. However, it can be reserved with strangers, which makes it a good watchdog.