There are several career paths open to those who choose to pursue a Master's in Public Health. Many schools offer several concentration options for graduate students to pick from including epidemiology, biostatistics, environmental health, and health policy. Additionally, there are several career fields to choose from such as those relating to education, nutrition, administration, and research areas. We've compiled a list of some of the top careers that would be open to graduates of MPH programs.
Epidemiology is one of the most important subsets of the public health field. Epidemiologists study the cause of diseases and work to prevent the spread of it. This field requires a lot of statistical analysis and data interpretation. Therefore, anyone considering this as a career must have a solid background in the math field and enjoy statistics. Many epidemiologists work for local health departments or larger organizations such as the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Some epidemiologists may work for private companies or for a university. According to the Bureau of Labor Statistics, epidemiologists make an average salary of $69,450 annually and the job outlook for this particular profession is expected to grow as fast as average.
Those who choose this career must rely even more heavily on mathematics and statistics than epidemiologists. Biostatisticians often work in laboratory settings compiling data from research studies and applying solutions to public health problems. Biostatisticians are more likely to be employed by private research companies and pharmaceutical corporations. The average salary is between $39,090 and $72,830, but top earners in this field can earn more than $100,000.
If you choose to major in environmental and occupational health when you are pursuing your Master's in Public Health, a career in environmental science may be for you. Environmental scientists work at the intersection of the environment and human health and they may work to clean up pollution or waste to improve the air or water quality of certain areas. According to the Bureau of Labor Statistics, the average salary for this profession is $67, 460 and the job outlook is expected to grow faster than average.
Health Educators and Community Health Workers
This important career is for those who want to help people improve their health directly. They often work with specific populations and implement plans that might promote the health of a community. These workers might be employed by any number of employers including non-profit organizations, hospitals, universities, and local health departments. Although many of these jobs only require a bachelors degree, those with a masters or advanced certification may be qualified for positions of higher rank with better salaries.
Medical and Health Services Managers
Healthcare administrators direct and coordinate many of the business, financial, and administrative aspects of the healthcare industry. Medical and health services managers are well compensated for their roles with an average salary of $94,500 and a job outlook that is much faster than average.
Whether you are interested in a career in community health, epidemiology, or biostatistics, an advanced degree in public health can help you get there. These are some of the top five careers for MPH graduates right now, but there are many more opportunities for you to explore with this degree.