SLIDING / LAUNCHING
When shifting heavy loads (bridges; houses; ships; machine parts), different techniques are well-known
The advantages of the APS-System:
Sliding friction resistance < 1%, Lifting and shifting with the same device,
Moving of loads from 50 tons up to over 100'000 tons (Modules can be combined optionally),
High displacement speed (20 - 150 m/h),
Possibility of direction change without changeover and turning of loads on the spot.
Lifting the load by extending the hydraulic jack.
Normally the load is raised for about half of the stroke (140 mm).
After taking over of load by the hydraulic cylinders,
the chambers of the support plate are inflated with compressed air.
The modules are now ready for the displacement and can be
shifted by the Push-Pull-Unit or the strand jacks.
Main components of the APS-System:
Load carrying module and support plate (APS M-250 and APS M-385),
Hydraulic pumping units,
Compressed air supply devices
Push-Pull-Units or Strand Jacks,
Temporary steel constructions for the APS-System
Different systems for the advance motion are available. The displacement goods can by moved by strand jacks, winches or by push pull unit.
The ideal pulling or pushing device will be applied depending on site conditions. The required anchor forces for winches and strand jacks are relatively small in reason of the low friction. Thus there is no demand in large structural measures.
Push- Pull Units
Particular advantage of the push pull unit is the both sided load locking.
Thus no additional bracing is required.
The modules can be used on any air-tight and sufficiently resistant surface. Normally skidways, especially developed for this purpose are used. Depending on the quality of the subsurface (bearing capacity), the skidway type heavy or light is used. Both types have a guide board. The board serves guidance and is also used for additional clamping of the PPU.
One skidway is defined as a guide way. This skidway has a width of 1200mm and guides the load during the sliding process. The other skidways are wider, so that the modules can slide on them without any restrictions.
The heavy skidways can be placed onto the ground without additional fixture. The skidways have self-sealing joints. The skidways are respectively pulled together laterally with threaded bars.
The light skidways are welded tightly at the joints and dowelled to the ground
approx. every 1.5 – 2 m.
Hebetec owns different skidshoes for different loads and different skidding profiles. Skidshoes are mostly used with a hydraulic jack to lift the load before launching.
Space saving system, With guidance, Pulling equipment on the outside