Where Did Acupucture Originate?
The interaction of Yin and Yang give rise to the flow of vital energy called Qi, Chi, and Ki. Oils apparent in all life in the form of change and movement. Over 5,000 years old, Acupuncture is an ancient and traditional form of medicine. It originates ¡n China and has spread to many countries around the world. The Chinese mapped meridians (channels) of Ql flow in the human and animal body. Any stagnation in the Qi flow leads to an impairment in health. Qi accumulates in the organs and governs the functions of these organs. According to the Chinese tradition, most illnesses are rooted in either an excess or deficiency of this Qi.
How is Acupuncture Performed?
Tiny filament needles are placed in specific locations according to the Practitioner’s diagnosis which rarely cause any discomfort to the patient. Acupuncturists may also use moxabustion, e-stim and laser for treatment. Sometimes herbs are prescribed.
The World Health Organization has listed many conditions that Acupuncture successfully treats. Researchers conclude that Acupuncture activates small myelinateci nerve fibres in the muscle, which send impulses to the spinal cord, mid-brain and pituitary-hypothalamus. The spinal cord uses enkephalin and dynorphin to block incoming pain information. The mid-brain uses enkephalin to release serotonin and norepinephrine. The hypothalamus-pituitary releases beta-endorphin into the blood and CSF. (cerebral spinal fluid) Acupuncture point locations are associated with many different nerves, blood vessels and neuromuscular attachments which communicate to the CNS. (Central Nervous System)
In general, the needles help to regulate the flow of Qi which govern the organs. The Practitioner seeks to either tonify, or sedate the flow of Ql in specific areas of the body which leads to balance within the flow of Qi and restoration of health.
What if I Don't Like Needles?
Jill understands that not everyone likes or can tolerate needles as many acupuncturists do. Here at Jill McCubbin-Clare Acupuncture we have state of the art technology to overcome this. The use of lasers has been proven to provide the same level of change in the body to stimulate the same response as needles. This means the same therapy is available without the needles!
Why Choose Jill for Acupuncture?
Jill McCubbin-Clare has over 25 years experience in the healing field and is licensed as an Acupuncturist and TCM practitioner in the province of Ontario. She holds a CA State Acupuncture and TCM practitioner license and is registered with the NCCAOM as an Acupuncturist. She teaches yoga and is involved with ongoing classes in fascia and functional movement.