From Creation to Christ
Outline: Explanation of creation; wickedness of man; Abraham, the family who obeyed God; God's laws given; God's laws broken by all; Christ's death and resurrection; His preparing a place for His followers.
|Theme:||Resurrection of Jesus; Son of God; Creation; Law of God; Death of Christ; Heaven; Sin, disobedience; Punishment for guilt; People of God|
|Genre:||Messages and Fiction|
Scripts are basic guidelines for translation and recording into other languages. They should be adapted as necessary to make them understandable and relevant for each different culture and language. Some terms and concepts used may need more explanation or even be replaced or omitted completely.
2. Greetings (returned)
1. I see you are reading!
2. Yes, These words tell why God sent His Son, Jesus Christ, to this earth to die for our sins. Did you know that Jesus Christ was nailed to a cross?
1. No, why? Were people angry with Him?
2. Yes, but listen. Jesus Christ was willing to die. He died for you and me.
1. For me! Why?
2. A long time ago God made the sky and the earth and all things. Afterward He made one man, and then He made a wife and gave her to him. (His name was Adam and her name was Eve. They were good and they were happy. After a time they disobeyed God and were separated from Him. Everyone born on this earth since Adam and Eve have been separated from God because of sin.) They then (Adam and Eve) had a child (of their own). The children that followed were many, but they left God and did evil. (After that God sent a great flood and destroyed all the people. He saved only one man, Noah, and his wife, three sons, and three daughters-in-law. From these eight people there came many, even more than before. They all spoke one language. But again the people set themselves against God. And at that time God caused them to speak different languages so that they were scattered abroad.) Then God saw one man, named Abraham, who trusted Him. (Abraham understood that God's way is good. God saw that Abraham and his family wanted to obey Him. So God chose Abraham's family to belong to Him in a special way.) (The family of Abraham became the people who listened to God.) God gave them a law. The law was good. It was written on two flat stones. God made the law so that the people would know how to live right. God said, "If you disobey this law, you will suffer punishment. This is God's law. God said,--
(1) I am the one true God. You must not worship another God.
(2) You must not shape wood or stone or anything, to bow down to it.
(3) You must not say God's Name in a bad way.
(4) Do not forget to rest on God's day. This day is holy and is for worship.
(5) Think good of your father and mother, and honor them.
(6) You must not murder.
(7) You must not take another person's wife.
(8) You must not steal.
(9) You must not tell lies against another.
(10) You must not wish to take that which belongs to another.
1. This law is good. Did the people obey it?
2. No, these people disobeyed God's law. All people (since that time) have disobeyed God. You and I have broken God's law. But listen! There was only One who perfectly obeyed God's law. His name was Jesus Christ. (He is the Son of God.)
1. Ah, so that is why Jesus (Christ) died for us.
2. Yes, because Jesus (Christ) was without sin, He was the only one who could take the punishment which we (was) deserved. Therefore Jesus willingly died in place of you and me. If we are truly sorry for our sin and we want to obey God, we can now ask God to forgive us and to wash away the sin from our heart (take away our badness).
1. How can we obey God's laws?
2. We cannot obey God's laws by ourselves (by our own strength). We need Jesus to help us. When we confess our sin, God will forgive our sin. (If we accept Jesus and confess to Him that we have disobeyed His laws, then God will forgive us.) The death (blood) of Jesus Christ cleanses us from all sin (uncleanness) (takes away all our sin. Jesus then helps us keep God's laws). Because Jesus came alive again from the dead He lives to (has power to) keep us from sinning. When we are tempted to disobey God, we can ask Jesus Christ to help us. He will always help us when we ask Him. We can be truly happy when we obey God and trust the Lord Jesus to keep us following in the way that is pleasing to Him.