Find information on common questions and issues.
Check on the status of your correspondences with members of the QUBES team.
Graphing grouped continuous data in R with swirl
13 Jan 2020 | Teaching Materials | Contributor(s):
By Marney Pratt
This lesson helps students know some of the options for how to graph grouped continuous data (such as those involved in doing a t-test or ANOVA) and how to choose the best option.
Conducting Analysis of Variance (ANOVA) in R with swirl
By Kevin Geyer
Young Harris College
This lesson offers an introduction to ANOVA, including 1) how this statistical test can be differentiated from others and 2) a step-by-step guide to conducting and interpreting ANOVA results in R,...
Interpreting one-factor ANOVA in R with swirl
By Jeremy Claisse
Cal Poly Pomona
Interpreting One-Factor Analysis of Variance (ANOVA)
One-way ANOVA in R with swirl
By Bengt Allen
California State University Long Beach
One-way analysis of variance (ANOVA), following the text in Chapter 5 of Beckerman et al. (2017) Getting started with R: an introduction for biologists, 2nd edition.
Soil Respiration Module
By Jessica Kleiss
Lewis & Clark College
Soils hold more carbon (C) than any other component of the terrestrial biosphere!
Rates of climate change: ice ages and today
Students explore rates of changes of temperature and atmospheric CO2 from the Vostok ice core record. They compare these rates to modern rates of climate change from the Keeling curve and GISS...
Data is the New Science - Modified and combined with Following the Data Module
10 Jan 2020 | Teaching Materials | Contributor(s):
By Darlene Panvini
In this module, students will be introduced to some emerging biodiversity data resources. They will be asked to think critically about the strengths and utility of these data resources and apply...
BLAST Exercises for Analyzing Cloning Results
09 Jan 2020 | Teaching Materials | Contributor(s):
By Erin R. Morris
Genome Solver began as a way to teach undergraduate faculty some basic skills in bioinformatics; no coding or scripting is required. These activities have modified Lesson 1: Introduction to Genome...
Databases: A Study of Influenza
By Selene Nikaido
University of Central Missouri
This lesson introduces the student to the Influenza Research Database. Students will select Influenza genome sequences to see how they are related. Students tests hypotheses about evolutionary...
Introduction to Genome Annotation
This exercise is an adaptation of the Annotation Lesson by Rosenwald et al. It introduces the use of bioinformatics tools to extract information from genome databases. It is a basic lesson on...
07 Jan 2020 | Teaching Materials | Contributor(s):
By Shawna Reed
Genome Solver modules were combined to make one project for students using tools within NCBI BLAST to explore phylogenetics and horizontal gene transfer from phage to Chlamydia.
Stream Discharge Module- Beck Modification
01 Jan 2020 | Teaching Materials | Contributor(s):
By Catherine Beck
Stream discharge is a fundamental measure of water supply in stream systems. Low discharge may cause problems with water supply and fish passage, while high discharge may mean flooding. In this...
Climate Change Module- Beck Modifications
Students explore how climate is changing from the recent record
Analyzing current and past climate data
18 Dec 2019 | Teaching Materials | Contributor(s):
By Sarah Beth Cadieux
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institue
Students analyze current and past temperature and carbon dioxide data in order to interpret how current climate change is related to climate over the past 450,000 years. Objectives: •Are global...
17 Dec 2019 | Teaching Materials | Contributor(s):
OBJECTIVES: •Differentiate P-wave from S-wave•Learn to identify body and surface waves on a seismic record•Learn how seismic waves change as you move away from the epicenter•Use seismic waves to...
Biodiversity research using digitized, internet-based natural history collections
By Kaitlin Stack Whitney
Rochester Institute of Technology
Collections based research is a critical tool for organismal biology and biodiversity research. Yet natural history collections have a complicated past. This multi-class module examines the...
An Introduction to Biodiversity Databases and Specimen Images
04 Dec 2019 | Teaching Materials | Contributor(s):
By Amanda Fisher
Long Beach State University
In this module, students will be introduced to some biodiversity data resources and how to search for and download herbarium specimen images. They will be asked to think critically about the...
Spectral Seismology Module
19 Nov 2019 | Teaching Materials | Contributor(s):
By D. S. Soule1, M. Weirathmuller1, G. Kroeger1, R. D. Gougis
Based on a conceptual presentation of waveforms and filters
Water Quality Module
By C. A. Gibson, D. N. Castendyk
Students utilize real-time nitrate data from the US Geological Survey to statistically evaluate water quality impacts and to identify their causes
Climate Change Module
By Catherine O'Reilly1, D. C. Richardson, R. D. Gougis
Illinois State University