What business tips can Greek philosophers offer to a modern day business?
One thing we must always remember “someone has already been in the same position before you and done the same thing”.
“Many people have failed, learned, improved and moved forward not being discouraged by the experience but grown and became stronger.”
The Greek philosopher’s business tips and knowledge is still relevant today which we can learn and flourish.
So, what can we learn from the ancient Greeks in this World of technology and fast moving business?
Develop Reasoning Abilities - Socrates
Socrates understood that people are motivated by the desire for happiness and the complete understanding of themselves. The more a person knows, the greater his or her ability to reason and make choices that will bring true happiness. Focusing on helping people develop their reasoning abilities with inquiry, discovery, and learning was the centre of his method.
Human logic and reason – teaching ethics and acceptable standards of conduct.
Think Carefully And Logically - Plato
Plato experts in ethical matters believed in two separate realms, the world of the senses and the world of ideas.
Wanting to bring order and clarity to our minds as he believed our lives go wrong due to not giving ourselves time to think carefully and logically. our ideas are derived from what the crowd thinks.
Eudaimonia: Almost means ‘happiness’ but closer to ‘fulfilment’, Life is not continual ‘happiness’ but more ‘fulfilment’ where we go through periods of great pain and suffering which seem to be an unavoidable part of life.
Plato strongly believed that decisions shouldn’t be based on ‘how you feel’
Plato Theory of Forms or theory of Ideas based around what is real and what is not. Believing there is basically an ‘Ideal’ for everything because we have concepts of the Ideal which only exists in people’s minds.
We need to understand our imperfections, seek and question in order to learn, have a desire for additional knowledge, search for alternatives and never accept things at face value.
We are not perfect, business is ever evolving and it cant be ‘Ideal’ or perfect everytime so learn, gather the knowledge or people to change direction and move on as your perfect only exists in the mind. Ideas in the mind, rather than reality very app for Marketing because learning and adopting are key.
Focus On What You Can Control - Epictetus
Epictetus believed that external events are beyond our control; we should accept whatever happens but that individuals are responsible for their own actions and accept them with intelligence.
Focus on what can we control and what we can’t. We can control our thoughts, attitudes and beliefs, but everything else is to some extent out of our control. We always have some choice how we react.
All Things Are Numbers - Pythagoras
Pythagorean table – The Table of Opposites – The world depends upon the interaction of opposites.
Can you image how Pythagoras would feel about Big Data? Businesses these days revolve around the data helping reveal patterns, emerging trends, and human behaviour. Big data helps businesses figure out how to get customers to buy there products, learn customers’ behavioural patterns, and to help point them toward conversion.
Using big date to eliminate fraud in Banking by monitoring transactions to notice anomalies to reduce theft and fraud and improve cybersecurity.
Imagine his take on today’s social media? “Do not say a little in many words but a great deal in a few” I think he would love twitter with limited characters to get across what you want to say.
Websites going from huge amounts of sometimes irrelevant content to more focused content in fewer well-chosen words.
Encourage And Nourish - Aristotle
Greek Philosophers Ahead In Business Tips
Understanding ourselves, the World around us and our fella human beings can help improve our lives and spread that success into business. Geek philosophers business tips are still relevant today.