Bibliography Definition The purpose of the discussion is to interpret and describe the significance of your findings in light of what was already known about the research problem being investigated, and to explain any new understanding or insights about the problem after you've taken the findings into consideration. The discussion will always connect to the introduction by way of the research questions or hypotheses you posed and the literature you reviewed, but it does not simply repeat or rearrange the introduction; the discussion should always explain how your study has moved the reader's understanding of the research problem forward from where you left them at the end of the introduction.
Data is expressed as number within the sample who possess the characteristic. Probability determined using a Mann- Whitney U test.
Why is Table 1 in most studies? Shows that demographic and prognostic variables were evenly balanced in the process of random allocation of subjects to experimental and control groups.
Components of Results section Results should answer main hypothesis or research question s Order of presenting results is arbitrary May be Results and discussion example in Table 1 in less-complicated studies; or be set apart to emphasize its importance.
Results that are "sidelights" should not receive equal weight When presenting the results for the main hypotheses, consider: Clear, concise, simple Is enough detail presented to allow the reader to determine whether the effect of the experimental treatment vs.
Were adverse effects reported? Do not state any differences were present between groups unless a significant P value is attached. You select those descriptive and inferential statistics you wish to use, and place them in the order that seems reasonable to you.
Tables and Graphs Presentation Tables and graphs must stand alone Can a member of your department unfamiliar with the study pick up your graph and explain its meaning to you?
Text should highlight the importance or meaning of the figures and tables, not repeat the data contained within them. Tables and graphs both carry a necessary part of the message- use both Do the numbers add up?
Are baseline values for the groups similar? Are tables and graphs clearly labeled and appropriately scaled? Are the results of statistical analysis presented? Can one determine what statistical test produced the result? Choosing graph types To compare proportions and relative amounts How big?
To show correlations how well does one thing predict another? If your results agree with previous work, fine. If they do not, explain why not, or you may leave it unresolved "We cannot account for the difference seen in Were there any problems with carrying out the method as originally planned?
Not enough men in the study? Unanticipated amounts of side effects or pain? Failure to look at a crucial time interval? Any unsettled points in results? Look forward Implications for patient care, or for theory Suggestions for future research "If I had to do it over I would Conclusion Beware inappropriate conclusions beyond the range of the data, beyond the design of the study Abstract Contains all sections of paper Introduction with clinical importance and a key reference or two Methods in pertinent detail Results of testing the main hypothesis and most significant other results only Discussion a sentence or two on main implications or conclusion Structured abstracts See current abstracts in Anesth Analg or Anesthesiology?
Is ondansetron as effective as droperidol in prevention of postoperative nausea and vomiting? Miller PharmD, Michael P. The cost of these drugs often results in the use of less expensive antiemetics such as droperidol. Common practice is to treat nausea and vomiting only after it has occurred.
Anesth Analg ; The purpose of this study was to determine if there was a difference between ondansetron and droperidol in preventing PONV. After institutional review board approval and with written informed consent, a controlled, double-blinded study was conducted with male and female patients, ASA status I to III, randomly assigned into 2 groups with the aid of a computer-generated table of random numbers.
All patients underwent elective intra abdominal procedures. Anesthesia was maintained with isoflurane or desflurane in oxygen.The Discussion section needs to follow from your results and relate back to your literature review.
Make sure that everything you discuss is covered in the results section. Make sure that everything you discuss is covered in the results section. The results and discussion sections are one of the challenging sections to write.
It is important to plan this section carefully as it may contain a large amount of scientific data that needs to be presented in a clear and concise fashion.
The purpose of a Results section is to present the key results . In your discussion section, relate the results back to your initial hypotheses. Do they support or disconfirm them? Remember: Results do not prove hypotheses right or wrong, they support them or fail to provide support for them.
I suggest the following information in the following order. The discussion section is not always about what you found, but what you did not find, and how you deal with that. Stating that the results are inconclusive is the easy way out, and you must always try to pick out something of value.
How to write the results and discussion. Michael P. Dosch CRNA MS June Results. Be happy! You’re getting there. Just a small amount of writing to go from this point. About the thesis chapter i.e. Results and Discussion • Function of discussion is to: Interpret results in light of what was already known about the subject and Explain new understanding of the problem after taking results into consideration.
• Explain how the results answer the question under study. Examples: • Photographs.