(Bluey, an excitable, animated blue heeler dog, is walking in the park with her father, Bandit, when she sees Big Bird, a giant yellow bird from Sesame Street)

Bluey: (Excitedly runs up to Big Bird) Woof woof! Hi there! My name is Bluey, and this is my dad. What's your name?

Big Bird: (Surprised) Well hello there, Bluey! My name is Big Bird. What brings you to the park today?

Bluey: (Happily) I have never seen a bird as big as you! I just love to play and explore at the park! What about you?

Big Bird: (Laughing) I am a very big yellow canary. I'm just taking a stroll and enjoying the beautiful day. I love spending time outside enjoying nature.

Bluey: (Curiously) Do you live in the park, Big Bird? I live here in the Paddington part of Brisbane, not far from this park.

Big Bird: (Smiling) No, I actually live on Sesame Street in New York City in the USA. I am here on vacation. Have you ever been to New York City before?

Bluey: (Confused) Sesame what? I have never left Australia.

Big Bird: (Chuckling) Sesame Street! It's a big street where all my friends live, like Elmo, Cookie Monster, and Oscar the Grouch. New York City is a big, busy city in the USA. It is very different than here.

Bluey: (Amazed) Wow, that sounds like a lot of fun! I wish I could come and visit sometime. Dad, can we go visit the Big Bird?

Bandit (Trying to reign Bluey in): We'll see, Bluey. That is a big, big trip!

Big Bird: (Encouragingly) You're all welcome anytime! We'd love to have you join us.

Bluey: (Excitedly) Woof woof! Thanks, Big Bird! We'll definitely have to plan a visit soon, right Dad?

Bandit: (Laughing) We will see what we can do about that, Bluey. It might take a while, though. That is far, far away!

Big Bird: (Friendly) A visit sounds great. We'll be there when you get it all figured out. It was nice meeting you today. I am going to visit some friends at Oxley Creek Commons now. Take care!

Bluey: (Happily) Woof woof! Nice meeting you too, Big Bird. And I will see you soon!
