- Manna and Ur
- Uruk: the first urban city
- Ur of Sumer: tombs of the gods
- Ur of the Hittites
- Urfa: birthplace of Abraham
- Urusalim: a city of peace
- Lemuria: the final stage of Great Experiment
I. Manna and Ur
The term UR has many meanings including: Universal Recollection, Universal RetURn and Universal Religion, LemURia, URmia, URals, JeRUsalem (former URu-Salim), King ArthUR, NatURal Law, etc.
Ultimately, Culture is Cult of Ur. CultURe is always associated with Enlightenment. In Arabic “nUR” means “the light” and may refer to the “Light of God”. It is claimed that URantia (“heavenly place”) is the name of the planet Earth in this local Universe. In Sanskrit, saURa means: solar, celestial, divine, relating or belonging or sacred to or coming from the Sun or the god sUrya.
Jesus said: “The Kingdom of Heaven is at hand”. The word “heaven” from the Greek New Testament language is the same word for heaven (sky) and the planet URanus. The New Age or cycle that the Earth is now entering is called the Age of Aquarius. It is the Age of the outpouring of the Spirit, a global paradigm shift, and the long-awaited Golden Age for humanity. The Zodiac sign Aquarius is ruled by URanus that represents awakening and evolution of consciousness.
It is believed that a red giant star ArctURus, related to URsa Major, provides tools for the awakening of planets to galactic cognition. This mentoring has been the reason why ArctURus was named “Shepherd” (or “Guardian of the Bear”). The goal of the ArctURians in relation to the Earth is the enlightenment of earthlings and the balancing of the system of its electromagnetic lattice. They do not get involved in various karmic lessons on Earth and consider the achievement of balance in all spheres of life one of the greatest tasks on this planet.
The birthplace of ancient kingdom of Manna in the 1st millennium BCE was the Lake URmia. It is second biggest salt lake in the world. The first one is the nearby Caspian Sea accounting for 90% of the water of all saline lakes in the world. Water and salt are the essence of life. The amniotic fluid in the womb is 1% water and salt solution — the sole. The word sole (natural salt solution) is directly connected to the word “soul”. Understandably, around the Caspian Sea / Lake are united religions which have had a key influence on the modern world: Zoroastrianism, Mithraism, Christianity, Islam, and Judaism. The first had a remarkable influence on the other described religions. The last three are Abrahamic religions. Their common forefather Abraham was born in the city of UR.
In the older books of the Hebrew Bible (Old Testament), the angels (of God) are mentioned without names. Number of commentators has asserted that all of the specific names for the angels were brought back by the Jews from Babylon freed by CyRus the Great. Major scholars agree that the Babylonian captivity (or Babylonian exile) was not as terrible as it is described in the Bible. Rather, dramatization was used so that this important moment in the history of mankind was not forgotten.
The literal translation of term “Babylon” is “The Gates of Gods” that might refer to the Nibiruans. The main celebration of Sumer and Babylon was the New Year, initially symbolizing arrival of Nibiruans to Earth. The procession went through the famous Ishtar Gates. See Inanna RetURns by V. S. Ferguson. Babylon was the beloved city of Marduk seized power in Nibiru. The revise (i.e. Middle Eastern) reading of the name of this planet also gives “Ur”. Today Veliky Ustyug carries on the ancient event, but with new meaning.
It is believed that the name “Sumer” is derived from the “Land of the Watchers”. Egyptian name Neteru can also be translated as “Watcher”. The ancestor of the Russian Romanov House, Procopius the Rightful who lived in the above mentioned Veliky Ustyug is noted for his three sticks resembling the Egyptian hieroglyph for Neteru / Watcher / Son of God / Angel, etc. The “Watchers” had a task to guard the Garden of Eden (“abode of rightful ones”). They started to mix with indigenous people of surrounding area.
Many images of angels and archangels with wings are very similar to the depiction of Nibiruan gods (technically advanced beings) in Sumer and following Eastern traditions.
Although the word “archangel” is today associated with the Abrahamic religions, it seems to be borrowed / influenced from Zoroastrianism. It is believed that the knowledge of them was revealed to Zoroaster, the prophet and founder of this ancient religion. He is considered to be a native speaker of Old Avestan that is closely related to Vedic Sanskrit, the oldest preserved Indo-Aryan language. Zoroaster’s exact birthplace and dating are uncertain as there is no scholarly consensus. The earliest date is somewhere in the 2nd millennium BCE. Other scholars put him in the 7th and 6th century BCE as a contemporary or near-contemporary of Cyrus the Great. In this case Zoroaster would also a contemporary of Manna (northwest Iran). One version states that he was born on the territory of Manna. The other version relates the birthplace of Zoroaster with still Sanskrit named Russian river Kama near city of Perm. In a broader sense, Zoroaster’s motherland was Airyanem Vaejah (approximately “expanse of the Aryans”) that previously covered parts of modern Russia (with its former lands in Southern Caucasus and Central Asia), Iran, India, etc.
The Book of the Watchers (part of The Book of Enoch) might have borrowed the information about angels / archangels not only from Zoroastrian sources, but also from Sumerian tablets from the library in Nippur where they are called by the name Annunaki (i.e. Nibiruans). This ancient Jewish religious work is ascribed by tradition to Enoch, the great-grandfather of Noah, whose place of landing place after the Flood is believed to be Nakhchivan, a former part the ancient Manna Kingdom.
The Royal Name of the first Monarch of the present Manna Kingdom is abbreviated to His Majesty Michael-Uriel I. Archangel Uriel (“God is my light”) is often described as one who “stands at the Gate of Eden with a fiery sword” or “one of the holy angels, who is over the world and over Tartarus”. Uriel has also become the angel of Sunday / regent of the Sun and one of the holy sephiroth that are the 10 attributes/emanations in Kabbalah, through which The Infinite reveals Itself and continuously creates both the physical realm and the chain of higher metaphysical realms. Kabbala was also the capital of Caucasian Albania that has existed on the territory of present-day republic of Azerbaijan, part of which used to belong to the above mentioned ancient kingdom of Manna.
II. URuk: the first urban city
Sumerian city of Uruk is one of the oldest cities in the world, located northwest of Ur. Uruk’s time of foundation is 4th millennium BCE, in the southeast of modern Iraq. It is suggested that the Arabic name “al-Iraq” (in use since the 6th century) is ultimately of Sumerian origin, as Uruk was the Akkadian name for the Sumerian city of Urug, containing the Sumerian word for “city”, UR. Uruk is identified with Biblical Hebrew Erech.
Uruk went through several phases of growth, from the Early Uruk period (4000 – 3500 BCE) to the Late Uruk period (3500 – 3100 BCE). Uruk was formed on the base of pre-Sumerian Ubaid culture, when two smaller Ubaid settlements merged and became the Eanna District and the Anu District dedicated to Inanna and Anu, respectively. One of the chief landmarks of the city was the Anu ziggurat crowned by the “White Temple”.
The legendary Gilgamesh (who ruled Uruk in the 27th century BCE) was the fifth ruler of Uruk. Seven kings were after him, then Uruk was defeated and the throne was moved to Ur. In the Epic of Gilgamesh, he builds the brickwork city wall around Uruk, about 10 km. in circumference. It was a crucial point for the future. The wall means urbanization in comparison to rural settlements. Uruk played a leading role in the early urbanization of Sumer in the mid 4th millennium BCE. So it could be said that the roots of modern city lifestyle (technological civilization) start in Uruk.
At its height circa 2900 BCE, Uruk was the largest city in the world at the time. It probably had 50,000 – 80,000 residents living in 6 km2 of walled area. In comparison, New York City (world champion and symbol of globalization) has over 9 mln residents distributed over a land area of about 790 km2.
Uruk was famous as the capital city of Gilgamesh, hero of the Epic of Gilgamesh, often regarded as the earliest surviving great work of literature and the source of the key stories for the Hebrew Bible (the Christian Old Testament), particularly the accounts of the Garden of Eden and the Great Flood. Some of the best copies of the Epic of Gilgamesh were discovered in the library of the 7th century BC Assyrian king Ashurbanipal, also well known in the history of Manna.
Initially, Uruk was a city-temple where on an artificial platform the first sanctuary dedicated to An (later Akkadian: Anu) was built. It was called E.AN or “House of AN”. Then supreme ruler of Nuburu An and his wife Antu visited and spent the night in this sanctuary during one of the visits to Earth. This sanctuary became later the city of Uruk.
An gave this place to his beloved great-granddaughter, whose name meant “beloved by An” or Inanna. During the reign of Inanna (Ishtar), Uruk turned into one of the richest urban centers of Mesopotamia. Here she founded the custom of the “Holy Marriage” which became an essential part of the ancient Middle Eastern world. A king-priest became her husband for one night.
In the sanctuary “House of An” (that later became Uruk), the Nibiruans made important decisions on the construction of new cities in Mesopotamia. The first was built a new city of Kish, in which the kingdom began after the Flood. Kish was given to Ninurta, the son of Enlil (the leader of the Nibiruan mission on Earth) and his half-sister Ninhursag (the creator of humanity along with her other half-brother Enki as presented in Sumerian texts). The reason why such an honor was given to Ninurta was his parents. According to the law of the Pleiades (the mother civilization of the Nibiruans), the heir becomes the one with more blood of the genus. Enlil and Ninhursag had different mothers, but the common father was An (Anu). Given this status of Ninurta, over time Kish became the first administrative capital of Sumer. Ur was built for Nannar (Sin) born by official wife of Enlil. Ur became the largest economic center of Mesopotamia.
These cities were given to people so that they could learn to live and manage independently. Since then, the words “city” and “civilization” are synonymous. Of course, this did not happen immediately after the Flood, but gradually. At first people had to develop under supervision of the gods (like before). In the countryside, they cultivated the surrounding fields for them, courted the gardens and bred domestic animals. In city specialties people were artisans, cooks, musicians, priests and even temple prostitutes. When people were ready, the Nibiruans gave them monarchies to manage cities and the scientific knowledge necessary for evolution in this direction. Of course it is not the only version of this story.
Kryon provides a deeper insight. The Nibiruans were not so altruistic. The played gods to persuade kind and hard working Sumerians work for them. Nibiru need gold to sustain its atmosphere and, ultimately life on it. Therefore, the Nibiruans was greedy for gold from Earth. Without them knowing, they were used to play an important role in the development of the planetary scenario. Their bio-robots for gold-digging unintentionally helped to activate the information and communication system (The Matrix) for the creation of anthropogenic civilization. It was a part of the experiment with Duality. This Matrix was largely responsible for the technological progress accrued for the last 6,500 years, including modern society, computerized and robotized at an incredible pace. The Matrix will be changed to serve spiritual purposes, first of all. So far, the technogenic matrix creates one of the options for the development of human society. It allows you to gain experience with the help of which the Beings of Light acquire the opportunity to master dense layers of matter and worlds. It is said that eventually this human would learn to harmoniously combine the technical and spiritual achievements. Mankind’s experience will benefit many and many civilizations of other worlds on other planets.
Uruk was abandoned approximately 700 AD. Presently, on the site of Uruk is the settlement of Varka. Dvarka is an ancient city in the state of Gujarat in northwestern India, place of Vedic civilization that is the source of modern Indian society. Dvarka is one of the four sacred Hindu pilgrimage sites, and is one of the seven most ancient religious cities in the country. In Iranian mythology, Var means “vow and devotion”. Vara is “the abode of the righteous”.
In revise reading the word “Uruk” is “Kuru”. The first recorded state-level society in the Indian subcontinent was Kuru Kingdom (circa 1200 BCE – circa 500 BCE). Kuru was the name of a Vedic Indo-Aryan tribal union in northern India, encompassing a number of the modern-day states, including Delhi. Legendary Uttara Kuru or the Northern Kuru was an ancient kingdom located north of the India. It was the birthplace of the ancestors of the Pandavas and the Kauravas, the main heroes and characters of the Mahabharata, major Sanskrit epics of ancient India. Vital part of the Mahabharata is the Bhagavad Gita, a concise guide to Hindu philosophy. It was revealed just before the battle on the Kuru field. The common ancestor of the Pandavas and the Kauravas was the ancient Indian king Kuru. This Aryan ruler had ancestors. It is well known that the Aryans came to India and Iran from the north. That north is Russia, and not only geographically. Many of its names are still translated from Sanskrit, including its capital Moscow and Tver. In Sanskrit (and its closest ancient relatives the Iranian languages Avestan and Old Persian), the terms “Arya” means “noble”, “respected”, “wise”. Aryan was a self-designation by Indo-Iranian people.
Near Russian city of Archangelsk, in the course of the Northern Dvina River (beginning in Veliky Ustyug) there are three famous islands: Kur, Nal and Uht. In Sanskrit Ukhta means “song”. Moreover, in the above mentioned Mahabharata, Kur and Nal are two brother-islanders who are the ancestors of the Aryans, i.e. the Pandavas and the Kauravas. Along with other facts, it gives evidences that Russia is the northern ancestral home of the Aryans, that is the above mentioned country “Uttara-Kuru” or Northen Kuru.
Beside India and Iran a wives of the Aryans went to the Middle East. Haplogroups identify a single line of descent. Different studies have revealed that many Arab men from ruling elite have haplogroup R1a as millions of Russian men, i.e. they have a common male ancestor. Same is with India. Hopefully, this brotherhood found in the ancient times would help build modern countries a better future. It is already coming. For instance, Russia was the first country to recognize the Saudi Arabia as an independent country.
Surely, the age of Uruk (founded in 4th millennium BCE) is greater than the time of the Aryans’ invasion to the Middle East (2nd millennium BCE). However, the link Uruk ↔ Kuru could be used along with Sanskrit for finding ancient cultural, linguistic, and other common roots, including the shared heritage of the gods (or highly developed civilizations) from different star systems found everywhere on Earth.
III. UR of Sumer: tombs of the gods
Ur in southern modern Iraq was important city of Sumer (southern Mesopotamia) and its capital. Ziggurat of Ur built is the best-preserved of those known from Iran and Iraq. It was built in approximately the 21st century BCE, by king Ur-Nammu who dedicated the great ziggurat of Ur in honour of the moon god Nannar (Sin), the patron deity of Ur.
Beside the construction of Ziggurat of Ur, which glorified Nannar (Sin), Ur-Namu is known for the Code of Laws established by him at the end of the 21st century BCE. This code and a later collection of laws of the king of the city of Isin Lipit-Ishtar (the second half of the 20th century BCE) are the forerunners of the laws of the Babylonian king Hammurabi (18th century BCE), which are believed to be used by the compilers of the laws of Moses, represented as a legal system or agreement, concluded on Mount Sinai. The original name of Mount Sion (Zion) in Jerusalem may also have been associated with Sin (Nannar).
It is believed that the forefather Abraham from the Bible was born here. One of the reasons why the Sumerian Ur was considered the birthplace of Abraham was the so-called Royal Tombs excavated in it in 1927 by the leading British archaeologist of the last century, Sir Leonard Woolley. Previously, in the years 1921 – 1922, Woolley was the head of the excavation of Ahetaton, the former capital of the famous pharaoh and reformer Akhenaten. Since 1922, Leonard Woolley led the work of the British-American archaeological expedition in the Ur, which lasted until 1934.
He began his excavations in the Sumerian Ur with the remains of the Great Ziggurat dedicated to the moon god Nannar (in Akkadian, Sin), who was the patron deity of the city. Here Woolley unearthed not only the remains of walls, canals, residential quarters, palaces, but also an ancient cemetery with unique tombs. He named them Royal Tombs. Woolley announced that his findings were worthy of Abraham. Having such connection it was easier for him to find money for further excavations. It was rather a PR action than science.
Excavations of residential quarters confirmed that the residents of Ur followed the Sumerian tradition of burying their deceased relatives under the floors of the houses where their families continued to live. Therefore, the finding of a separate cemetery with 1800 graves was extremely unusual. They were located in a sacred fenced area, their age began from the 4th millennium BCE (that is, before the earthmen were granted the Kingdom from Nibiruans), until the first centuries of our era. Leonard Woolley discovered among them about 660 graves completely different from the rest. Out of these 660 unique graves, 16 were buried in shrouds or in wooden coffins, emphasizing their highest status (due to the lack of wood in Sumer and its high price). Each of these bodies was in a spacious rectangular pit, and was laid on its side, and not on its back as in the rest of the graves. On these bodies and around them were personal jewelry, jewelry, goblets, etc., dating from the 3rd millennium BCE, the period when the central authority over the Sumer was in Ur. The power to Ur had been passed from Uruk, managed by Inanna (Ishtar) who was daughter of Nannar (Sin), granddaughter of Enlil (Commander of the Earth project, according to famous author on Nibiru Zecharia Sitchin, born in Baku, raised in Mandatory Palestine before moving to New York).
There was no single centralized power in the early stages of Sumer’s development. Nibiruans divided Mesopotamia into regions, and the center of each of them became a city that was under the control of one or another god / goddess. So, Ur was ruled by the moon god Nannar (Sin), the son of Enlil. The general leadership of Sumer and the Nibiruans mission on Earth was carried out by Enlil in Nippur. Current governance in their cities / regions Nibiruan gods and goddesses carried out independently. Here is the origin of the system of city-states (policies), each of which had its own legislation and procedures. A similar system of division into regions (nomes) was used by Nibiruans in Ancient Egypt.
Based on the above, Leonard Woolley concluded that these 660 burials belonged to Ur’s elite. However, the 16 tombs that they uncovered were unique not only for Sumer, but for all of Mesopotamia, the whole Middle East and not only for their time, but for all periods of the history of this part of the planet. The findings of the British archaeologist were comparable with the finding of another Englishman Howard Carter, who excavated in the Valley of Kings near Luxor in 1922 the tomb of the young pharaoh Tutankhamun, the son of Akhenaten.
Leonard Woolley, like other leading archaeologists of the time, regarded the gods as myths that never physically existed. Therefore, he concluded that he had discovered the tombs of the kings and queens of Ur on the basis of the seals he found in the excavations with the titles “Nin” and “Lugal”. Despite the lack of explicit evidence, it has become a scientific tradition to believe that the above-mentioned 16 tombs belonged to the rulers of Ur and their wives and not to the gods and demigods (as one might suppose). Even today, scientists can not say exactly when these tombs were built and for which kings.
Zachary Sitchin draws attention to the fact that these unique 16 tombs were made of stone; they had domed roofs, the construction of which required special engineering skills for those times. Entering some of them was possible on inclined ramps leading to large rooms, behind which the tomb itself was. In addition to such high-tech architectural methods, the uniqueness of these tombs is proved by the fact that some bodies did not just lay on their side in coffins located inside special fences, but were covered with unique jewelry, many of which are made only in single copy. In the tomb of the PG-755 Woolley discovered more than a dozen objects around the body inside the coffin and more than 60 works of art in the tomb itself, including a gold helmet and an excellent gold dagger with a lapis lazuli hilt. Lapis lazuli was a sacred stone for Nibiruans and served as an indispensable attribute of their ceremonial royal decorations. It is believed that the symbol of supreme power, the throne of Anu (the supreme ruler of Nibiru) was encrusted with lapis lazuli.
Another confirmation that these burials could belong to the Nibiruan gods and demigods is the fact that at that time the metallurgical abilities of people were at the level of bronze. Nowhere in the ancient world were found such skillfully made artifacts and ornaments as the above-mentioned gold helmet and dagger. The world famous posthumous gold mask of young Tutankhamun, sculptures and other outstanding objects of his tomb, date back to the twelve centuries later Woolley’s findings in Ur.
The clay tablets describing the arrival of Anu (the supreme ruler of Nibiru) and his wife Antu to Earth, says that absolutely all bowls, cups, plates from which they will eat, drink and wash their hands should be of pure gold, including spills, on which they will be offered food and drinks, mainly various types of beer and wines. According to the instructions, on all these subjects there should be an ornament of eight petal roses, as confirmation of their belonging to Anu. Practically, it was precisely this kind of banquet / ceremonial objects, symbols of power and status that were found in the 16 tombs of Ur. Since the arrival of Anu and Antu in Uruk took place around 4000 BCE, i.e. three centuries before the time when the Nibiruans gave the Sumerians the Kingdom (civilization), only Nibiruan masters who were on the Earth could make these gold objects.
In addition to the unrivaled jewelry and household items discovered by Woolley in the 16 tombs of Ur, another proof of the connection with the Nibiruan gods and demigods is the female body in the so-called Tomb of the Queen (PG-800) owned by Nin.Puabi (the goddess Puabi). Zacharias Sitchin reasonably points out that despite the fact that Nin.Puabi’s father was a demigod Lugalband, her mitochondrial DNA, which is inherited from mother, is the purest Nibiruan. According to the female line, the mother of Nin.Puabi was the goddess Ninsun, and her grandmother was the goddess Bau (daughter of Anu, the supreme ruler of Nibiru). Ninsun was also the mother of the above mentioned legendary hero of the ancient world Gilgamesh, the fifth ruler of Uruk.
Zacharias Sitchin (1920 — 2010) believed that in the remains of Nin.Puabi (now stored in the London Museum of Natural History) might be the most missing link or genes of Nibiruans.
According to Woolley’s descriptions, Nin.Puabi’s skull was large and elongated. Leading British anthropologist Sir Arthur Keith, after studying and detailed measurement of her remains, concluded that Nin.Puabi could not be a representative of the Sumerian civilization, but descended from a long- headed race. The volume of her skull exceeded the average human, and the size of her head was disproportionately large in relation to the rest of her very feminine body. In the ancient world such an elongated form of skulls had Akhenaten and his family members.
Another proof of the extraordinary size of the head of Nin.Puabi is headdress found in her tomb. It was fixed with gold pins and gold ribbons. Employees of the museum of the University of Pennsylvania (where it is now stored) have made for the dummy a special huge wig of hard hair so that it could withstand this finding. Also noteworthy is not only the disproportionate body size of the headgear, but also the massive earrings decorated with precious stones. The total weight of jewelry of Nin.Puabi was almost 6.5 kg.
The body of Nin.Puabi was not decorated with clothes, but with long laces, on which were expensive beads, 60 of which were of gold, beautifully combined with lapis lazuli and carnelian. On each finger she had gold rings. Necklace on the neck of Nin.Puabi had a rose, the symbol of Anu. Perhaps, by this she wanted to emphasize her kinship with him. The number of gold beads on her burial attire speaks in favor of it. 60 is the number of Anu, the supreme ruler of Nibiru and the Sumerian pantheon.
The maidens buried with Nin.Puabi had headgear proportional to the size of their heads, i.e., only Nin.Puabi was either long-headed or this headgear had been given to her by her Nibiruans, many of whom are believed to be tall and, respectively, having a large head size.
Journal “World Channeling” provides information about dolichocephalic (elongated) skulls, which became a transitional stage from the crystalline form of consciousness of Pascats (intelligent lions) to the crystalline form of consciousness of modern man. The homeland of these creatures is in the star system Sirius B.
The elongated shape of the skull is thought to be a stepping stone from the Oneness (in which the Lemurians and others stayed) to the Duality that is part of the Universal Game of Integration of the Polarities. It is believed that the Lemurians did not need to accumulate knowledge and learn to think rationally. Their brains had no division into the right and left hemispheres (as in modern humans), but represented a single undivided structure. Its main purpose was to manage the body, rather than independent analysis or thought processes. To get answers to their questions, the Lemurians could connect to the planetary information bank of data or the Collective Planetary Consciousness.
Some of the elongated shape skulls are exhibited in the city of Ica, Peru. There are different versions regarding the name of the country. It ends with Ru that Ur in revised reading. Peru is among the top sites for the heritage of highly developed civilizations. Ica is special. The distance to the Nazca Lines is 120 km., to the Paracas Candelabra is 60 km., to Machu Picchu — 360 km., from Machu Picchu to Cusco is 75 km.
It is possible that the disappearance of Lemuria was part of the Universal Plan. In order to gain experience of Duality, a brain structure divided into two hemispheres was required. The uniqueness of modern time is that a person, having a brain physiologically divided into two complementary parts, can develop it to the former state of Oneness. At the same time, people will go beyond the previous civilizations, since they will think and analyze independently, almost like the very structures to which the ancient inhabitants of the Earth applied for answers.
Ur, the Ubaid culture and Manna
Ur dates from the Ubaid period circa 3800 BCE, a prehistoric period of Mesopotamia. Ubaid period is dated from 6500 — 3800 BCE. Ur was started on their territory and heritage. The still unanswered questions remain to the modern scientists the strange findings of Tell Al’Ubaid. Reptilian-headed clay figurines found in several Ubaid cemeteries. These pre-Sumerian 7 000 year old artifacts represent humanoid figures with lizard characteristics: long heads, almond shaped eyes, long tapered faces and a lizard-type nose. Moreover, their postures, such as a female figure breast-feeding, do not suggest that they were ritualistic objects. Certain tips are given in the interview with Lacerta (lit. a genus of lizards), a reptilian woman from an ancient race dwelling in the Inner Earth. Their history and role are well described in the magazine «World Channeling».
There is a certain connection between the Ubaid civilization and the ancestors of the ancient kingdom of Manna. The Leyla-Tepe culture of ancient Azerbaijan (first located in the 1980s by I.G. Narimanov, a famous Soviet archaeologist) and the Maykop culture of Caucasus region of Southern Russia provide evidence that people of Ubaidi culture migrated there from Mesopotamia. They later assimilated with the Hurrites who created the state of Mitanni in northern Mesopotamia in the 16th -13th centuries BCE. The Hurrites were among the main ancestors of the Mannaeans, who lived around the 10th to 7th centuries BCE, and merged in the region of Lake Urmia (northwestern Iran).
The Hurrites also had a strong influence on the Hittite kingdom, a powerful ancient power in Asia Minor existed circa 1800 — 1180 BCE.
IV. UR of the Hittites
Harran, located on the territory of modern Turkey, was in ancient times a major trading center in the land of the Hittites, who lived here thousands of years before the arrival of the Turks. It is believed that Ur of the Hittites (Harran) was founded by merchants from Sumerian Ur located in the south of modern Iraq. Sumerian Ur or Ur of the Chaldees is mentioned in the Hebrew Bible (source of the Christian Old Testament).
There is a version that the forefather Abraham was born in Nippur (the city of Enlil), but grew up in the above described Sumerian Ur where his father was a priest. At a certain stage the priesthood of these two cities was united, which was the possible reason for the migration of Abraham’s father from Nippur to Ur.
It is believed that after the tragic death of Ur-Nammu in the battle with the troops of Marduk and his son Nabu in 2096 BC, Abraham’s father moved with his family to Harran, serving as the connecting city of Sumer with the Hittites loyal to the Enlil clan and opposing Marduk’s Babylon. In Harran was the second largest temple of Nunnar (Sin), the first was in the Sumerian Ur. Therefore, Harran was often called the second Ur.
According to the modern interpretation of the Old Testament, the birthplace of Abraham, the forefather of the three monotheistic religions (Judaism, Christianity and Islam), is the Sumerian city of Ur (present Iraq). On the other hand, even in the last century, many researchers traditionally believed that Abraham was born in Harran (modern Turkey) which during the time of Abraham was known as “Ur away from Ur”.
Sumerian Ur and the ancient Harran were the cities of the cult of one god. The Sumerians called him Nannar. The later Semites called him Sin, the god of the moon. It is suggested that the crescent as a symbol of Islam is associated with this tradition. The name of Sinai Peninsula or simply Sinai is also related with Sin (Nannar). Sinai was the place of important infrastructure of the Nibiruans.
A huge temple of Nannar (Sin) was in the center of Harran. Nannar was the firstborn of Enlil on Earth, that is, one of the first Nibiruans born not on Nibiru, but on this planet. In the Nibiru hierarchy, Nannar had a numerical rank of 30, his son Utu (Shamash) — rank 20, his daughter Inanna (Ishtar) — 15, Ishkur (Adad) — 10. The highest numerical rank was 60 and belonged to the supreme ruler Nibiru Anu. His sons Enil and Enki had the next ranks. The head of the Nibiruan mission on Earth Enlil had 50. His stepbrother (and the creator of humanity of Sumer scripts) Enki had 40.
The following brief historical background (based on works of Zecharia Sitchin and other related sources) will help to better understand the relationship with Harran and the Hittites of Sumer Abram, who changed his name at the age of 99, made circumcision and became the forefather of monotheistic religions.
The Sumer Abram and his direct descendants belonged to the genus from Nippur, where was located the Nibiruans mission headquarters headed by Enlil. Farah, the father of Abraham, came from this priestly royal family, created by the Nibiruans, so that people could learn to manage their civilization. The founding of the genus occurred around 3700 BCE when the Kingdom was descended from Heaven (Nibiru) to Earth and Enlil gave the people a calendar named Nippur (named after his residence) which later became Jewish. The founder of this family was the demigod Alulim in whose veins was half the Nibiruan-Pleiadian and half human blood.
Farah with his entire family, including the already married Abraham and Sarah, moves to Harran in 2095 BCE. Sarah was a half-sister to Abraham. They had one father but different mothers. Thus, it could be stated that the male and female lines of the Abraham family belonged to the highest Sumerian society, the descendants of kings and priests. Marriages between stepbrothers and sisters were a typical phenomenon in the ruling elite of Nibiruans who created Sumerians with their civilization. Sons born in such unions automatically became heirs according to the Pleiadian law. It was believed that such an heir had more genes of this kind. This was especially important in the royal family.
Sarah’s name underscores her high status. The Sumerian word “Sar” means “The Supreme Ruler”, this is one of the epithets of Nibiru, the native planet of the Sumerian gods. Hence the roots of the Middle Eastern name Sarah meaning “Princess”. It is believed that by the word “Sar” the Sumerians called the period of rotation of Nibiru around the Sun, which was 3600 years and was also translated as “the right circle” or “full cycle”. The number of 3600 Sumerians denoted by a large circle (orbit) icon. The Sumerians made identical these three terms: the planet Nibiru, its orbit, the number 3600. The term “Sar”, like other astronomical knowledge, the Sumerians could receive from Nibiruans who were not only their gods, but also teachers (to some extent).
After the death of Farah in Harran at the age of 205, the god (from the Enlil clan) told Abraham and Sarah (who still had then Sumerian names), as well as their nephew Lot, to leave Haran (the territory of the Enlil’s clan) and go to Canaan, then controlled by the Enki’s clan. The most powerful of them was his son Marduk. In the same year he was sent to exile in Harran.
The younger brother of Abraham Nahor remained in Harran. Nahor’s granddaughter Rebekah later became the wife of Issak, the first-born of Abraham and Sarah, who, by virtue of their old age, have lost the hope of having children. For the bride in Harran will go the son of Isaac and Rebekah Jacob, later named Israel.
After many years of work on the uncle (turned exploiter and deceiver), Jacob married his cousins Leah and Rachel, the daughters of Laban, who was the brother of Rebekah, the mother of Jacob. It is used as one of the evidences that the birthplace of Abraham is not the Sumerian Ur (modern Iraq), but the Harran region, in particular Edessa (modern Turkey), which will be discussed below. When Abraham was born, his father was 70 years old. Abraham was 86 years old when he fathered his firstborn Ishmael (from Egyptian servant lady). Abraham was already 100 years old when was born Isaac, his firstborn of Sarah.
Abraham and the Hittites
The Hittites were Abraham’s neighbors in Harran. Abraham buried Sarah in the cave he bought from the Hittites of Hebron. According to one of the Jewish traditions, the cause of Sarah’s death was the news of the planned sacrifice of Isaac. This same tradition argues that the age of Isaac during the abortive sacrifice was 37 years, contrary to popular beliefs about him being a child. In the Old Testament, God called Isaac the only son, although Abraham had seven sons, including the firstborn of Ishmael, the forefather of the Arab tribes.
Only the Hittites managed to capture Babylon, base of Marduk (from the Enki clan). The supreme god of the Hittites was Teshub, the god of wind and storm (thunder). Most likely, it was Ishkur (Akkadian: Adad), who was the youngest son of Enlil, the head of the Nibiruan mission on Earth. Enlil was the god of the wind. The unofficial name of Baku is the City of Winds. As the god of lightning Teshub (Ishkur / Adad) was revered throughout Asia Minor, his attributes were an ax and lightning.
It is believed that Ishkur / Adad (the son of Enlil), later known to the Hittites as Teshub, was sent to seek gold in South America. He successfully coped with this task and even left his mark in Peru, next to Paracas — the famous Candelabrum, a height of more than 100 meters. It is located on the slope of a sandy mountain, descending to the water at an angle of 45-50 degrees. In this case, the width of the ditches is approximately 4 meters, and the depth is 2 meters. Moreover, for so many thousands of years, even the strongest oceanic wind was unable to fall asleep this figure.
David and the Hittites
The wife of the military commander of the Hittite was Bathsheba, seduced in Jerusalem by King David, when her husband fought his enemies. Subsequently, Bathsheba became the wife of King David, and their son went down in history as the owner of a huge harem of 700 wives and 300 concubines. The most famous feat of David is the victory over Goliath, the descendant of Nephilim, who was some kind of terminator of that time. However, Goliath’s weapons and clothing described in detail belong to the heavily armed soldiers of the Greek army who lived three centuries after the events described, just like the people who described this fight. Without David and Solomon there would be no Jewish kingdom, but no reliable direct historical evidence of their existence, primarily archaeological, has been found so far. Very little is found, although the image of David is one of the central in the Bible. One of the reasons of the absence of evidences may be the repeated destruction and reconstruction of Jerusalem. The compilers of the Bible reckon Jesus to the family of David. However, in one Gospel he was of the family of David by mother. In the other Gospel his father Joseph was also from the lineage of David.
As far as the Jerusalem Temple is concerned, David bought from a Hittite a place on Mount Moriah for the construction of the temple.
Solomon and the Hittites
Solomon’s father was the above-mentioned King David. His mother of the Hittite was Bathsheba, seduced by David and later became his wife. King Solomon is known not only for his great harem, but also for his great wisdom. However, many of the songs attributed to him were known to different peoples of Egypt and the Middle East long before his birth.
Solomon bought horses from the Hittite princes. Solomon’s wife was daughter of one of them.
Chronology of Haran (Ur)
The history of Harran dates back to the 4th millennium BCE. Harran was an important center of worship for the god Sin (the Sumerian Nannar, the father of Inanna or Ishtar), who was the Mesopotamian god of the Moon. Despite the persecution from Christians and Muslims, this cult existed in Harran until the 12th century. It is believed that it has survived due to the fortune-tellers and astrologers from the priests of Sin. Their services were always in demand, despite the prohibition imposed by monotheistic (Abrahamic) religions succeeding each other in Harran.
In the 7th century BCE, before going to Egypt, the Assyrian king Asarhaddon, the brother of the future librarian Ashurbanipal, restored the Sin’s temple. During the preparation of the second expedition to Egypt, Asarhaddon died in Harran. Ashurbanipal, who took the throne after the death of his brother, served as the supreme priest of the Temple of Sin in Harran. Namely, thanks to the Ashurbanipal library excavated in the 19th century, the modern world has learned about the Sumerian origins of the Old Testament and the daily life of ancient Mesopotamia.
At the end of the 7th century BCE, Harran served as the last capital of Assyria conquered by the Babylonians. In Harran, the Assyrians chose a new king and attempted to restore their empire with the help of the Egyptian pharaoh Necho. The fall of Assyria allowed Media (the first Iranian empire) to take over the ancient kingdom of Manna.
The last Babylonian king Nabonidus lived in Harran, where he restored the cult of Sin and made his mother Adda-Guppy the high priestess of the Temple of Sin.
In the 4th century BCE, Harran was under the rule of the Persians. It was liberated by Alexander the Great, who settled the veterans of his army here.
In 53 BCE in Harran was killed Mark Crassus in the battle with the Parthians. He was a famous Roman commander and politician, who along with Caesar and Pompey entered the first triumvirate. Mark Crassus defeated the slave uprising led Spartacus. He was one of the richest men of his time (about 170 billion US dollars for modern money). This devastating defeat of Mark Crassus was considered a disgrace to the Roman army for a long time. The head and right arm of Krass were taken to the Armenian city of Artashat, the fourth capital of Great Armenia, to the southeast of Yerevan. Several legendary Roman eagles were captured as trophies to the Parthians. Later, the first Roman Emperor Augustus would establish peaceful relations with them and return the captured eagles. The defeat of Crassus at Harran was one of the reasons for the fall of the Roman Republic and the transition to monarchy in Rome.
After Harran became part of the Roman Empire, the god Sin became revered in their capital Rome. In the spring of 217, the Roman emperor of Caracalla arrived in Harran to offer a sacrifice to the god of the moon Sin, where in 53 BCE the Romans had suffered the above mentioned defeat from the Parthians. Under strange circumstances Caracalla was killed here. After stopping briefly to urinate, Caracalla was approached by a soldier who and stabbed him to death. The conspiracy was set in motion by the Praetorian Guard Prefect Macrinus, Caracalla’s successor. Caracalla has still largely had a reputation as being among the worst of Roman emperors. His reign was notable for granting Roman citizenship to nearly all free men and free women throughout the Roman Empire.
In 382, during the reign of the Byzantine emperor Theodosius the Great, the Temple of the god Sin was closed, but the community of adherents of the ancient cult could survive in the city until the 12th century.
In the 7th century Harran was captured by the Arabs. In the 14th century, the Mongolian army turned the city into ruins. In the 16th century, Harran was annexed by the Ottoman Empire. Today it is a Turkish city, a couple of dozen kilometers from the Syrian border.
Harran was always known as a city where prominent figures of culture, science, and philosophers lived.
Sabians and Harran (Ur)
A thousand years ago here was the center of the intellectual tradition of the Harran Sabians, who honored Hermes Trismegistus and spread his legacy.
The Sabian religion was a mixture of Chaldeanism (the heritage of Babylon), parsism (fire worshipers), Judaism, Christianity, Gnosticism, Neoplatonism, etc. They disappear in history from the 12th century, when the Egyptian Sultan Mamluk Saladin finally destroyed what remained of the Temple of Sin. It is possible that continue to exist somewhere in the region but under a different name. There are a lot of texts written in the purest Syrian-Aramaic dialect left from the Sabians.
Since ancient times, the Sabians were called stargazers because they studied mathematical astronomy and translated them into Arabic ancient Greek texts. Therefore, in a broad sense, the term Sabeism means worshiping the stars.
Sabians are mentioned three times in the Koran, together with Jews and Christians. The Sabians were the same as they belonged to the monotheistic tradition. According to Muslim authors, the Sabians followed the Book of Zabur, which was the fourth in the Abrahamic tradition. According to the Koran, the book “Zabur” was given to King David, the founder of ancient Israel.
Islam and Harran (Ur)
Harran University was considered the first Islamic university. The local madrasa is the oldest center of education in the Islamic world. It was built in the era of the Abbasid dynasty at the mosque on the territory of the Temple of Sin. It was attended by such Islamic scholars as doctor and mathematician Sabit ibn Kurra, astronomer Al-Battani, discoverer of the atom Jabir ibn Hayyan and the theologian Ibn-i Teimiye.
The main mosque of Harran was made in the 12th century from the Christian church, which, in turn, was rebuilt in the 5th century into a Christian temple from the synagogue, which stood on the site of the Temple of Sin (god of Moon).
The stelae of the Sin’s temple were used as floors in the main mosque of Harran, whose second name was “Paradise Mosque”. It was built during the last caliph from the Umayyad dynasty in the period 744-750. It was discovered during archaeological excavations in 1983. Its seize was 104 m. by 107 m. Thus, it is evident that Harran has transmitted traditions from generation to generation. The symbol of Islam (the Crescent) was formerly a symbol of Mesopotamian god of Moon Sin (the Nibiruan Nannar).
The Egyptian Sultan Saladin destroyed to the ground everything that remained of the Temple of Sin and built a mosque on its foundation in 1179. However, 50 years later it was destroyed during the so-called yellow crusade of the Mongolian army of Nestorian Christians and their allies against the Middle Eastern Muslims.
The remains of the Temple of Sin and the Main Mosque were discovered only in 1957 during the British archaeological expedition. Under the ruins of the three gates of the mosque, three stone slabs with carved symbols of the god Sin were found. They were laid out in such a way that Muhammad’s followers entering the mosque stood on them as a sign that an ancient (idolatrous) religion had been destroyed forever. Due to the lack of education and short life expectancy, then the zealots of monotheism could not see that it was simply the gods changing their masks. Succession is also confirmed by the usual fact that the modern inhabitants of Haran are proud of being descendants of the ancient diviners of the lunar deity, although the cult of Sin disappeared more than eight centuries ago.
Ezekiel, the Third Temple and Harran (Ur)
In the vicinity of Harran, prophet Ezekiel had the famous divine vision of the heavenly staircase. Under his hand during the so-called Babylonian captivity ideology and religious treatises of the Jews were born. Many world artists (such as Raphael) have applied to the prophecies of Ezekiel. More often they portrayed “The vision of Ezekiel about the throne of Jehovah’s chariot”. It was Merkava (Hebrew: “Chariot”) also spelled Merkabah, the throne, or “chariot,” of God as described by the prophet Ezekiel.
Today Merkabah, often spelled Merkaba, is the well known as the Light Body or the divine light vehicle allegedly used by ascended masters to connect with and reach those in tune with the higher realms. Drunvalo Melchizedek has provided The Teaching Of The MER-KA-BA.
In this vision, Ezekiel saw four mysterious animals with faces of a man, a lion, a calf and an eagle, which later became the symbols of the four evangelists. All events in this vision have astronomical and astrological symbols. It is believed to be a well-organized and thought-out sacred mystery of the transition of star religion into newly formed monotheistic religions.
The world has entered the Age of Aquarius. New divine abilities are being opened now, including the connection with Merkaba that is the body of Light or the throne of Jehovah’s chariot shown in the vision of Ezekiel.
The four animals from Ezekiel’s vision are portrayed in all the Orthodox churches together with the four evangelists, each with its own symbol: Luke with Taurus, Mark with Leo, John with Eagle, Matthew with the Angel (man). From the astronomical point of view, the heavenly cross, symbolically reflected by the four Evangelists on the gates of Christian churches and fixed by the points of the spring and autumn equinox, as well as the winter and summer solstice, indicates the transition of humanity to the Age of Aquarius.
Veliky Ustyug is believed to be the capital of this Aquarius Age. The Lord of this new epoch is the Ascended Master Saint Germain. Among his last incarnations on the planet was Christopher Columbus. Saint Germain also incarnated as High priest in the civilization of Atlantis 13,000 years ago serving in the Order of Lord Zadkiel in the Temple of Purification, located on the island now called Cuba. Interestingly, Cuba is the name of old important town in Azerbaijan whose modern territory used to be Manna. Saint Germain’s incarnation was Saint Alban, the first British Christian martyr. Albany is the capital of the U.S. state of New York. Caucasian Albania was the state of indigenous people of modern-day Azerbaijan. After the rise of the Parthian Empire (247 BC — 224 AD) defeated the Roman army of arrogant Mark Crassus (see above), the kings of Caucasian Albania were replaced with an Arsacid family of Sakas origin. Saint Germain is believed to be Merlin, magician and counselor at King Arthur’s Camelot who inspired the establishment of the Order of the Knights of the Round Table. Some researchers credit Saint Germain with inspiring the Founding Fathers to draft the United States Declaration of Independence and the Constitution, as well as providing the design of the Great Seal of the United States.
Annie Besant met the Count Saint Germain in 1896. A passage from her book “A Treatise on the Seven Rays” could be used with regard to the vision of the prophet Ezekiel:
“These ancient Mysteries were originally given to humanity by the Hierarchy, and were—in their turn—received by the Hierarchy from the Great White Lodge on Sirius. They contain the clue to the evolutionary process, hidden in numbers and in words; they veil the secret of man’s origin and destiny, picturing for him in rite and ritual the long, long path which he must tread. They provide also, when rightly interpreted and correctly presented, the teaching which humanity needs in order to progress from darkness to Light, from the unreal to the Real and from death to Immortality”.
Globally speaking, the Ezekiel’s visions of the new temple and the new Israel are more likely to be addressed to the Age of Aquarius, the new humanity and the renewed Earth. Many of the readers of Ezekiel literally go astray and see this new (third) temple in the historic center of Jerusalem. Today, on this site is a Muslim complex. There is a body of evidences that in the distant past it was a site of the Nibiruan spaceport.
Ezekiel, who was taken to Babylonia, lived in the village of Tel Aviv near Nippur, the city of Enlil who led the Nibiruans mission on Earth. Apparently not by chance, it was there that Ezekiel saw the future of the Jewish people and all of humanity in the vision. Telavi is a Georgian town (The Caucasus). Some 110 km. wets of Telavi is Gori, the birthplace of Stalin. Between Telavi and Gori is Tbilisi, the modern capital of state Georgia, neighboring Azerbaijan. The name Tel Aviv was suggested by the immigrants from the Russian Empire in memory of the Mesopotamian site mentioned in The Book of Ezekiel of in the Tanakh (Hebrew Bible). The Ezekiel is one of the major prophetic books in the Old Testament.
Marduk and Harran (Ur)
The history and actions of the Nibiruans on Earth often represent a struggle between the representatives of two clans of half-brothers Enki and Enlil. Enki was the firstborn of their common father Anu, but Enlil’s mother was Anu’s half-sister, which automatically gave Enlil the title of heir Anu. This contradiction was transferred from Nibiru to Earth. Although Enki began it exploration and mining of gold for Nibiru, Enlil was appointed head of the Nibiruan mission on Earth. Although the brothers often argued with each other, they did not resolve their differences by waging wars as it happened with their children and grandchildren.
Being the firstborn of Enki, Marduk understood that his father or he should rule, if not Nibiru itself, then at least the Earth, whose resources for the salvation of Nibiru became accessible only due to Enki and his kinship with other civilizations inhabiting the Earth long before the arrival of Nibiruans.
Marduk began the struggle for power, and, ultimately, displaced his grandfather Anu from the post of the supreme ruler of Nibiru (circa 2200 BCE). However, his way to the top of power was thorny and not always smooth. Marduk was removed from the government several times and sent to exile to cool his ardor (ambition). The traditional place of exile for Marduk was Harran, controlled by the clan of his uncle Enlil who really feared Marduk and the support of the earthlings he received thanks to his son Naboo, born of an earthly woman. Naboo was worshiped even in the territory of present-day Israel (ancient Canaan), which the Enlil clan gave to Abraham for perpetual use for help in the fight against Marduk, which ended in 2024 BCE with a nuclear war and the destruction of Sumer.
The name of Naboo (prophet) might be traced in the name of Mount Nebo, from which Moses would see the Promised Land. In Russian, Nebo means “Heaven”. It is believed that Moses went to Heaven (died) on this mount. He led the Exodus from Ancient Egypt to Sinai and brought them to the mount Nebo. Wandering long time within Sinai they constantly got Manna from Heaven.
In the struggle for power, Harran became Marduk’s base in 2048 BCE and continued to be so for 24 years until his younger brother Nergat and his cousin Ninutra (opposed Marduk) used nuclear weapons. Commanding from Harran, Marduk and his son Nabu managed to attach to their territories the Baalbek Spaceport and Jerusalem. The spaceport on Sinai, earlier considered as neutral territory, was under threat of capture by Marduk. From Sinai, Marduk and Nabu could have control of all the Nibiruans’ cosmoports on the Earth. Members of the Enlil clan could not let it happen. The troops loyal to them began to strike back at the armies of Marduk. In this first national war of antiquity, Abraham commanded cavalry on the side of the Enlil clan.
Marduk’s claims to power were based not only on the birthright of his father Enki, but also on the change of twelve epochs, each of which lasts approximately 2160 terrestrial years. It is believed that the Nibiruans had an agreement on the transfer of government on Earth from one god to another, with the onset of each new of the above epochs, thereby seeking to avoid internecine wars and conflicts over power. The Piscean Age, marked by the birth of three monotheistic religions, was under the control of the Enlil clan, including Ereshkigal being the granddaughter of Enlil and the wife of Nergal. Ereshkigal (lit. “Queen of the Great Earth”) was the daughter of Nannar (Sin). The sign of Pisces was dedicated to her. It is believed that her core territory was South Africa, producing much gold for Nibiru. Her son Ningishzida (“Lord of the Good Tree”) was one of the best Nibiruan scientists and enlighteners of mankind, after his father Enki.
Naboo is considered to be the patron of the Age of Aquarius, in which humanity is now entering. Naboo was the grandson of Enki and the son of Marduk. Naboo was the nephew of Ningishzida who always strove to reconcile the clans of Enlil and Enki. By the way, friendship is the quality of the sign of Aquarius. It is believed that the ancient symbol of medicine (the snake over the cup) originates the cult of Ningishzida. The origin of the images of ancient god of healing of Asclepius and wisdom god Hermes are also attributed to the cult of Ningishzida.
After spending 24 years in Harran, Marduk demanded that in accordance with the new precessional era and the arrangements between the Nibiruans, the supreme authority over the Earth in the Age of Aries has to be passed from the Enlil clan to the Enki clan, the firstborn of which was Marduk.
After the last victory of the Enlil clan over the Enki clan, it was decided that power would belong to the sons of Enlil until the preceding era of Aries. In the Era of Cancer, the ruler was Ninurta, in the Era of Gemini — Nannar (Sin), in the Era of Taurus — Ishkur. Obviously, the Enlil clan was not interested in transferring power to Marduk. They used every possible way to delay compliance with their own arrangements with the Enki clan. The representative of the Enlil clan did not want to recognize the precession for a long time, so as not to transfer power to Marduk, forcing him to resort to new wars, which were fought by the armies of people being directed against each other by competing Nibiruans.
Eventually, Enlil had to convene an urgent council. This meeting was watched from Nibiru by its supreme ruler Anu. Strict disputes and mutual accusations led to Nergal proposing the use of nuclear weapons against his own brother Marduk. This decision was supported by Anu, but on condition that the blow would be limited and solely on the spaceport at Sinai. They didn’t want Sinai facilities to be taken by Marduk. This spaceport with its internal tunnels (portals) was the key not only to Nibiru, but to the entire star system of the Pleiades, the birthplace of the Nibiruans. According to Anu’s decision, the gods and people should not suffer from these limited nuclear strikes.
Selected for this purpose cousins Ninurta and Nergal destroyed not only spaceport in the Sinai Peninsula, but also allied to Marduk cities, including the ill-famed biblical Sodom and Gomorrah. From that point, the guilty of their residents was transition to the side Marduk. Thus, the reasons for the death of these cities were exclusively political. After preventive nuclear strikes, the radioactive wind unexpectedly went from Sinai to the east toward Sumer that was stronghold of Enlil clan, presented by the bombers Ninurta and Nergal. This evil wind caused the destruction of almost all important Sumerian cities, together with their population which did not manage to escape.
Nevertheless, the above-mentioned wind did not touch Babylon, the beloved city of Marduk, located north of Sumer. This was seen by many as a sign of the choosiness of Marduk, the chief god of Babylon. It strengthened his faith in his own rightness and less than two centuries after the nuclear war. He seized power not only on Earth, but also on Nibiru, displacing his grandfather Anu who sanctioned this war. Thus, the nuclear war that put the end to the Sumerian civilization opened the way to power for Marduk, against which it was launched.
Having become the supreme ruler, Marduk ordered to make appropriate changes to the ceremony of the New Year that was the main holiday of Mesopotamia. From now on, he replaces Nibiru and instead becomes the winner of the battle with Tiamat. The Babylonian New Year ceremony appeared instead of the one from Sumer. The ideas and inner content of the Babylonian New Year would later be passed into Judaism, Christianity and Islam, which formed the present world. As a matter of fact, Babylon has made a huge contribution to the development of modern civilization.
Nabonidus and Harran (Ur)
As it was said above, Harran was the cult place of the Sumerian Moon god Nannar (later called Sin). According to legends, in Harran Adda-Guppy, the priestess and mother of the last Babylonian king Nabonidus, made a treaty with the patron of this ancient city, the god of the Moon Sin (Nannar). The oath was that if he helps her son become king, the latter would restore worship and the cult of Sin. Nabonidus became king of Babylon and rebuilt the temple of Sin not only in Harran, but also in Ur, as well as in other lands where the Sumerians had lived 1500 years ago. Sin and his wife were so loved by the inhabitants of ancient Mesopotamia that in his honor the Sinai Peninsula was named. It was an important place of the Nibiruans and also played an important role in Judaism and Christianity and Islam that came out of it.
Nabonidus was not a Chaldean but from Assyria, in the city of Harran. He treated Sin as his god-patron. Sin’s symbol was a crescent moon. It is believed that with the participation of Nabonidus this symbol was adopted by the followers of Islam. In Ugaritic sources, the moon god was called El or “God” which is the forerunner of Islamic Allah, whose symbol (the crescent moon) adorns every mosque.
Nabonidus’ elevation of the cult of the moon-god Sin evoked protests of the priests of Marduk. They put forward numerous accusations against Nabonidus, the most significant of which was his blasphemy. The situation was aggravated by the fact that Nabonid announced the end of the celebration of the New Year (Akita), during which a performance was imitated simulating the sufferings and death of Marduk, his resurrection, exile, and ultimately triumphant return. The very life of Marduk influenced the compilers of the Bible, who could use the passions of Marduk as a prototype for the passions of Christ. The priests of Marduk forced Nabonidus to leave Babylon and go into exile. Nabonidus entrusted rule for long periods to his son Prince Belshazzar, known from the book of the biblical prophet Daniel. After that Nabonidus went to Arabia.
As evidenced by historical documents, in the retinue of Nabonidus were Jews from Harran who previously resettled there from Judea. Nabonidus made his residence the oasis of Tayma (Tyeman) in the north-west of modern Arabia (Tabuk province). This settlement is mentioned several times in the Bible. The oldest mention of the oasis city appears as “Tiamat” in Assyrian inscriptions dating as far back as the 8th century BCE. Nabonidus founded here six settlements of his followers, and five of them were described in a thousand years (adherents of Islam) as a city of Jews. One of these cities was Medina where Muhammad founded Islam.
With the reign of Nabonidus ended the Neo-Babylonian Empire. To the east, the Persians had been growing in strength, and eventually Cyrus the Great conquered it (539 BCE). The Jews kept in Babylon greeted the Persians as liberators. When Cyrus the Great conquered Babylonia, he portrayed himself as the savior chosen by Marduk to restore order and justice.
V. URfa: birthplace of Abraham
Urfa (Turkey) is a competitor of the Ur (Iraq) as the alleged birthplace of the biblical patriarch Abraham, the founder of three monotheistic religions (Judaism, Christianity, and Islam). Although today the city is completely Islamized, its history is directly connected with Christianity and the Old Testament. It is believed that the prophet Abraham (Islamic analogue — Ibrahim) was born in Urfa, paid visits to the city prophet of Job (Islamic Eyub), Jesus Christ and St. George. The story of St. George has certain parallels with the epic battle of Nibiru and Tiamat. This epic was crucial part of Sumerian New Year festival and holiday. Later it was passed to Judaism, Christianity, and Islam.
The apostle Thomas preached in Urfa (Edessa) on his way to India. In the local church bearing his name were kept (from 6th to 7th centuries) his relics transported from India. Thus, Urfa is often called the City of the Prophets.
Prior to the excavation in the south of modern Iraq, it was believed that Urfa, i.e. Ur in Northern Mesopotamia (modern Turkey), was the birthplace of Abraham. This idea is supported by the Islamic tradition. On the site of the cave where Abraham (Ibrahim) was born and lived, the mosque Khalil Ur Rahman was built in 1170. Before the mosque, in this place stood a Christian church built by the Byzantines in 457 and called the “Red”. Today the octagonal bell tower of the Red Church serves as a minaret.
It is not accidental that Abraham was born in a cave. All great heroes of the past, including Jesus, were born in caves. All the heroes of solar myths are born in caves. The cave is a symbol of Darkness, from which they must come out and show the way to the rest of the people.
According to the Jewish tradition, the birthplace of Abraham (Ur) was located in Aram-Nagaraim. Today it is called Urfa. In the Hittite documents of the 2nd millennium BCE, the present Urfa was called Uras, Ursu. In the Assyrian — Ruhua. The Seleucid name of the city was Edessa. The Arabs called this city Urhai.
Seleucus I Nikator, one of the generals of Alexander the Great, gave the city the name of Edessa in honor of the ancient capital of Macedonia, from where Alexander went to conquer the world. Seleucus founded it in 302 BCE at the site of a pre-existing settlement, which was called Urhai in the Aramaic language. This name was subsequently used quite often, including in medieval Armenia. Ur is the name of the planet Earth in Cosmos. It is common in Armenia. For example, the mighty neighbor of ancient Manna kingdom Urartu formed in the area of Lake Van. In the language of Vans or Urartians, Moscow means “Great River”. Moscow region still has a lot of the key names translated from Sanskrit. In Armenia there is Lake Sevan. In the Jewish month Sivan was given the Torah.
The first builder of Urhai was the biblical king Nimrod, the grandson of Ham and the great-grandson of Noah who survived the Great Flood and landed on the place that would later become a part of Manna. Nimrod was also credited with building the Tower of Babel and persecuting Abraham, although seven generations divided Nimrod and Abraham. Nimrod’s grandfather Ham was the father of Canaan, whose descendants were cursed by Noah, according to the Old Testament. Ham had the imprudence to see his father Noah lying drunk and naked, which he told his brothers. As a result, having slept through, Noah cursed the descendants of Ham, and condemned them to eternal slavery among his brothers. Since then, slavery has been explained as God-imposed punishment to the descendants of Ham for allegedly being disrespectful to his father, the first winemaker Noah, who not only drank before losing consciousness, but also stripped himself for some reason, although he was saved by the biblical God solely from for his integrity and exemplary behavior before the Flood.
The founder of the kingdom of Edessa (2nd century BCE) is believed to be the Armenian king Abgar who was in correspondence with Jesus Christ. At the request of Abgar, Jesus sent Mandylion that is now known as Image of Edessa. It is a holy relic consisting of a square or rectangle of cloth upon which a miraculous image of the face of Jesus had been imprinted. It is regarded as the first icon.
Although it is a legend, but there is a historical fact that later in the end of the 14th century with the Image of Edessa / Image of the Savior, Stephen of Perm (born in Veliky Ustyug) baptized Komi people (Uralic ethnic group). In 1703, Russian Tsar Peter the Great used this icon to bless the foundation of his new capital Saint-Petersburg on the Nile meridian.
There is a legend that in Edessa, during the reign of King Abgar, began to preach the future apostle of India Thomas. According to this tradition, an Indian merchant brought to Edessa the remains of the apostle Thomas, who was put to death in India. After returning to Edessa, they became a local shrine, along with the Image of Edessa / the Savior (Jesus Christ).
Urfa played an important role during the formation of Christianity. There were about 300 monasteries around the city. In Edessa lived Ephraim the Syrian, one of the great teachers of the church of the 4th century. Here was the school of his followers. The capture of Edessa by the Turks was the cause of the Second Crusade led by the King of France Louis VII and the German King Conrad III.
Urfa (Edessa) in Common Era
In 260, the Persians in front of the city gates defeated the Roman emperor Valerian. In the 6th century the city was destroyed by an earthquake, but was soon rebuilt by the Byzantine emperor Justin I and received a new name Justinopolis.
In the 11th century, Count Baldwin, brother of Gottfried Bouillon, the first Christian king of Jerusalem, easily took Edessa with the support of the Armenian population of the city. Later, Baldwin I himself will become King of Jerusalem. His successor, Baldwin II, gave his royal blessing to the creation of the Knight Templar Order in Jerusalem and allocated a place for them to pray on the Temple Mount (believed to be the site of the former Nibiruan spaceport).
In 1391 the city was destroyed by the Samarkand ruler Tamerlane (The One who Knows Merlin). In 1637, the city became part of the Ottoman Empire, renamed to Urfa and began to prosper again.
After the collapse of the Ottoman Empire and the ensuing War of Independence of 1918-1923 Urfa was part of the Turkish Republic. In gratitude it received the title “Glorious” from Ataturk.
In the mid 1990s on the outskirts of Urfa (or vice versa) was excavated now the world famous archaeological site Göbekli Tepe dating back to the 10th millennium BCE, i.e. the fall of Atlantis (roughly speaking). It is considered to be the first temple in the world. This is a huge megalithic structure with huge T-shaped pillars weighing up to 20 tons each, perfectly aligned to the stars. Moreover, the erection of such a monument assumes the existence of a social hierarchy that was not common among hunter and gatherer communities. Göbekli Tepe (Turkish: “belly hill”) could profoundly change the understanding of crucial stages of the human history, the history of the birth of mankind, and the participation of the highly developed civilizations.
Only 600 km. is the distance (actually it is a straight line) between Göbekli Tepe, i.e. Urfa and south of Urmia Lake, where was formed the ancient kingdom of Manna. See the map.
Urfa & the birthplace of Abraham
Although today it is believed that the birthplace of Abraham was Ur in Sumer (south of Iraq), there are several linguistic and geographical factors that confirm that Abraham’s birthplace was Ur located in the northern part of Mesopotamia (modern Turkey).
First of all, the Sumerian Ur was not the only city with such a name in the ancient world. Some of ancient clay tablets say about Ur in Haran, i.e. about Urhai (Edessa). None of the found ancient tablets call the Sumerian Ur as “The Ur of the Chaldeans” (as stated in the Old Testament). This name is found only in the Book of Genesis which opens the Old Testament.
The Chaldeans appeared as a separate nation only in the 9th century BCE in the south of Babylon, i.e., more than a thousand years after Abraham. At the time of Abraham, described in the Book of Genesis, the name “Ur of the Chaldeans” as the Chaldeans themselves did not exist. Then the whole population of Mesopotamia was Sumerian, including Abraham himself.
The Old Testament was composed in Babylon approximately in the 6th century BCE, during the so-called Babylonian captivity. For the compilers of the Old Testament, as for all other inhabitants of the then world, the names Babylon and Chaldea were, in fact, synonymous. Both the Sumerian Ur and Ur in northern Mesopotamia were in the territory of the same county Babylonia (Chaldei) which grew up on the site and heritage of Sumer and continued to remain sacred. It might be the season why the birthplace of Abraham was named “Ur of the Chaldeans”.
As some researchers suggest, Urkhai was founded in the north of the Sumerian Ur as its trading colony by the rulers of the Third Ur Dynasty, approximately two thousand years before Common Era, and this new city (colony) was given the name of the then capital of the Empire, i.e., Ur. Moreover, Urhai sounds almost like the biblical term “Ur of the Chaldeans” (the birthplace of Abraham). The Jews have long lived in Urhai (Edessa) and Harran, including five Hebrew prophets.
Another confirmation that the birthplace of Abraham could be Edessa (Urhai) in the territory of present-day Turkey is the geographical indication in the Book of Genesis. It is about choosing wives for his son Isaac and grandson of Jacob. Abraham ordered his servant to go in Aram-Nagaraim for the wife for his son Isaac. Later, Isaac himself sent his son Jacob there to find a wife, who was the daughter of his uncle.
These wives lived in Abraham’s homeland and were his relatives. This territory is called Aram-Nagaraim, in the middle Euphrates. The Sumerian Ur (excavated by Leonard Woolley in the 20th century) is located in the lower Euphrates, near Eridu (believed to be the first city of Nibiruans on Earth). None of them traveled thousands of kilometers from Canaan to the Sumerian Ur, located almost on the shore of the Persian Gulf. Patriarchs Isaac and Jacob found wives in their ancient homeland that was Aram-Nagaraim, near Harran, located 44 km from Urhai (Edessa).
Aram-Nagaraim became the place where the state of Mitania (“the weapon of Anu”) later appeared. Mitanni was the birthplace of the mother and both wives of Akhenaten who claimed monotheism in Egypt less than a thousand years after Abraham. The capital of Mitanni was on the source of the river Habur, where later Jews will be resettled to the so-called Babylonian captivity, which will result in the transition of the Sumerian-Nibiru traditions of the New Year holiday to The Old Testament and Judaism and through it into Christianity and the Islam.
Edessa and Russia
In translation from Illyrian, Edessa means “water city”. There might be a link with the name of the famous Black Sea port of Odessa, based on the site of the Greek colony. Odessa was famous for its special Jews with their unique sense of humor and efficiency. The Jewish community was strong also in Edessa, since this city stood on the Silk Road.
Today Edessa is called Urfa or Rugi (Assyrian name given in the 8th century BCE). Its history is more than 9000 years old. In the past its significant part was made up of Armenians, but after the Turkish pogroms of the 19th and 20th centuries, their number fell sharply. Some surviving residents of Edessa (Urfa) survived in Russia.
The village of Edissia was founded at the end of the 18th century by the decree of the Russian Emperor Paul I at the request of the Armenians of Derbent and other environs. Derbent is located on the Caspian Sea, near the Russian border with Azerbaijan. Derbent along with Jerusalem is called the city of three religions: Judaism, Christianity and Islam. Initially, it was a part of the Caucasian Albania and Christianity was first Abrahamic religion here.
The Edissians were from the village of Kilvar in the territory of modern Azerbaijan. They were Turkic-speaking Armenians and kept the Turkish language for a long time. The name of their village (Edissia) comes from the city of Edessa (modern Turkey), in which their ancestors lived. The village of Edissia has striking coordinates: 44 degrees North latitude and 44 degrees East longitude, i.e. 44 to 44 degrees.
Job the Long-suffering and Nicholas II
The last Russian emperor Nicholas II was born on the day of the memory of Job the Long-suffering. A few kilometers from Urfa (Edessa) is the mosque of the righteous Eyyub (Job) which is the fourth shrine of Islam after Mecca, Medina and Jerusalem. It is built over the cave in which the Old Testament Eyub (Job) lived for 7 bitter years. It is one of the most beautiful mosques in Turkey. The current Eyyuba mosque stands in the place of the Christian church.
The righteous Job (Eyub) is believed to have lived 2000 years before Christ. According to legends, he was the nephew of Abraham, the forefather of monotheistic religions.
Biblical Job is the symbol of patience, humility and faith. He passed through all the hardest sufferings: the death of all children and the loss of all property on the 78th year of his life, a serious illness, complete loneliness, etc.
VI. URusalim: a city of peace
Jerusalem is one of the oldest cities on the planet. Urusalim means City of Peace. Urusalim or Rushalim, Yerushalaim are the ancient names of Jerusalem, the holy city of Judaism, Christianity, Islam, that is, the three monotheistic religions that have shaped the modern world.
In Hebrew, Jerusalem sounds like Yerushalaim. The word “shalem” is “peace”. This is common version of origin of the name. In various ancient and modern Semitic languages the word “peace” sounds exactly like “shalem”, “salim”, “shalom”, “salyam”, etc.
In the Old Testament, Jerusalem under the name “Salim” is first mentioned in reference to Melchizedek, King of Salem, who blesses Abraham. In Jewish traditions, Melchizedek is the priest of the God and the king-priest of Salem (peace). He was the son of Noah, who escaped with the family after the Flood. Melchizedek chose the present-day Jerusalem as place of his stay. This highlights the idea that soon after the Flood, Jerusalem was chosen as the center of world history and the place of the future “salvation” of mankind. On the other hand, there is evidence that it had been a place (platform) of highly developed being who were able to cut and lift huge stones weighted hundreds of tons. Even today such technologies have not been developed by mankind. Some researchers attribute it to the Nibiruans. The Great Flood is widespread in the myths of practically all the peoples of the world. The Great Flood described in the Bible was known to the ancient peoples long before the Old Testament was created. Thanks to the archeology and the clay tablets with cuneiform text from the library Ashurbanipal (found in the 19th century), it is well established today that the first book of the Old Testament (Genesis) goes back to the most ancient Epic of Gilgamesh. This story was widely known in the Middle East already in the 3rd millennium BCE, i.e. a thousand years before the writing of the Old Testament. Gilgamesh was the ruler of Uruk. People already lived long before the arrival of the Sumerians to Mesopotamia. The Old Testament texts in many respects repeat ancient Sumerian, Babylonian and even Egyptian texts. The history of the Biblical Noah is borrowed from the Sumerians. Their heritage, received from Nibiruans, has passed into the Bible, which for many centuries influenced the development of our civilization.
The Book of Urantia states that the Melchizedeks are teachers and advisers from the Higher Worlds. The biblical Melchizedek was one of them. He came to Earth in order to prepare the world for the spread of monotheism, i.e., the belief in the One God. Melchizedek was this God’s first priest, the king and priest of Salim, and tutor and teacher of Sumer Abram turned Abraham. About seven centuries after him, the next messenger of monotheism was the Egyptian pharaoh Akhenaten. His mother and both wives were from the Hurrian kingdom of Mitanni, whose blood was in the veins of the Jebusites, as well as the founders of the ancient kingdom Manna. The Jebusites inhabited Jerusalem prior to its conquest by Joshua (Moses’ assistant and the leader of the Israelite tribes after the death of Moses) or King David (circa 1000 BCE). Non-biblical mention of Jerusalem is the Amarna letters, several of which were written by the chieftain of Jerusalem Abdi-Heba and call Jerusalem Urusalim (1330s BCE). Amarna is the modern name for the ancient Egyptian capital of Akhetaten founded by the above mentioned pharaoh and reformer Akhenaten (1350s – 1330s BCE) during the 18th dynasty of Egypt. Akhetaten (Amarna) is located on the Nile Meridian.
It is often said that the king of the Salim Melchizedek, who met Abraham with bread and wine on Mount Moriah, was a Jebusite. These people lived in the territory of present-day Israel before the arrival of the ancestors of modern Jews. It is believed that the Jebusites at the end of the 3rd millennium BCE founded the city of Jerusalem, which at that time was called Salim or Jebus. They became its first inhabitants. According to the Old Testament, they were the descendants of a Jebusite from the family of Canaan, the grandson of Noah. As described above, the descendants of Canaan were curiously cursed for slavery by his grandfather Noah, only because Ham (the father of Canaan) had the impudence to see Noah, his own father, lying drunk and naked. Here is another contradiction, giving a clue to those who read carefully. Noah had image of righteousness in the eyes of God before the Flood. After his divine salvation, it turned out that Noah rolled down and became a completely different person…
The Jebusites were related to the Hurrites and the Hittites who succeeded them, on whose lands the above-mentioned city of Harran (Ur of the Hittites) was located.
After the capture of Jebus (i.e. Jerusalem) by King David, the Jebusites (a people of mixed Semito-Hurrito-Hittite origin) were not exterminated. David stormed the Jebusite acropolis on Mount Zion and transferred the capital of his state there, and the sacred mountain for the Jebusites continued to be honored by the Jews. For them, Zion became the symbol of Jerusalem (Jebus) and the entire Promised Land, which the Jewish people sought from the time of the dispersion after the destruction of the Jerusalem temple by the Romans in the year 70.
VII. LemURia: the final stage of Great Experiment
In the Telos trilogy, it is said that Lemur is a planet in the Universe of Dal, from which the ancestors of the Lemurians came to Earth about 4,5 million years ago. The first Lemurians who came to Earth were well known today Sananda, Maitreya, Saint-Germain, El-Moria, Mary Magdalene, Serapis Bey, Lanto, Adam and others. These souls were destined to become the seed of the Lemurian race.
At that time the Earth existed in the density of the fifth dimension, and they lived in the bodies of the fifth vibration, but could lower their vibration level in order to experience denser states. The place in which the above-mentioned souls came was the Royal Teton, now known as the Grand Teton National Park in the US state of Wyoming.
Over time, other races from the star systems of Sirius, Alpha Centauri, Pleiades, etc. came and joined these “seed” souls to evolve together. In the fusion of these races, the Lemurian civilization was born, which later became the mother civilization for other civilizations on the planet, including Atlantis. Gradually, they lowered the vibration of their consciousness, eventually they were at the level of the fourth dimension, and later in the density of the third. However, this was not degradation, but only a part of the Great Experiment. In accordance with it, great souls wanted to test themselves in Duality (or temporary separation from God), which is possible only in the third dimension where they do not remember where they came from and forget about their connection with the Creator, of whom they are a part.
Thus, the Lemurian Epoch began about 4,5 million years ago and ended approximately 12,000 years ago. Lemuria was a giant continent, hid in the waters of the modern Pacific and Indian oceans. However, not all were lost. The archives were saved and today Telos is the city of surviving Lemurians thriving under the Mount Shasta in California. It is believed that Shasta is an amended Russian word “schast’ye” meaning happiness. The name was given during the time when Alaska and part of California were Russian America, the Russian colonial possessions in North America from 1733 to 1867. Its capital was Novo-Archangelsk (New Archangel), which is now Sitka, Alaska, USA. The Russians settled Old Sitka in 1799, calling it Fort of Archangel Michael. Later they established New Archangel as a permanent settlement named after the Russian Arkhangelsk being connected with ancestors of the founders of Vedic civilization in India. Arkhangelsk was named after Archangel Michael by the first Russian Tsar Ivan Grozny. As it is stated in the Section I, the Royal Name of the first Monarch of the present Manna Kingdom is abbreviated to His Majesty Michael-Uriel I. These are Archangel Michael (“Who is like God”) and Uriel (“God is my light”).
Today Shasta is one of the main spiritual portals of the planet. Veliky Ustyug is the capital of the Age of Aquarius, into which the world is passing from Duality to the state of Oneness. Shasta and Veliky Ustyug started their official historical connection through the “Russian-American Company” that found Russian America and run it until transferring to the United States.
In detail, the history and lessons of Lemuria are presented in the books of Sal Rachel, who, like other authors, notices that Lemuria was a civilization that could be called today as right-hemisphere, while Atlantis was left hemisphere. The tragedy of these civilizations was mainly internal imbalances, which affected the fate of their continents. Feelings and reason must be balanced.
Via the journal “World Channeling”, Kryon reveals how Lemuria was connected the last stage of the Great Experiment, started five million years ago. The final stage of this Great Experiment began one hundred thousand years ago.
Then, one hundred thousand years ago, sixteen star civilizations, united in one Union of Experiment Participants, genetically engineered the human biological body. However, the visible, biological structure (physical body) is only a part of the multitudinous person. The leaders of the Experiment set themselves the task of creating a God-like human who, in the material (four-dimensional) world, evolving his/her true self, gradually from the biological separate structure creates the Divine Essence, and himself / herself becomes a CREATOR. In addition to the biological body, the Experiment members created seven more subtle bodies and a multidimensional, complex structure that the humans even cannot imagine yet.
The magnetic, invisible component of DNA is a unique, wonderful space program, the realization of which allows humans to create new worlds in the Universe … on the basis on which they have not yet been created!
Human genetics is a complex set consisting of genes of representatives of different civilizations, different star systems. In the basis of human genetics were laid the seeds of 16 star civilizations from the star systems of the Pleiades, Andromeda, Arcturus, Orion and the Ponocteon (part of the so-called Orion Belt). In addition to the genetic component, a multidimensional light body was created for man (known today as MERCABA). It has the form of a star tetrahedron (this is when one pyramid penetrates into another, forming a complex structure).
After the difficult process of creating a multidimensional person, the final stage of the Great Experiment began. Among the vast ocean, near the modern continent Australia, from under the water appeared an island that began to expand. Finally, this island turned into a real continent of Lemuria. This was the first of the new civilizations, which opened the final stage of the Experiment. It happened a little over a hundred thousand years ago. It was on the new continent that a new man/woman appeared, a Lemurian. In appearance, he/she was not very different from the modern man (those people who lived even earlier had, for example, a different number of hands and eyes). True, there were differences. First, growth. The man reached 6 meters and the female lemurians were at first higher than men. Only by the decline of civilization did men become almost as tall as women. Secondly, the eyes. They were disproportionately large, unusual in shape. Thirdly, the shape of the head that was unusual for modern humans, its occipital part was disproportionately large. To some extent, it could be compared to head shape of above mentioned Egyptian pharaoh-reformer Akhenaten himself and his family.
Despite the fact that the Lemurians were tall, their bodies could not be called powerful and muscular. At that time, the gravity on the planet was different, much less. That’s why it was easy for the high Lemurians to move around the planet. They called it Gaia.
The Lemurians did not have any military equipment because they did not fight with anyone. Beside the main continent of Lemuria, there were three more on the planet at that time. These continents were not inhabited by other civilized people. One of the main tasks of the Lemurians was to master them, build cities, other populated areas, socially necessary structures, roads, parks. 35,000 years ago the Lemurian civilization reached a high level of development. One of the main problems faced by the Lemurians in the development of their society was low birth rate. This happened about 7,000 years after the emergence of a highly developed Lemurian civilization. Despite all the efforts of scientists, geneticists, various specialists, children were born less and less often. Then the Lemurians decided to give up all their efforts to increase life expectancy. It should be noted that people of that time led a very correct way of life. They combined mental, intellectual labor with the physical, paid much attention to spiritual life. Engaged in what could now be called yoga, special gymnastics, carefully designed spiritual practices (meditations). As a result of all efforts, life expectancy increased almost threefold. Previously, the Lemurians lived about five hundred years, and then they began to live up to a thousand five hundred years. But this did not solve the main problem. Their civilization was decreasing in numbers. It caused deep despair in the whole society. Love lived in the hearts of young men and women, marriages were concluded, but the birth of a child in the family was the greatest rarity. Scientists could not find an answer to this question, all attempts to create a human embryo artificially ended in failure.
Lemuria received the long-awaited help from the angels (Higher realms). They helped one Lemurian archaeologist find in Eurasia (The Sayan Mountains in southern Siberia, Russia) a cave with well preserved bodies of people.
There, deep below the ground, in specially equipped rooms, were stored the bodies of people. They were not like Lemurians. The height (3,5 meters) was almost half that of the Lemurians (6 meters), the heads were rounded. The eyes were smaller and their shape was completely different. Those eyes were stretched out not horizontally, like the Lemurians, but rather vertically. The hair of all people was only bright red, and not chestnut and fair-haired, like the overwhelming majority of Lemurians. The bodies of these people were in the state of Somadhi, when the Spirit has ascended to the Upper world, without interrupting its connection with the body.
Apart from the bodies of red-haired people, there was another body in the cave in the state of Somadhi. It was completely different from them. This body had four arms, but the nose, eyes, face were almost identical to the Lemurian. It was the Great Sage, who would be able to get answers to almost all questions. His body had been underground in the state of Somadhi for many thousands of years. After awakening b coming out of the cave, he said that it was necessary to make the planet heavier.
The Great Sage lived in Lemuria for more than two thousand years, but never took food. He drank only pure water. His body always remained healthy, strong and muscular. It was the body of a representative of a completely different civilization, which lived long before the Lemurians. It completed its existence in this world 137 thousand years ago. The abbreviated name of this sage was Amon-Ra. He informed the Lemurians that he was the Representative of the Spiritual Government of the planet. His spirit entered the body of the man of Arimoya civilization, which was specially preserved for this purpose in the ancient underground vault. Representatives of this race of ancient people were outwardly like Lemurians. However, they were much lower in height (still below the red-haired people), had four arms. Each Arimoyan had two hearts in the chest. They were very kind, funny and intelligent people.
Amon-Ra informed the Lemurians that he had come with a very important mission. He said that the civilization of Lemuria played a special role in organizing the final stage of the Great Experiment, which was being conducted on the planet.
Amon-Ra rejoiced people, saying that they were all really Great Angels who had came from the Spiritual World. Once they all had passed strict selection, careful preparation and only after they incarnated in this world, on the planet. To be a participant of such an experiment was very honorable and responsible. Amon-Ra told about the main purpose of the experiment. Its essence was that the highly developed Spirits leave the Higher World, the Spiritual Motherland, incarnate into Matter, leaving their Divine part and forgetting about who they really are. The gods cease to be gods, leaving in a dense world. Would the gods remember who they really are? Would they be able to return to the Higher World on their own? Would they find the way Home? In the time of Lemuria, the Matter was not yet condensed very strongly. One of the goals set for the Lemurians was to thicken Matter; to make even denser the Veil, which separates the earthly world of people from the Spiritual world. Lemurians had to build pyramids with sharp tops. Through them would flow to the planet the energy, which would help to compact the Matter. Gradually the force of gravity would increase. People would grow smaller, the density of Matter on the whole planet would increase.
Amon-Ra did not go to live in Lemuria, although he was given the most honorable place to live in the capital city of Yaruslim. He stayed in the mountains, built himself a beautiful wooden house, without using a single artificial element, everything was only wooden. He was visited by the leaders of the Lemurian society. He began to develop a plan for the construction of the pyramids. These pyramids are now known as the Egyptian ones, standing on the Nile meridian.
The Lemurians asked the sage the question of the red-haired people in the cave. He said that they should be taken out of the state of Somadhi. They must become Lemurians, and the Lemurians should become them. They had to marry each other and have children. These children would be adapted to greater gravity on the planet, to life in dense matter. The height of people would decrease, the structure of the body would change and become more muscular, fit for physical work, because life in dense matter is heavier.
A month after this conversation, a solemn ceremony of awakening from the state of Somadhi of red-haired people took place. This race lived before the existence of the Arimoyans (in the period 298 — 376 thousand years ago). They were called Horaions, the guardians of the teachings of the Sun. As a matter of fact, in Greek, “horaion” means “ripe, at its peak”. The Horaions and the Lemurians became very friendly. Boys and girls, men and women from different races fell in love with each other. Marriages took place; children were born. They were representatives of a mixed race. In Lemuria new races began to emerge. Here appeared the race later called Atlantis. But it took thousands of years for the Atlanteans to separate from Lemuria and form their new race.
The Lemurians have done a great job in creation of modern civilization. They were the paratroopers of the Forces of Light on the planet. They fulfilled his task with honor. Now it is time for modern civilization to understand why they came to this world and fulfill their high mission of the Angels incarnated from the Spiritual World.
The Matrix for Angels (on robotic entities and the shadow government of the planet)
Kryon for the readers of «World Challenging» magazine reveals the story of the information and communication system that is now
better known as The Matrix. It was created 800,000 years ago by a highly developed civilization which is named Ra-Gods.
This civilization had a highly developed information and communication system based on the action of field, fine material structures. The storage system could be compared to the artificially created Akashi Chronicles, and the methods of transmission — with the telepathy of the human brain.
Using their high technologies, Ra-Gods got almost everything they wanted. Only then they realized that they were truly unhappy. Their lives practically lost meaning. Abundance came, but meaning of all this was gone. Spiritual degradation was nearby. Mass cases of voluntary withdrawal from life became more frequent. It was then that the very plan for conducting a global experiment matured. They decided to isolate themselves from all material wealth. They discovered a wonderful parallel world, where only the pristine nature existed. There was not a single object in it that was artificially created as a result of the scientific and technical process, there was nothing synthetic. They left this reality to another, existing on a different frequency of material and spiritual vibrations. However, after them remained robots, bio-mechanisms and other, more complex forms of their creation.
The Ra-Gods were gone; the remained robots took responsibility for the management of the life-support processes of cities, settlements, roads, transport, all types of communications, etc. The civilization of robots not only did not die, but also continu