Think You Know School Breakfast? Think Again! Part 1: Breakfast In the Classroom
It’s National School Breakfast Week and we’re taking the opportunity to showcase three successful and unique programs throughout the week that are trying to reach more students with school breakfast.
Michigan schools served more than 64 million breakfasts to about 380,000 students in the 2017-2018 school year. But we can do more! Michigan has a goal to increase breakfast participation by 2,000 students per day by June 30, 2019. This is because the Michigan Office of Health and Child Nutrition Services believes that well-nourished students are vital for us to become a top 10 education state in 10 years.
Why? Research shows school breakfast enhances students’ readiness for learning and improves their classroom behaviors. There is a link between regular access to school breakfast and a reduction in tardiness to class, improved memory and on-task behavior during lessons, fewer visits to school nurses or clinics and even higher scores on tests of mathematics and English language arts.
Today we have the story of an elementary school that delivers breakfast to their students in their classrooms.
East Kelloggsville Elementary School – Breakfast in the Classroom
A food service staff member fills the insulated bags that get delivered to each classroom.
Student breakfast participation has doubled since East Elementary School in the Kelloggsville School District switched to serving breakfast in the classroom the beginning of the 2018-2019 school year, according to assistant food service director, Janet Dusendang.
The school uses insulated bags with wheels to deliver food to each classroom, which ensures the quality and safety of the foods. They serve several breakfast kit options, mini pancakes and waffles, assorted muffins and breads, string cheese, breakfast cookies, bagels, filled crescents, juice and milk. The most popular offerings are the muffins and banana bread.
Each bag is filled with breakfast items and ready to go!
Although there was an initial challenge with getting teacher buy in for serving breakfast in the classrooms, they are now sold on the approach.
“The staff sees students’ increased energy levels and concentrations after eating breakfast [in the classroom], says Dusendang. “Breakfast in the classroom enables teachers to start their day right when the bell rings.”