HVAC stands for Heating, Venitlation and Air-Conditioning. Within this topic you’ll find articles on how to choose the best air conditioner for your home or office, how refrigerators work, and all about designing a room for optimum ventilation.
Get expert advice and opinion at with our Mechanical Engineering articles, whether you’re tackling an at home project, getting informed before making your next purchase, or brushing up on technical info and stats.
An HVAC system is designed to keep the occupants of offices, tower blocks and retail properties happy and healthy across the world. However, sometimes, your unit will need a helping hand to keep itself in top condition.
Nature created mankind, but with the advancement of technology, man is now trying to recreate nature. This may have its own advantages and disadvantages, but nowhere is this struggle more evident than in the field of environmental control for our inhabited interior spaces.
Whether you’re upgrading an existing system or building a new one, good knowledge of the principles of heating and air conditioning, and typical designs, will allow you to make wise decisions when the time comes. These principles, along with descriptions of typical components, are referenced here.
Calculations for heat exchanger designs use heat transfer parameters such as convection heat transfer coefficients, overall heat transfer coefficients, and log mean temperature differences. These calculations are needed for shell and tube and double pipe heat exchangers, as well as other types.
The power used in running a building’s Heating, Ventilation and Air Conditioning (HVAC) is quite substantial, so any measures to improve its efficiency will save energy and cash.
An upgrade of the HVAC system can be carried out by replacing the old worn components with modern more efficient units.
Wall mounted air conditioner units have advantages and disadvantages. In this article, we will talk about the installation and maintenance of wall mounted room air conditioners and their comparison with other popular types of air conditioning units.
Freon leaks from air conditioners have adverse effects on our health. Keeping a check over Freon levels in air conditioners is important not only for health but for effective and smooth working of air conditioning units as well. Air conditioner leak detection is described in detail in this article.
Using UV lamps for improving the air quality indoors is the right solution for killing airborne bacteria and removing other pollutants. Read to learn the best practices for installing UV lamps in air handlers.
A chiller unit requires water, so the term “chiller water treatment" is important for the life of the system – or is it? Being a closed loop system, is treatment for chilled water really needed? If so, what are the available methods of treatment?
Are hydronic heat systems more effective than conventional ducted heat? The answer to this question is a resounding maybe. There are several factors to consider, the question of which system is better ultimately may come down to personal preference.
The first law of thermodynamics states that “energy can neither be destroyed nor created and it can only be transformed." Thus what happens to the inner energy after death? Is hell endothermic or exothermic? What is the thermodynamics of hell? This article is an attempt to answer the above.
The correct sizing of the central air conditioning and heating systems play a major role on energy expenditure. Here are a few working tips for getting better performance from a central AC and heat system.
Many people believe that hydro-air systems do not dry the air like furnaces do. Since dry air can cause a number of health ailments, this would be a significant advantage that would justify a hydro-air system’s increased cost. However, the science behind this claim is dubious at best.
Air conditioning in the home is used in warm countries; keeping the inside temperature relatively cool whilst lowering the humidity of the air. It is important to have the house surveyed in order to have the right size of A/C unit installed and balanced to give optimum temperature and humidity.
Are you planning to buy a conventional type of air conditioner from the market? Wait a moment: the low cost, efficient, and eco-friendly homemade air conditioner design project shown here may just change your mind. The drawbacks of Freon and ammonia air conditioner units are also included.
Mechanical Ventilation is an integral part of HVAC. It is the movement of air from one space to other as well as supply of fresh air into the air conditioned space. Mechanical ventilation assists in controlling the humidity, contaminants, air borne particles, and general air quality.