Sciatica is one of the most common types of lower back pain. In fact, an article published by Harvard Health reports that approximately 40 percent of people will experience sciatic pain at some point in their life. What’s more, the risk for sciatica syndrome only increases with age. But what, exactly, is sciatica and how can you find relief for this painful neuromuscular complaint? The team at Arne Wellness Center will share their insights about this common pain condition.
What Is Sciatica?
Sciatic pain occurs in the lower back, glutes, and legs, usually on one side of the body but sometimes on both. The sciatic nerve, which is the largest nerve in the human body, is a bilateral nerve originating in the lower back (in the lumbar and sacral plexuses), which travels down the hips into the buttocks and down into the leg where it branches off into smaller nerves and nerve endings in the lower leg.
When the sciatic nerve is pinched or irritated due to trauma, stress, misalignment, disc compression, or other triggers, it causes a painful sensation that ranges in from mild to excruciating. Sciatica interferes with normal everyday movements making sitting, standing, walking, and/or lifting objects challenging.
Understanding the Causes of Sciatica
By understanding the risk factors, causes, and symptoms, individuals who suffer from acute or chronic sciatic pain can better manage their discomfort with effective natural treatments that address the cause of the pain.
Common Risk Factors
Nearly anyone at any age can experience sciatic pain. Some of the common risk factors include:
Injury or Trauma
When the spine or the surrounding tissue in the lumbar and sacral spine is damaged, the sciatic nerve is more prone to becoming aggravated. Auto injuries, sports injuries, work injuries, and personal injuries that cause trauma to the spine or soft tissues that can essentially entraps the sciatic nerve, leading to irritation from pressure being placed on the nerve.
Whether your job requires you to sit at a desk for eight hours, or you do a lot of lifting and heavy lifting, both of these actions place added stress on the lower back, which can irritate the sciatic nerve.
Over time, the spine becomes more susceptible to injury, wear and tear, and degenerative diseases and joint dysfunction that causes tissues to wear away as we age. Conditions like bone spurs, spinal stenosis, and disc herniations can irritate the sciatic nerve, causing chronic pain to develop.
Achieve Sciatic Pain Relief With Chiropractic
These are just some of the risk factors associated with sciatic pain, so join us next time as we continue exploring more causes, as well as the symptoms and treatments for this complex type of lower back pain.
If you experience sciatic pain and want to experience natural, long-lasting relief, chiropractic is an ideal treatment for sciatica. Chiropractic care can not only alleviate the pain and discomfort associated with this type of nerve pain, but it can also reduce numbness, tingling, and restore function. Reach out to your chiropractor in Littleton to schedule an appointment and start feeling and moving better. At Arne Wellness Center, we’re here to help you on your path to finding a healthier you.