A gem or bead cut in convex form and highly polished but not usually faceted. Cabochons usually have a flat underside. The most common shape for cabochons is oval. This shape is attractive. It is hard to identify small imperfections in this shape.
A round cabochon must be cut carefully. Cabochons may also be found in squares and rectangles. Also modern or naturalistic asymmetrical shapes.
Filigree is the term used to describe ornamental work especially of fine wire of gold, silver, or copper.
Carnelian (also spelled cornelian ) is a brownish-red mineral which is commonly used as a semi-precious gemstone. Carnelian was used widely during Roman times to make engraved gems for signet or seal for imprinting a seal with wax on correspondence or other important documents. Hot wax does not stick to carnelian
Seed bead refers to different shapes and styles of small, usually glass beads. They are used for many purpose but mostly Bead weaving. The most consistent seed beads are Delica, followed by Japanese and then Czech.
Most important information about seed beads is that Size runs reverse to size numbers, the smaller the number the larger the beads Its advisable to buy enough quantity of seed beads for a particular project.Color might vary as per manufacturer.
Are available in variety of metal and metal finish such as brass, silver plated, copper & gold plated etc. Also used as spacer and bead weaving as well.
This are made of natural material. Wooden beads have large holes. They are good for stringing on thicker materials like cotton, leather cords.
They are dynamic, trendy when added to any jewellery. Primary choice while making jeweler
These are affordable glass beads. Facets are available hand cut and machine cut.
A form of Quartz, this semi precious stone has a purple translucent appearance
A variety of Quartz characterised by its fineness of grain and brightness and range of colours. Agates are normally associated with volcanic rocks but can also be found in certain metamorphic rocks. Agates have been used in jewellery making since ancient times.
This gemstone is a form of Chalcedony that contains small mineral inclusions. These additional materials, usually mica or iron oxide, give the stone a glistening effect. Aventurine’s granular appearance and particular translucence are its most distinctive characteristics. It is also called aventurine quartz. It is usually dark green but it also comes in reddish brown and golden brown. These stones can be found in Austria, Brazil, India, Russia, and Tanzania.
Also known as Fibre Optic Beads. These glass beads are called cat’s eye beads because of the iridescent white streak that glows from the middle and resembles a light-reflecting cat’s eye. This is due to light refraction within the bead.
A medium, including clay, parian, porcelain, terracotta, raku and earthenware, that can be modelled, moulded, and pressed before firing to harden it. After which it is usually decorated with glaze or paint.
Cane Glass Beads are adapted from Italian glass-making techniques. These beads use large decorated “canes” built out of smaller canes encased in clear glass and then pulled out to shape the beads with twisting, linear, or stripe patterns.
Chevron Beads comprise numerous layers of colored glass. Also known as Rosetta or star beads.
Also available in black, reds and pink
Beads are made by plunging molten glass into water, causing the exterior to crack whilst the still hot interior stays solid.
Japanese Seed Beads trademarked to to the Miyuki Shoji Corporation. They are made of precisely cut glass giving them a uniform size, shape and colour. They typically have large holes compared to their diameter and have a rounder shape with thicker walls than normal seed beads.
These are flattened disc like beads with a large central hole usually fashioned from glass, stone or wood
Beads with a circle, a dot, or a combination of the two so that it resembles an eye. The intention being to avert the gaze of the Evil Eye.
In jewellery terms this usually refers to a decorative metal component with an open lace like structure which is formed by soldering bent wire into delicate designs or alternatively stamping or casting metal into predefined ornate shapes. Silver with an antiqued finish over brass.
These glass beads start life as a pressed round which is then machine-faceted, it is then placed in a polishing furnace that heats the bead’s surface and softens the facets. The resulting facets don’t have the machine-cut precision of, say, crystal glass beads, but this gives them a charm of their very own. Fire-polished beads do not contain lead, so they are distinct from crystal glass and should not be labelled as such. Czechoslovakia produces beautiful fire-polished beads in a myriad of colours and applied finishes. India produces similar beads but they are generally of lesser quality – the facets.
Manufactured in the Czech Republic, faceted roundel shapes in vibrant solid colours in the most popular selling sizes. Size and shape may vary slightly and colour may vary from dye lot to dye lot.
Metallic accents on tube cathedral fire polished Czech glass beads increase the reflective radiance of the facets. Available in a variety of colours, these beads are popular for upscale costume jewellery as they can have the look of vintage beads used in authentic antique jewellery. Colours and dye lots of fire polished glass beads may vary.
Glasswork technique which produces distinctive decorative patterns on glassware. The term millefiori is a combination of the Italian words "mille" (thousand) and "fiori" (flowers).
Islamic prayer beads
Glass beads are full of brightly colored swirls, ideal for adding creative style to personalized designs. Colours can include transparent and opaque brown, green, light blue, peach, purple and red. Sizes, shapes and colours may vary with handcrafted items. Items are made with solid colour glass, which means the base colour of the glass is saturated throughout the object and will not fade or rub off over time. Express your creativity with white swirls round Czech lamp work glass beads! Czech lamp work glass beads are handcrafted by melting rods of glass with a flame torch and forming the molten glass into the desired shape. FusionBeads.com offers a wide selection of Czech lamp work glass beads that will bring texture and colour to your designs. Due to the handmade nature of these beads, colours and details may vary from piece to piece, even within the same batch.
will vary slightly in colour, markings, shape and size, due to their being made of natural materials...
a crystal of intuition, hope, and more. Moonstone is said in crystal healing to help calm responses and stress, and avoid overreaction. It brings hope, enhances feminine energies, sensitivity, intuition, and psychic abilities.
is perhaps the oldest stone in man's history, the talisman of kings, shamans, and warriors. It is a stone of protection, strong and opaque, yet soothing to the touch, healing to the eye, as if carved from an azure heaven and slipped to earth.
is a stone of protection that is also very stabilizing and grounding.
is colourless and untreated. Colourless topaz is often irradiated and heat treated to form blue topaz. Silver Topaz is also called "white topaz".
with its gentle pink essence, is a stone of the heart, a Crystal of Unconditional Love. It carries a soft feminine energy of compassion and peace, tenderness and healing, nourishment and comfort.
is known to separate. It can help release negative emotions such as sorrow and grief. It is used to end unhappy or bothersome relationships.