Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) is an autonomous body established under the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, Government of India. The FSSAI has been established under the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 which is a consolidating statute related to food safety and regulation in India. FSSAI is responsible for protecting and promoting public health through the regulation and supervision of food safety. FSSAI ensures safety and quality of food being served. Not only customers but also institution itself are conscious and are taking strict measures to make sure that the food outlets don’t function without one.
ADVANTAGES OF FSSAI REGISTRATION
- Lays down science-based standards for articles of food
- It facilitate food safety and regulates manufacture, storage, distribution, sale and import of food
- It spreads consumer awareness as they have become more alert about food safety
It gives a legal advantage to the business
- Using FSSAI logo, as many consumers want to consume food products which have this logo
PROCESS TO GET FSSAI REGISTRATION
TYPES OF FSSAI REGISTRATION
If the annual turnover of the business is less than 12 lakhs then the food business operator shall get registered with Registration Form B
If the annual turnover of the business is between 12 lakhs to 20 crore then the food business operator shall apply for State license Form B
If the annual turnover of the business is above 20 crore, then the food business operator shall apply for Central License Form B
- Photo Identity of FBO;
- Proof of possession of premises (Rental Agreement);
- Partnership Deed / Certificate of Incorporation / Articles of Association;
- List of food products;
- Food safety management system plan.
STATE LICENSE AND CENTRAL LICENSE:
Responsibility of ensuring compliance of FSS Act, 2006 rules and regulations made thereunder by the FBO’s
Enforcement is undertaken on the basis of surveillance, monitoring, inspection and random sampling of food products carried out by the Officials of Food Safety Departments
Food Safety and Standards Authority of India and State Food Authorities are jointly responsible for implementation & enforcement of FSSA, 2006. The details are provided Section 29 of FSS Act, 2006.
The enforcement is primarily undertaken by all Food Safety Commissioners of State/UT along with Designated Officers and Food Safety Officers.
The details are available on FSSAI’s Official website:http://www.fssai.gov.in/home/compliance/compliance-orders.html
The FSO shall be liable to a penalty which may extend up to one lakh rupee if he/she is found to be guilty of an offence mentioned under section 39 of the Act. Provided that in case the complaint made against the Food Safety Officer is false, the complainant shall be punishable with fine which shall not be less than fifty thousand rupees and may extend to one lakh rupees.
The improvement notice is the notice issued by Designated Officer if FBO fails to comply with the regulations as mentioned in Section 32 of the FSS Act, 2006.
If the food business operator fails to comply with an improvement notice, his licence may be suspended.
If the food business operator fails to comply with the improvement notice, the DO may, after giving the licensee an opportunity to show cause, cancel the licence.
Yes, any FBO aggrieved by an improvement notice may appeal to the State Commissioner of Food Safety whose decision thereon shall be final. The same can be challenged in the Food safety Appellate Tribunal/ high court of his respective States/UT’s
Fifteen days from the date on which notice of the decision was served on the person desiring to appeal or the period specified in the improvement notice whichever expires earlier.
“Recall” means action taken by the FBO to withdraw any food from market which is not complying Section 28 of FSS Act, 2006.
No, there is no need to submit physical documents at regional offices for central license. FBO can track their application status from the FLRS system with the help of Login credentials. In case the concerned Designated Officer requires additional information, he will ask the same through FLRS system only and not through email or physical letter. FBO shall check their system regularly for any updates.
Any change that alters the information contained in the license certificate (Form C) shall apply for modification of license with the fee equivalent to one year license fee. No fee is required for modification of non-Form C details.
FBO receives SMS/ Email alerts during ID creation, renewal of license/Registration and whenever DO forward the application to FBO for additional information/changes in the application.
FBO can approach concerned Designated Officer of concerned area. Designated Officer will create USER ID and issue you a new system generated license number which can be renewed through online process.
It will minimize the number of documents required during renewal of license. The old license number will also be attached with the new license number. FBO will be able to track the application during the course of processing.
Only Merchant Exporter can file Quarterly annual report through online system
FBO manufacturing Milk and/or Milk products shall file half yearly return in the Form D-2 and submit it manually to the to the concerned Central/State licensing Authority for the periods 1st April to 30th September and 1st October to 31st March of every financial within a month from the end of the period
(Manufacturers and Importers) have to file Annual Return (Form D-1) and submit it manually to the concerned Central/State licensing Authority on or before 31st May of each year for each class of food handled by him during the previous financial year.
The list of documents that are to submitted can be downloaded by the FBO by clicking on the link “Supporting Documents” on the login page.
An importer cannot submit another application with same IEC code that he has already submitted until and unless he deletes the incomplete/application already submitted.
FBO can select kind of business from the following list:
- Dairy units
- Vegetable oil processing units
- Slaughtering units
- meat processing units
- 100% Export oriented units
- Fish/ meat/ poultry shop/ seller
- Food catering services in establishment and units
Food Business Operator operating in more than two States has to get Central License for its registered Office/ Head Office and separate license/ Registration for each units depending upon the capacity/ turnover from the concerned State/ Central Licensing Authority.
FSSAI license/Registration for food premises under Railways are issued by the Railways Designated Officers/FSO notified by Food Authority from time to time.
FSSAI license for food premises in Airport/Seaport are issues by APHO/PHO notified by Food Authority from time to time through Online FLRS system
FBO can’t renew his License or Registration if it is not applied within 6030 days from the expiry of license/registration. Once the license/registration is expired, the FBO has to apply afresh.
Licensing Officer can reject the application in the case when the required information is not provided within the stipulated time of 30 days
All FBO including medical stores have to get FSSAI license/registration.
No NOC is required to be taken from Food Safety and Standards Authority of India for exporting food products from India.
FBO can contact at toll free help desk no 1800112100 or can mail his query to [email protected] Further, the homepage of Food Licensing and Registration System (FLRS) show “HOW TO APPLY” which provide step by step information for food business operator to apply for Central/ State License and Registration by himself.
FSSAI license is a premise based license. Multiple kinds of activities carried out at the same premise can be endorsed in the single FSSAI license.
What People Say About Us
“We are associated with your team for last 4 years and we had an amazing experience with your team. Every single time our work has been completed within the given time line.Also the quality of service is excellent.Thanks”
Rajendra Chaudhari • Senior Partner • Forgewell Industries
“It was wonderful experience with Registration Arena during my company registration.Queries were addressed instantly through mails, phone calls; and the follow-up was just fantastic.Within a week of time my private limited was registered.There was no requirement of follow up at all.Also got instant help for opening bank account.Great work team Registrationarena ,would be more than happy to be associated with you guys in future.”
Gaurav Waidande • Director • Koncinnity Solutions Private Limited
“Fantastic service quality team.Really impressed with the working style of your company .
I would definitely recommend your services to everyone looking for ISO Certification.
Akshay Gawade• Director • Loconest India Private Limited
“I am really impressed with the kind of support your company provides.Any question ,any doubts, and you will have complete clarity .Team Registration Arena has crossed all leaps and barriers in order to gain my confidence.I would definitely recommend your services.”
Shreya Gupta • CEO & Founder • Imperial Rubber Products
On Time Delivery
Just tell us a few details about your brand and we’ll process your application. In three working days, you’ll be ready to use the symbol alongside your brand name.
We make your interaction with government as smooth as is possible by doing all the paperwork for you. We will also give you absolute clarity on the process to set realistic expectations.
Tech Driven Platform
Our team of experienced business advisors are a phone call away, should you have any queries about the process. But we’ll try to ensure that your doubts are cleared before they even arise.