Oranges Or Peaches ?
Both of them ! In fact you can add apples too.
During winter time, I usually eat a lot of oranges. It is for a variety of reasons, some of them are that they represent a tradition in my family. Oranges always remind me of Christmas and childhood. Also, they are vary healthy and now we are going to see how.
Although they are usually recommended because of the high percentage of vitamin C, oranges have many other useful features. Oranges are a rich source of vitamin B1 (thiamine), folate, potassium, vitamin A and calcium. Oranges contain a flavonoid called herperidin. Studies have shown that herperidin lowers cholesterol and blood pressure, and also has strong anti-inflammatory properties. Since it is located mainly in the cortex and white matter, which is located in the heart of the orange , do not completely remove the white substance while eating this fruit.
Moreover, oranges are an excellent source of limonoids, which are known to have a preventive effect against some cancers. Unlike polyphenols from green tea, which act similarly but are active only 4 to 6 hours, limonoids found in citrus fruits, including orange, remain in the body 24 hours. There is also one another flavonoid, cryptoxanthin, that is found in oranges. It has been shown that have a preventive effect against lung cancer. Finally, daily consumption of orange juice, according to the British Journal of Nutrition, increases the pH of urine and the excretion of citric acid, which reduces the risk of kidney stones.
Many of the fruits were for the first time cultivated in China. Among them is also a very juicy fruit – peach.
Its botanical name is Prunus persica , however genetic studies suggest that peaches originated in China and not in Persia. Peach was brought to India and Western Asia in ancient times, and was brought to the Americas by Spanish explorers in the 16th century (and eventually brought to England and France in the 17th century). Peaches have close relatives: nectarines. Nectarines belong to the same species as peaches, but have smooth skin (while peaches have fuzzy skin).
In fact, peach is a really healthy fruit. It is rich in vitamin A, vitamin C, as well as vitamin E and K. It is also a good source of vitamin B group: thiamine, riboflavin, vitamin B6, niacin, folate and pantothenic acid. Furthermore, it is a significant source of potassium, so about 4-5 peaches can meet the daily needs of this important mineral for the body. Peaches also contain a certain amount of magnesium, phosphorus, zinc, copper, manganese, iron and calcium.
Because of its richness in vitamins, minerals and fiber, and minimal calories, peach is a great food for weight loss diets (diets).
As an excellent source of a particular antioxidant, chlorogenic acid, as well as lutein, zeaxanthin and cryptoxanthin, peaches help reduce the effects that lead to premature ageing and chronic diseases. These antioxidants also alleviate inflammatory processes and have a preventive effect against the development of cancerous cell changes.
Above all, peaches are exceptionally tasty and have refreshing effects in summer heat!