Introduction Computer Hardware and Systems (CST125) – Through hands-on experiences, this course prepares students to install, configure, upgrade, and troubleshoot personal computers. Students learn the fundamentals of PC hardware including the motherboard, power supply, CPU, memory, storage devices, add-on cards, BIOS/UEFI, and CMOS. In addition, students learn the fundamentals of the Windows operating system including operating system functions, structure, major system files, and the basic boot sequence. This course will prepare students to sit for the CompTIA A+ certification offered by CompTIA or other comparable certifications.
Introduction to Programming (CST201) – This course introduces the basic concepts of a structured programming language. All programming languages use the same concepts and the language will be based on the current need of the industry. The student will learn to design and develop software applications using the building blocks of a language which can include basic variable declaration and sequential code using mathematical expressions to more advance techniques with decision and repetition coding using advance data variable structures such as arrays and records (these may have different names in some languages but, have the same ideas). File manipulation for input/out will be addressed. The course will begin to look at breaking a large program down into functions that forms the basis for object-oriented programming.
Linux (CST325) – This course is designed to develop students’ knowledge and aptitude in UNIX and Linux Operating Systems at a command line level as well as the administration level. This course will prepare students to sit for the CompTIA Linux+ certification offered by CompTIA as well as the RedHat Linux Administrator certification offered by RedHat or other comparable certifications.
Network Infrastructures 1 (CST330) – This course teaches basic concepts associated with using PC's in a networked environment, including connecting to a network and connecting networks together. Included are peer-to-peer and client/server networks, network topologies and architectures, the OSI model, Ethernet and TCP/IP protocols, IPv4/IPv6 and MAC addressing, routers and routing, network printing, NAT and VPN's, plus wireless networking. The course also provides a strong foundation in preparation for the CompTIA Network+ Exam offered by CompTIA or comparable certifications.
Server Administration (CST345) – This course prepares students to install, configure, and administer Windows Server Active Directory Students will be prepared for the Microsoft MCSA certification on Windows Active Directory.