New studies and clinical trials have proven that women who are 30 and above currently give birth at higher rates compared to women who are in their 20s. The Centers for Disease Control reports that the rate for women between 30 and 34 years old giving birth was increased to 102.6/1000 in 2019 from 101.5/1000 in 2015. In the 35-39-year-old bracket, there was an increase as well, but only at slower strides. The younger batches of between 25 and 29 years old, on the other hand, showed a decreased rate of childbirth from 104.3/1000 to 101.9/1000 over the past five years. These new data confirm that women 30 years old and above are now delivering more babies compared before, while the younger generation of women is currently slowing down on childbirth.
If you are a woman over 30, then this article is for you. Read on, learn, and understand. Finally, once you’ve absorbed everything, you can decide if you are ready to get pregnant.
Getting Pregnant In Your 30s
Generally, there is a little decline in the fertility of women when they reach the age of 32. However, this decline will increase rapidly when they have reached 37. They are more fertile, on the other hand, when they are in their 20s, but currently, as mentioned above, the trend indicates that more women are now willing to wait until they are 30 and above to have babies. They have become more career-oriented and more determined to become financially stable before they give birth.
According to university professors Melinda Mills, Ph.D., and Ronald Rindfuss, Ph.D, “Women’s increased education is linked to later ages at childbearing, which is attributed to difficulties in balancing student and mother roles as well as the fact that better-educated women are more likely to pursue careers that entail a steeper career ladder and more investment in human capital. Young adults may also delay childbearing until their income increases and they can ‘afford’ children, but also to avoid the ‘wage penalty’ of early motherhood.”
Sadly, the longer they delay this, the more difficult it becomes to get pregnant. Also important to know is that a man’s fertility is as much affected when they grow older too.
There are about 30% of women over 35 who seek the help of a fertility doctor. This percentage increases with age. This simply means that the earlier you ask for help, the more chances you have for having a baby. This could be anything from taking oral medications to just monitoring your ovulation, down to in vitro fertilization. You may be concerned about the quality of your egg cells. Have them tested so you will be aware of the status of your ovulation? Apparently, without the help of a fertility doctor, your chances of getting pregnant would be about 20%.
Higher Likelihood For Twins
Evidence-based reports show that the likelihood of delivering twins as you grow older is higher compared to getting pregnant below 30 years old. This is due to the erratic condition of your hormones as you age. The hormonal increase becomes more significant when you reach 35 and above, which may also be due to fertility treatments if you are going through one.
Taking Care Of Your Pregnancy
While it is true that all pregnancies carry the risk of miscarriage, the risk increases as a woman’s age go up. A lot of miscarriages are caused by chromosomal dysfunctions, and the likelihood of babies having these dysfunctions increases with the age of the mom, especially after she reaches 35.
Additionally, you are most likely to be at risk of miscarriage if you have an existing chronic condition, such as diabetes, thyroid disease, or high blood pressure. You should keep yourself healthy before you get pregnant to reduce further risk. Thus, you must consult with your healthcare provider for a workup before trying to conceive.
Physical And Emotional Changes
Undoubtedly, there are going to changes that will happen to your body when you get pregnant. As you grow older, the physical changes that will occur will be more challenging for you to deal with. If you can, you must stay physically active throughout your pregnancy, which is possible, especially if you were already physically active a few years back. Don’t let your pregnancy stop you from exercising and keeping yourself healthy.
Susan Newman, Ph.D., confirms with a past research that women who plan on giving birth later in life have boosted brainpower. She says, “it’s also plausible that later pregnancies protect against cognitive decline. Researchers at the University of Southern California found that women have “better brainpower after menopause” if they had their last baby after age 35. “
If you ask a woman friend or family who has experienced pregnancy, they would tell you that pregnancy alters your moods and emotions. You can still blame this on hormonal changes, though mood and emotion can change whether or not you are pregnant. If you have friends who are also pregnant, luckily, you have a group you can reach out to with the same experiences, making your pregnant life a little easier than expected.
Laura M. Glynn, Ph.D. surmises, “At no other time in a woman’s life does she experience such massive hormonal fluctuations as during pregnancy. Research suggests that the reproductive hormones may ready a woman’s brain for the demands of motherhood—helping her becomes less rattled by stress and more attuned to her baby’s needs.”
Getting pregnant at a later age of 30 and above does pose several risks, so if you have the chance to plan it all out, there’s no harm at all in consulting your doctor about it. He can help you make your pregnancy journey less stressful and more meaningful for you.