Science Experiments With Water
Researchers and scientists use experiments to answers questions and expand their general knowledge. Water is one of the most important chemicals in the world, and you, too, can learn about its properties by performing a number of fun science experiments. Water science experiments can help you to understand how water is constructed, how it moves through the water cycle, and how it changes states. Water is a very simple chemical, composed of two hydrogen atoms and one oxygen atom that form a covalent bond. Despite the simplicity of the molecule, water behaves in several unusual ways, best illustrated through science experiments with water.
Always think about safety first, while performing any water science experiments. While water is a relatively safe substance, some science experiments with water may call for you to use heating devices or chemicals that may be dangerous. Always wear safety goggles when performing experiments, tie back long hair, and be sure that you do not have any sleeves or jewelry dangling from your wrists, arms, or hands. Always know where the nearest eye-washing station and fire extinguisher are. Finally, always be sure your parents or teacher know what experiments you are doing so they can provide help if you need it.
By passing a current through a volume of water, you can cause the hydrogen and oxygen atoms to pull apart from each other.
Learn about how water tends to stick together, especially at the surface. Called surface tension, this characteristic of water allows things to float on the surface. However, as you will learn, some simple chemicals can destroy the surface tension of water, making it impossible for things to float.
Using a bit of pepper, you can see how quickly soap breaks the surface tension of water.
While eggs usually sink in plain water, you can get them to float by making the water denser.
By experimenting with the way in which oils and water repel each other, you can try to create a working lava lamp.
Chlorine is a chemical added to drinking water and pool water to kill bacteria that may live in the water. However, chlorine can kill pet fish and frogs, so it is important to learn the best way to remove it.
Water does some funny things to light; and, in the right circumstances, water magnifies objects. These water science experiments help to illustrate this tendency and create your own magnifying glass.
Several properties of water, including the amount of space it takes up, change with the temperature. These science experiments with water help you to understand the liquid's strange properties.
Ancient mariners learned that by floating a magnetized needle in water, they could create the first compasses. See if you can use your understanding of water and the principles of magnetism to create your own.
Droplets on a Penny (Video)
Because water has such strong surface tension, a single penny can hold far more water than you would ever imagine. This fun science experiment illustrates the strength of water's bonds.
While some substances readily dissolve in water, others fail to do so, no matter how long you stir them. Experiment with simple household chemicals to learn more.
Evaporation is an important part of the water cycle. Learn how and why water evaporates by performing simple experiments.
Investigate the properties of water and the scientific process by learning how experiments yield new knowledge.
Some mining activities cause pollution to enter the local water. Several experiments can help you determine if your local water contains mining byproducts.
Under the right conditions, water can remain liquid below 32 degrees Fahrenheit.
Written By: Lynn Taylor