- MOST RECENT
5 HEALTHY CARBOHYDRATES YOU MUST INCLUDE IN YOUR DIABETES DIET
Diabetes is one of the most common diseases worldwide and this chronic condition is characterized by an abnormally high level of sugar (glucose) in the blood. The high blood glucose level is a direct consequence of the absence or decreased production of insulin in the body. It is the role of insulin to breakdown the glucose in the blood and thus stabilize the blood sugar level. As a result of insufficient insulin production, this physiological malfunction occurs which goes by the name of diabetes mellitus.
Owing to the increased level of glucose in the blood and the body’s inability to break it down, diabetic patients are recommended to stay away from carb-enriched meals. However, eliminating this vital food group totally is not the best idea either.
Here is a list of healthy carbohydrates that you should stick to (in small portions) as they provide your body with the energy to function smoothly.
Sweet potato: Many consider it to be a traditional treatment for diabetes as it helps the body to maintain the blood sugar at optimal levels. The hormone adiponectin in sweet potato ensures that the blood sugar does not fluctuate too much. They are also high in fibre, which further makes it more nutritious.
Greek yogurt: A 3/4th cup serving of Greek yogurt contains about 7 grams of carbohydrate, which is definitely less than most other carbohydrates like a slice of bread. Further, it is rich in protein and calcium, which is all the more essential for people suffering from diabetes, for their bone density tends to get affected.
Brown rice: Brown rice contains all three parts of the fiber-rich grain kernel, unlike white rice. The presence of fibre reduces the intensity at which the carbohydrate hits the bloodstream. Moreover, other whole grains like oatmeal are also recommended by nutritionists. They are rich in soluble fibre and also lower blood cholesterol.
Pulses: Protein-rich pulses like beans and lentils are yet another terrific addition to your diet. A starchy form of carbohydrates, beans can be consumed in the form of healthy salads or nutritious soups. On the other hand, lentils are rich in potassium which helps in regulating the blood pressure.
Blueberries: Blueberries contain antioxidants which reduce the effect of oxidative damage within the body. Fruits like strawberries and raspberries can also be a part of your diabetic diet for they are low in calories and packed with all the essential minerals, vitamins and antioxidants. Some studies even claim that they possess the potential to reverse the effects of diabetes.
The key to a balanced diet that does not endanger your health is eating in moderation. People suffering from type 2 diabetes are usually horrified by the mere mention of carbs in their diet. However, expert nutritionists and dieticians around the world recommend that the consumption of the above-mentioned food items does not pose any risk to the patient’s condition. Moreover, the inclusion of healthy carbohydrates can be good for your overall health and it also fuels the body with sufficient energy. So plan your diet wisely and stay healthy by making healthy choices.
And while you are in this journey towards good health, why not make it truly count by going organic. 24 Mantra offers a range of certified organic products that are free from all chemicals and adulterants. Know more about the products here: https://www.24mantra.com/products/