Rich in iron, zinc, and fiber, toasted pumpkin seeds make a quick, savory snack. Together with their naturally salty flavor of tamari sauce, they also serve as a perfect garnish for soups, and rice dishes. Tamari is a wheat free soy sauce from Japan that is loaded with digestive enzymes.
Great snack to take to that holiday party!
Eastern View: Pumpkin is a cooling demulcent used topically for soft skin and internally for ulcers. Pumpkins have a diuretic action but are also high in potassium and sodium. The orange color indicates that pumpkin is high in beta-carotene, useful for regeneration and rasayana.
Pumpkins have a sedative and laxative effect. Pumpkin seeds widely known as Pepitas, are used and recommended in Ayurvedic healing for treating urinary problems, low bone density, arthritis, bed-wetting, joint pain, vascular diseases, controlling cholesterol levels (LDL) and for supporting the functions of the kidneys and prostate.
The remedial values of Pumpkins are antioxidant, anti-arthritic, anti-parasitic, anti-inflammatory, antimicrobial, detoxifying, anti-hypertensive, emollient, nutritive, anti-inflammatory, sedative, moisturizing and tranquilizing.
One of the most interesting facts about pumpkins are that they are extremely rich in an amino acid called as tryptophan that assists in eliminating the toxins in the mind, thus helping with stress, anxiety, trauma, anger and is also proven to enhance your cognitive abilities and calm the nervous system.
Lots of benefits – go ahead and enjoy your pumpkin seeds this winter.
Western View: Many people tend to think of pumpkins as little more than just a Halloween decoration or a Thanksgiving pie filling, but maybe it is time to rethink this plump, nutritious orange plant. Pumpkin is an extremely nutrient-dense food, meaning it is chock-full of vitamins and minerals but low in calories.
Pumpkin is one of the best-known sources of beta-carotene, a powerful antioxidant that gives orange vegetables and fruits their vibrant color. Beta-carotene is converted to vitamin A in the body once it is eaten. Consuming foods rich in beta-carotene may reduce the risk of developing certain types of cancer, offer protection against asthma and heart disease, and delay aging and body degeneration.
Eating pumpkin is good for the heart. The fiber, potassium, and vitamin C content in pumpkin all support heart health.
Pumpkins are high in potassium and consuming adequate potassium is almost as important as decreasing sodium intake for the treatment of hypertension (high-blood pressure). Other foods that are high in potassium include cantaloupe, avocado, pineapple, tomatoes, oranges, spinach, and bananas.
Increased potassium intake is also associated with a reduced risk of stroke, protection against loss of muscle mass, preservation of bone mineral density, and reduction in the formation of kidney stones.
Research has demonstrated a positive relationship between a diet rich in beta-carotene and a reduction in the occurrence of prostate cancer; this is according to a study conducted by the Harvard School of Public Health’s Department of Nutrition.
Beta-carotene has also been shown to have an inverse association with the development of colon cancer in the Japanese population.
The antioxidants vitamin C, vitamin E, and beta-carotene (all of which are found in pumpkin) have been shown to support eye health and prevent degenerative damage. A higher intake of all fruits (3 or more servings per day) has been shown to decrease the risk of and progression of age-related macular degeneration.
Plant foods like pumpkins that are high in both vitamin C and beta-carotene offer an immunity boost from their powerful combination of nutrients.
Tamari Pumpkin Seeds
- 2 cups raw, hulled pumpkin seeds
- 3-4 tablespoons tamari sauce or Bragg’s amino acids
Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F.
Spread the pumpkin seeds evenly on a dry baking sheet. Bake them till they swell and turn bright golden-green, about 10 minutes. Immediately remove them from the oven and sprinkle with tamari and stir the seeds on the pan.
Serve the seeds warm or at room temperature.
Check out my meal plan program below for more meals that heal so that you know you are eating the right foods for your metabolic type.