Content of the Article
My grandmother used to tell me that I had to chew up to a hundred times before I swallowed. For me, it was an exaggeration that I only liked to give him that pleasure, but when I got home, I forgot all about it. Now that I'm older, I understand how clever your advice was. As silly as it may sound, one of the best ways to lose weight is to try to eat more slowly. It is scientifically proven that eating little by little helps to fight obesity and avoids gaining superfluous calories.
In most cases, eating slower means eating less. This is corroborated by an investigation by the North American Association for the Study of Obesity conducted in two thousand and four. In this research, multiple individuals were asked to eat as much as they wanted at different speeds. The first group was allowed to eat without limiting their speed. The second, they were only allowed to eat one bite every time a horn sounded. At the end of the research, the scientists verified that, having spent exactly the same amount of time, the honking subjects had ingested less food than the former.
Another Japanese study directly linked obesity to the speed at which it is eaten. After studying 23 different cases, scholars concluded that people who eat fast are twice as likely to be obese. In part, this is because eating slowly satisfies the appetite more than eating fast. The food spends more time in the mouth and the taste buds are, over a considerably longer period of time, sending signals to the brain. Sensors of the tongue and oral cavity are triggered to send satiety signals to the brain," says Dr. Kathleen Melanson.
In fact, the mere fact of chewing or having something in your mouth is already a mechanism to neutralize your appetite. When the brain senses an activity in the oral cavities, it releases a histamine to its neurons that strengthens the message of satiety. Hence, chewing gum reduces the feeling of appetite. When you eat slowly, your blood sugar levels are regulated," explains Dr. Melanson. This helps your body to properly store its energy reserves and distribute them throughout the day.
Unfortunately, there is no ideal time to determine how long a lunch should last. There is also no specific figure specifying how many times you should chew a food before you eat it. According to the doctor, it all depends on a number of variables such as the type of food or the size of your bites. The best thing, then, is to focus on the size and texture of the food even before swallowing. Hence, be sure to chew hard enough to give your bite a smooth consistency.
6 Tips for Slower Eating
1. Request menu
Instead of sitting in front of a giant combination dish, try to eat a first, second and dessert. If you start your lunches with a light meal, you'll be able to fill up on low-fat groceries, and by the time you get to the second one, you'll need less to satisfy yourself.
2. He eats little bites.
The smaller the bite, the longer it will take to finish the food and the less you will eat. When you eat, the brain takes about 20 minutes to digest what it has eaten. If you go slowly, you give him more time to make up his mind that he's satisfied.
3. Eat fiber-rich foods
In addition to being healthier, high-fiber foods usually take longer to chew. Fruits, vegetables and whole grains require a slower chewing process.
4. Swallow already before pricking
Even if it's just a mnemonic rule, you should start to realize that you can't prick another piece of meat before you've swallowed what's in your mouth. It may take some time before it becomes a natural behavior in you, but once you assimilate it, the results are assured.
5. Drink water throughout the meal
Train yourself to drink plenty of water throughout your lunches. Apart from stopping fork and knife activity for a few seconds, it will help you swallow better.