Police Detective: Mr. Wolf, do you understand why you are here?
Wolf: I have no idea, detective. I was in my kitchen when your officers said I needed to come with them. No one's told me anything!
Police Detective: Well, Mr. Wolf, you were seen and heard pounding on the front door of two residences in Pigville.
Wolf: Pounding is an exaggeration. I was knocking. I needed to borrow an egg.
Police Detective: I'm sorry, an egg?
Wolf: Yes, I was baking and ran out.
Police Detective: You were heard telling them you would "Blow their house down." We have officers at your home right now with a search warrant to look for explosives. Things will go a lot better for you if you just tell me where they are.
Wolf: Seriously, man? It's a euphemism. I'm not literally going to blow their house!
Police Detective: Hm. Then, twenty minutes later, you were seen climbing the roof of a third residence.
Wolf: What? No. Look, I really needed an egg. I tried the front door. When no one answered, I walked around to call through the back door - I'm often over at the Pigs' and they don't hear the front door if they're in the kitchen. Then I noticed their gutters were blocked with leaves from that wind storm we had yesterday and the pigs can't climb, so I thought I'd quickly clear them out. 
Police Detective: You were clearing their gutters?
Wolf: Yes.
Police Detective: And the chimney?
Wolf: Well, when I got up there I could smell something cooking. I don't know what they were cooking, but, mm, man, it smelled divine!
Police Detective: So you climbed down the chimney?
Wolf: No! I leaned over to smell better. Then I finish the gutters and climbed down. I got an egg from old Mrs. Goat two houses down and went home. Next thing I know your goons are hammering on MY door.
Police Detective: These pigs, you say they're friends?
Wolf: Yeah! We went to uni together and all moved into this neighborhood five years ago. Ask anyone.
Police Detective: Oh, we will, Mr. Wolf, we will. That's all I need from you right now.
Wolf: I can go?
Police Detective: For now. I'll have one of my officers take you home. Don't leave town.
