Outline Excel Data in Microsoft Excel: Overview You can outline Excel data to add an organizational quality to a long or wide worksheet. When you outline Excel data, you group worksheet data into different levels based on column and row headings. Lower level data is associated with the headings in the rows or columns.
Set Margins in Excel: Overview To set margins in Excel worksheets before printing, open the “Page Setup” dialog box. To open the “Page Setup” dialog box, click the “Page Layout” tab in the Ribbon. Then click the “Page Setup” dialog box button in the lower-right corner of the “Page Setup” button group. Then click
Make Columns in Publisher: Overview You can make columns in Publisher to aid in the layout of a publication page. You can then add text boxes over the column guides you create in the page to produce newsletter-style layouts. When you make columns in Publisher, you can also add rows to a publication page.
Create a Custom Page Background in Publisher: Overview Create a Custom Page Background in Publisher: How to Apply or Remove a Page Background You can create a custom page background in Publisher using the “Fill Effect” formatting also applied to shapes and pictures. To display the available default page background choices, click the “Page
Master Pages in Publisher: Overview You can use master pages in Publisher to change the default appearance of pages in a publication. Master pages in Publisher contain the default page layout objects and content to apply to a publication page. When you add pages to a publication, they are
Timeline Options in Excel: Overview This lesson shows you how to set timeline options in Excel. After inserting a timeline, an “Options” tab within a new “Timeline Tools” contextual tab then appears in the Ribbon. This tab appears in the Ribbon any time you select the timeline within the worksheet. You use the buttons
Custom Color Schemes in Publisher: Overview You create custom color schemes in Publisher to apply colors you select to publication elements in a consistent way. To create custom color schemes in Publisher, click the “Page Design” tab in the Ribbon. Then click the “More” button in the lower right corner of the “Schemes” list.
Conditional Formatting in Excel: Overview Conditional formatting in Excel lets you define criteria for cells which change the way the cells look in the worksheet, but only if the cells’ values match the criteria. For example, you could create a conditional formatting criterion that makes a worksheet cell appear with a red fill color