A handy tool
For all those who are into woodworking as part of their profession or as a hobby, selecting the right tool to get the job done is of utmost importance. It is necessary that you make use of the tools that would not only make your work easier but also pave the way for better results. With the help of these tools, you would be able to acquire the professional touch and attain perfection in your work. Among the various tools that are frequently used in woodworking, one is the router.
A router basically refers to the tool that is used to hollow out an area in a hard workpiece. It is most often used in cabinetry. It can either be used as a plunging tool or be inverted into a router table. Routers can be put to a variety of uses. You can use them to produce dovetails, mortises, and tenons. They can also be used to produce moldings and panel doors and frames.
Variety of options
When we talk about routers, there are different options with regards to the type and size. The one that you use should be in accordance with your requirement. Among the various options that you have, the one that tends to be the source of confusion is to decide whether one should go for a fixed base router or a plunge base router.
The plunge base router allows you to have controlled vertical movement when you are cutting. You can plunge the cutting piece into the surface of the workpiece. With the help of a plunge base router, you will find it easier to make accurate cuts with a lot of precision on the interior of the piece that you are working on. While you are using a plunge base router, you will have to place the sole of the base on the surface of the workpiece and keep the cutting bit raised above it. When the motor is turned on, you can lower the cutter into the work and attain the level of cut that you are looking for with precision.
If you are using a fixed base router, you will have to set the depth of the cut you are hoping to achieve before turning on the tool. The sole plate of the tool is either rested on the workpiece, ensuring that the cutting bit is not in contact with it, or is placed at an angle above it. When the tool is turned on, the tool cuts its way into the workpiece. With the help of a fixed base router, you will find it easier to shape the edges as it would be able to provide you more precision in this regard. It is easier to control the movements of a fixed base router due to the fact that your hands are closer to the workpiece. More stability is offered with the fixed base router. As the depth you require is fixed beforehand, you will get the exact result that you are looking for.
Which one to get
Which router you ought to get your hands on largely depends on the use that you want the router to be put to. However, for those who indulge in woodworking frequently, it is a good idea to get both. For the purpose of cutting the interior, it is the plunge based router that is perfect, while for the purpose of shaping the edges, it is the fixed base routers that will prove to be perfect. If, however, you want to get your hands on just one, it might be a good idea for you to opt for the fixed base router, especially since you are an amateur. The fixed base router offers more stability and thus, operating it is a tad bit easier than the plunge based router. You also need to ensure that whichever type you get your hands on is of profound quality. Quality is not something that can be compromised when it comes to woodworking if you are looking for the perfect result.