People used to refer to all types of illegal and addictive drugs as narcotics, but the term has a much narrower meaning today. At present, narcotics refer to opium, opium derivate and their semi-synthetic derivate. In addition to their medical use, narcotics produce a general sense of well-being by reducing anxiety, tension and aggression. Some of the common street names for various narcotics/opioids include Horse, Brown Sugar, Black Tat, Junk, and Sippin Syrup, among others.
What is a narcotic drug
Narcotics are a class of pain-relieving drugs derived from opium, a drug produced by the poppy plant. Commonly referred to as opioids or opiates, narcotic drugs have the ability to bind to naturally occurring opioid receptors in the brain and nervous system to produce euphoria and provide pain relief to its users. For this reason, opioid painkillers are typically prescribed to patients who experience chronic pain or have acute moderate-to-severe pain after an injury or a surgical procedure.
Narcotic drugs are primarily abused due to their strong effect and intense euphoric feelings. Generally administered orally or injected into veins, narcotic drugs are extremely addictive. Similar to the effect of other drugs, the more the amount of narcotics taken, the more is their tolerance. An increase in the tolerance level, increases the chance of an addiction and hence, an overdose.
Types of narcotic drugs
Narcotic drugs come in various forms, including tablets, syrups, capsules and intravenous injections. Common opioids or narcotic drugs include illicit drugs like heroin, and prescription pain medications, such as hydrocodone, oxycodone, morphine and codeine. Prescription opioids are common narcotic drugs that are prescribed for managing acute and chronic pain and are often prescribed with other drugs, such as acetaminophen, a common over-the-counter (OTC) medication. Other types of narcotic drugs include synthetic drugs derived from opium.
Prescribed by doctors to suppress cough, treat pain, cure diarrhea, and help induce sleep; the effects of narcotics depend on the amount, frequency and methods of their consumption, and previous exposure to the drug if any. Depending on their therapeutic usage, abuse potential, safety, and chemical dependency, narcotic drugs vary from Schedule I to Schedule V. Due to their high abuse potential and the dangers resulting from their abuse, even prescription narcotics come under controlled substances.