‘I want to learn Russian’. Is that about you? Find out the most efficient and cost-effective way to study Russian language.
Wondering what to start with? Obviously, the first thing is to learn Russian alphabet. The Russian people use Cyrillic which differs much from Latin. Wondering how many letters in the Russian alphabet? There are 33 of them, quite a lot! You’ll have to learn how to write letters and type Cyrillic. So, learning Russian seems to be challenging for English speakers at a first glance.
Our online Russian language school offers an easy solution! We have taught Russian for beginners as well as helped intermediate and advanced level students to master Russian since 2014. With our online tutor you will study the language in an easy and learner-friendly way. You’ll not only learn how to write in Russian but will also be able to read a Russian text and type letters very soon.
Normally complete beginners can use simple Russian phrases and hold a conversation on everyday topics after 15-20 hours of study. However, your progress depends much on your age and motivation. Besides, the frequency of online lessons and the quality of your homework contribute greatly to your success.
Actually, one will definitely need a private tutor to learn Russian grammar. It has not much in common with the English system. There are 3 noun genders, 6 noun cases, complicated verbal system along with numerous exceptions. Thus, Russian grammar remains ‘terra incognita’ for the majority of Russian students. But not for our students! First of all, your teacher will develop a personalised Russian course based on your needs and goals. Then she will provide online tutoring to help you overcome all the difficulties. We do out best to make your learning effective and enjoyable!
Native Russian tutor is definitely needed to solve the issues with Russian pronunciation. That’s all because you can learn to speak a language correctly only from a native speaker. For example, Russian letter ‘r’ as well as palatalized consonant sounds and sibilants do not exist in English. So, it is really difficult
for an English speaker to pronounce Russian words without a qualified teacher’s help.
To sum it up, taking regular Russian classes online will step by step bring you to a desired level. Finally, you will be proud to say ‘I speak Russian’ in Russian.
Learn Russian online with a qualified Russian teacher. Book a free trial lesson today!