About This Chapter
Who's It For?
Anyone who needs help learning or mastering rulers of the Roman Empire material will benefit from the lessons in this chapter. There is no faster or easier way to learn about rulers of ancient Rome. Among those who would benefit are:
- Students who want to learn a broad topic in a short amount of time
- Students who are looking for easy ways to identify the most important information on the topic
- Students who have fallen behind in memorizing events and people associated with ancient Rome
- Students who prefer multiple ways of learning ancient Roman history (visual or auditory)
- Students who have missed class time and need to catch up
- Students who have limited time to study for an upcoming exam
How It Works:
- Watch each video in the course to review all key topics
- Refer to the video transcripts to reinforce your learning.
- Test your understanding of each lesson with a short quiz.
- Complete your review with the Rulers of the Roman Empire chapter exam.
Why It Works:
- Study Efficiently: The lessons in this course cover only information you need to know.
- Retain What You Learn: Engaging animations and real-life examples make topics easy to grasp.
- Be Ready on Test Day: Take the Rules of the Roman Empire chapter exam to make sure you're prepared.
- Get Extra Support: Ask our subject-matter experts any question about the history of ancient Rome. They're here to help!
- Study With Flexibility: Watch videos on any web-ready device.
Students Will Review:
This chapter summarizes the material students need to know about the rulers of the Roman Empire for a standard ancient Roman history course. Topics covered include:
- Early Rome and Caesar Augustus
- Mark Antony and Cleopatra
- The rule of Emperors Hadrian and Claudius
- The Nervan-Antonine Dynasty
- The Severan Dynasty
1. The Early Roman Empire and the Reign of Augustus Caesar
This lesson is about Augustus, the first emperor of Rome. In this lesson we follow Augustus's meteoric rise to power, the collapse of the Roman Republic, and the rise of the Roman Empire.
2. Mark Antony of Rome: Biography, Facts & Death
Explore the life and times of the Roman politician and general Mark Antony and test your understanding about the foundation of the Roman Empire and the ancient world.
3. What was Cleopatra? - History, Biography & Facts
Explore the life and achievements of the Egyptian Pharaoh Cleopatra and test your understanding about ancient Egypt, the Greek Empire, and the Roman Empire.
4. Emperor Hadrian of Rome: Facts, Biography & Accomplishments
Explore the life and accomplishments of the Roman Emperor Hadrian in this lesson. Then, test your understanding of Roman culture, the Empire and classical architecture with a brief quiz.
5. The Roman Emperor Claudius: Facts & Achievements
In this lesson, you'll explore the life and achievements of the Roman Emperor Claudius. Learn more about the Roman Empire, the life and death of emperors, and the Roman military.
6. The Five Good Emperors of Rome & the Nervan-Antonine Dynasty
This lesson will identify the emperors of the Nervan-Antonine Dynasty. It will explain the rule of the Five Good Emperors of the era, while also highlighting the rule of Commodus, the last of the dynasty's emperors.
7. Emperors of the Severan Dynasty
This lesson focuses on the Severan Dynasty, which ruled Rome from 193 CE to 235 CE. Although the lesson explains the military and social reforms of this dynasty, it also highlights the outlandish personalities of the individual rulers.
8. Division of the Roman Empire: Diocletian & the 3rd Century Crisis
This lesson will explain the 3rd Century Crisis of the Roman Empire. It will focus on the political, civil and economic problems that caused the crisis, and will also highlight the role of Diocletian in the resolution of the crisis.
9. Constantine & the Eastern Roman Empire
This lesson will explain the reign of Constantine and his move to Constantinople. It will focus on the advantages of its location, its ties to Roman law, and its homogeneous Christian population.
10. Who was Dido, Queen & Founder of Carthage?
Dido was the queen and founder of Carthage. Can there really be much more to say about her? Yes. In this lesson, we'll explore the full legend of Dido, and see how that story varied depending on who was telling it.
11. Who was Roman Emperor Marcus Aurelius? - Biography & Death
In this lesson you will learn about the life of the Roman Emperor Marcus Aurelius, who ruled from 161-180 C.E. Topics in this lesson will include important biographical information, noteworthy contributions, cultural impact, and the aftermath for Roman society following his death.
12. Marcus Aurelius: Contributions & Accomplishments
In this lesson, you will learn about the Roman Emperor Marcus Aurelius, including how he ascended to the throne and his achievements. You will also learn about his philosophical writing.
13. Marcus Aurelius: Quotes, Writing & Speeches
Marcus Aurelius was a scholarly emperor. His thoughts survive in a work called 'Meditations' and three speeches debatably attributed to him survive as well. Learn more about them through some quotes in this lesson.
14. Marcus Aurelius: Philosophy & Religion
Marcus Aurelius was a philosopher-king, known for his writings on how a Stoic should live. Marcus emphasized acting for the good of the community and following your true nature.
15. Roman Emperor Caligula: Biography, Facts & Quotes
This lesson will look at the life of the Roman emperor, Caligula. Perhaps one of the most infamous of all of the emperors who ruled, his name over the centuries has become synonymous with Roman corruption and debauchery.
16. Roman Emperor Nero: Biography, Facts & Quotes
This lesson goes over a brief biography of Roman Emperor Nero's life and reign. You'll learn about his early life and family and contrast his early reign from his later reign.
17. Roman Emperor Vespasian: Biography, Facts & Quotes
This lesson goes over the early life and rule of Vespasian. You'll learn about the man's family, his early career, and what he was like as a person and emperor.
18. Vespasian: Reign, Leadership Style & Achievements
If you are looking to learn more about the Roman Empire and its many leaders, this lesson has information on several emperors and their relationships. This lesson will cover the reign of Emperor Vespasian, first of the Flavian emperors.
19. Emperor Domitian: Biography, Facts & Achievements
In this lesson we explore the life and reign of Domitian, a first century Roman emperor. Domitian was the second and less favored son of another Roman emperor, Vespasian.
20. How Did Nerva Become Emperor?
This lesson goes over the way by which a relatively little known emperor rose to power. He is known as Nerva, and he was definitely not born to be an emperor.
21. Roman Emperor Nerva: Biography, Facts & Accomplishments
This lesson is going to go over a little-known Roman Emperor by the name of Nerva. You'll learn a bit about his family, his career, and his accomplishments as emperor.
22. Antoninus Pius: Facts, Quotes & Accomplishments
Antoninus Pius lived from 86 to 161. He was the 15th Roman emperor. Ruling as a just and gentle man, under him, Rome reached its peak of peace and prosperity.
23. Who Was Commodus? - Facts, Quotes & Accomplishments
This lesson will look at the life and reign of the Roman emperor, Commodus. Best known for his obsession with the gladiatorial games, he was one of the many emperors of Rome who ruled for a very brief time before being assassinated.
24. Septimius Severus: Quotes & Accomplishments
After rising to power amidst tumultuous political circumstances, Septimius Severus expanded the Roman empire immensely and developed the military. Learn more about Septimius' accomplishments by reading this lesson.
25. Constantine the Great: Accomplishments & Quotes
Constantine I is one of the more well-known emperors in the history of the Roman Empire. During his reign, he accomplished many things. In this lesson, we will learn about these accomplishments, including his legalization of Christianity, his founding of Constantinople, and his reforms of Diocletian to keep the Roman Empire together.
Earning College Credit
Did you know… We have over 200 college courses that prepare you to earn credit by exam that is accepted by over 1,500 colleges and universities. You can test out of the first two years of college and save thousands off your degree. Anyone can earn credit-by-exam regardless of age or education level.
To learn more, visit our Earning Credit Page
Transferring credit to the school of your choice
Not sure what college you want to attend yet? Study.com has thousands of articles about every imaginable degree, area of study and career path that can help you find the school that's right for you.