I would guess that 99% of your piano lessons include a time when your student is asked to clap a rhythm. Clapping rhythms is a handy way to separate rhythm from notes in order to truly hone in on improving rhythmic understanding. But while clapping simple measures of rhythm is effective, it can also very, very boring.
However, it doesn’t need to be boring! As this form of rhythm drill is so simple, with little effort, it can be turned into a great deal of fun!
In today’s post your students’ imaginations can run wild as they use their knowledge of rhythm to answer questions for a “superhero job interview”. While it works great as a stand-alone activity it works even better when paired with our comic-based piano books, The Adventures of Fearless Fortissimo (learn more about them on here). Check out the free, printable activity below!
A Superhero Job Interview To Reinforce Rhythm
The next time you have an action-obsessed piano student sitting on your bench, pull out the printable below and harness that energy for rhythm-busting action.
The printable pack below contains two printables: one with provided rhythms and one with blank spaces for you to write your own rhythms (thus enabling you to suit the needs of any student in your studio). Print the activity, laminate it and then use the sheet with the provided rhythms or use a dry erase pen to fill in rhythms in the provided spaces to suit your student’s current level. Hint… writing in two rhythms from your students’ current piece will guarantee success when they return to the bench!
To play the activity with your student, begin by counting and clapping each of the two rhythms at the bottom of the page until your student can do so unassisted. Next, read the first question of the superhero job interview to your student and then read Answer A and Answer B. Ask your student to answer your question without speaking by clapping the rhythm at the bottom of the page that corresponds to her choice of answer. For example, if you ask “Would you be a superhero or supervillain?”, and your student decides she would be a supervillain, she would answer you by clapping the rhythm found under “Answer B”. Continue playing until all questions have been answered.
Looking For More Superhero Piano Printables?
If you’re looking to have more superhero fun with rhythm, check out this activity here. And, if you want to have a blast with a board game that reinforces note reading in G position visit this post here to learn download Note Reading Ruckus.