Kolob, signifying the first creation, nearest to the celestial, or the residence of God. First in government, the last pertaining to the measureme[n]t
of time. The measurement acording to celestial
time; which, celestial time, signifies one day to
a cubit. One day, in Kolob, is equal to a
thousand years, according to the measuremet
of this earth, which is called by the Egyptians
Stands next to Kolob, called by the Egyptians
Oliblish, which is the next grand governing
creation, nearer to the celestial or the place where God resides, holding the key of power also,
pertaining to other planets; as revealed to <from>
God to <to>
Abraham, as he offered incenceSacrifice upon an alter, which he had.
built unto the Lord.
Is made to represent God, sitting upon his throne,
clothed with power & authority; with a crown
of Eternal light upon his head; representing,
also, the grand Key words of the Holy Priesthood,
as revealed to Adam in the Garden of Eden, as also to Seth, Noah, Melchisedek Abraham & all
to whom the priesthood was revealed.
answers to the hebrew work raukeeyang, signifying
expanse, or the firmament of the heavens: also, a
numerical figure, in Egyptian, signifying 1000:
Explanation of Facsimile of Papyrus Drawing, Nauvoo
Principal gathering place for Saints following expulsion from Missouri. Beginning in 1839, LDS church purchased lands in earlier settlement of Commerce and planned settlement of Commerce City, as well as surrounding areas. Served as church headquarters, 1839...
24 June 1804–11 Mar. 1854. Teacher, lecturer, doctor, clerk, printer, editor, postmaster. Born at Hopkinton, Middlesex Co., Massachusetts. Son of Joseph Richards and Rhoda Howe. Moved to Richmond, Berkshire Co., Massachusetts, 1813. Moved to Chatham, Columbia...
; three pages; Book of Abraham Manuscripts, ca. 1837–1841, CHL.
Note: The transcript of the Explanation presented here is used with permission of the Neal A. Maxwell Institute for Religious Scholarship. It was published earlier, with some differences in style, in Brian M. Hauglid, A Textual History of the Book of Abraham: Manuscripts and Editions (Provo, UT: Neal A. Maxwell Institute for Religious Scholarship, Brigham Young University, 2010), 184–193.
Explanation of Facsimile of Papyrus Drawing, Early 1842