Systems engineering may be complicated to explain and comprehend, but not with LabVIEW. Use this software to visualize and accelerate your work in multiple ways.
Visualize your applications
From hardware configuration to debugging, LabVIEW generates fast results and turn your acquired data into real business solutions.
LabVIEW is a system-design platform that provides visualization to all aspects of your application. It uses a graphical programming language called G instead of standard text-based ones like C++ or Java. Rather than writing code, drag and drop blocks or diagrams to create a framework and script. Process your data flow without any programming experience and interruption, such as missing syntaxes. If your task requires advanced intervention, integrate LabVIEW with other programs and develop your own algorithms to turn data into practical insights.
LabVIEW comes with a user-friendly interface that uses familiar terminology for engineers and scientists. The program accesses data from hardware and generates instant visualizations with integrated data viewers. It allows you to take measurements, analyze your input, and present outcomes to different users, including ones with little or no technical background. Other ways to use this program include creating simulations, presenting your ideas or even teaching basic programming concepts.
It works well with many other programs. Thus it is popular among users all over the world. This equals to a large community of support and references, as well as open-source libraries.
Where can you run this program?
LabVIEW is available on all platforms including Windows, Mac OS and Linus.
Is there a better alternative?
No. LabVIEW is notable for its powerful G language that excels in virtual instrument control. MyOpenLab or LabJack may be used as an alternative, but they require mastering other programming languages.
LabVIEW enables you to test and control hardware in a fast and efficient way with minimal technical knowledge.
Should you download it?
Yes. Solve complex problems with LabVIEW and acquire beautifully visualized results.