Iowa Learning Farms will host a webinar on Wednesday, October 16 at 12:00 p.m. about the research being done at Iowa State University on bees in agricultural settings.
Did you know there are between 300 and 400 species of bees in the state of Iowa? Randall Paul Cass, Extension Entomologist at Iowa State University, will present research that is currently being conducted at Iowa State University, which focuses on observing the challenges and opportunities for bees in Iowa’s agricultural landscapes.
“We thrive when bees thrive,” said Cass, whose research focuses on honey bees and native bees and on exploring how Iowa’s landscapes impact bee health and abundance. Join us at noon on October 16 to learn more about Iowa’s native bees and the research being done at Iowa State University on the relationship between bees and agriculture.
A Certified Crop Adviser board approved continuing education unit (1 CEU: Crop Management) is available for those who are able to watch the live webinar. Information for submitting your CCA/CPAg/CPSS/CPSC number to earn the credit will be provided at the end of the presentation.
To watch, go to www.iowalearningfarms.org/page/webinars and click the link to join the webinar shortly before 12:00 p.m. on October 16, to download the Zoom software and log in option. The webinar will be recorded and archived on the ILF website for watching at any time at https://www.iowalearningfarms.org/page/webinars.
Established in 2004, Iowa Learning Farms is building a Culture of Conservation by encouraging adoption of conservation practices. Farmers, researchers and ILF team members are working together to identify and implement the best management practices that improve water quality and soil health while remaining profitable. Partners of Iowa Learning Farms include the Iowa Department of Agriculture and Land Stewardship, Iowa State University Extension and Outreach, Leopold Center for Sustainable Agriculture, Iowa Natural Resources Conservation Service, Iowa Department of Natural Resources (USEPA section 319) and GROWMARK, Inc.
Hilary Pierce Jacqueline Comito
Extension Outreach Specialist ILF Program Director