Why cite sources?
Whenever you quote or base your ideas on another person’s work, you must document the source you used. Even when you do not quote directly from another work, if reading that source contributed to the ideas presented in your paper, you must give the authors proper credit.
Citations allow readers to locate and further explore the sources you consulted, show the depth and scope of your research, and give credit to authors for their ideas. Citations provide evidence for your arguments and add credibility to your work by showing that you have read and examined a variety of resources. In written academic work, citing sources is standard practice and shows that you are responding to this person, agreeing with that person, and adding something of your own. Think of documenting your sources as providing a trail for your reader to follow to see the research you performed and discover what led you to your original contribution.
- Students will be asked to provide evidence, such as notes, drafts, or other work samples.
- Students found to have violated Academic Integrity will be subject to the following:
- Zeros are assigned to the student or students involved.
- A letter will be sent to parents and counselor.
- When a published work is plagiarized, a letter of apology will be sent to the writer or publication.
- A second offense may result in an ‘F’ grade and/or being dropped from the course without credit.
Make sure to follow Copyright!
Planning on using Wikipedia as a source?
MLA Citation Examples
The following are examples of MLA citation for you to use as a guide when citing your sources. Make sure to pay attention to capitalization, punctuation and formatting.
Author (last, first). Title of Book. City of Publication: Publisher, Copyright Date. Print.
Severo, Richard. The Wages of War: When America’s Soldiers Came Home-from Valley Forge to Vietnam. New York: Simon and Schuster, 1989. Print.
Book With 2 or 3 Authors (List authors in the order they appear on title page)
Author (last, first), Author (first last), and Author (first last). Title of Book. City of Publication: Publisher, Copyright Date. Print.
Caldwell, Bruce, Louis Scatt, and Henry M. Tipton. Economic Progress: Fact or Fantasy? Columbia: U of Missouri P, 1991. Print.
Essay/Chapter from Book
Author (last, first). “Title of the Essay.” Title of Book. Ed (First Last). City of Publication: Publisher, Copyright Date. Page Range. Print.
McCarthy, Ann. “Talking to the Walls.” Great Science Fiction Tales. Ed. Harry Green, Moe Black, and Maggy Brown. New York: Doubleday, 1985. 177-188. Print.
Article from Online Database – IF USING EBSCO/SIRS THIS WILL BE CREATED FOR YOU!!
Author (last, first). “Article Title.” Title of Magazine. Date of Magazine. Name of Database. Subscribing Library, Library Location. Date of Access.
Kaestle, Christine E., and Martha W. Waller. “Bacterial Stds And Perceived Risk Among Sexual Minority Young Adults.” Perspectives On Sexual & Reproductive Health 43.3 (2011): 158-163. Academic Search Elite. Web. 7 Mar. 2013.
Author (last, first). “Article title.” Title of Web Site. Name of institution/organization of web site. Date of publication/last update. Web. Date of Access.
Gibson, Christine. “Radio: A Christmas Gift to the World.” American Heritage People. American Heritage. 24 Dec. 2005. Web. 25 Jan. 2008.