This presentation reports on the development of a transmedia narrative within an undergraduate course which serves students from 12 discipline areas. It identifies key principles of transmedia narrative and links those to examples from the narrative of Bullfinch, South Australia, a fictional town which provides the setting for the transmedia narrative in the course.
Transmedia storytelling is the technique of narrative development across multiple platforms, media and formats using a variety of technologies, with the potential affordances of each platform contributing to the story domain. This approach relies on the development of a story-world which users access in a variety of ways across media channels. Transmedia pedagogies are an acknowledgement of the changing role of the student in contemporary higher education, as they encourage students to become co-creators of this narrative based story-world and to participate fully in its development.
In educational situations, this transmedia narrative engages users in highly contextualised authentic problem scenarios which elicit purposeful learning activity. Students are exposed to experiences through these scenarios, that they might one day encounter (Kalogeras, 2014). Transmedia storytelling supports constructivist pedagogical approaches which seek to engage both cognitively and emotionally and elicit productive learner activity (see Jenkins, 2010; Dudacek, 2015).
This presentation reports on the development of a transmedia narrative to support learning in undergraduate coursework. The presentation describes the context of Critical Approaches to Online Learning, an introductory course for 12 online undergraduate programs. It identifies key principles of transmedia narrative and links those to examples from the narrative of Bullfinch, South Australia, a fictional town which provides the setting for the story-world in the course. The presentation also illustrates how the development of the transmedia story world supports learning across multiple courses within a set of online course offerings, including examples of learning tasks from multiple disciplines.
Dudacek, O. (2015). Transmedia storytelling in education. Procedia Social and Behavioral Sciences, 2015, vol. 197, p. 694-696.
Jenkins, H. (2010). Transmedia storytelling and entertainment: An annotated syllabus. Continuum: Journal of Media & Cultural Studies, 24(6), 943-958.
Kalogeras, S. (2014). Transmedia Storytelling and the New Era of Media Convergence in Higher Education: Palgrave Macmillan.