Happy 4th of July!
“We hold these truths to be self-evident, that all men are created equal, that they are endowed by their Creator with certain unalienable Rights, that among these are Life, Liberty and the pursuit of Happiness.”
On this day of celebration take a few moments to honor what it truly means to be free. There was a cost to the freedoms we now enjoy and with that freedom comes a certain responsibility. To truly be free means you honor and respect what you have. You take responsibility for your words and actions. When you are free you allow others their freedom as well. Freedom does not give you the right to judge or have power over others because even if you disagree, they have the right to freely express who they are.
We are fortunate here in the States. There are other places in the world where tyranny reigns, women are not equal and people are not allowed to have their own religious beliefs. There are places where people do not have freedom of speech, the right to vote and in some cases they are not even allowed their free-will.
Cherish your freedom and take a few moments in gratitude for the freedoms you have. Look inside and see what freedom means to you. Let our freedoms include love and tolerance of others. Take a moment to give thanks to those who fought (and are still fighting) for our freedoms. Take a moment to give thanks and honor those who paid the ultimate price with their lives.
Yes we have the right to life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness. Let us think about how fortunate we really are to have those rights. Then of course….get the party started! How will you celebrate your freedom today?~Shine Your Light Debbie
©Debra Taitel 2014 All rights reserved
Daily Muse Home Page
Memorial Day in the United States has changed from its civil war roots originally called Decoration Day. It has become a day for honoring those who serve(d) in the armed forces.
This is a day to put aside any judgement about war and honor those who fought (and are still fighting) bravely. It is time to pause and reflect upon the true meaning of Memorial Day and not just consider this day as the unofficial start of summer.
It is a sad truth that war exists but it does. It is a part of history in almost every country. Whether it be a civil war, the fight for freedom, human rights or against tyranny there are those who step up and take on the duty of serving and protecting.
There are many reasons men and women join the armed forces but the fact remains they are stepping up with the knowledge that they might have to go into battle at some point. They step up when they KNOW they could lose their lives. Even those who were drafted in years past fought for their lives and ours. Many paid the price and made the ultimate sacrifice in the name of freedom.
War is not pretty and leaves a mark on everyone and everything it touches; Soldiers, family, friends and the countries where the wars take place. It leaves a mark on each one of us as we watch with horror from our homes. Saying thank you isn’t enough. One day of honor and memorial isn’t enough. Mere words are not enough nor is placing flowers or a flag on a gravestone but it is all we can do.
To those who have put their lives on the line for us; To those who put their lives on the line to help others be free; To the families of those who lost their lives in the line of duty let us say thank you. Let us honor this day and give thought to the meaning of memorial day and how our lives have changed because of these brave souls who took on the huge responsibility of defending our country and fighting for democracy and freedom all over the world.
We honor you and thank you for your service. We honor those who lost their lives and pray that those who fought and returned find love and peace in their hearts again. We say thank you and pray for the families of those who made the ultimate sacrifice. We say thank you and honor each and every person who stepped up to sign up.
We say thank you and honor those who were drafted. On this memorial day please join me in a moment of silence to honor, say thank you and send out the vibration of gratitude, appreciation and peace to our veterans past and present. It is with the utmost respect, gratitude and appreciation that we say THANK YOU for your service! You ARE appreciated and words are simply not enough…..~Shine Your Light Debbie
©Debra Taitel 2012-2016 All rights reserved
Daily Muse Home Page