1850 printing of the 1850 copyrighted text. This text professes to elevate invention to the first rank in rhetorical instruction. It credits Whately as the only other recent author not to excluded invention, but states that he does so more narrowly than this work shall do. Secondly, it attempts to reduce of the principles of rhetoric to a more exact system,. The art of rhetoric is philosophically distinguishable from logic, grammar, aesthetics, poetry, and elocution, and it is not limited, as it is in Whately, to argumentation. Day argues that explanation and persuasion are large parts of rhetoric and distinguishable from argumentation. and the treatment of rhetoric as an art rather than a science. Thirdly, an emphasis on the practice of rhetoric as an art, and not merely a science, has resulted in the prescription of numerous exercises, and the inclusion of an appendix of themes for composition. The preface credits the influence of German writers Schott, Hoffmann, Richter, Eschenburg, Theremin, and Becker. The text it is divided into two parts: invention and style. Invention is further divided into explanation, confirmation, excitation, and persuasion. Style is divided into absolute properties, subjective properties, and objective properties. The Schultz Archive copy is roughly the complete text.
1867 printing of the 1867 copyrighted work: a reconstruction of Elements of the Art of Rhetoric (1850). The author is credited as the author of books on logic, grammar, composition, and rhetorical praxis. The preface states Elements of the Art of Rhetoric was distinct for elevating invention to the first rank in rhetorical instruction, reduction of the principles of rhetoric to a more exact system, and the treatment of rhetoric as an art rather than a science. This text made changes to make stronger relations between rhetoric and logic and aesthetics, fuller develop the processes of explanation, and the more exact classification of style. A treatise and textbook on rhetoric, it is divided into two parts: invention and style. Invention is further divided into explanation, confirmation, excitation, and persuasion. Style is divided into absolute properties, subjective properties, and objective properties. Discourse is discussed as oratory, epistolary composition, poetry, representative discourse, judicial, deliberative and sacred. Exercises are used throughout. The Schultz Archive copy is roughly the complete text.
Ninth edition/printing (no year) of the 1867 copyrighted text. Day is credited as the author of Logic, Rhetoric, and Rhetorical Praxis. The book is based on Day's rhetoric that argues thought (and forms of thought) is the starting point for teaching rhetoric, composition, and grammar rather than style and form of language. Emphasis is put on teaching methods of thought and study with accompanying exercises. Definitions and principles are here given in their simplest forms. Introductory exercises cover parts of speech, such as sentences, clauses, and words. The next section, the Art of Composition, is divided into simple objects, principal elements fo the sentence, modifying elements, abnormal forms, construction, analysis, symbolism of thought, and explanation. Oral and written exercises are included throughout, including exercises in correction. The Schultz Archive's copy is roughly the complete text.