- Pink snow has appeared on mountain tops in Yosemite National Park this week.
- On Facebook, park rangers said snow at high elevations, 9,500 feet or higher, can appear pink or red in warmer months as a result of algae.
- While the phenomenon is nicknamed "watermelon snow," visitors are not encouraged to try eating it.
- Visit INSIDER's homepage for more stories.
Yosemite National Park is always a glorious place to see. But this week, visitors were treated to something extra special at the park — pink snow.
On Sunday, rangers shared a photo of the magnificent and rare weather event on Facebook. In a post, the rangers said the pink snow was not only safe, but it's actually a pretty regular occurrence in the park.
According to the post, some snow at elevations higher than 9,500 feet can appear pink or even red in the summer months. The color is caused by algae (called Chlamydomonas nivalis) that "thrives in freezing temperatures and liquid water, living on the snow," the park said in the post.
Although this particular type of algae is naturally green, the rangers explained, it has a pigment called carotenoid that acts as a protective barrier.
It's a "natural type of sunscreen to protect itself from too much heat and damaging UV radiation," the rangers said. This "sunscreen" bleeds out in the summer months, dyeing the area a darker color to protect that algae's chlorophyll. This color will make the snow heat up faster and melt just a bit more quickly.
The phenomenon even has an adorable name: Watermelon snow. Though it's a cute and delicious-sounding name, one expert is warning it's probably best not to eat it.
"Although it probably isn't harmful to eat, we certainly don't recommend it," Scott Gediman, the park's public affairs officer, told TODAY.
It may be August, but there is still plenty of snow and ice above 9,500 feet! If you look closely in the first image you may notice a slight reddish color to the snow. The second image is a close up example of the coloration. Ever see this and wonder what it is? Some snow, typically found at high elevations (9,500’+) where snow persists even through the summer months, can appear pink or red. The color comes from a cold-loving algae, Chlamydomonas nivalis, that thrives in freezing temperatures and liquid water, living on the snow. This algae is typically green but contains a special red pigment called a carotenoid that acts as a protective barrier, shielding the algae’s chlorophyll. Since chlorophyll is necessary for its survival, it uses this natural type of sunscreen to protect itself from too much heat and damaging UV radiation. The pigment dyes the surrounding area a darker color, giving the effect of a pink or red snow field, and allows the snow to heat up faster and melt more quickly. Though, even with melting snow most trails in the high country may still have variable conditions, such as snow, mud, water crossings and other hazards. Hikers and Backpackers should be aware that trail conditions can change throughout the day. If conditions are not ideal for you, turn back, and try your hike or backpacking trip another time. It is not worth risking your safety to finish your hike. First image is of an unnamed lake in the high country. #Yosemite #NationalPark #WatermelonSnow #ScienceIsCool
The watermelon snow phenomenon isn't just limited to Yosemite. Last year, it was also spotted in Glacier National Park too. It can happen anywhere snow is exposed to summer weather conditions.
And, again, despite this snow being highly photogenic, it's important to remember to be careful while hiking to find it. Even though the snow is melting in the higher parts of the park, certain sections of hiking trails may still prove dangerous for some. If you begin to feel unsafe on the trails, the park recommends you turn around immediately.