Richard the Lionheart: A Life From Beginning to End by Hourly HistoryRichard the Lionheart You might have heard of King Richard-the Lionhearted, the good king in the tales of Robin Hood. But what do you really know about this twelfth-century ruler of England? Do you know why he left England, or why he was taken prisoner by another sovereign as he tried to return? Did you know Richard had other brothers besides the famed scoundrel, Prince John? Have you heard tales of Richard not only as a missing king but as a leader who rode boldly into battle alongside his knights? Inside you will read about... - From Aquitaine to King of England - Beginnings of a Crusade - The Way to Palestine - Sea Battles and Sieges - A Captive King - The Last Five Years And much more! In this book, youll learn the actual story of King Richard, a king who may not have been exactly good, but was certainly brave, charismatic, and dashing-a historical character with a story to remember.
Richard I (1157 - 1199)
In reality, however, Richard the Lionheart was a far more complex character and certainly no angel. Here are 10 facts about him. But the wedding never actually went ahead. Instead, Henry kept Alais as a prisoner for 25 years, part of which time he also used her as his mistress. After ascending the throne at the age of 31 without a wife, Richard eventually married three years later. But his marriage to Berengaria of Navarre was strategic — he wanted to obtain control of the Kingdom of Navarre — and the two spent very little time together, with no children being born. In fact, the Lionheart is seen by many as having tormented his father to a premature death.
By the age of 16, Richard had taken command of his own army, putting down rebellions in Poitou against his father. Richard spoke both French and Occitan. Following his accession, he spent very little time, perhaps as little as six months, in England.
the duel hamilton and burr book
25. So Many Titles, So Little Time
King Richard the Lionheart was King of England from until his death. - He is known both for his military skill and the neglect of his realm because of his long absence.
His knightly manner and his prowess in the Third Crusade —92 made him a popular king in his own time as well as the hero of countless romantic legends. He has been viewed less kindly by more recent historians and scholars. They forced him to acknowledge Richard as his heir and harried him to his death. Richard I spent little time in England during his reign as king. Rather than planning for the future of the English monarchy, he put everything up for sale to fund the Crusade that he would lead. He managed to raise a fleet and an army and departed for the Holy Land in Sailing home via the Adriatic, Richard I was captured and imprisoned in the castle of Duke Leopold of Austria, whom he had insulted during the Crusade.