1. Intro
    A. Creator of Bitcoin
    B. Not much is known about early life
2. Creation of Bitcoin
    A. First message about Bitcoin
         i. Posted to P2P Foundation
         ii. Introduced Bitcoin Whitepaper and source code
         iii. Expressed concern about the banking industry and fiat currencies
    B. Mining Bitcoin
         i. Genesis Block
            a. First block on Bitcoin's blockchain
            b. Included headline, "The Times 03/Jan/2009 Chancellor on brink of second bailout for banks"
                 i. Interpreted as dissatisfaction with the financial industry
         ii. Test of mining algorithm SHA-256
         iii. Fate of Satoshi Nakamoto's Bitcoin
    C. Registration of Bitcoin.org
         i. Satoshi Nakamoto uploaded the Bitcoin Whitepaper to Bitcoin.org
         ii. Now an information site
             a. Allows users to find a wallet
             b. Beginning users can learn about Bitcoin
3. Communications
     A. Founded Bitcointalk Forum
          i. A place to discuss Bitcoin and cryptocurrencies
          ii. One of the most active Bitcoin-related forums
          iii. Satoshi Nakamoto was regularly active on Bitcointalk until he left Bitcoin
     B. Emails with other Bitcoin community members
     C. Notable opinions expressed by Nakamoto
          i. Block size
          ii. Sidechains/"altcoins"
          iii. Alternative uses for blockchain
4. Departure from Bitcoin
     A. Designation of new "lead developer" and repository maintainer
     B. Reasoning for departure
     C. Last confirmed communications
5. Known associates
     A. Hal Finney
          i. Early beta tester of Bitcoin
          ii. A cryptography expert
          iii. Later suspected to be Satoshi Nakamoto
               a. Circumstantial evidence
               b. Unconfirmed
     B. Gavin Andressen
          i. Early developer for Bitcoin
          ii. Became lead maintainer of Bitcoin's code repositories after Nakamoto's departure
6. Speculation about identity
    A. Said he lived in Japan
         i. Analysis of writing suggests he lived in the Commonwealth
         ii. Inclusion of "The Times" headline suggests he may have lived in London while developing Bitcoin
    B. Suspected identities of Satoshi Nakamoto
         i. Hal Finney
         ii. Dorian Satoshi Nakamoto
         iii. Craig Wright
             a. Claims to be Nakamoto
             b. Was unable to provide convincing evidence
             c. Is widely seen as a nuisance and fraud
         iv. Nick Szabo
         v. Dr. Vili Lehdonvirta
         vi. Michael Clear
         vi. May be a group of people or a government agency
7. Conclusion
