What is it that really affects our quality of sleep?
Although all of the tips presented in this series may help you sleep, what they are really doing is helping our internal systems do what they are supposed to do.
These systems are designed to bring about a balance in our bodies that allows them to function properly.
According to the Cambridge English Dictionary, the definition of ‘homeostasis ‘ is…
“The ability or tendency of a living organism, cell, or group to keep the conditions inside it the same despite any changes in the conditions around it.”
A simple metaphor would be the cruise control in a car. Once you set the ‘balance point’, say at 50 mph, when the car is going downhill, the cruise controller actually slows the engine down so that the car does not go over the ‘set point’ by more than a couple of mph. Similarly, in going uphill, the controller speeds up the engine so that the car maintains its ‘balance point’ speed.
Obviously, our bodies are a lot more complicated than cruise control on a car but the many functions of the body operate in much the same manner.
If the temperature outside is cold, mechanisms within our bodies kick in to keep our bodies as close to optimum body temperature as possible. If a harmful bacteria enters your body, defenses are put into play to counter any ill effects.
A body in balance is healthy and functions well for a long time. However, a body out of balance suffers from illness, gets overweight/underweight, can’t get restful sleep, can’t focus or think clearly.
There are several systems in our bodies that work to maintain this optimal balance that keeps us healthy.
The main system I am referring to, however, is the endocrine system.
The Endocrine System
Very simply (please do some research for your own edification), the endocrine system is a series of glands that produce hormones. Hormones are produced as needed by the cells throughout the body to regulate their functions (making them work properly).
You may have heard of the term ‘hormonal imbalance’. In this case, either the gland is unable to produce enough of the needed hormone or possibly none at all. ThIs imbalance causes functions in your body to go awry, causing all sorts of problems.
One of the most important hormone produced while we are growing up is Human Growth Hormone (HGH). Up until we reach our late 20s, this hormone, secreted by our pituitary glands, not only regulates our physical growth, but it helps us to heal quickly, develop toned muscles, get restful sleep and much more.
After our 20s, our bodies produce less and less of this HGH hormone – thus causing the onset of aging and its related symptoms (i.e., wrinkled skin, loss of muscle tone, slower healing, etc.).
Most people know of HGH because they have heard of athletes, body builders, weight lifters, etc. using the injectable version. Not only do you need a doctor’s prescription for that version, but it is prohibitively expensive as well. In addition, the large doses can have serious side effects.
A better way is to reactivate your own pituitary gland to start producing more HGH than it currently is.
(For information on a new over-the-counter product that helps reactivate the HGH production in our bodies, see this three-minute video – and then contact me if you are intrigued or have questions.)
In conclusion, sleep is essential for balance in our bodies. An important way to enhance restful sleep and add to homeostasis throughout our bodies is through adding HGH to our health routine. To your Health!