Comparison Contrast Essay
A comparison contrast essay is an assignment that requires students to evaluate many different sides to one situation or story. Students will not only need to be able to draw similarities between two competing events, but students will also need to show why two different events are dissimilar. Therefore, learners will have to perform a large amount of research in order to create effective comparison contrast essays.
The first step that students should take in order to create comparison contrast essays is to evaluate the project requirements. Professors will have a list of particular project requirements that will need to be met. For example, professors may require learners to compare and contrast two specific things, or they may require a comparison and contrast of more.
Students may then select their project topic. In most cases, learners can select their comparison contrast essay topics. However, professors may sometimes assign topics. Students need to make sure that they understand the topic before they begin the document.
The nest step after receiving or deciding on a comparison contrast essay topic is for students to begin their research. Students may want to investigate primary and secondary research representing multiple sides or points of view on the same topic. From in depth comparison contrast essay research, learners should be able to develop a clear picture of the similarities and differences between a particular topic or set of topics.
Students should keep journals during their research, especially for comparison contrast essays because they will need to frequently refer back to different similarities and differences. Once the student is satisfied that he or she has performed a suitable amount of research, the student should outline the comparison contrast essay in depth.
The comparison contrast essay outline will serve as a roadmap for the document itself and provide format and direction that the learner will be able to easily follow as he or she drafts the report itself. The student should plan to create several drafts of the comparison contrast essay before completing the final document version. Therefore, the student should allow plenty of time for revisions.
There is a difference between a comparison contrast essay and other report forms. In general, comparison contrast essays require learners to interact with two different subjects in equal manner. Therefore, they must be familiar with two subjects. However, many essays only require learners to be familiar with one subject in depth. Therefore, they may require less research and knowledge to create.
Premium Essays Involving "Comparison Contrast Essay"
Helpful Videos on Essay Writing