This module explores how human activity can create or change places that can be considered to be "impossible"
Students undertake independent research into forbidden places using web based tools. They complete a short project and respond creatively to their chosen location. Finally they consider the nature of forbidden places in their local area.
Why some are places forbidden?
What would it be like to visit a forbidden place?
Some places are restricted because of past or present military activities. Places may also be forbidden for cultural, political or environmental reasons
Wikipedia entry for Pripyat
Wikipedia entry for Gruinard
Hawthorn (nuclear bunker)
Korean Demilitarized zone
Nanda Devi Sanctuary
Mecca (for non Muslims)
Watch the You Tube video 'Visions of Pripyat'
Where is it?
Why is abandoned?
Pripyat is an abandoned city in the ‘Zone of alienation' in northern Ukraine, near the border with Belarus. It was the home to the Chernobyl Nuclear Power Plant workers. It was abandoned in 1986 following the Chernobyl disaster. Its population had been around 50,000.
Use the list of forbidden places.
For each place research to find out:
Where the place is located (preferably a screenshot from Google Earth/Google Maps)
Why the place is forbidden
What special clothes, equipment and permission is required to visit the place
An image of the place
Read excerpts of your work to rest of the class.
Are there any ‘forbidden places’ in your local area?
Annotate an OS map of your local area to show places where you are made to feel unwelcome or are prohibited from entering.
Mark on the spaces or places where you are made to feel welcome.
By placing a booking, you are permitting us to store and use your (and any other attendees) details in order to fulfil the booking.
We will not use your details for marketing purposes without your explicit consent.
You must be a member holding a valid Society membership to view the content you are trying to access. Please login to continue.
Join us today, Society membership is open to anyone with a passion for geography
Cookies on the RGS website