The United States may be mildly embarrassed about its difficulties with science and technology literacy, but it is still struggling with how to fix it. A perspective published in Science tackles one likely hurdle: vocabulary and reading comprehension of scientific text. In the article, Catherine Snow of the Harvard School of Education asserts that it's the students' failure to comprehend the highly conceptual and precise wording that exists in academic publications that is making science hard for them. We need to assess why we force students to deal with jargon if we want the quality of science education to move forward.
Snow defines academic language as the polar opposite of casual conversations: dense sets of text that often using grammatical structures that embed ideas within ideas ("The wheel was invented. It made transport easier," as opposed to "The wheel's invention made transport easier"). She notes that, even though modern textbooks make a point of defining difficult academic terms, they often do so via similarly difficult terms, creating a kind of bottomless comprehension pit.
As an example, she cites a textbook definition of torque that uses the words "product," "magnitude," "force," and "lever"—words that a student will probably have encountered before torque, but are difficult to synthesize when used all together. By contrast, a webpage on torque proved much easier to read because of its expressive, personal tone and casual language.
Still, Snow asserts that we shouldn't abandon textbooks in favor of Wikipedia—while science and tech vocabulary can be hard to swallow at first, the words are far more precise, help us communicate efficiently, and avoid redundancy, which would be a far worse crime than difficulty. Imagine if instead of saying "electron," we had to say "a tiny piece of matter that has a negative charge." (It's worth noting that even this definition has conceptual words that you'd have to learn before you'd know what an electron is.)
So what are kids supposed to do with all of these impenetrable words and concepts nested within one another? Snow says that education systems need a new focus on scientific terms—not just what they mean, but how they're used. We also need to deal with words used to talk more broadly about science like "data," disprove," and "interpret." While students can't meet all of the demands of academic language by middle or high school, a system that nails down understanding of these words would provide a solid foundation to build on later. And that seems necessary if the students are to pursue science- or technology-related careers.