Do you know where Spanish is spoken? The Caribbean Central America Europe North America South America Africa
The Caribbean – Las Antillas Cuba Capital La Habana Facts #1 producer of sugar Guantanamo Naval Base belong to US Known worldwide for its cigars
La República Dominicana Capital Santo Domingo Facts Santo Domingo is the oldest American city, established in 1496 shares the island with Haiti
Puerto Rico Capital San Juan Facts Commonwealth of the US as of 1898 American citizens as of 1917 Ponce de León first governor
Central America Guatemala Capital La Ciudad de Guatemala Facts Most populated country of CA Was the seat of the Mayas, one of the most advanced ancient civilizations
Honduras Capital Tegucigalpa Facts Most mountainous of CA countries US buys 90% of their exported products
El Salvador Capital San Salvador Facts Smallest country in CA Only CA country with no Atlantic coast
Nicaragua Capital Managua Facts Largest CA country Largest cattle producing country in CA
Costa Rica Capital San José Facts Only CA country without an army Home to the worlds 3 rd most active volcano “Arenal”
Panamá Capital La Ciudad de Panamá Facts US built Panama Canal Panama Canal only way for ship or boat to cross from Atlantic to Pacific without going to tip of South America
España Capital Madrid Facts Columbus received monetary support from Queen Isabel which resulted in the discovery of the New World Ruled by Dictator Francisco Franco 1939-1971 Ruled by King Juan Carlos I 1975-present Europe
North America México Capital La Ciudad de México Facts Chichén-Itzá ruins of Mayas and Toltecas La Ciudad de México founded on ruins of Tenochtitlán, ancient capital of Aztecs
South America Venezuela Capital- Caracas Facts- Known for petroleum industry (CNN global gas prices USD- $.12 a gallon) Hugo Chávez elected as president in 1999. In 2009 constitution changed to eliminate term limits for elected officials.
Colombia Capital- Bogatá Facts- Produces 12% of world’s coffee Has endured 4 decades of government vs. anti- government conflicts. (decline since 2002) No real “season” due to being near equator. Climate has more to due with geography.
Ecuador Capital- Quito Facts: Original site of the Incan empire Located on the equator Many people still speak Quechua Economy depends on oil exportation
Perú Capital- Lima Facts: Cuzco was the capital of the Incas Machu Picchu is the “Lost Incan City” not discovered until 1911 by an American explorer/historian
Bolivia Capital- La Paz (modern)/Sucre (original) Facts- La Paz is the highest world capital Bolivia is landlocked- has no coast Lake Titicaca is shared on the west with Perú.
Chile Capital- Santiago Facts: Has 2,700 miles of coastline and is only 110 miles at its widest. Opposite seasons make Chile an important fruit exporter to NA in the winter. Home to the driest desert in the world-Atacama
Argentina Capital- Buenos Aires Facts: Largest Spanish Country in SA. Home to the highest SA peak Mt. Aconcagua Igauzu Falls are larger than Niagra Falls Tango originated among the lower class Patagonia is home to glaciers
Uruguay Capital-Montevideo Facts: Population is about 3,500,000 and about half the people live in the capital. Until 1825 was controlled by Brazil Comprised of mostly European descendents
Paraguay Capital- Asuncion Facts: Landlocked- no coast line Spanish and Guarani are the official languages. Also home to the Iguazu Falls
Africa Equatorial Guinea Capital- Malabo Facts: Large oil industry, but general population does not benefit. Only African country with Spanish as it’s official language.
Wilson’s “Free Gifs&Animations.” Animated World Flags [Online] Available http://www.fg- a.com/flags.htmhttp://www.fg- a.com/flags.htm Levy, Stephen L. and Nassi, Robert J. Spanish Three Years Workbook. (New York, New York: Amsco School Publications, Inc 1988), pp. 407-451. Carroll, Don. “Tijuana Taxi.” Don Carroll’s Midi-Riff- Bulge Page. [Online] Available http://www.dave- gipson.com/carroll//carroll.htmhttp://www.dave- gipson.com/carroll//carroll.htm Citations