What dehydration means?
Dehydration is when the amount of liquid leaving your body is higher than the amount you took in.
Water is essential for life, it helps you feel fresh and healthy, plus your body usually functions because water makes up 75-80% of our whole body mass.
If you’re thirsty, you’re instantly dehydrated.
Dehydrated people often experience thirst, dryness, and stickiness in the mouth, tongue, and lips.
Why is dehydration bad?
Dehydration occurs typically due to lack of water in the body, but it can result in some severe health conditions such as:
- Becoming unable to urinate
- Chest pain
- Dry eyes or blurred vision
- Cool, dry or blotchy skin
- Muscle contractions
- Kidney condition such as or kidney failure and kidney stones
- Deep and rapid breathing
- Lack of sweat
- coma, shock or even death.
- Dry mouth
What Are Warning Signs and Symptoms of Dehydration?
1. Headaches and fatigue
Dehydration can induce headaches or triggers migraines.
When the body is dehydrated, it loses potassium and sodium, two vital minerals that cause a change in blood composition and generate sensitivity in the brain causing the feeling of a headache, loss of strength, tiredness and muscle weakness.
It is a severe problem because you will lack the strength to carry out your regular activities.
As the human brain is nearly 85 percent water, even moderate dehydration can lead to changes in your mood, difficulty with concentration and memory.
2. You suffer from constipation
For more regular bowel movement, your body needs plenty of water for food processing and hydration of the intestines.
If you don’t get enough water and fluids in your body, the colon extracts water from your stools, boosting your risk of constipation.
Not drinking enough water can create toxin build-up and weight gain, and you will begin to feel bad.
Also, when you dehydrated, the body does not have sufficient water to remove waste creating irritable bowel syndrome, abdominal pain, nausea, and reduced appetite.
3. You’re always hungry
If you are dehydrated, your body can confuse the signals, so you may assume you are starving, main while you need water intake.
It can happen most of the times a day or night.
You can get into a bad cycle of over-eating and appear depressed by eating more and more, which puts extra stress on your body.
Drink water, it allows the body systems to function well, providing you more energy.
You will consume less if you are adequately hydrated.
4. Your mouth and lips are dry
Your lips are dry when the body is dehydrated.
If you are not drinking lots of water, your mouth and lips start to dry and cracked.
If your lips or mouth are always dry all the time, you need to drink more extra water.
Boosting your water intake can prevent dehydration. You should take no less than eight glasses of water a day.
You may need more if you are a physically active person or engage in vigorous exercise.
5. Dark urine
If your urine is darker in color and has an also strong smell, it means that your body is dehydrated.
You may be able to tell that you need to drink 8-10 glasses of water every day. Moreover, it is vital to apply this rule right if you see that your urine is darker in color.
6. You have joint pain
Dehydration can create joint pain because the cartilage found in the joints and vertebral discs, which is required to prevent bones grinding together.
Cartilage consists of around 80% water.
Water helps in maintain the cartilage around our joints hydrated and ensuring that the bones stay lubricated.
Therefore, proper hydration ensures excellent shock absorption in the joints during your regular liveliness.
Note: If you start to feel as if you are performing less in your daily activities or tired, your first instinct should be to get a glass of water.
How can you tell if a child is dehydrated?
- Crying without tears
- Decreased urine output or dry diapers
- Skin color changed
- Dry mouth
- Appears to be irritable, crying and fussiness
- Fever higher than 103 F (39.4 C)
What are treatment choices for dehydration?
Drinking eight 8 oz. glasses of water a day will help prevent and treat dehydration.
If it is hard for you to take a lot of water because you’re vomiting, try drinking little amounts of water more often.
The medical treatment for dehydration is hospitalization, where they would replace the fluids and electrolytes lost from the body with intravenous (IV) fluids.
Treatment for Babies
Give your child plenty of liquids, like breastmilk or formula. Is usually better to give your baby smaller amounts of water more often.
If you believe your child is dehydrated, you should see your doctor as soon as possible.