We’re only two days into 2020, but the year has already brought immense destruction. Australian wildfires, which have spread since September last year, have reportedly killed half a billion animals and plants and also turned glaciers in New Zealand black. Even in spite of all this tragedy, no one’s seems to care as much as they should.
Australian forests are one of the most important parts of our planet. The animals that inhabit these regions are unique and require protection. However, no one takes Aussie forest protection as seriously as they should.
Nature Conservation Council ecologist Mark Graham told the parliament: “The fires have burned so hot and so fast that there has been significant mortality of animals in the trees, but there is such a big area now that is still on fire and still burning that we will probably never find the bodies.”
As a result of the Australian wildfires, the glaciers in New Zealand have been burning as well. Moreover, social media posts from many platforms show that the glaciers look “caramelized” and are surrounded by thick smoke.
In addition to the deaths of thousands of animals (including 8,000 koalas), the fires have also stranded over 10,000 Australians. The escape routes that Parliament installed are seemingly not working as they should since people are stuck in traffic or are trapped on the outskirts of burning cities for hours on end. On top of that, the authorities in Victoria fear for the lives of 17 missing people and strongly urge everyone who is still in the affected areas to evacuate immediately.
In order to calm the citizens down, Australia’s Prime Minister Scott Morrison visited a fire-ravaged town, but his visit did not go as planned. Many residents expressed more than just disapproval about his lack of action.
Animals are burning alive, people are missing, and some are stranded in dangerous locations, yet no one is giving it nearly as much attention as they give pop culture events. Our society has become insensitive to serious issues and overly sensitive to minor problems. Although there’s not much we can do about the fires (especially if we’re not citizens of Australia), we can still help raise awareness about these devastating wildfires and pray that more animals and people won’t lose their lives.