Dictators: Rise of 20thC Dictators | Rule of 20thC Dictators
Wars: Origins of Wars | WW1 / WW2: origins compared
Tsar Alexander II
Tsar Alexander III
IGCSE Revision and Study Skills
•IGCSE Paper 1 Model Answers
IBDP Essay/Sourcework Skills •IB Historiography / TOK •IB Internal Assessment • IB Extended Essay •40+ Model Essays •IB Curriculum Map •IB Revision
Early Modern British:
Henry VII | Henry VIII 1509-1529 | Henry VIII 1529-1547 | Edward VI | Mary I | Elizabeth I
Lutheran Reformation | Zwingli/Calvin/ Radicals | Counter-Reformation | Ferdinand/Isabella | Charles I/Phillip II | Ottoman Empire | French Revolution / Napoleon
Please fill in the following form to contact the author, Russel Tarr
ActiveHistory provides entertaining, educational award-winning interactive simulations, decision-making games, self-marking quizzes, high-quality worksheets and detailed lesson plans for teachers and students.
View the top 50 activities here.
The IB History examination is very keen that students learn to compare and contrast the methods and conditions which led to the rise to power of single party state rulers - sometimes insisting that they are from different parts of the world, and / or that one is a right-wing dictator whilst the other is a left-wing dictator!
As a result, I follow my detailed treatment of the Rise of Mao in China with a shorter "mini-unit" on Pinochet in Chile. Students then conclude this study by writing an essay on the subject of "Compare and contrast the methods and conditions which led to the rise of Mao and Pinochet".
Combined with their studies of the Rise of Franco in Spain and Rise of Stalin in the USSR, this means that students go into the exam equipped with two left-wing dictators (each from a different part of the world) and two right-wing dictators (each from a different part of the world).
Students are presented with a series of images from which to draw their own initial deductions. They are then told what each one represents. A good introduction to the topic.
Individual Research Task
Students are given this worksheet framework to help structure their investigation about why Pinochet became leader of Chile. They should use any sources available to them (books, video, websites). A particularly good video is the 10-minute drama film by Ken Loach which can be found on YouTube.
Feedback: Comparing and Contrasting the Rise of Two Single Party State Rulers
Students then get into pairs and small groups to compare their approaches to the previous task. There is a lengthy list of "discussion points" provided too in this worksheet designed to get them thinking more (e.g. the USA opposed Mao, but failed to prevent his rise; but they favoured Pinochet, who succeeded. Why the difference?). There are some teacher notes to help with this exercise too.
Evaluate the political and economic impact of military rule in Chile between 1973 and 1989
A model essay by RJ Tarr, ideal for revision purposes.
Fling the Teacher Quiz: The Rise of Pinochet
I give students 10 minutes at the start of the lesson to try to complete the quiz. Anyone completing the quiz within the available time gets a score based on the amount of minutes left on the clock. They can then move on to the first lesson task, whatever that happens to be, whilst the other members of the class continue to play. I build up a 'leaderboard' of scores over the numerous lessons we have during revision time to build up momentum!
Starter Activity: Dialogue Poem
After a study of the 1973 Chilean Coup, and before/during a study of Pinochet's rule of Chile, ask two female students to read out the following dialogue poem to the class as a powerful starter activity. For further ideas about using "Dialogue Poems" in class, follow this link on Tarr's Toolbox: http://www.classtools.net/blog/writing-dialogue-poems-to-compare-and-contrast-viewpoints.
"Backward Essay Planning" - the Rule of Pinochet
In this activity, students are presented from the outset with a model essay on the subject of the Rise of Pinochet. They then go through this reading it carefully for style and content, highlighting off key features and discussing their thoughts with the class. Next, each student is given a different key term or event to research which isn't currently covered in the essay and decide how to incorporate this into the essay most effectively. These thoughts again are shared so that the essay develops and improves further. Finally, they are given a factual test on the rule of Pinochet and write a timed essay on a different title relating to the same topic:
"Santiago, capital of Chile during the Marxist government of elected, highly controversial president Salvador Allende. Father McEnroe supports his leftist views by introducing a program at the prestigious "collegio" (Catholic prep school) St. Patrick to allow free admission of some proletarian kids. One of them is Pedro Machuca, slum-raised son of the cleaning lady in Gonzalo Infante's liberal-bourgeois home. Yet the new classmates become buddies, paradoxically protesting together as Gonzalo gets adopted by Pedro's slum family and gang. But the adults spoil that too, not in the least when general Pinochet's coup ousts Allende, and supporters such as McEnroe" (from imdb.com).
© 1998-2020 Russel Tarr, ActiveHistory.co.uk Limited (Reg. 6111680)
High Park Lodge, Edstaston Wem, Shropshire, England, SY4 5RD. Telephone/Fax: 01939 233909
Events (300 years ago today): 1720 – Sweden and Prussia sign the Treaty of Stockholm.
Births (200 years ago today): 1820 – Joseph Wolf, German ornithologist and illustrator (d. 1899)
Births (100 years ago today): 1920 – Errol Barrow, first Prime Minister of Barbados (d. 1987)
Births (50 years ago today): 1970 – Alen Bok?i?, former Croatian footballer
Deaths (1600 years ago today): 420 – Yazdegerd I, king of the Sassanid Empire
Deaths (700 years ago today): 1320 – Árni Helgason, Icelandic bishop (b. c. 1260)
Deaths (350 years ago today): 1670 – Claude Duval, French highwayman (b. 1643)
Deaths (150 years ago today): 1870 – Alexander Herzen, Russian philosopher and author (b. 1812)
Commemorations:Martin Luther King Day
RSS Feed | Full week | Get Widget
Google Earth Interactive Tour: three key Silk Road explorers
Three key Silk Road explorers: European, African and Asian
Crossword test Silk Roads
Introduction to the Silk Roads
The Silk Roads: Online Adventure Game
Fling the Teacher! Quiz Generator for teachers and students
New Generator: Online Image Annotation Tool!
Consequences of the Korean War: HTML5 Hexagons
Factual Test: Changes in the Civil Rights Movement in the 1960s
Multimedia lecture : Changes in Location: From Rural South to Urban North
Multimedia lecture : Changes in Methods: From Nonviolence to Militant Self-Defence
Multimedia lecture : Changes in Objectives: From Integration (Civil Rights) to Black Nationalism (Human Rights)
Caesar Cypher Generator
ActiveHistory is now FLASH FREE!
New Blogpost: True, False, or Anachronism?