Some of our students are using this to
- create virtual tours of important buildings in Malaysia
- display their poetry in a 360 world - students choose the location and read the poetry
- explain the different things they see in an ecosystem or different parts of a structure
- reflect on an excursion or field trip
- share their understanding of a geographical feature
- create a "where am I puzzle" for their classmates (great for ESOL learners)
The really easy cheats way to make your own 360 videos with nothing more than a computer
1. download a Google Streetview photosphere (360 image)The first thing you want to do is find and download a 360 degree image, To do this we used Street View Panorama downloader. (Software here) This nifty little program allows you to download Google Streetview panoramas.
Searching on streetview downloader isn't great (nor very accurate), so I find it better to find the location on Google Maps and then load the panorama into the downloader.
To download the panorama you copy the Panorama ID into the downloader program, select the download location and name and hitting the download button.
2. Import the image into iMovie.(or any other movie editing software)
Once the panorama is in iMovie make sure you change the cropping to fit, so that it doesn't cut off any of the 360 image.
You can then add titles and a voice over, you can even have multiple panoramas so that it acts more like a tour.
Adding the voice over is the big win for us, we want students describing features in the panorama or explaining what is happening while someone watches the 360 video. Students can also create virtual tours with themselves as the guides.
We then export the movie, making sure to keep the aspect ratio in tact, so that when youtube detects it as a 360 video everything is there.
3. Add 360 video metadata to your videoTo ensure your video is turned into a 360 video on youtube, I find it is best to follow these instructions to add the 360 metadata (video information) to your video.
You download a small piece of software (spacial media metadata injector) which adds the information to your video
Once you have the video with the injected metadata, you can .....
4 Upload it to Youtube
Once you upload the video, youtube should detect it as a 360 video. It can now be viewed like any other 360 video on a computer, tablet or with Google cardboard.
This is also a handy way to add music and titles to student created 360 videos. It would also be cool to use green screen and have a avatar (you could use gabsee or snapchat) talking as people scroll around the 360 video.