Huge product rangeOver 140,000 books & equipment products
Rapid shippingUK & Worldwide
Pay in £, € or U.S.$By card, cheque, transfer, draft
Exceptional customer serviceGet specialist help and advice
Arthropod-borne viruses (arboviruses) are the causative agents of significant morbidity and mortality among humans and domestic animals globally. They are maintained in complex biological life cycles, involving a primary vertebrate host and a primary arthropod vector. While all known arboviruses are zoonotic pathogens, their emergence as human pathogens is associated with dramatic increases of human population growth leading to uncontrolled urbanization, changes in land and water use, changes in agricultural practices, new irrigation systems and deforestation. Arboviruses brings together a panel of expert arbovirologists to produce a timely review of the rapidly expanding arbovirus research literature. In addition authors identify the most pressing questions that remain to be answered, thus providing a stimulus for future research. Topics include: taxonomy, genome organization, virus-host and virus-vector interactions, evolutionary history, role of vertical transmission in arbovirus maintenance and evolution, epidemiology, arbovirus replication, pathogenesis, arbovirus diagnostics and control, including vaccines, novel anti-viral drugs, RNA interference and genetically modified vectors. Essential reading for every arbovirologist and highly recommended for all virologists and public health officials.
1. The Arboviruses: Quo Vadis? / Duane J. Gubler and Nikos Vasilakis Pages: 1-6
2. The Taxonomy of Arboviruses / Nicole C. Arrigo, Scott C. Weaver and Charles H. Calisher Pages: 9-30
3. Genomic Organization of Arboviral Families / Nikos Vasilakis, Amy Lambert, N. James MacLachlan and Aaron C. Brault Pages: 31-44
4. Host Metabolism and its Contribution in Flavivirus Biogenesis / Rushika Perera and Richard J. Kuhn Pages: 45-60
5. Vector-borne Bunyavirus Pathogenesis and Innate Immune Evasion / Brian Friedrich, Birte Kalveram and Shannan L. Rossi Pages: 61-70
6. Vector-borne Rhabdoviruses / Ivan V. Kuzmin and Peter J. Walker Pages: 71-88
7. Alphavirus - Host Interactions / Kate D. Ryman and William B. Klimstra Pages: 89-106
8. Molecular Interactions Between Arboviruses and Insect Vectors: Insects' Immune Responses to Virus Infection / Natapong Jupatanakul and George Dimopoulos Pages: 107-118
9. Genetic Diversity of Arboviruses / Kenneth A. Stapleford, Gonzalo Moratorio and Marco Vignuzzi Pages: 121-134
10. Ecological and Epidemiological Factors Influencing Arbovirus Diversity, Evolution and Spread / Roy A. Hall, Sonja Hall-Mendelin, Jody Hobson-Peters, Natalie A. Prow and John S. Mackenzie Pages: 135-166
11. Role of Inter- and Intra-host Genetics in Arbovirus Evolution / Alexander T. Ciota and Gregory D. Ebel Pages: 167-174
12. Arbovirus Genomics and Metagenomics / Adam Fitch, Matthew B. Rogers, Lijia Cui and Elodie Ghedin Pages: 175-190
13. Role of Vertical Transmission in Mosquito-borne Arbovirus Maintenance and Evolution / Robert B. Tesh, Bethany G. Bolling and Barry J. Beaty Pages: 191-218
14. The Boundaries of Arboviruses: Complexities Revealed in Their Host Ranges, Virus-Host Interactions and Evolutionary Relationships / Goro Kuno Pages: 219-268
15. Laboratory Diagnosis of Arboviruses / Amy J. Lambert and Robert S. Lanciotti Pages: 271-280
16. Conventional Vector Control: Evidence it Controls Arboviruses / Scott Ritchie and Gregor Devine Pages: 281-290
17. Biological Control of Arbovirus Vectors / Thomas Walker and Steven P. Sinkins Pages: 291-302
18. RNA Interference: A Pathway to Arbovirus Control / Kathryn A. Hanley and Christy C. Andrade Pages: 303-314
19. Genetically Modified Vectors for Control of Arboviruses / Ken E. Olson and Alexander W.E. Franz Pages: 315-336
20. Arbovirus Vaccines / Scott B. Halstead Pages: 337-372
21. Small Molecule Drug Development for Dengue Virus / Qing-Yin Wang and Pei-Yong Shi Pages: 373-382
22. Arbovirology: Back to the Future / Robert B. Tesh and Charles H. Calisher Pages: 385-390
"provides a thorough and compelling review on the current status of arbovirology [...] Overall, Arboviruses: Molecular Biology, Evolution and Control is an outstanding book. An impressive team of contributors was involved in its conception, and each contributor provides an excellent review of their particular research niche. This is arguably the first comprehensive book devoted specifically to arboviruses to be published in the last few decades. The book is highly recommended for every arbovirologist whether it be a first-year graduate student or an established researcher."
– The American Journal of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene
"authored by prominent and well-known scientists in the arbovirus field. The author list is commendable and is a key selling point of this book [...] The chapters are extremely detailed and well-written [...] There is an effective use of figures and tables throughout each chapter, all of which are of a high standard [...] extremely timely [...] the way in which the book as a whole has been brought together is commendable, with a logical order of chapters, and a wide-range of subject matter [...] the book should be considered a must-have book for both experienced researchers and students interested in studying arbovirology as well as scientists and policymakers wishing to increase their understanding and knowledge of emerging arboviruses."
"Leaders in the field, such as Marco Vignuzzi, Richard Kuhn and Goro Kuno, present chapters on basic and applied aspects of arbovirus biology on topics ranging from taxonomy, pathogenesis, vaccines and antivirals to the ability to generate genetically modified mosquitos [...] this book would suit any audience."
– Microbiology Today