Examples of analysis sections
An example from a law field report about a courtroom observation
Click here to see the description section of this law field report.
| The legal processes I observed in the district court hearing reflect to a certain extent Australian social values. Their purpose is to attempt to maintain an efficient court system and create justice before the law. Processes such as rules of evidence which ensure only the most applicable evidence is heard have been developed over many years, thus demonstrating an influence of past and future cases. Similarly, the doctrine of precedent ensures that similar cases have similar results. Procedural grounds for objections protect witnesses from harassment and potential confusion. Therefore, all of these legal processes create an environment in which changing social values will bring about complementary changes in court decisions.
||The meaning and theoretical significance of the observations described are explored
Footnote 1: adapted from Woodward-Kron, R., Thomson, E. & Meek, J. (2000) A text based guide to academic writing. CD-Rom. Dept. Of Modern Languages, University of Wollongong.
An example from an education field report about a classroom practicum experience
| As I help the students I am conscious of the scaffolding Vygotsky described taking place. I observed other people such as teachers and parents scaffolding with their children. It was, therefore, interesting to realise that I was doing the same as I walked around the classroom helping the children with their tasks. Scaffolding helps the children to reach their zone of proximal development which in turn helps them to achieve more complex tasks.
I have found my practical experience in the classroom has been full of examples supporting the theories of Piaget and Vygotsky and to a lesser extent Erikson. It is also good to see that these theories actually have real world application to child development.
|Exploring the significance of practical experience and observations from a theoretical perspective
Reflection about what the field experience has meant for theoretical understanding
This is the analysis section from a history field report about historical monuments.
Click here to see the description section of this history field report.
The Bulli Coal Mining Company had 331 employees: this represented approximately 20% of the population of Bulli. Given the small size of the Bulli community, the population was calculated at 1352 persons in the 1891 census (Mitchell & Sherington, 1984: 42), and its dependence on the Bulli Coal Mining Company, the impact of a disaster of this magnitude was enormous. Henry Parkes and his government realising the hardship being experienced by the community, particularly the bereaved families, gave “official support to a public fund and established a board to distribute the money after investigating the needs of those bereaved” (Mitchell & Sherington, 1984: 58).
The impact of the disaster is reflected in the structure of the monument. The monument was intended to last the test of time. Its shape, an obelisk, is unlike anything else in the area. This fact combined with the historical use of the obelisk, principally in ancient Egypt, suggests the memorial was considered important to the community. No reference is made on the monument, however, in regard to the date of the dedication or to who unveiled it which is significant given the government support of a disaster relief fund for the Bulli community in the wake of the disaster.
Analysis of the event the monument commemorates
Conclusion drawn about the structure and shape of the monument given
Footnote 2: adapted from Flello, J. unpublished manuscript.
An example from an education field report about a classroom practicum experience. (This example contains a mixture of description and analysis within a single paragraph. This is an alternative approach to having these two types of different writing in separate sections.)
| Both childcare centres encouraged the children to think critically and reflectively about themselves and the wider community; for example, I observed an incident at centre 2 (14/5), where the teacher helped the children with an equity of access issue in the playground. Several children wanted to play on the slide and gym equipment but one child continually walked up the slide disrupting the pattern of play. The group of children began to speak loudly and harshly to him and threatened to kick him. The teacher was able to facilitate a resolution to this problem by getting the children to examine what was happening and think of alternative actions. There were all, in effect, being empowered to deal with the injustice they were facing in the playground rather than resorting to physical violence or giving up and playing elsewhere, as some children were about to do.
||Topic sentence: a general theoretical conclusion is drawn
Conclusion illustrated by an example observed in the field
Description of the observed event
Theoretical perspective used to analyse the event
Footnote 3: adapted from McNabb, Learning Skills Centre, University of Melbourne.
Comments and questions should
be directed to Unilearning@uow.edu.au