Some articles on gap, gaps:
... Cumberland Gap has lent its name to a popular folk song recorded and performed by American folk and bluegrass musicians such as Woody Guthrie and Earl Scruggs and British skiffle artists such as Lonnie ... The gap has been mentioned in many songs, including the Old Crow Medicine Show song "Wagon Wheel" co-written by Bob Dylan and Ketch Secor, the song "The Ballad of Thunder ... Fair, the fair Chicago's bid eventually won, "and out of sheer cussedness voted for Cumberland Gap" as the proposed site ...
... Gap is an unincorporated community in Stokes County, North Carolina, United States, approximately 5 miles WSW of Danbury, North Carolina, near Hanging Rock State Park, on North Carolina State Highway 66 ... Big Creek Danbury Meadows Peters Creek Quaker Gap Sauratown Snow Creek Yadkin CDPs Germanton‡ Pinnacle Unincorporated communities Aarons Corner Asbury Boyles Chapel Brook ...
... "I knew I had to give it everything and if there was no gap, then there was no gap ... But it worked out well." Despite having quite a considerable gap coming into the final lap, Van Dijk refused to believe that the race was won until the very end ... I didn't know how big the gap was, I didn't look back, I was just focused on riding hard and getting everything out." A few days on from the ...
... The gap was named for Prince William, Duke of Cumberland, who had many places named for him in the American colonies after the Battle of Culloden ... spread to many other features in the region, such as the Cumberland Gap ... Company, arrived in the region leading a company of men to widen the path through the gap to make settlement of Kentucky and Tennessee easier ...
... A wind gap is a valley through which a waterway once flowed but is now dry as a result of stream capture ... A water gap is a similar feature, but one in which a waterway still flows ... Water gaps and wind gaps often provide practical routes for trails, roads, and railroads through mountainous terrain ...
More definitions of "gap":
- (noun): An open or empty space in or between things.
Example: "The explosion made a gap in the wall"
- (noun): A conspicuous disparity or difference as between two figures.
Example: "Gap between income and outgo"
- (verb): Make an opening or gap in.
- (noun): A pass between mountain peaks.
Famous quotes containing the word gap:
“I peer eagerly into every gap in a fence of a zipper.”
—Mason Cooley (b. 1927)
“For women the wage gap sets up an infuriating Catch-22 situation. They do the housework because they earn less, and they earn less because they do the housework.”
—Sylvia Ann Hewitt (20th century)
“The great enemy of clear language is insincerity. When there is a gap between ones real and ones declared aims, one turns as it were instinctively to long words and exhausted idioms, like a cuttlefish squirting out ink.”
—George Orwell (19031950)