The Age of Open Source Science
Within seconds and with nothing more than a cell phone we can search and access much of the accumulated knowledge of mankind. We can study any subject we want and more importantly we can study all sides of the story. We are no longer limited to what is in the local library or to what to the latest government program says is the proper thing to teach. This access and unprecedented freedom has opened up science to all the people.
Too many revolutionary theories get buried because they can't get exposure through the 'normal' channels. The internet is changing that. The purpose of this site is to provide a place for people to come together and explore exciting new theories about our world. If you have a theory or idea you want to get out there -- consider publishing it here. We are always open to new ideas and look forward to your contributions.
The purpose of this site is to create communities of people which discuss new, exciting and even opposing theories in science. Initially we are starting with two communities - the Structured Atom Model (SAM) and EU Geology. We hope to add additional theories such as Water, Weather, EU Archaeology and EU Cosmology.
By joining a community you will automatically receive email notices of new content for that community.
Scientists believe there are protons and neutrons inside the nucleus of the atom. However they have no theory for how or even if they are organized. Quantum mechanics states we only understand the nucleus through mathematics. Is this reasonable? We know there are particles in there, it stands to reason they are arranged in some manner. Is it possible we just haven't discovered it yet?
The Structured Atom Model is a theory that the nucleus is highly organized and stable. This organization is responsible for the properties of the elements and chemistry. The rules which define how the nucleus is built are relatively simple and adhere to key principles found in nature.
Everywhere we look in space we see signs of electricity - magnetic fields, radio sources, synchrotron radiation, heat, light, particles accelerating. Every one of these phenomena are produced here on Earth with electricity. We've built our entire modern world around understanding electromagnetic phenomena.
The transmutation of elements is thought to only occur in high temperature, high pressure environments. However more and more proof is coming to light that transmutation occurs regularly on Earth at low temperatures. Chickens convert potassium into calcium, bacteria are being used to break radioactive waste into lighter elements, electric arc welders convert Nitrogen gas into Carbon Monoxide. What's going on here, are our theories about how elements form incorrrect?
The "Transmutation of the Elements" community is here to explore these discoveries and attempt to make sense of them. Does transmutation really happen in biology? Can we solve our radioactive waste problems with bacteria? Come explore with us the possibilities.
EU Geology is a group of enthusiasts that believe electricity played a pivotal role in the Geology of Earth. Early man observed these events and recorded them in myths and religious stories.