Our pets rely on us to take care of them when they’re sick or injured. But if we’re not prepared, panic and confusion can hinder our ability to help when they need us most. The best way to increase your chances of responding quickly and calmly to a pet emergency is to familiarize yourself with basic pet first aid.
“Though never a substitute for veterinary treatment, properly applied first aid can minimize pets’ trauma and even save their life until you’re able to get them to a veterinarian,” says Marin Humane director of shelter medicine Belinda Evans.
You are your first priority
In an emergency situation, your first priority should be to protect yourself. Before approaching an injured animal, carefully assess the scene to check for hazards (i.e., electrical wires, traffic, unstable structures, etc.). If all looks clear, approach slowly and with caution. Any injured animal has the potential to bite.
An animal should be muzzled and properly restrained before any care is administered. If necessary, make a homemade muzzle on the spot using a piece of cloth. Restraint techniques will depend on the extent and location of injury. It might be dangerous to muzzle an animal that is coughing, vomiting, having trouble breathing or resisting out of fear. In this case, don’t attempt treatment on your own.
Practice reading vital signs
Practice measuring vital signs on your healthy pet so you become sensitive to changes that signal a medical emergency.
The heartbeat of a dog or cat can be felt by laying an animal down on its right side and placing your hand over its chest, just behind the left elbow. Normal heart rates for dogs average 60 to 160 beats per minute, while cat heart rates average 160 to 220 beats per minute. Pulses may also be measured with your middle and index finger on the inner thigh, just below the wrist and just below the ankle.
You can measure an animal’s breathing rate by observing its sides to watch the chest expand. Or, you hold a tissue in front of the nostrils to see if it moves, or hold a mirror up to the animal’s nose to look for condensation. Normal dog breathing rates are 10 to 30 breaths per minute, while cat breathing rates average 20 to 30 breaths per minute.
Know your ABCs
If an animal has stopped breathing, knowing the ABC steps (airway, breathing, circulation) can mean the difference between life and death. If there is no breathing despite a clear airway, you will need to perform artificial respiration. If there is no pulse, compressions alternating with breaths will be necessary. The American Red Cross’ Pet First Aid book is a great resource for learning how to perform CPR, but a better way is to take a class where you can practice on an animal mannequin.
When is it an emergency?
Difficulty breathing, seizures, excessive bleeding, shock, poisoning, heatstroke and snake bites are some of the more obvious emergencies. But some trauma can be less obvious. Learn what’s normal for your pet so you’re able to recognize when something is wrong. Always have the phone number for your emergency veterinarian handy, too. By asking questions over the phone, they should be able to tell you whether you need to bring your pet in right away.
Get hands on experience at Marin Humane’s upcoming pet first aid and CPR workshop on March 23. To learn more and to register, go to marinhumane.org/events.
Lisa Bloch is the director of communications for Marin Humane which contributes Tails of Marin articles and welcomes animal-related questions and stories about the people and animals in our community. Go to marinhumane.org, Twitter.com/marinhmane, or email firstname.lastname@example.org.