The braking system, together with the shock absorbents and the tires, make up what is known as the safety triangle. The stability and balance of your vehicle depend to a large extent on these components. Brakes are one of the most essential components of your car, and even a slight flaw could become a car accident, in which you could put at risk not only your life but also other individuals. Most drivers are usually not aware of the wear of these components until their brakes begin to fail or behave strangely.
Don't wait for a tragedy to happen, checking and maintaining the brakes is paramount, and in the meantime, you can apply these small hacks to preserve the integrity of the brakes for longer.
Check your driving style: Driving abruptly or aggressively forces you to use the brakes frequently, as you must stop and reduce the speed suddenly, which in the long run causes more significant wear of the friction system.
Avoid overloading the car: A more substantial car will require more work from the braking system to be able to stop it, further wearing out the brake pads. As much as possible, avoid unnecessary loads, especially if you are going to drive on mountainous and steep routes. Aforementioned will also help you reduce your fuel consumption so that it will give you a double benefit.
Do not depend only on the brakes: Use the gearbox to reduce speed, especially on the slopes, in this way you will avoid using the brakes too much.
Pay attention to the small signs: Depending on the age and model of your car, you can have on the instrument panel a notice about the wear of the brake system. Take your car to check if you see this blinking alert on your panel. In the same way, if you feel that the brake pedal is going to the bottom when you step on it, that it feels spongy or vibrates, it is important to take it to review. Do not wait until it's too late.
Don't push the brake pedal to the bottom: If the braking distance increases or if you have to push the brake pedal all the way to the bottom, then the brake pads and brake system are worn out, and you should go as soon as possible to replace them, as you are likely to cause an accident.
Make regular maintenance: You are supposed to check the brake system every time you service and maintain your vehicle, but it is essential to change the brake pads at least every 10,000 miles; However, if you frequently drive in mountainous areas, with steep slopes or rough roads then you should make more frequent revisions and replacements, as the system wears faster under these conditions.
Check the type of parts used in the brake system: When replacing the brake pads and discs during maintenance, you should check the kind of piece they use, if those parts comply with the safety measures and if they are quality parts. If you do not know anything about the subject, just check the network for the name and model of the part they use or consult with the trusted mechanic.