The Ultimate Playground For Cats and Kittens
Cats have a dry skin just like humans. The fur on their body protects them from exposure to elements such as dirt. For pet cats that have dry skin, it is advisable to use moisturizing or soap-free products. Cats normally develop skin problems such as Seborrhea. The best way to treat this disorder is to use medicated shampoo.
Cats have the great qualities. They are better than human beings in seeing things and hearing sounds around them. They smell and feel the nature very well. Due to these abilities, cats were often mistaken to possess black magic. The current era does not suspect cats of having an influence over the supernatural powers. It is necessary to know cats' sense, which may help in understanding their behavior much better.
1. Sight: Cats have a good night vision. Where there is no enough light, cats see much better than humans. However, they are not able see in complete darkness. This ability comes at the cost of daytime vision, which is beneficial for nocturnal predators. Actually, cats fail to see distant objects at daytime. People know little about the colors that cats see visibly. Science says that, they can identify some of the colors than humans do. With their eyes, cats detect faster movement of things in their surroundings. On the other hand, it is hard for them to pay attention on slow moving objects.
2. Sound: Cats have very sharp ears. Even when fast asleep, cats trace the noisy sounds of small rodents. Their ability to hear sounds is three times as high as that of human beings. Cats move their large ears sideways to capture the sound more accurately. For this, they first locate the place from where the sound actually comes. While chasing the target, they sometimes pause to listen and determine the location of their prey.
3. Smell: Cats largely depend on their sense of smell. They always sniff their food before eating. Smelling things is the essential part of feline communication. There is a mechanism at the top of their mouth, which makes possible for them to analyze smell. With the help of this mechanism, cats twist their lips, open their mouth, and express disgust over certain things.
4. Taste: Cats use this sense to decide the foods good for them. They are truly carnivores. As such, their sense of taste best lies in recognizing fat and protein. Unlike dogs, cats prefer to stay away from sweets. In addition, cats do not respond well to the taste of salt. Experts suggest the reason behind this as, enough salt from the meat food.
5. Touch: Cats have touch receptors all over their body. These receptors are nerve cells that transfer sensations of pain, pressure and temperature from any point to the brain. The nerve cells are concentrated mainly on their front paws and face. The hair, covering body of cats, help them to stay alert even on the slightest touch of air passing by.
Courtesy of articlebase.com