March 1 is Zero Discrimination Day, an annual worldwide event that promotes diversity and recognises that everyone counts.
Print the butterfly, take a picture of yourself holding it and post it with your diversity message on #UCNow, (#ZeroDiscrimination, #UCDiversity).
The Zero Discrimination Day is a UNAIDS campaign of solidarity that stands up to racism, discrimination at work, discrimination at school, and other activities that reduce people’s ability to participate fully and meaningfully in society.
Organisations like the United Nations (UN) actively promote the day with various activities to celebrate everyone’s right to live a full life with dignity regardless of age, gender, sexuality, nationality, ethnicity, skin color, height, weight, profession, education, and beliefs.
The symbol for Zero Discrimination Day is the butterfly, widely used by people to share their stories and photos as a way to end discrimination and work towards positive transformation.
If you’re based at Dovedale campus or visit regularly, you’ve probably noticed the brightly coloured hoardings around the old gym. These hoardings have been decorated with various words and phrases relevant to UC – including ‘Tautua.’
‘Tautua’ means service and responsibility. It comes from the Samoan phrase “O le ala i le pule, o le tautua” which translates to “The pathway to authority is through service.”
The phrase, also featured in UC’s Pasifika Strategy, is a well known Samoan proverb meaning by serving others; we can create a meaningful path to success. It can also be translated as “The pathway to leadership is through service.”
Service to others, particularly family and community, is highly valued in Pasifika culture. It’s a value which is also applicable when it comes to education. Education allows one to give back to the community, and rise to positions of leadership and responsibility.
Below: Ashalyna Noa and Bernard Mackenzie from the Pacific Development Team check out the brightly coloured hoardings.
What’s happening in February?
Check out the 2016 Diversity Calendar to see what our diverse communities are celebrating, and let us know of any significant dates you’d like included!
Come see us on Orientation Day!
UC Diversity will be on the O-Day Trail (from 8.45am to 11.00am) to greet our new students and seek their advice on what type of Diversity events they would like to attend this year. Our goal for 2016 is to encourage greater engagement with Diversity at UC.
Have you noticed new artworks in the help point towers around campus? From tower one on Science Road to tower 13 at Dovedale campus, these images weave a story of creation, adaptation and the development of biculturalism in Aoteaoroa New Zealand through mythology, religion, art and architecture.
Created by Ngāi Tahu artist Hori Te Ariki Mataki, the drawings weave the University and its on-going transformation into the story through images that are especially familiar. On the back of the towers, each piece of artwork is explained, with a map to help you follow the trail from start to finish.
We encourage you to take a journey along the trail and discover that biculturalism is no new concept, but an inherent part of the evolution of the Canterbury district. You could also encourage our students to follow the trail as the beginning of their own bi-cultural journey.
A supporting brochure and webpage will be available shortly.
Key strategies for Māori women across all Sectors to accomplish personal and community goals and maximise opportunities for career advancement
Liquid Learning is delighted to present the Māori Women’s Leadership Summit 2015, an inspirational networking and professional development opportunity for current and emerging female leaders across New Zealand.
Some of the featured speakers:
Aroha Campbell Trust Chief Executive Officer
-Tauhara North No.2 Trust
June McCabe Director
-Sustainable Prosperity NZ Limited
Rachel Taulelei Founder and Chief Executive Officer
-Yellow Brick Road
Paula Collins Chief Advisor Māori
-Tertiary Education Commission
Awhimai Reynolds Managing Director
And many more inspirational speakers!
Pipitea Marae and Function Centre Wellington
For more information about the summit and booking form click here
If you have further questions please contact one of the L&D team