Tuesday Meaning and Superstitions
Tuesday is named after the Norse god Tyr. He is also known as Tiv and Tiwaz as a Germanic combat god.
In Norse mythology Tyr was the only god brave enough to put a leash on the gruesome Fenrir wolf.
It is easy to recognize Tyr. He is the god with only one hand.
In the process of putting the leash on the wolf he got his right hand bitten off.
The Fenrir wolf stays tied up until Ragnarok, the end of the world.
At Ragnarok the wolf brakes free and kills Odin (Wednesday is named after Odin), the chief god. Fortunately a new world emerges.
The Fenrir wolf was a child of the deceitful god Loki and lived in Asgard, the home of the gods.
In Spanish speaking countries Tuesday is called “Martes” and is named after the planet Mars. In Ancient Rome Mars was the god of war. His equivalent in Ancient Greek is Ares.
In French Tuesday is “Mardi” and is also named after Mars.
The Japanese have also named this weekday honoring Mars. They call this day “Fire Day” and the planet Mars “Fire Star”. In Thailand this weekday is also associated with Mars.
Tuesday is career day. It is a great day for anything involving business or work.
This is the day of progress and advancement in your field of work. Believe in yourself and stand up for yourself.
In Thailand superstition states that Tuesday is a good day for a haircut. It means you will gain power. All super ambitious people should make sure that they get a haircut on this particular day.
The lucky color for Tuesday in Thailand is pink or lilac.
In Greek and many Spanish speaking countries Tuesday the 13th is considered a very unlucky day. It is more unlucky than the infamous Friday 13th.
It is told Constantinople fell into the hands of Muslim invaders (Ottoman Empire) on May 29th 1453. May 29th was a Tuesday (under the old Julian calendar). When we add the digits in 1453 (1+4+5+3) we get 13.
Many Jews and Christians consider this a very lucky day because of what is written in Genesis 1:9-13. This is the creation story. Counting Sunday as day one and Tuesday as day three, this is the only day where the phrase “it was good” is mentioned twice.
“You may have heard of Black Friday and Cyber Monday. There’s another day you might want to know about: Giving Tuesday. The idea is pretty straightforward. On the Tuesday after Thanksgiving, shoppers take a break from their gift-buying and donate what they can to charity.” Bill Gates
Pancake Tuesday is the popular name of Shrove Tuesday. Many also call this day “Mardi Gras” which means Fat Tuesday in French. Many places around the world celebrate this day with carnivals and parades. This is the last day to enjoy fatty food before Lent.
This is the day before Ash Wednesday. Ash Wednesday is the first day of Lent. Lent is the 40 day period preceding Easter in the Christian faith.