Group Dynamics: Chapter 13
Terms in this set (27)
The eventual matching of the behaviors displayed by cooperating or competing group members.
A performance situation that is structured in such a way that success depends on performing better than others.
Disagreement, discord, and friction that occur when the actions or beliefs of one or more members of the group are unacceptable to and resisted by one or more of the other group members.
A performance situation that is structured in such a way that the success of any one member of the group improves the chances of other members' succeeding.
Resolving differences of opinion and transactions by claiming or dividing resources, making offers and responding with counteroffers, and the guarded disclosure of interests.
dual concern model
A conceptual perspective on methods of dealing with conflict that assumes avoiding, yielding, fighting, and cooperating differ along two basic dimensions: concern for self and concern for other.
Giving oneself more responsibility for an outcome or event than is warranted; often indexed by comparing one's own judgments of personal responsibility to judgments of responsibility allocated by others.
An online communication, such as an e-mail or posting, that is perceived to be hostile, aggressive, intimidating, insulting, offensive, or unfriendly.
A performance situation that is structured in such a way that the success of any one member is unrelated to the chance of other members' succeeding.
Resolving differences of opinion and transactions by identifying common and complementary interests and proposing solutions that satisfy all concerned parties.
A disagreement or confrontation between two or more groups and their members that can include physical violence, interpersonal discord, and psychological tension.
Disagreement or confrontation between members of the same group.
One who intervenes between two persons who are experiencing conflict, with a view to reconciling them.
A performance setting in which the interdependence among interactants involves both competitive and cooperative goal structures.
A reciprocal communication process whereby two or more parties to a dispute examine specific issues, explain their positions, and exchange offers and counteroffers to reach agreement or achieve mutually beneficial outcomes.
Interpersonal discord that occurs when group members dislike one another.
prisoner's dilemma game (PDG)
A simulation of social interaction in which players must make either cooperative or competitive choices in order to win; used in the study of cooperation, competition, and the development of mutual trust.
process conflict (or procedural conflict)
Disagreement over the methods the group should use to complete its basic tasks.
public goods dilemma
A social dilemma when one may or may not not contribute any resources in support of a public good (such as a park or a highway system) but also cannot be excluded for failing to contribute.
A complex emotional and cognitive reaction that occurs when individuals feel that their freedom to make choices has been threatened or eliminated.
rules of order
Prescriptive rules and principles that describe the processes groups and organizations should use when working collaboratively.
An interpersonal situation where individuals must choose between maximizing their personal outcomes or maximizing their group's outcomes.
social trap (or commons dilemma)
A social dilemma when individuals can maximize their outcome by seeking personal goals rather than the collective goals, but if too many individuals act selfishly, then all members of the collective will experience substantial long-term losses.
social values orientation (SVO)
The dispositional tendency to respond to conflict settings in a proself or prosocial way; cooperators, for example, tend to make choices that benefit both parties in a conflict, whereas competitors act to maximize their own outcomes.
task conflict (content conflict or substantive conflict)
Disagreements over issues that are relevant to the group's recognized goals and procedures.
tit for tat (TFT)
A bargaining strategy that begins with cooperation, but then imitates the other person's choice so that cooperation is met with cooperation and competition with competition.
trucking game experiment
A research procedure developed by Morton Deutsch and Robert Krauss in their studies of conflict between individuals who differ in their capacity to threaten and punish others.
YOU MIGHT ALSO LIKE...
Social Psychology | Bordens, Horowitz
Working in Groups_ Ch 8 Conflict and Cohension in Groups
Group Communication - Chapter 8 Managing Conflict
Group Communication - Chapter 8 Managing Conflict
OTHER SETS BY THIS CREATOR
Group Dynamics: Chapter 14
Group Dynamics: Chapter 12
Group Dynamic: Chapter 11
Group Dynamics: Chapter 10
THIS SET IS OFTEN IN FOLDERS WITH...
Group Dynamics: Chapter 9
Group Dynamics Chapter 13 Conflict (3)
Group Dynamics Chapter 13 Conflict (Best ver)
Group Dynamics: Chapter 5