More key literacy components Writing is the ability to compose text effectively for various purposes and audiences . Writing is a tool for communication and learning that allows us to document, collect, and widely circulate detailed information . Writing also provides a means of expressing oneself and persuading others.
Elaborate Evaluate When planning a lesson each of these areas should be completed. Often times these lessons may take a few days to complete. It means to wow them in a way that catches their attention.
It is not forcing children to learn but inviting them to do so. This is how lessons are introduce. It does not have to be difficult or overly detailed just interesting enough to open students minds for the learning process to begin.
Using Smartboard technology, videos, illustrations, asking questions, KWL charts, reading a great book, acting out a character or even introducing a game are ways to engage students at the beginning of a lesson.
Explore Once students are fully in grossed in the lesson, intrigued by a video or maybe a book, now it is time to allow them to explore the concept.
Lets say I do a lesson on Camouflage, first I would engage them with an informative video, explaining camouflage with animation.
Now in the explore they will play lets say a game where they will go out side and break up into teams. Each team will be given a minute to find as many various colored strings scattered in the grass. The idea with exploring is to give the learner the opportunity to practice or work with their new knowledge in some way.
The most effective explorations allow for mistakes or trial and error. Its is looking at a concept before discussing all the details, with hopes that students will discover answers to possible questions through exploration.
Explain Students now have an opportunity to hear from their educator. They also may pose questions to the student to see what they are able to explain what they have learned. Checking for misunderstandings helps the teacher to observe what objectives need to be clarified or taught.
So for example, with the Camouflage Lesson, once the students have picked as many strings as possible, they should count each color that they picked. Which color did they pick up the most, which color did they pick the least amount of?
Have them make a chart, so they can look at their findings and compare as a group. Students should notice that they picked less green strings because the green was blending in with the grass. They have more of a different color like purple because of its contrast in color.
This explaining is done without the teacher having to do much lecturing. The lesson is reinforced by what the students have seen from their exploring. Elaborate Here the students can participate in an extension or a different activity that either re-teaches an objective or teaches more details about the concept being taught.
Here differentiation can be used. A student above level will need an elaboration that extends or enriches the lesson.
A student below level will need perhaps a repeat of the same explore activity with more teacher input to guide students through again to correct misunderstandings.
Again with the camouflage, elaboration may be discussing what other animals besides say frogs use camouflage? What elements in their habitat allow them to do so? Doing so will allow him or her to re-teach or elaborate on what was misunderstood. Evaluate Finally, after the objectives are taught, it is time to assess.
What have students effectively learned? What do they not understand? What should be done to help them? Assessments do not have to be the traditional quiz or essay.
It can be a reflection, a project, book report, or a model. Like with the camouflage lesson, the evaluation could an assignment where students come up with 5 facts about camouflage and illustrate each in their own unique way.
They might make a model, paint a picture, or make a mini book with drawings and facts to illustrate what they learned.
Using a rubric the teacher or parent can now easily grade or make note of what is learned and of what needs to be retaught. I think that it makes teaching the lesson easier in that the students are more willing to learn, the activities are set up, the lesson sequence is well thought out and the objective is thoroughly covered.The 5 E lesson supports inquire-based instruction.
It allows children to make discoveries and to process new skills in an engaging way. Teachers can also adequately plan power objectives more effectively by using the 5E process. The historiography of World War I is immense, more than 25, volumes and articles even before next year’s centenary.
Still, Clark, and Sean McMeekin, in “July ,” offer new perspectives. The Purdue University Online Writing Lab serves writers from around the world and the Purdue University Writing Lab helps writers on Purdue's campus.
Writing is the ability to compose text effectively for various purposes and audiences . Writing is a tool for communication and learning that allows us to document, .
Providing educators and students access to the highest quality practices and resources in reading and language arts instruction.
Triepels Slagwerk - Geleen Limburg,Uw Drumspecialist, Drumstel kopen, boomwhacker lessen.