Eric Nelson's book, Cultivating Outdoor Classrooms, clarifies the vision of the outdoor classroom and explains how it addresses the needs of today's children. The Outdoor Classroom's vision is simple: Its goal is equally simple:
Research based methods for successful field trips, including specific examples for a geoscience course The Out-of-Classroom Experience by Dave Douglass: In its simplest form, this may involve field trips into a community where students will have occasions to have discussions with community members or local experts on an issue related to course content.
Even greater learning potentials and community benefits rest in more intensive forms of community engagement in the form of service learning projects. These projects, typically designed by both faculty and community partners, allow for students to learn in highly effective ways while helping a Learing doesnt ocurin classroom address its needs.
In all of these experiences, student growth can be extensive, whether it is through improved critical thinking and problem solving skills, greater personal efficacy and leadership development, or enhanced social responsibility and career opportunities. Study Abroad These notes adapted from: Gardinier, Lori, and Dawn Colquitt-Anderson.
There are several models for study-abroad programs. In some, participants enroll in foreign universities as visiting, non-matriculated students. In other programs, the sending institution retains more control over the curriculum, duration, faculty selection, and experience.
Increasingly, schools are internationalizing their curriculum by offering short-term, faculty-led, study abroad programs. Regardless of the mix, students should arrive at the destination with a grounding in both the academic and cultural context through a combination of pre-departure lectures, guided research, online discussions, readings, and cultural events relevant to the trip.
It can be helpful to set specific parameters for how, when, and where you will relate to students during the program. It is important to identify risks and liability. Directors must be prepared for expected emergencies involving lost or stolen property, illnesses, and so on, as well as unexpected emergencies involving natural and manmade disasters.
In collaboration with governments, foundations and other sponsors, IIE creates programs of study and training for students, educators and professionals from all sectors. These programs include the flagship Fulbright Program and Gilman Scholarships administered for the U.
IIE also conducts policy research, provides resources on international exchange opportunities and offers support to scholars in danger. The National Association of International Educators NAFSA NAFSA and its members believe that international education and exchange—connecting students, scholars, educators, and citizens across borders—is fundamental to establishing mutual understanding among nations, preparing the next generation with vital cross-cultural and global skills, and creating the conditions for a more peaceful world.
Journal of Studies in International Education The Journal of Studies in International Education JSI is a forum for higher education administrators, educators, researchers and policy makers interested in research, reviews, and case studies on all facets of the internationalization of higher education.
Each issue brings together the concepts, strategies, and approaches of internationalization, the internationalization of the curriculum, and issues surrounding international students and cross-border delivery of education.
Once in the field, students can use mobile devices—including ones they already own—to engage in learning activities.
Below are some examples to help you start thinking about how you might use technology outside your classroom. Location-Specific Content With the right apps, students can access content that is tied to a particular location and only available when students visit that location.
Spanish instructors at the University of New Mexico use an iPhone app from the Augmented Reality and Interactive Storytelling ARIS project to send students on a fictional murder mystery through the Los Griegos neighborhood in Albuquerque that develops and tests their language skills.
Students receive location-specific clues to the mystery by typing their location into the app. Instructors at the University of Iowa plan to have students use this app to learn more about Iowa City authors and their connections to particular local environments.
Students cracked codes and ciphers that led them to particular locations on campus featuring QR codes, two-dimensional bar codes that students scanned with their smart phones to receive additional clues in the hunt.
Instructors can also have students create location-specific content. For example, students at the University of Northern Colorado created a scavenger hunt designed to teach other students about local water rights using the ARIS platform. Data Collection and Sharing Mobile devices have a variety of mechanisms for collecting and sharing data.
Students can use these devices to generate location-specific content whether on a field trip or on their own.
Students in the course visited different tourist sites around Nashville, captured photos of these locations using their cell phones while on-site, and then blogged about their visits and their photos later. Lawrence University students in an introduction to environmental science course collect geotagged water quality data during field trips using GPS devices and tablet PCs.
Students pool their data, then analyze it using geospatial visualization software while still in the field. Many such specialized data collection and analysis tools are developing mobile apps that run on iPhones and other smart phones.
Peripatetic Pedagogy An English Writing About Literature class from University of Alaska Southeast experimented with peripatetic pedagogy and created a video documenting the experience. Place-Based Learning Places have both natural and cultural histories, which therefore lend themselves to examination by all disciplines.The ultimate engagement is to put the learner in charge of learning.
Create a rich learning environment and a motivation to learn, and the students do all the hard work of learning, while the teacher merely facilitates.
It sounds so easy. Flipping Your Classroom Series Posted on October 25, by Matt Barton The tendency of a traditional classroom is to build more basic, foundational knowledge during class and then send students out to do more complex thinking on their own as assigned work.
In fact, students come to the university classroom with different backgrounds, sets of experiences, cultural contexts, and world views. Additionally, issues of diversity play a role in how students and teachers view the importance of the classroom and what should happen there.
In nature, linear learning doesn’t exist. People didn’t learn to swim or hunt in a linear way – through a staggered, textbook process. We learned instead by doing, through direct experience, through dealing with things as they arose, and through discovering what it was that was important at the time.
In addition to my own language. Using active learning to liven up your classroom Each semester, I open my class by explaining to my students that, as a graduate student adjunct lecturer, I’m in the unique position of simultaneously being a student and a teacher.
The moderator’s question came from a realistic vantage point: with a wide range of educational terms, including project-based learning, blended learning, personalized learning, and online learning, it can be difficult to differentiate what blended learning is and isn’t.