Egypt is well known for holding one of the oldest civilizations in the world. The country is full of story borders. But when we talk about monuments already made by these civilizations the only answer we hear is the “pyramids”.
The main purpose of the pyramids was to shelter and protect the body of the mummified pharaoh and his personal effects, such as jewelry, personal utensils and other material goods. But have you ever imagined that there would be more monuments in Egypt than the pyramids?
With that in mind, we have listed for you some of the buildings that reside in Egypt, but almost nobody knows:
This temple was built for funeral or even commemorative for Queen Hatchepsut. Hatchepsut ruled for 21 years, and is considered to be one of Egypt’s largest housekeeper.
The monument is located in Deir El-Bahri, and is known as “Djeser-djseru”, which means “the holy of holies”, on a series of columned terraces that are accessed via long ramps decorated with gardens. It was built inside a cliff that rises over time.
These two huge stone statues are known as the Colossi of Memnon. They are located on the west bank of the Nile River, very close to the city of Luxor, Egypt. They are intended to represent Pharaoh Amenhotep III, who reigned in ancient Egypt.
The statues are made to look like they are sitting with their hands on their knees, looking east toward the river. They were at the entrance gate of the Amenhotp memorial temple, built while Pharaoh was still alive, where he was worshiped as a true god.
3 – Malkata Palace
Amenhop III ruled Egypt for almost 40 years, and before his rule Egypt had never witnessed such prosperity and riches. He was considered a king god in his Malkata palace.
The palace was huge, housing Amenhotep’s entire family, servants, guests, and a great harem of princesses, each with their own servants.
4 – City of Tanis
The city of Tanis was one of the closest ports to the Asian coast, and was considered one of the richest cities in the region. It was an important commercial and strategic city until it was threatened by flooding from Lake Manzala, until it was finally abandoned. After a long time it became known as the “Lost City of Tanis”.
5 – Seti I time
Located in Abydos, one of the places that is considered very sacred in ancient Egypt. Abydos was originally dedicated to the god Wepwawet, whose goal was to open the way for the dead to enter the afterlife.
One of the few remaining temples inside Abydos was the Arrow I Temple, which has an “L” shape. The temple had commemoration halls and large rooms where workers supported the roof by placing many columns throughout the structure.
6 – Babylon Fortress
Originally built by the Romans, the building has been linked to Babylonian followers, and even prisoners brought from Babylon by Pharaoh Sesostris in the 19th century BC.
The fortress was considered a refuge for Christians, especially those who suffered some kind of persecution. In the fortress itself are several built churches, including the “Suspended”, one of Egypt’s most famous “Coptic” churches.
7 – Meritamun Statue
Unlike most of Egypt’s historical cities, Akhmim is still active today, and is opposite the ancient Egyptian city of Ipu. As archaeologists excavated the site, they eventually discovered fragments of a statue of Ramses II and an intact 11-meter-tall statue of Meritamun, daughter of Ramses II.