Do you ever have trouble “connecting the dots” in Scripture? For example, how does a New Testament verse reflect truth or prophesy from an Old Testament verse? How are they related and what picture is forming as you connect the dots?
Truth always validates truth, but finding these connections through 66 books and 5,000+ years of history can be challenging. Until of course the connection practically jumps off the page through the teaching of the Holy Spirit.
Try connecting these dots.
1 John 2:2 (ESV) says Jesus “is the propitiation for our sins, and not for ours only but also for the sins of the whole world.” Propitiation means “final atonement”, meaning the shedding of the Perfect Lamb’s blood fully satisfied God’s Law as echoed in Hebrews 9:22 “Indeed, under the law almost everything is purified with blood, and without the shedding of blood there is no forgiveness of sins.”
In Leviticus 17:11, God states through Moses, “For the life of the flesh is in the blood, and I have given it for you on the altar to make atonement for your souls, for it is the blood that makes atonement by the life.” The shed blood of Christ is our final atonement. God’s law is ultimately fulfilled through Jesus. The Old is woven into the New as we discover that the New has been there all along.
Ok, so we connected these dots, but wait there’s more!
We know today, unlike those in biblical times, that blood cells are created within bone, specifically in the marrow. Red blood cells carry oxygen and nutrients, white blood cells support our immune system and help fight disease, and platelets help blood clot.
We also know from Genesis 2 that God took a rib from Adam in order to create Eve. God created Eve and gave her life through a rib bone. The very bone He created in man to provide life-giving and life-sustaining blood, He used to create woman. Life is in the blood.
God’s mind is mind blowing!
What image do these dots form to you when connected? What comes to mind?
I would love to hear from you. Describe your vision. Please share in the comments.