Verb(1) make worse(2) exasperate or irritate
(1) He also criticised the city's universities for exacerbating the situation.(2) The apparently untreated road was progressively freezing-over, exacerbating the problem.(3) So what they do is take the driving test and then they fail, and it simply exacerbates the situation.(4) How can the war continue, they ask, if it's exacerbating the problem it was meant to solve?(5) This provides the opportunity to intervene before the exacerbation develops fully.(6) Additionally, asthma exacerbations are reduced to levels that are arguably as low as might be expected.(7) Asthma exacerbations increase morbidity and mortality in patients, decrease their quality of life, and increase the cost of treatment.(8) That strains that whole relationship, probably exacerbates the situation.(9) So it's not the violence, per se, but the exacerbation and constant repetition.(10) Along comes a referee intent on making peace but instead of getting both sides to kiss and make up the peacemaker only exacerbates the situation.(11) Vicky, Alex's wealthy sister, exacerbates the situation by offering Neil money.(12) These issues were all being felt in our local communities, with the last three years of public housing reforms only exacerbating the situation.(13) Vehicles driving through the floodwaters were causing waves, exacerbating problems for households already flooded.(14) Significant reductions in the number of primary school pupils are in some cases exacerbating financial problems.(15) Pilots, unhappy at the increased expectations placed on them, are exacerbating the situation by striking for improved pay and conditions.(16) It is possible to misinterpret worsening of symptoms as an exacerbation of multiple sclerosis.
1. aggravate ::
2. worsen ::
1. allay ::
2. alleviate ::
3. assuage ::
4. help ::
5. mitigate ::
6. relieve ::
Different Formsexacerbate, exacerbated, exacerbates, exacerbating
English to Danish Dictionary: exacerbate
Meaning and definitions of exacerbate, translation in Danish language for exacerbate with similar and opposite words. Also find spoken pronunciation of exacerbate in Danish and in English language.
Tags for the entry "exacerbate"
What exacerbate means in Danish, exacerbate meaning in Danish, exacerbate definition, examples and pronunciation of exacerbate in Danish language.