Much of the original Barrett Parkway was taken from the two-laneRoberts Road, which generally went from Cobb Parkway (constructed around 1949 for U.S. 41) to Bell's Ferry Road and served an area that was rural in nature. During the 1980s, dramatically-increased land development, most notably the extension of Interstate 75 in 1977 (which cut Roberts Road in half south of Barrett Parkway), the construction of I-575 in 1980, and the completion of the major regional Town Center at Cobbshopping mall in 1986, strained the road to capacity, and was subsequently widened to six lanes (three in each direction, plus turn lanes) with a median by the Cobb County Department of Transportation. Turn lanes were only at the numerous traffic lights. In the mid-1990s, Barrett Parkway was extended by a completely new median-divided highway southwest of U.S. 41 to Burnt Hickory Road, then by widening Ridgeway Road south to Georgia 120, west of the city of Marietta. This was briefly called West Cobb Parkway (which created potential confusion with Cobb Parkway).
One of Cobb’s greatest political leaders, Ernest Barrett, was chair of the county commission for five consecutive terms from 1965 to 1984 and played a central role in making Cobb one of the nation’s most desirable places to live. His administration illustrates the positive impact a county government can have in facilitating social change. Indeed, Cobb’s phenomenal growth in those years stemmed directly from Barrett’s ability to gain support for roads, parks, libraries, schools, water lines and sewers — essential ingredients in generating a high quality of life.
A Cobb County native, Ernest Barrett was born April 29, 1922, on his grandfather’s farm on Chastain Road. At age 20, he married Jackie Knight of Marietta. After serving in the army in World War II, Barrett used the G.I. Bill to learn the laundry business. After opening Fair Oaks Cleaner and Laundry, he joined the Junior Chamber of Commerce, from which emerged the “Young Turks,” a group of rising community activists whose support was crucial to his 1964 election as chair.