Hindu Faith with Kailash Mansarovar Yatra According to Hindu Belief, Lake Manasarovar is a representation of purity and a path to absolute salvation. A sip of water from Lake Manasarovar would abstain one from sins committed by him during a hundred lifetimes and let him for absolute stay at the abode of Shiva after death. Other pious region for what lake Mansarovar is revered for being place of origin for great rivers as Brahmaoutra, Ghaghara, Indus and Sutlej and has made Kailash Mansarovar a most revered spot for pilgrims travelling to the place for thousand years. It is believed that Lake was first formed in the mind of Lord Brahma and later on surfaced on the earth. It is also known to be as “Manasa sarovaram", that is a combination of Sanskrit words “Mind” and “Lake”. The lake is also known to be summer abode of the hamsa (Swan). The hamsa is symbolic of wisdom and beauty. It is represented in Hinduism as the Supreme Spirit, Ultimate Reality or Brahman in Hinduism. The flight of the hamsa symbolizes moksha, the release from the cycle of samsara.
Annual Kailash Mansarovar Yatra to be held at autonomous region of Tibet is an annual pilgrim and has impressive religious significance for Hindus, Buddhist and Jains. Lake Manasarovar is a freshwater lake in the Tibet Autonomous Region, China and is located around 940 kilometres away from Lhasa. Lake Mansarovar is situated around 4,590 meters above mean sea level.
Lake Manasarovar comparatively is round in shape and has circumference of 88 kilometres and surface area of around 320 square kilometres. Lake Manasarovar has very much importance due to its proximity to sources of River Sutlej, Brahmaputra, Indus, and Ghaghara.
The name of the Lake “Manasarovara” has been originated form Sanskrit language words “Manas” and Sarovara” referring to lake of mind. As believed in Hindu Mythology, Lake was first formed in the mind of the Lord Brahma after that it occurred on the Earth.
Jainism Faith with Kailash Mansarovar Yatra: In Jainism, Lake Manasarovar is associated with the first Tirthankara, Rishabha. As mount Kailash known to be as Meru Parvat or Sumeru in Jainism close to Ashtapada, the mountain next to Mt. Kailash, where the first Jain Tirthankara, Rishabhadeva, attained Nirvana or moksa.
Back to Blog Page