California runs a number of programs that help it reduce its climate pollution, including financial support for electric vehicle purchases, mandates on biofuels and requirements that utilities source a substantial amount of their power from renewable sources. The new legislation requires the California Air Resources Board to strengthen these programs, or roll out new ones, to ensure that the new targets are met.
In the context of climate change, divestment and Socially Responsible Investment means avoiding financial alignment with companies who perpetuate reliance on fossil fuel sources and investment in groups that are committed to being part of the global climate solution.
At Nebraska Land Trust flexible easements further long-term management objectives. As climate conditions present new management threats, it is important that conservation easements allow for the flexibility to mitigate and adapt to these impacts.
Otsego Land Trust’s socially responsible investments support conservation goals and objectives, aligning the organization’s money with its mission.
Assessing whether renewable energy is an appropriate activity is a site-specific question that can only be answered after careful analysis of the conservation values of a given property and in the full context of an individual project. These “practical pointers” help support that analysis.
Some land trusts have found renewable energy deployment to be compatible with land management objectives and existing easements. Emissions reductions can result from these synergies.
More coming soon! Do you have resources or a story about renewable energy deployment to share? Please email Erin M. Derrington or contact us here.
Renewable energy is energy from a source that is not depleted when used, such as wind or solar power. Some definitions of “renewable” energy also include hydro-power, geothermal, and biomass. All energy generation and use requires some resources to develop and distribute, so when considering the “appropriateness” of energy siting proposals it is important for the conservation community to consider the costs and benefits of the proposed technology.
Land trusts can play an important role in renewable energy development. This publication offers specific guidance on ways that land trusts can participate in renewable energy siting planning and implementation to support improved conservation outcomes in the context of a changing climate.
This paper builds upon past work on siting policy to examine siting solutions tailored to meeting renewable energy demand in a land constrained region.