72 °F / 23 °C
Pulau Sumbawa Island is located in the middle of Lesser Sunda Islands (West Nusa Tenggara province, Indonesia), neighbouring Pulau Flores (east), Lombok (west) and Pulau Sumba (southeast). Sumbawa Island is in traditionally famous as source of sappanwood (red dye), honey and sandalwood. The savanna-like climate and extensive grassland allow breeding cattle and horses.
Sumbawa has a kand area of 15448 km2 (5965 ml2), which is 3 times the size of Lombok, and has population around 1,4 million. Sumbawa marks the boundary between the isles to the west (influenced by culture and religion spreading from India), and the area to the east which was less influenced. This applies to both Islam and Hinduism.
Sumbawa Island is located within the Pacific Ring of Fire. Its active volcono (Mt Tambora) last exploded in April 1815. This was the most destructive volcanic eruption in contemporary history in terms of ejected magma. The eruption killed nearly 72,000 people and destroyed the Tambora culture. The eruption ejected around 100 km3 (24 ml3) of ash into upper atmosphere, which caused 1816 to be called the "year without a summer".
Sumbawa's residents are at risk of starvation every time crops fail because of lack of rainfall. Most on them are engaged in agriculture. Tourism industry is starting to develop, with several surfing spots famous as world class surf locations, Island's most popular beaches are Supersuck, Jelenga, Lakey.
Regularly scheduled ferries from Lombok cross to Sumbawa (Poto Tano). Ferry service from Sape to Flores is infrequent. Island's largest city (Bima) has bus and ferry service directly to Bali and Java.
Pulau Sumbawa Island cruise terminal
Cruise ships to Sumbawa Island dock (anchor) at Sumbawa Besar - port city on the northern coast.
Ferries are available between Labuhan Lombok ferry port (Lombok Island's east coast) and port Poto Tano (Sumbawa Island). The Indonesian company Pelni Shipping Line serves a nation-wide network of vehicular and passenger ferry services throughout the whole archipelago. Pelni Line's offices are in Ampenan (port to Mataram, Lombok Island).
Port Pulau Sumbawa Island cruise ship schedule shows timetable calendars of all arrival and departure dates by month. The port's schedule lists all ships (in links) with cruises going to or leaving from Pulau Sumbawa Island, Sumbawa Besar, Indonesia. To see the full itineraries (ports of call dates and arrival / departure times) and their lowest rates – just follow the corresponding ship-link.