Webster Breech Technique
The Webster Technique, developed by Dr. Larry Webster in 1978, founder of the International Chiropractic Pediatric Association (ICPA), is a specific chiropractic adjustment for pregnant mothers. It is a chiropractic technique is designed to relieve the causes of intrauterine constraint. This technique has been highly successful in relieving intrauterine constraint and helping to convert breech presentations to cephalic presentation for more than 20 years.
What is intrauterine constraint? Intrauterine constraint is defined as any forces external to the developing fetus that obstructs the normal movement of the fetus. Intrauterine constraint can prevent the developing fetus from attaining a head down position.
Performance of the Webster Technique involves analysis of the relationship of the bones of the pelvis, and correction of aberrant biomechanics through the use of a light force chiropractic adjustment of the sacrum (Step 1). It also involves analysis and relief of specific abdominal muscle tension or spasm (Step 2). Both steps are intended to relieve the musculoskeletal causes of intrauterine constraint that may lead to cesarean section delivery.
It is important to stress that the Webster Technique is not to be misconstrued as the practice of obstetrics. The Webster Technique is a specific chiropractic technique intended to relieve a specific musculoskeletal condition, and is well within Dr. Water's scope of practice. At no time does Dr. Waters attempt to change the position of the fetus as is done in external cephalic version (ECV). Untrained individuals should not attempt the Webster Technique.
In addition, the Webster Technique should not be confused with other unproven or unsafe "chiropractic breech turning" techniques.
The Journal of Manipulative and Physiological Therapeutics reported in the July/August 2002 issue that 82% of doctors using the Webster Technique reported success. Further, the results from the study suggest that it may be beneficial to perform the Webster Technique in the 8th month of pregnancy
How is a breech presentation diagnosed?
A few weeks prior to the due date, a health care provider may place his/her hands on the mother's lower abdomen to locate the baby's head, back, and buttocks. If they think the baby is in a breech position, an ultrasound may be used to confirm. Special x-rays can also determine the baby's position and measure the pelvis to determine if a vaginal delivery of a breech baby may be attempted.
Can a breech presentation be changed?
The best time to try to turn a breech baby is between 32-37 weeks of pregnancy There are many different types of methods to use and all have different levels of success.