The National School Lunch Program is a federally assisted meal program operating in over 100,000 public and non-profit private schools and residential child care institutions.
It provided nutritionally balanced, low-cost or free lunches. Learn more about the National School Lunch Program (NSLP) from this informative fact sheet.
National School Lunch Program (NSLP)
The National School Lunch Program is a federally assisted meal program operating in public and nonprofit private schools and residential child care institutions. It provides nutritionally balanced, low-cost or free lunches to children each school day. The program was established under the National School Lunch Act, signed by President Harry Truman in 1946.
Nutrition Standards for School Meals
Through the Healthy, Hunger-Free Kids Act championed by the First Lady and signed by President Obama, USDA made the first major changes in school meals in 15 years, which will help us raise a healthier generation of children.
Healthier School Day Tools for Schools
Tools for Schools offers topic-specific policy and resource materials to assist schools in meeting the new nutrition standards. Refer to the latest regulations, find free nutrition education curricula, or get ideas for adding tasty, kid-friendly foods to enhance your school meals program.
Team Nutrition provides support to schools with resources to serve healthier school meals.
FRAC: National School Lunch Program
The National School Lunch Program (NSLP) makes it possible for all school children in the United States to receive a nutritious lunch every school day. The Food Research and Action Center has many great resources including information about nutrition standards of school meals.
Kids love cold milk! Strive for a milk temperature of 35°F at all points of meal service. Receive it cold, keep it cold in storage and serve it cold.
Cold milk stays fresh longer. Did you know the shelf life of milk is reduced 50% for every 5-degree rise above 40°F? Evaluate your school’s milk handling procedures and equipment with this milk quality checklist
First In, First Out. Rotate deliveries, so older milk is in the front of the milk cooler and served first.
Tools to Improve Student Satisfaction
Students are the customer. Do you know how they feel about the food service program? Ask them! Sample new foods and get feedback using this taste test ballot from Team Nutrition. Or if you need a salad bar taste test use this one from Fuel Up to Play 60.