Did Abel, Noah and Lot all tithe? Didn't Abraham and Jacob
give a TENTH to God (Gen.14:12; Gen.28)Where did Noah's grandsons migrate (Gen. 10)? What did they look like? Who are they today? Do Caucasians have a DUTY to help mankind? Why did God forbid Israel from taking "a wife of the daughters of Canaan"? How was Esau a "FORNICATOR"? What does "ADULTERATE" mean? Is a HYBRID forbidden from citizenship in Israel (Deut. 23:2)? Did God practice SEGREGATION when He "separated the sons of Adam" racially (Deut. 32:8)? Why did Moses marry an ETHIOPIAN woman (Num. 12:1)? Why not "let thy cattle breed with a DIVERSE KIND"? Why not "sow thy field with TWO KINDS of SEED" (Lev. 19:19)? Was God forbidding HYBRIDIZATION?
Do Caucasians Have a DUTY To Help Mankind?
God called and chose ALL of the main Old Testament heroes from the WHITE, Caucasian Race -- from SHEM'S line. Why? Not because God plays favorites, or because the WHITE race deserves this honor, but because Shem and Abraham obeyed God. "Abraham (who happened to be Caucasian) OBEYED my voice, and KEPT my charge, my commandments, my statutes, and my laws" (Gen. 26:5). God told Abraham that "Thou shalt be a BLESSING" (Gen. 12:2). "Abraham shall surely become a GREAT and MIGHTY nation, and ALL the NATIONS of the earth shall be BLESSED in him" (Gen. 18:18). In thee and in thy SEED shall ALL FAMILIES of the earth be BLESSED" (Gen. 28:14). "The remnant of Jacob shall be in the midst of many people like DEW from the Eternal, like the SHOWERS upon the grass" (Micah 5:7). "They shall show forth my PRAISE" (Isa. 43:21). "God hath chosen thee to be A SPECIAL PEOPLE unto himself, ABOVE ALL PEOPLE who are upon the face of the earth. The Eternal did not set his love upon you (Caucasian nations), nor choose you, because you were MORE in number than any people; for ye were the FEWEST of all people. But because the Eternal LOVED YOU, and because he would KEEP the OATH which he had sworn unto your fathers (because of THEIR OBEDIENCE to God), hath the Eternal brought you out" (Deut. 7:7-8). Caucasians shouldn't feel conceited because "God is able of these stones to raise up children unto Abraham" (Luke 3:8). To whom much is given, much is required" (Luke 12:48). The "strong ought to bear the infirmities of the weak" (Rom. 15:1). We have a DUTY to HELP the rest of MANKIND just as God has helped us. Rudyard Kipling called it the "WHITE man's BURDEN." But that help must be selective. If we help an EVIL man, we are partakers "of his EVIL deeds" (2 John 11) and are strengthening "the hands of EVILDOERS" (Jer. 23:14). "Shouldest thou help the UNGODLY, and love them who HATE the Eternal? Therefore, there is wrath upon thee from before the Eternal" (2 Chr. 19:2). Christ said, "Give not that which is holy unto DOGS" (Matt. 7:6). Now "God is no respecter of persons; But in every nation he that FEARETH him, and worketh RIGHTEOUSNESS, is accepted with him" (Acts 10:34-35). We must LOVE our NEIGHBOR as ourselves (Matt. 19:19) and the parable of the "Good Samaritan" shows that KINDNESS is not a matter of RACE. Our "NEIGHBOR" can be a non-Israelite man who is KIND to us, no matter what RACE he belongs to. Luke 10:37 defines a "NEIGHBOR" as "he that showed MERCY" (or "KINDNESS" -- RSV) toward us. Peter discovered that "I should not call ANY MAN common or unclean" (Acts 10:28) based on RACIAL or ETHNIC background.
"Thou Shalt Not Take A Wife Of The Daughters Of Canaan"
Shem perpetuated the pure WHITE strain down to the time of Abraham. Abraham came directly from the WHITE race of Shem and Arpachshad known as the Chaldeans (11:28). So did his wife Sarah since she was his "half-sister" (20:12). In the Seventh Dead Sea Scroll, commenting on Genesis 12:14 where she is described as "VERY FAIR" (literally meaning "to be BRIGHT" or "LIGHT" in Hebrew, we read "how lovely all her WHITENESS" (cp. Ca.5:10,11; Es.2:5; Lam.4:7). Yes, "My beloved is WHITE and RUDDY, the chiefest among ten thousand" (Song 5:10). "Her Nazarites (nobles) were purer than snow; they were WHITER than milk; they were more RUDDY in body than rubies" (Lam.4:7). Rebecca was "BEAUTIFUL and well favored" (Gen.29:17). Joseph was "a GOODLY person, and well favored" (Gen.39:6; cp. Jasher 44). Moses was "EXCEEDING FAIR" (Acts 7:20). David was "RUDDY (a red-head), and ... of a BEAUTIFUL countenance, and GOODLY to look to" (1 Sam.16:12). Not all purebred Israelites were HANDSOME however. Jesus "hath no form nor comliness, and when we shall see him, there is no beauty that we should desire him" (Isa.53:2).
But someone is sure to mention that Abraham begot Ishmael by having intercourse with an "EGYPTIAN" named Hagar (Gen.16:1). This is true but it doesn't mean Hagar was BROWN. After all, Moses the Levite (Ex.2:1-2) was called an "EGYPTIAN" too (Ex.2:15-19). "EGYPTIAN" can mean one's nationality and place of origin or it can mean one's race. Joseph's wife "Asenath, the daughter of Potiphera, priest of On" (Gen.41:45) (an EGYPTIAN) should be understood as a CITIZEN of Egypt rather than of the BROWN RACE. "On" was located in the Goshen area where the Aramean Hyksos settled. Both of these EGYPTIANS were part of the upper class nobility, rather than the peasantry (see Jasher 15:31) , and the upper class of Egypt was WHITE. If Hagar were BROWN, and Ishmael married another Egyptian who was also BROWN (Gen.21:21), then that would make Arabs three-fourths Egyptian and therefore three-fourths BROWN. We believe only Ishmael's wife was BROWN because the context of Genesis 28:6-9 shows that Esau considered Ishmaelite women similar to Chaldean women in the racial context.
Uriah the HITTITE had a wife who was WHITE called Bathsheba (2 Sam. 12). Uriah was a descendant of the KHETTI from Keturah rather than from HETH of Canaan (Deut. 7:1-3). Therefore she was LAWFULLY his wife.
Abraham sent his best servant back to his own family and race among the Chaldeans (purebred WHITES) to find a wife for Isaac. Abraham said, "thou shalt NOT TAKE a WIFE unto my son of the daughters of the CANAANITES (hybrid WHITE) among whom I dwell" (Gen.24:3). We find no mention of religion or heathen practices as the basis of this order. It was a matter of RACE rather than religion. Recall that Laban and Rachel were both Jacob's kindred but both also had a liking for images or false gods (Gen.31:19,30-35), so the reason for marrying within one's kindred was not solely a matter of pure religion. If we are Abraham's children, as all Christians are (Gal.3:7,29), we will do the works of Abraham too (John 8:39) and only take a wife of our own kindred race. Deuteronomy 22:10 says, "Thou shalt not plow with an ox and an ass TOGETHER." (a marriage of different types) Leviticus 19:19 says, "Thou shalt not let thy cattle gender (breed) with a DIVERSE KIND: thou shalt not sow thy field with TWO KINDS OF SEED." Is God altogether concerned with animals and plants, or did he intend these commands for human beings also? This law in Leviticus 19:19 is called a "STATUTE" (Heb. "chuqqah"). And we know that "Abraham obeyed my voice, and kept my charge, my commandments, my STATUTES (Heb. "chuqqah"), and my laws" (Gen.26:5).
Why NOT mix cattle or mix seed? Deuteronomy 22:9 answers, "lest the fruit ... be DEFILED." It is unlikely this command is directed against breeding one SPECIES with another because "hybridization between species -- is a rare and exceptional event in nature.... hybrids do occasionally arise.... species are, however, ordinarily PREVENTED from crossing with one another by a variety of isolating mechanisms." Even if they are able to interbreed and produce a hybrid, it is "semifertile or sterile" depending on how closely related the two species are (from pp.629-630 of volume 14, Encyclopedia Americana, '80). Here in Leviticus 19:19, "KIND" refers to RACE primarily! But in Genesis one, "after its KIND" may refer to animals and plants reproducing according to their FAMILY, GENUS, or SPECIES.
One of the reasons God instituted the circumcision covenant (Gen.17:9-14) was "in order to keep his (Abraham's) posterity UNMIXED with others" (Antiquities 1:10:5).
How Was Esau A FORNICATOR?
Next come the examples of Esau and Jacob. The Eternal says, "Jacob have I loved, but Esau have I hated" (Rom.9:13). Why? "Esau took his wives of the daughters of CANAAN" (Gen.36:2). "And Rebekah said to Isaac, I am weary of my life because of the daughters of Heth (CANAANITE); if Jacob take a wife of the daughters of Heth (CANAANITE), such as these who are of the daughters of the land, WHAT GOOD SHALL MY LIFE DO ME? And Isaac called Jacob, and blessed him, and charged him ... THOU SHALT NOT TAKE a WIFE of the DAUGHTERS of CANAAN" (Gen.27:46 to 28:1). Esau later also took an Ishmaelite wife after "seeing that the daughters of Canaan (white half-breed) pleased not Isaac" (28:8).
In Hebrews 12:16 Esau is called a "FORNICATOR." Why? Genesis 26:34 says that Esau married HITTITE wives which was forbidden in Deuteronomy 7:3-4. Therefore, he was not legally married. The word "FORNICATION" refers broadly to many types of UNLAWFUL sexual relations, even including incest (1 Cor.5:1) and sodomy (Jude 7; Gen.19:4-8). A marriage certificate does not make them legal. But Jacob married Leah and Rachel, daughters of Laban (Abraham's nephew) who lived in the land of Haran (Abraham's brother). The whole town of Haran, where Laban lived, was of the same family ancestry as Abraham. According to Strong's Hebrew Lexicon, numbers 3835 and 3836, the name "Laban" means "WHITE." Even the maids of Leah and Rachel were probably of pure Hebrew ("EBER" -- Gen.10:24) stock. Jacob knew all about "selective pure-breeding" between only the same strains of the strongest cattle, sheep and goats (Gen.30:40-42). Why wouldn't he practice it in his selection of a wife? The Hivite (WHITE but HALF-BREED) who raped Dinah was killed (Gen. 34:25).
In Tobit 4:12-13, Tobit warns his son, "My boy, beware of any immorality. First, take a wife who is of the STOCK of your forefathers; do not marry an ALIEN; who does not belong to your father's tribe, for we are the sons of the prophets. Remember, my boy that NOAH, ABRAHAM, ISAAC and JACOB, our forefathers of old, all married WIVES from AMONG their KINDRED, and were blessed in their children, and their posterity will possess the land. Now, my boy, love your kindred, and do not disdain your brothers and the sons and daughters of your people, and REFUSE to MARRY one of THEM."
After Jacob and his sons and families were summoned into Egypt by Joseph, they settled in the land of Goshen, SEGREGATED from the rest of Egypt and marrying only among themselves.
Why Did Moses Marry An ETHIOPIAN Woman?
Next, God used Moses to deliver the Israelites out of Egypt so they would not be assimilated by another race and here is the one incident of INTERRACIAL MARRIAGE which proponents of mixed marriages love to quote. It is found in Numbers 12.
Verse one reads, "And Miriam and Aaron spoke against Moses because of the ETHIOPIAN (CUSHITE) woman whom he had married; for he had married an ETHIOPIAN (CUSHITE) woman." In verse 10 Miriam became leprous as a punishment for speaking against Moses. Some people think that Miriam was punished because she DISAPPROVED of INTERRACIAL MARRIAGE. This is NOT true! Miriam was punished for causing DIVISION and for trying to set herself up as a leader IN PLACE OF Moses (Num.12:2; cp. Heb.5:4 & Rom.16:17). The very fact that she DID oppose INTERRACIAL MARRIAGE implies that this sin was well-known and serious in the eyes of the Israelites. How else could she hope to gain the large following she would need to overthrow Moses?
But Josephus fills in the missing details and shows us why Moses married this Ethiopian. In Antiquities 2:10:2 we read that Moses, the general of the Egyptians, fought against the Ethiopians: "However, while Moses was uneasy at the army's lying idle, (for the enemies durst not come to battle) this ACCIDENT happened: -- Tharbis was the daughter of the king of the Ethiopians: she happened to see Moses as he led the army near the walls, and fought with great courage; and admiring the subtlety of his undertakings, and believing him to be the author of the Egyptians' success ... she fell deeply in love with him; and upon the prevalency of that passion, sent to him the most faithful of all her servants to discourse with him about their marriage. He thereupon accepted the offer, on condition she would procure the delivering up of the city; and gave her the assurance of an oath to take her to his wife; and that when he had once taken possession of the city, he would not break his oath to her. No sooner was the agreement made, but it took effect immediately; and when Moses had cut off the Ethiopians, he gave thanks to God, and consummated his marriage, and led the Egyptians back to their own land."
The non-canonical Book of Jasher gives a different account from that of Josephus. Only certain selected verses will be quoted from the account:
71:1 And Moses was eighteen years old, he desired to see his father and mother and he went to them to Goshen, and when Moses had come near Goshen, he came to a place where the Children of Israel were engaged in work, and he observed their burdens, and he saw an Egyptian smiting one of his Hebrew brethren. (cp. Ex. 3:11-12).
73:32 And Moses FEARED THE LORD God of his fathers, so he CAME NOT to her, nor did he TURN HIS EYES to her.
The examples of obedience by NOAH, SHEM, ABRAHAM, ISAAC, JACOB and MOSES to the law commanding SELECTIVE BREEDING were "written for our learning" (Rom.15:4) and "these things (righteous acts) were our examples" (1 Cor.10:6,11). "All scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable for DOCTRINE, for REPROOF, for CORRECTION, for INSTRUCTION in RIGHTEOUSNESS" (2 Tim.3:16) and the only "scriptures" known to Timothy were the "Old Testament."
"Thou Shalt Make No Covenant With Them"
"When the Lord thy God shall bring thee into the land, and hast cast out many nations before thee ... And when the Lord thy God shall deliver them before thee, thou shalt smite them ... thou shalt MAKE NO COVENANT with them, nor SHOW MERCY unto them" (Deut. 7:1-2).
But the United States MADE PEACE TREATIES with the Indians rather than break down their totem poles and utterly destroy them as God commanded (Deut. 7:2-5). We SHOWED "MERCY UNTO" (7:2) them.
With regard to negro slaves brought over from Africa, the United States even amended our Constitution to make him an EQUAL, VOTING CITIZEN of our country -- 14TH & 15TH AMENDMENTS -- rather than separate from him as the Bible commands (Lev. 20:24).
Furthermore, illegal Mexicans can give birth to children in this country and their children automatically become citizens with full rights.
Yes, we have MADE COVENANTS with Indians, Africans and Mexicans and God says, "they shall deal with thee HATEFULLY, and shall TAKE AWAY all thy labor, and shall leave thee naked and bare ... because thou hast gone a WHORING AFTER the HEATHEN ... Because thou hast forgotten me, and cast me behind thy back, therefore bear thou also thy lewdness and thy WHOREDOMS" (Ez. 23:29-35). But unlike other HARLOTS who RECEIVE PAY FROM their LOVERS, the United States PAYS the HEATHEN: "thou GIVEST thy GIFTS TO all thy LOVERS, and HIREST them, that they may come unto thee on every side for thy whoredom" (Ez. 16:33). Companies are given FINANCIAL INCENTIVES to HIRE minorities. Minorities cannot be paid less than the MINIMUM WAGE. If minorities are laid off, they receive UNEMPLOYMENT INSURANCE. AFFIRMATIVE ACTION laws and QUOTAS FAVOR minority HIRING over more qualified whites.
Repealing the fourteenth and fifteenth Amendments and thereby reinstating the Dred Scott vs. Stanford ruling that NON-WHITES CANNOT BE CITIZENS is a proper and necessary action for the preservation of the white American people. This was DE JURE until 1868 and DEFACTO through the 1950s. Although non-whites had gained nominal citizenship rights before 1950, the JIM CROW laws prevented them from exercising those rights. Prior to 1868, NON-WHITES COULD NOT BE CITIZENS due to the U.S. Supreme Court's ruling in the Dred Scott decision which the 14th Amendment overturned.
Foreigners come to live in the United States for a few years with their families. Children are born to them here, and by virtue of the citizenship clause of the 14th Amendment, these children become American citizens, when in reality, they have no more in common with this country than a birth certificate. Pregnant Mexicans abuse this clause to gain citizenship for their children by sneaking into this country without visas to have their babies. Often is the case where a Japanese or Korean company will send a young family to the U.S. and a baby is born here. When the family returns to its native country, the baby has a separate U.S. passport that entitles it to live here with the foreign family it brings with it on its next visit. The whole world is taking advantage of our ridiculous laws. Illegal aliens have no right to unalterably destroy the race (through miscegination), heritage, culture and make-up of our nation. Mainstream America will eventually not be able to pass one law. We will be at the mercy of a non-white majority who will destroy our freedoms.
The Fourteenth Amendment states, "All persons born or naturalized in the United States, and subject to the jurisdiction thereof, are citizens of the United States and of the State wherein they reside. No State shall make or enforce any law which shall abridge the privileges or immunities of citizens of the United States; nor shall any State deprive any person of life, liberty or property, without due process of law; nor deny to any person within its jurisdiction the equal protection of the laws."
The 14th Amendment was adopted illegally. The constitution requires a two-thirds majority of both houses to ratify an amendment. But the representatives of ten Confederate States were EXCLUDED under reconstruction acts, in order to achieve this two-thirds majority in spite of the fact that the Constitution also provides that each state shall have at least one representative in the House. Adoption under the Constitution also required ratification by at least three fourths, or 28 of the 37 states then in existence. But Kentucky, Delaware and Maryland REJECTED the amendment outright. The amendment has NEVER been RATIFIED by California. New Jersey and Ohio initially ratified it but both later WITHDREW their ratification. All ten of the Southern states immediately REJECTED it. But Congress, over President Johnson's veto, enacted the Reconstruction Act of 1867 which declared that NO LEGAL GOVERNMENT EXISTED in the ten states, placed them all under MILITARY OCCUPATION, DISENFRANCHISED the white people, and put the state governments in the hands of ILLITERATE Negroes and carpet-baggers. In another section, this wholesale bill of attainder provided that each excluded state MUST RATIFY the amendment in order to enjoy the status of a state, including representation in Congress. It was only under such DURESS that the amendment was finally adopted. The Fourteenth Amendment has, through legislation and judicial decree, abolished or suppressed the moral laws prohibiting SODOMY, ABORTION, PORNOGRAPHY, INTERRACIAL MARRIAGE, ILLEGAL IMMIGRATION, etcetera under its "equal protection" clause. The 14th Amendment is the legal force that has protected the DRUG DEALER, MURDERER, RAPIST, DRUNK DRIVER and KIDNAPPER by establishing lenient penalties under its new form of "liberty." The application of this amendment is responsible for the REMOVAL of PRAYER and BIBLES from SCHOOLS, a DEBAUCHED ECONOMY, INTEGRATION, and for the SUPPRESSION of INALIENABLE RIGHTS and FREEDOMS.
The Fourteenth Amendment should be changed to read, "No person shall be a citizen of the United States unless he is a non-Hispanic white of Northwest European descent in whom there is no Negro blood. Only citizens of the United States have the right to reside permanently in the United States."
"Neither Shalt Thou Make Marriages With Them"
"If a stranger (foreigner) sojourn with thee in your land, ye shall not vex (annoy) him; but the stranger (foreigner) that dwelleth with you shall be unto you as one born among you, and thou shalt love him as thyself: for ye were strangers (foreigners) in the land of Egypt" (Lev.19:33-34). Recall that "Rahab the harlot" was CANAANITE but was KIND (Josh.6:17) and "Hiram, king of Tyre" (a CANAANITE) was on FRIENDLY terms with Solomon (1 Ki.5:12). Also the "widow of Zarephath" (belonging to CANAAN) was KIND to Elijah (1 Ki.17:9). All were true "NEIGHBORS" as Luke 10:37 defines the term: all showed "MERCY" (KINDNESS). And we should love our neighbor as ourselves (Ja.2:8). But we should not marry them or give them special privileges.
Racial INTEGRATION and INTERRACIAL MARRIAGE are unbiblical! Speaking to Israel about the sons of Canaan, God said, "Neither shalt thou make marriages with them: thy daughter thou shalt not give unto his son, nor his daughter shalt thou take unto thy son. For they will turn away thy son from following me, that they may serve other gods" (Deut.7:3-4; see also Ex.34:12-16). Since God doesn't change (Mal.3:6) and Jesus Christ is "the same yesterday, and today, and forever" (Heb.13:8), it is safe to say this law is not abolished.
God only dwells "in the tents of Shem" (Gen. 9:27). The Eternal is a "God of Shem" (9:26) and, more fully, is "the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob" (Ex. 3:15). This is God's name "forever" and "unto all generations" (v.15). Other nations and races are cut off from God. They are ruled by demons (Dan. 10:20; Ps. 106:35-37) and by Satan (Matt. 4:8-9; 2 Cor. 4:4) who fill the spiritual vacuum. HAMITIC and JAPHETIC peoples can become converted "spiritual Israelites" in individual cases, but as a whole are predominantly Islamic, Voodoo and Hindu-oriented or Buddhist, Shinto, Taoist and Confusian-oriented. Israel is ruled by the archangel Michael (Dan. 10:21; 12:1) under the Eternal. And "Hath a nation changed their gods"? (Jer.2:11). The implied answer is that no nation but Israel has ever changed religions (v.11), so RACE and RELIGION go hand in hand. Yes, "every nation made gods of their own" (2 Ki.17:29). Demons keep these other nations in line with cheap tricks like levitating yogis, hypnotizing fakirs and barefood firewalkers. Idols cry tears and sweat blood (cp. Hislop's Two Babylons, p.257). Does this mean God is unfair? Of course not! He will deal with the rest of mankind later (Rev. 20:5, 11-13). But for now "he not only shows mercy as he chooses, but also makes men stubborn as he chooses" (Rom. 9:18; NEB). God allowed mankind to stray into error (Deut.4:19; NEB).
Furthermore, HOW were pagan gods worshipped? Idolatry included "FORNICATION" (Acts 15:20) and "NAKED DANCING" (Ex. 32:25,19) called "PLAY" (32:6). SEXUAL ORGIES accompanied idolatry (Num. 25:1-9; 1 Cor. 10:7-8). Both the Egyptians (Her. 2:60) and Babylonians (Her. 1:199) made RELIGIOUS PROSTITUTION part of their rite (Deut. 23:17). Idolatry and ADULTERY are inseparably linked in the Bible (Ez. 6:9). Idolatrous people had LOST all sense of SHAME and couldn't BLUSH (Jer. 8:12). Therefore Deuteronomy 7:3-4 most definitely prohibits RACE-MIXING as well as IDOLATRY. Notice Numbers 25:1 where Israelites "began to commit WHOREDOM with the daughters of Moab" as part of the IDOLATRY. Paul referred to this as "FORNICATION" (1 Cor. 10:8). Yes Israel "MINGLED among the heathen, and learned their works. And they served idols, which were a snare unto them. Yea, they sacrificed their sons and their daughters unto devils (demons)" (Ps.106:35-37) (See also Mal.2:11; 1 Chr.23:22; 1 Cor.7:39 & 2 Cor.6:14.)
What Does "ADULTERATE" Mean?
God's way is everything "AFTER ITS KIND" (Gen. 1:11). "God is not the author of confusion" (1 Cor. 14:33). Exodus 20:14 is a direct command against INTERRACIAL MARRIAGE. It says, "Thou shalt not commit ADULTERY." WHAT DOES "ADULTERATE" mean? "To corrupt, debase, or make IMPURE by an ADMIXTURE of baser materials; as, to adulterate liquors, or the coin of a country" (Webster's 1828 Dictionary). The Hebrew word for "ADULTERY" means "to commit ADULTERY" (Strong's #5003). If the seventh commandment merely means "extramarital sexual relations," then it is redundant since the tenth commandment also says, "Thou shalt not covet thy neighbor's wife." Deuteronomy 22:10 says, "Thou shalt not plow with an ox and an ass TOGETHER." (a marriage of different types) Leviticus 19:19 says, "Thou shalt not let thy cattle gender (breed) with a DIVERSE KIND: thou shalt not sow thy field with TWO KINDS OF SEED." Once again, is God only concerned with animals and plants, or did he give these commands for the benefit of human beings also? This law in Leviticus 19:19 is called a "STATUTE" (Heb. "chuqqah"). And we know that "Abraham obeyed my voice, and kept my charge, my commandments, my STATUTES (Heb. "chuqqah"), and my laws" (Gen.26:5).
Once again, Deuteronomy 22:9 tells us we shouldn't MIX SEED, "lest the fruit ... be DEFILED." These scriptures are referring to two kinds of CORN seed together in the same field or two kinds of WHEAT seed together in the same field. In other words, the plant equivalent of RACE-MIXING -- not the rare phenomenon of SPECIES-MIXING.
Although the word "cattle" can mean any large beast in Leviticus 19:19, the only examples of large beasts that come to mind are the STERILE MULE from breeding a horse and donkey and the "CATTALO" -- a cross between American buffalo and domestic cattle. This is the only known cross between different species of cattle but "Cattalo" are mostly infertile (Collier's Encyc., vol.4, p.519). Israel didn't even know about American Buffalo!
One should think Leviticus 19:19 would have a broader base than just these two examples. Thus we know Leviticus 19:19 and Deuteronomy 22:9 MOST LIKELY prohibit hybridization between RACES (breeds). If this law applies to HYBRID CATTLE RACES (Brangus, Santa Gertrudis) and HYBRID GRAIN SEED (most Corn and Soy), why not to HYBRID HUMAN RACES also?
Breeders of purebred stock follow this law. No breeder would allow his pedigree, purebred, prizewinning animal to mate with anything but the best -- another purebred strain of the same variety. Otherwise he would end up with inferior mongrels and hybrids. His cattle would not be "above all cattle." Each race or variety brings out its best qualities, "above all" others, when kept pure. This applies to the three primary races of mankind just as much as to horses, cattle, or dogs. Perhaps Moses had this in mind when he said, "the Eternal thy God hath chosen thee to be a special people unto himself, ABOVE ALL PEOPLE who are upon the face of the earth" (Deut.7:6). Again in Numbers 14:12 it is written that God "will make thee a GREATER and MIGHTIER nation than they."
We've already seen that ABRAHAM, ISAAC, JACOB and MOSES obeyed Leviticus 19:19. Also, it is a fact that ABEL, NOAH and LOT were all "righteous" (Matt.23:35; 2 Pet.2:5,8) and "all thy commandments are righteousness" (Ps.119:172) including Deuteronomy 7:3-6, 22:9, Exodus 20:14, 34:12-16 and Leviticus 19:19. Therefore, ABEL, NOAH, and LOT obeyed this law too.
Lamech married two wives: Ada ("White") and Zillah ("Dark"), so he participated in interracial marriage (Gen. 4:23). Some other characters of the Old Testament who violated this law include ESAU (Gen.36:2), SIMEON (Gen.46:10), ISHMAEL (Gen.21:21) and JUDAH (1 Chr.2:3). But Simeon later "repented and took a second wife from MESOPOTAMIA, like his brothers" (Jub. 34:22) and the royal, kingly line of Judah did not pass through Judah's eldest son Shelah because Shelah had a CANAANITE mother (Gen.38:2-5) and we read that "thou mayest not set a stranger (FOREIGNER) over thee" as king (Deut.17:15). Furthermore, Tamar may have been Israelite. The Bible doesn't say. Therefore when Judah got her pregnant, both Pharez and Zarah could have been 100% Israelite (Gen. 38).
Leviticus 19:19 is part of the Old Covenant (Deut.22:9). God promises to keep this covenant (the Book of Deuteronomy) with his people for 1000 generations (Ps.105:8; 1 Chr.16:15; Deut.7:9) and the Bible defines a "generation" as a "hundred" years (Gen.15:13-16). Therefore, from Moses to our day is only 34 generations. Both the covenant and the law are still in full force!
Does The Bible Teach RACIAL GENOCIDE of Canaanites?
No. Of course not. "God is no respecter of persons; But in every nation he that FEARETH him, and worketh RIGHTEOUSNESS, is accepted with him" (Acts 10:34-35). Peter discovered that "I should not call ANY MAN common or unclean" (Acts 10:28) based on RACIAL or ETHNIC background.
We read in Deuteronomy 25:18 that Amalek met Israel and smote the feeble, faint and weary. Therefore in 1 Samuel 15:2-3 we read, "Thus saith the Eternal of hosts, I remember that which Amalek did to Israel, how he laid wait for him in the way ... Now go and smite Amalek, and utterly destroy all that they have, and spare them not; but slay both man and woman, infant and suckling, ox and sheep, camel and ass." This is PAYBACK -- not an issue of an INFERIOR RACE or RACIAL EXTERMINATION.
We read in 1 Samuel 27:9-11 that "David smote the land, and left neither man nor woman alive, and took away the sheep, and the oxen, and the asses, and the camels, and the apparel ... And David saved neither man nor woman alive, to bring tidings to Gath, saying, Lest they should tell on us" (that we attacked Israel's enemies rather than Israel). So here is another example of extermination, this time to CONCEAL a LIE -- not because they were an INFERIOR RACE.
Israelites were to kill "every male" of the cities located far from Israel if they didn't surrender (Deut. 20:13) while the Israelites were to "save alive nothing that breatheth" (men, women, children and animals) in Palestine among the "Hittites ... Amorites ... Canaanites ... Perizzites ... Hivites, and the Jebusites ... That they teach you not to do after all their abominations, which they have done unto their gods" (Deut. 20:13-18). APOSTASY is the reason -- not INFERIOR RACE. They sacrificed their children to idols.
In Deuteronomy 13:12-18, we read about a city that becomes apostate and starts to "serve other gods." The remedy God gives is to "smite the inhabitants of that city with the edge of the sword, destroying it utterly, and all that is therein, and the cattle thereof ... And there shall cleave nought of the cursed thing to thine hand." Then we read in Joshua 6:21 that Israel "utterly destroyed all that was in the city (of Jericho), both man and woman, young and old, and ox, and sheep, and ass, with the edge of the sword" because God had said "the city shall be accursed, even it, and all that are in it, to the Eternal" (6:17). Deuteronomy 2:34, 3:6 and 7:2, Joshua 10:28-40 and 11:8-14 are other examples of extermination. Once again, this extermination is for APOSTASY -- not INFERIOR RACE.
Why exterminate man, woman and child in Numbers 31? Because the Midianites had first attempted to do this to Israelites (Nu. 25) and "as he hath done, so shall it be done to him" (Lev. 24:19). "Then shall ye do unto him, as he had thought to have done unto his brother: so shalt thou put the evil away from among you" (Deut. 19:19).
"A HYBRID Shall Not Enter"
Deuteronomy 23:2 says, "A BASTARD shall not enter into the congregation of the Eternal; even to his TENTH generation shall he not enter into the congregation of the Eternal." The Hebrew word for "BASTARD" actually means "MIXED" (Wilson's Word Studies, p.29) or "a MONGREL" (Strong's Lexicon, #4464). The Oxford English Dictionary states that a bastard is a "MONGREL, HYBRID, or INFERIOR BREED."
In other words, assuming only the first generation INTERRACIALLYmarries and the rest breed true, first generation children are 1/2 foreigner, second generation are 1/4 foreigner, third generation are 1/8 foreigner, fourth are 1/16, fifth are 1/32, sixth are 1/64, seventh are 1/128, eighth are 1/256, ninth are 1/512, and tenth generation are 1/1024 foreigner. Then at 1/2048 he is allowed back into the congregation. But someone will object and quote Deuteronomy 23:7-8 which allows "the children that are begotten of (Egyptians or Edomites to) ... enter into the congregation of the Eternal in their THIRD generation." Why? Because the Edomite "he is thy brother (a CAUCASIAN)" (23:7). The Egyptian nobility was also WHITE! Therefore, the problem was merely CULTURAL and RELIGIOUS adjustment, not RACIAL adjustment. How did they determine who was a HYBRID? "They declared their PEDIGREES" (Num. 1:18) and REGISTERED their "GENEOLOGY" (Ezra 2:62).
In Numbers 25:7-13, the Israelites committed harlotry with Moabites (WHITE) and Midianites (WHITE), so the SIN at Baal-peor was NOT interracial marriage (Deut.23:3-4), but IDOLATRY, that Phinehas fought against.
Next we come to the nation of Israel. The Bible is a book written by Israelites, about Israelites, and to Israelites. Other nations are only mentioned to the extent that they come into contact with Israel. Gentiles don't understand this book unless they are grafted in as spiritual Israelites (Rom.11:17). The Eternal took special care to SEGREGATE Israel from all other nations. As Exodus 33:16 states, "For wherein shall it be known here that I and thy people have found grace in thy sight (Moses asks God)? Is it not in that thou goest with us? So shall we be SEPARATED, I and thy people, from all the people that are upon the face of the earth." God "determined ... the BOUNDS of their habitation" (Acts 17:26). He "SEPARATED the sons of Adam" (Deut.32:8). And again in Leviticus 20:24: "I am the Eternal your God, who have SEPARATED you from other people." "The people shall dwell ALONE, and shall not be reckoned among the nations" (Num.23:9). (See also Ex.11:7 & Deut.32:8.) God is the author of SEGREGATION!
Segregation is a universal law of nature. "Birds of a feather, flock together." A giraffe doesn't join a herd of elephants. Salmon don't swim with sharks. We never see a flock of geese flying with eagles. Animals won't integrate. They segregate voluntarily.
The right to "FREELY ASSOCIATE" is fundamental. FREE MEN can HIRE, FIRE, PATRONIZE, or do BUSINESS with WHOMEVER they want -- for GOOD reasons, BAD reasons, or NO reasons at all. They need ANSWER to NO ONE. When the Supreme Court made its infamous ruling in Brown v. Board of Education in 1954, neither race rushed into the arms of the other. Both races still remained largely separate. So the Supreme Court made BUSING and SCHOOL DESEGREGATION mandatory in 1968. WHITE people HATED it. Between 1968 and 1976 -- in just eight years -- no fewer than 78% of the WHITE students left the Atlanta school system. BLACKS were not enthusiastic either. Both races naturally prefer to be with their own kind.
Why SEGREGATE Israel? Because Israelites were the PUREBRED WHITE descendants of Shem in the midst of the HALF-BREED WHITE descendants of Canaan. God made the different primary races. And what God made "was very good" (Gen.1:31). Why should man "DILUTE" and destroy the purebred racial stocks by HYBRIDIZATION?
King David of Israel was "RUDDY" (1 Sam.16:12 & 17:42) (He had RED HAIR!) and of "FAIR countenance" (17:42) -- the same word used in describing Sarai! This fact is significant because ONLY THOSE of ISRAEL'S OWN RACE were ALLOWED to be KING! So we know that the Israelite nation was also "RUDDY" (RED-HAIRED somewhat) and generally of "FAIR countenance" in the racial context. The Eternal commanded in Deuteronomy 17:15, "Thou shalt in any wise set him king over thee whom the Eternal thy God shall choose (David was chosen by God) ONE FROM AMONG THY BRETHREN shalt thou set king over thee; THOU MAYEST NOT SET A STRANGER (foreigner) OVER THEE, who is not thy brother." (Incidentally, since Moses was also selected by God as a sort of "king" over them, he must have been of a "fair countenance" racially too.)
Thomas Jefferson said, "Nothing is more certainly written in the book of fate than that these people (the Negroes) shall be free, nor is it less certain that the two races, equally free, CANNOT LIVE under the SAME government." "When freed, (the Negro) is to be REMOVED beyond the reach of MIXTURE" (colonization back to Africa). Jefferson proposed the 1784 ordinance to create new states in the Mississippi Valley, suggesting the name "Chersonesus" for the area between lakes Huron and Michigan. This is because the Saxon branch of Anglo-Saxons had originated in Denmark as well as in Schleswig-Holstein. The shape of Michigan reminded him of Denmark (Cimbric Chersonesus) and Saxons were not to forget their origins. James Madison proposed that the federal government sell off public land to raise the huge sums necessary to buy the entire black population and SHIP it OVERSEAS. He favored a Constitutional amendment to establish a colonization society to be run by the President. After his two terms in office, Madison served as president of the American Colonization Society to which he devoted much time and energy. The following prominent Americans were not merely members but officers of the society: Andrew Jackson, Henry Clay, Daniel Webster, Stephen Douglas, William Seward, Francis Scott Key, Gen. Winfield Scott, and two Chief Justices of the Supreme Court, John Marshall and Roger Taney. As for James Monroe, the capital of Liberia is named Monrovia in gratitude for his help in RETURNING blacks to AFRICA.
Woodrow Wilson was a confirmed SEGREGATIONIST, and as president of Princeton PREVENTED BLACKS from enrolling. He enforced SEGREGATION in government offices and was supported in this by Charles Eliot, president of Harvard. During the Presidential campaign of 1912, Wilson took a strong position in favor of EXCLUDING ASIANS: "I stand for the national policy of EXCLUSION.... We cannot make a homogeneous population of a people who do NOT BLEND with the Caucasian race.... Oriental coolieism will give us another race problem to solve and surely we have had our lesson." Warren Harding's views were the same: "Men of both races may well stand uncompromisingly against every suggestion of social equality. This is not a question of social equality, but a question of recognizing a fundamental, eternal, inescapable DIFFERENCE. Racial AMALGAMATION there CANNOT BE." Henry Cabot Lodge took the view that "there is a limit to the capacity of any race for assimilating and elevating an inferior race, and when you begin to pour in unlimited numbers of people of alien or lower races of less social efficiency and less moral force, you are running the most frightful RISK that any people can run." In 1921 Calvin Coolidge wrote, "There are racial considerations too grave to be brushed aside for any sentimental reasons. Biological laws tell us that certain divergent people will not mix or blend.... QUALITY of MIND and BODY suggests that observance of ethnic law is as great a necessity to a nation as immigration law."
Congressman William N. Vaile of Colorado was a prominent supporter of the 1924 immigration legislation that set policy until the revolution of the 1960s. He explained his opposition to non-white immigration this way: "Nordics need not be vain about their own qualifications. It well behooves them to be humble. What we do claim is that the northern European, and particularly ANGLO-SAXONS MADE this COUNTRY. Oh yes, the others HELPED. But that is the full statement of the case. They came to this country because it was ALREADY MADE as an Anglo-Saxcon Commonwealth. They ADDED to it, they often ENRICHED it, but they did not make it, and they have not yet greatly changed it.. We are determined that they shall not. It is a good country. It suits us. And what we assert is that we are not going to surrender it to somebody else or allow other people, no matter what their merits, to make it something different. If there is any changing to be done, we will do it ourselves."
Harry Truman INTEGRATED the armed services by executive order in 1948. Yet in his private correspondence he said, "I am strongly of the opinion Negroes ought to be in AFRICA, yellow men in ASIA and white men in EUROPE and AMERICA." Dwight Eisenhower argued that although it might be necessary to grant blacks certain political rights, this did not mean social equality "or that a Negro should court my daughter." Alexis de Tocqueville said, "There are two alternatives for the future: the negroes and the whites must either wholly PART or wholly MINGLE." Madison Grant said, "If the PURITY of the two races is to be maintained, they CANNOT continue to live side by side, and this is a problem from which there can be no escape." Rudyard Kipling said, "A man should, whatever happens, KEEP to his OWN caste, race, and breed. Let the White go to the White and the Black to the Black -- unless he wants a DISASTER."
SLAVERY in the Bible?
The U.S. Constitution, Amendment 13  says, "Neither slavery nor involuntary servitude, except as a PUNISHMENT for CRIME whereof the party shall have been duly convicted, shall exist within the United States, or any place subject to their jurisdiction."
The Bible agrees! Defaulting debtors (Lev.25:39; Matt.18:25), thieves (Gen.43:18; Ex.22:3) and prisoners of war (Deut.20:14; 21:10-14) are the only sources of biblical slaves and even then, humane treatment (Ex.21:26-27) and a day of rest (Ex.20:10) are required. Hired servants must be paid daily (Deut.24:15). Furthermore, some slaves were to be released after seven years with "severance pay" (Deut.15:14); other slaves were to be released after 49 years and given their land back (Lev.25:41). Slavery based on color of skin or profit potential is an UNBIBLICAL idea.
It is to the credit of the United States that fewer than 5% of all African New World slaves came here (500, 000) and were better cared for than in any other part of the New World. (see Hugh Thomas, The Slave Trade, 1997)
"The Holy Seed Have MINGLED Themselves"
A "MIXED MULTITUDE" went up out of Egypt with Israel (Ex.12:38). This heterogenous, half-breed group of part Israelite, part foreigner, caused Israel to sin! Notice Numbers 11:4: "And the MIXED multitude (Hebrew literally means "rabble" or "riffraff.") that was among them fell to lusting, and the children of Israel also wept again, and said, Who shall give us flesh to eat?" This was the result of INTEGRATION!
The solution to this problem is revealed in a similar situation that Israelites found themselves in hundreds of years later. We read in Ezra 9 that "The people of Israel, and the priests, and the Levites, have not SEPARATED themselves from the people of the lands, doing according to their abominations, of the Canaanites (WHITE HYBRIDS), the Hittites (WHITE HYBRIDS), the Perizzites (WHITE HYBRIDS), the Jebusites (WHITE HYBRIDS), the Ammonites (WHITES), the Moabites (WHITES), the Egyptians (BROWN), and the Amorites (WHITE HYBRIDS). For they have taken of their daughters for themselves, and their sons, so that the holy seed have MINGLED themselves with the people of those lands" (Ezra 9:1-2).
It is plain to see that intermarriage with the Ammonites and Moabites was forbidden because of Deuteronomy 23:3-4. The other peoples are forbidden because of Deuteronomy 7:3-4, 23:2 and Leviticus 19:19. SELECTIVE BREEDING requires more than WHITE skin.
Since INTEGRATION always leads inevitably to INTERMARRIAGE, we notice further that Nehemiah saw "Jews who had married wives of Ashdod (WHITE HYBRIDS), of Ammon (WHITES), and of Moab (WHITES): And their children spoke half in the speech of Ashdod, and could not speak in the Jew's language, but according to the language of each people" (13:23-24). So Nehemiah "contended with them, and smote certain of them, and plucked off their hair, and made them swear by God, saying, ye shall NOT GIVE your daughters unto their sons, NOR TAKE their daughters unto your sons, or for yourselves. Did not Solomon, king of Israel, SIN by these things? Yet among many nations was there no king like him, who was beloved of his God, and God made him king over all Israel; nevertheless, even him did outlandish (FOREIGN) women cause to SIN. Shall we, then, hearken unto you to do all this GREAT EVIL, to TRANSGRESS against our God in marrying FOREIGN wives?" (Neh.13:25-27). Once again, in the cases of Ammon and Moab, the Jews had violated Deuteronomy 23:3-4. But in the case of Ashdod, they had violated Deuteronomy 7:3-4, 23:2 and also Leviticus 19:19 in principle.
In Ezra 9 and Nehemiah 13 we find that the Israelites were commanded to put away, not only the wives, but also the offspring by these unions. If FALSE RELIGION were the only consideration, children would not be put away too since their minds are too young to be opinionated. The children were RACIAL HYBRIDS and so violated Deuteronomy 23:2 which says, "A HYBRID shall not enter into the congregation of the Eternal."
In time of war, an Israelite male was allowed to marry a female captive foreigner (Deut.21:11; Num.31:18). This law doesn't violate or contradict any of God's other laws for "God is not the author of confusion" (1 Cor.14:33). So we must conclude that the female was a purebred of the Caucasian race. As Exodus 23:32-33 says, "Thou shalt make no covenant (of marriage or employment or religious freedom) with them, nor with their gods. They shall not dwell in thy land (via INTEGRATION), lest they make thee sin against me." But "the children of Israel dwelt among the Canaanites, Hittites, and Amorites, and Perizzites, and Jebusites" and "took their daughters to be their wives, and gave their daughters to be their sons, and served their gods" and "did EVIL in the sight of the Eternal, and FORGOT the Eternal" (Judges 3:5-6).
According to Ezekiel 44:22, Levite priests will be required to "take maidens of the seed of the house of Israel" for wives. Dan and Naphtali mixed with the PHOENICIANS of Tyre (Ant.3:4; 1 Ki.7:14; 2 Chr.11:14). Wicked King Ahab married PHOENICIAN Jezebel too (1 Ki.16:31). Even "Ephraim hath MIXED himself among the people; Ephraim is a cake not turned (black on one side). Strangers (FOREIGNERS) have devoured his strength (genetically, religiously, economically, politically, etcetera), and he knoweth it not" (Hos.7:8-9). We find that "King Solomon loved many strange (FOREIGN) women; together with the daughter of Pharaoh, women of the Moabites, Ammonites, Edomites, Sidonians, and Hittites, Of the nations concerning which the Eternal said unto the children of Israel, Ye shall not go in to them, neither shall they come in unto you; for surely they will turn away your heart after their gods. Solomon clave unto these in love" (1 Ki.11:1-2). Also in Judges 14:3 we read about Samson. This verse states, "Then his father and his mother said unto him (Samson), Is there no woman among the daughters of THY BRETHREN, or among all MY PEOPLE, that thou goest to take a wife of the uncircumcised PHILISTINES? And Samson saith unto his father, Get her for me; for she pleaseth me well." We know that Jesus Christ had in his royal lineage Rahab the CANAANITESS and Ruth the MOABITESS (Matt.1:1-6) but Jesus came after the tenth generation from these ancestors (Deut.23:2). Furthermore, Joseph's line was merely the legal line, not the hereditary line.
Moses "received the lively oracles (Ten commandments; statutes; judgments) to give unto us" (Christians) (Acts 7:37-38) so they aren't abolished. "Do not think that I will accuse you to the father: there is one that accuses you (of sin), even Moses, in whom ye trust. For had ye believed Moses, ye would have believed me: for he wrote of me. But if ye believe not his writings, how shall ye believe my words?" (John 5:45-47) If we don't believe the Torah, we won't believe Jesus!
"HYBRID" Means "INSULT" In Greek!
Mixed marriages between any two of the primary races often creates offspring LESS ABLE TO ADAPT to their environment than either parent. "As a general rule hybrids are INTERMEDIATE between parental type in their morphological and physiological characteristics. The hybrid between a red-flowered and a lemon-flowered species of columbine has orange-colored flowers. Large-bodied species or races of animals crossed with small-bodied species usually yield hybrids with an INTERMEDIATE body size (unless the gene happens to be dominant or recessive rather than normal).... A hybrid may also develop ABNORMALLY ("defiled" -- Deut.22:9) so that it does not resemble either parent or the average condition between the parents; such a hybrid is TRANSGRESSIVE. An example is the DWARFISH or INVIABLE hybrid resulting from vigorous parents.... Hybrid luxuriance refers to the numerous instances where a hybrid is larger or faster growing, or otherwise exceeds its parents in some quality, but is NOT ADAPTIVELY SUPERIOR -- that is, it would not succeed better in life than its smaller parents. The mule, for example, is a stronger animal than the horse or the donkey, but it is also STERILE, whereas the parental species are fully fertile. The overall value of the mule in nature is therefore close to zero. Hybrid corn is LESS NUTRITIOUS and MORE SUSCEPTIBLE to BUGS and DISEASES so must be sprayed with pesticides. Hybrid cattle must be vaccinated because of being PRONE to DISEASE whereas purebred cattle stay healthy. In the wild a white- tail deer gallops to escape predators and a mule deer runs by executing a series of four-legged jumps. A hybrid between these two types of deer neither gallops nor jumps, but instead performs a CLUMSY MIXTURE of the two. Thus the hybrid is MORE VULNERABLE to PREDATORS in any environment (Discover magazine, Nov. 1993, p.14). Luxuriance invariably DISAPPEARS in the PROGENY of the hybrids, if there are any" (Encyc. Amer. 1980 14:629). Even when a hybrid is adaptively superior to either parent because RECESSIVE MUTANT GENES are not able to express themselves, "Suppression of the effects of recessive mutant genes lasts only during the lifetime of the FIRST GENERATION hybrids ... effects may appear in later generations" (ibid. p.630).
"The progeny of hybrids ... comprises a highly variable and diversified array of types.... The MAJORITY of the variants ... will prove ILL-ADAPTED for any available habitat and so will eventually be ELIMINATED by natural selection. Some of the new types, however, may inherit a favorable combination of characters" (ibid., p.631). In humans, of course, the children of INTERRACIAL couples cannot be "ELIMINATED" to prevent them from further breeding as in plants or animals. But "hybrids are usually partially sterile" (ibid., p.631). Hosea 5:7 mentions "strange children." (HYBRIDS?) And Jude 7 mentions that "Sodom and Gomorrah, and the cities about them in like manner, giving themselves over to fornication, and going after strange flesh (abnormal sex and OTHER RACES?), are set forth for an example, suffering the vengeance of eternal fire." Isaiah 2:6 says, "Therefore thou hast forsaken thy people the house of Jacob, because they be replenished from the east, and are soothsayers like the Philistines, and they please themselves in the children of strangers (other RACES)." "Each species has passed through many generations of natural selection (TEN required); in the process it has become ADAPTED to its habitat and has achieved an INTERNAL BALANCE and HARMONY in its genetic constitution. In the F2 derivatives of an interspecific HYBRID, the favorable gene combinations are BROKEN UP into NUMEROUS UNTRIED and mostly DISHARMONIOUS mixtures of genes. By crossing among themselves ... the hybrids segregate many new types that are NOT ADAPTED for any HABITAT" (Encyc. Amer. 1980, 14:631). As domestic pedigree horses and dogs are selectively bred by man, so are the human races selectively bred by nature. The HYBRIDIZING of the varieties (races) of the species, whether domesticated animals or man, irretrievably ELIMINATES the superior genetic traits.
To HYBRIDIZE high quality, thoroughbred stock just to make more money produces no "hybrid vigor" or advantage if there are no recessive mutant genes to cover up. This may be the case when dealing with purebreds since they have been selectively bred for generations! But when HYBRIDIZATION gives an immediate short-term gain, it does so by creating an UNBALANCED, DISHARMONIOUS animal or plant for the sake of higher profits. But the organism only lasts ONE GENERATION and must be continually recreated! If breeding is done God's way, the results will be LASTING and GOOD for ALL GENERATIONS.
Furthermore, extreme HYBRIDS tend to be DEPENDENT on artificial means of irrigation and fertilization so that it COSTS MORE to get the plant to produce. Animal hybrids tend to be LESS than self-sufficient also because they are bred for quick, large supplies of meat or milk WITHOUT THOUGHT to the WHOLE ANIMAL and its OVERALL NEEDS! A rancher makes a larger profit only to pay the veterinarian more often. No doubt the quality of food that plant and animal hybrids produce is inferior to that of purebreds also. Who then first "discovered (how to breed) mules"? ESAU'S branch (Gen.36:24).
HYBRID garden seeds don't breed true when the seeds are saved from year to year, so the farmer is forced to depend on a dealer each year for new seed. He's not independent, nor is his food supply guaranteed. The product of hybrid seeds will either be STERILE or will REVERT to one of the parent varieties. HYBRIDS are LESS HEALTHY and REQUIRE MORE chemicals to kill pests. Pests attack SICK or WEAK plants -- not healthy ones. This is why the word "HYBRID" means "INSULT" or "OUTRAGE" in Greek (Encyc. Brit. 1973, 11:921). Furthermore, farmers are killing people with hybrid crops because they contain less protein and nutrients.
According to DNA research, the black gene pool shows white genetic ancestry ranging from 6.8% (Jamaica), to 13% (Philadelphia), 20% (Pittsburgh, 11.6% (Charleston), 16.9% (Houston). 16.3% (Detroit), 15.5% (Baltimore), and 22.5% (New Orleans). A white gene parentage of 25% would be the equivalent of having three African and one European grandparents (See Am. Journal of Human Genetics, Dec., vol.63, #6, pp.1839-1851).
Were All Men Created EQUAL?
It is a common cliche to say that "all men are created equal." But nobody quotes the rest of the sentence. How are all men created equal? In abilities? In strength? In intelligence? NO! All men are created equal in RIGHTS! "We hold these truths to be self-evident, that all men are created equal, that they are endowed by their Creator with certain unalienable RIGHTS, that among these are life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness" (Declaration of Independence, 1776). Everyone knows that a Hereford cow does not have the milk-producing capacity of a Holstein. Also the German Shepherd breed makes better guard dogs than Australian Shepherds and Australian Shepherds make better sheepherders than German Shepherds. Heredity far outweighs environment in determining the qualities of an individual animal. But when we discuss differences among humans, this common sense approach is called RACISM.
"The HAIR of mongoloids tends to be black ... It may grow quite long on the head, but heavy beards and generously distributed body hair are uncommon" (Encyc. Amer.1980, 23:116). "The African ... male beard is sparse; body hair is rare" (Zondervan Pict. Encyc. of the Bible 5:21) "and ranges from brown to black" (Encyc. Amer. 1980, 23:117). Caucasians have red, yellow, brown or black hair and thick beards are common (ibid). The many biblical references to Israelites with beards (1 Sam.21:13; 2 Sam.20:9; Ezra 9:3; Ps.133:2; etc.) shows that Israelites were Caucasians!
Mongoloid EYES are "brown to black" (ibid. 23:116) and Negro eyes are "brown to black" (ibid. 23:117) but Caucasian eyes are blue, green, brown or black.
GLANDULAR ODORS have powerful sexual influences, both to attract and repel. Mongoloids such as Chinese, Koreans and Japanese are singularly devoid of body odors, and to them the smell of Europeans is offensive. The odor given off by Pygmies is repugnant to Negroes, a deterrent against intermarriage. Caucasoids of the Indian subcontinent dislike the characteristic musklike smell of Negroids. Europeans find the smell of Negroes strong and markedly different from their own. (pp.14-15, Racial Kinship, by H.B. Isherwood).
Regarding DISEASE, blacks have a "greater frequency ... of some genetic traits that foster resistance to malaria. These include genetic variations in hemoglobin (such as sickle-cell hemoglobin and hemoglobin C) and an enzyme deficiency of red blood cells that apparently makes those cells less prone to infection by malarial parasites" (Funk & Wagnalls New Encyc. 1983,22:51). Through race mixing, "sickle-cell anemia" and a hepatitis virus (which is ten times as common in blacks as whites) can be transmitted to non-Negro races. This is also a powerful argument against interracial blood transfusions. Negroes have an alarming susceptibility to TB and lactose intolerance. Caucasians are more susceptible to cancer, psychoses and skin diseases.
Mongoloids, especially the Chinese, often hide their FEELINGS, both pleasure and pain, behind a mask. Caucasians and Blacks tend to show more emotions.
Mongoloid VOICES, particularly the Chinese, are high-pitched, their speech sounding twittering to other races. But the gutteral talk of Mongoloid Amerindians is deep-pitched. The voices of Negroes are relatively low in tone. The voices of the more variable Caucasians range between the two extremes. Associated with this are differences in musical appreciation. Europeans do not like or understand the music that appeals to the Mongoloids. Asiatic Indians dislike classical music of Europe. The drum-beating, sexually psychedelic music of Negroes appeals to younger Caucasians. (p.15, ibid.).
Regarding HEAD SHAPE, Mongoloids all have round heads. Negroes are mainly in between, tending towards narrowness. Caucasians are mixed, some having long heads (Nordics and early Mediterraneans) and some round heads (Alpines). It is quite possible that the heavy incidence among Europeans of migraine and chronic baldness (rarely found among Negroes and orientals) may have resulted from the incompatible hybridization between long heads and round heads. (p.17, ibid.)
Blacks are usually the BEST ATHLETES: There are only 800 million blacks, or one in eight of the world population, but athletes of African origin hold every major world running record. Blacks make up 70% of the NFL and 85% of professional basketball. Even in sports in which blacks are not a majority (baseball, soccer, rugby, cricket, bobsledding) blacks are represented in greater numbers than their share of the population. Only 2% of the population of Britain is black, but 20% of its pro soccer players are. The Negro hand-eye coordination is generally good. The Black mind is more auditory and visual than abstract. Blacks have longer arms and legs, a shorter trunk, narrower hips, and heavier bones than whites. West African blacks have more muscle, less fat, hands relatively longer than forearms, and feet relatively longer than lower legs (which are relatively longer than thighs). They have higher serum testosterone levels, which increases muscle mass and aggressiveness, and smaller chest and lung capacities, which is why they wear out at long distances. Heavy bones and less fat explain why so many blacks are "sinkers" in the pool, and low lung capacity is a problem in swimming events as it is in long-distance running. W. African blacks have a larger percentage of what is called fast-twitch fiber in their muscles, which is what the body needs for explosive bursts of speed. It also helps blacks jump. The best whites can jump straight up 50% of their height; blacks can go over 60%. East African blacks have a larger lung capacity than whites and process oxygen more efficiently. They do not suffer as much from lactic acid build-up in their muscles and are therefore less susceptible to fatigue. They naturally have the slim build of good distance runners. Blacks respond to athletic training more quickly than whites and require less of it. Sprinter Carl Lewis worked out only eight hours a week when he was training for the 1984 Olympics; whites may work out nearly that much in a day. East Africans can reportedly take months off from training but quickly regain top form. (from John Entine's Taboo: Why Black Athletes Dominate Sports and Why We're Afraid To Talk About It, 2000).
Regarding the ABILITY TO DIGEST MILK, whites of European ancestry are "statistically unusual in tending to maintain high intestinal lactase levels into adulthood. That race has the highest proportion of people who can drink milk in great quantities without distress even when they are grown up." But among orientals and blacks, this "disorder of lactose metabolism is ... very common" (ibid. 15:354) "The ability to digest this carbohydrate (lactose) throughout life provides the calories of milk sugar in cold climates; also, the minerals in milk, coupled with efficient Vitamin D production by the skin, may protect young Caucasians against rickets" (Acad. Amer. 16:35).
Regarding the INTELLIGENCE of the three races, "The I.Q.'s of American Negroes are from 15 to 20 points, on the average, below those of American whites" (p.18, The Biology of the Race Problem). "Where American Negroes have scored more marks than average, this has been ascribed to varying degrees of part Caucasoid or Mongoloid ancestry." (p.18, Isherwood's Racial Kinship). Three examples are Ralph Bunche the diplomat, Thurgood Marshall the justice, and George Washington Carver the chemist, all of whom had some white ancestry. Intelligence is linked to heredity since intelligence is proportional to slower maturation, larger head size at birth, and nearsightedness. Thomas Sowell points out that "In the United States, blacks of above-average socioeconomic status have not averaged as high IQ as whites of lower socioeconomic status" and that ethnic Chinese school children outperform the English in math in Hong Kong ("Race and Culture," ch.6). "Japanese and Chinese ... actually score higher in IQ tests than Caucasians" (p.13, Race, Intelligence & Education).
Regarding CLIMATE and ENVIRONMENT, blacks were designed perfectly for tropical, equatorial areas. There is "evidence that they (American Negroes) withstand humid heat better" (Encyc. Brit. 1973, 18:985). "Negroes are more vulnerable to frostbite in cold climates than are whites, but tolerate humid heat better than the latter because their body temperature does not require so much sweating and evaporation from the skin to keep it from rising" (Encyc. Brit 1974, 4:729). "Dark-pigmented skin is common in the tropics and serves to filter out excess ultraviolet radiation, some of which is required for the production of vitamin D by the skin. (Too much ultraviolet radiation, however, can result in excessive vitamin D production and calcium deposits that can cause crippling.)" (ibid, 2:1044). "Skin cancer is far more frequent among light-skinned, freckled Texans than it is in east Texans of African origin" (ibid.). Blacks have a greater tolerance of heat and a higher sweating capacity. They tend to have long limbs, slender bodies and long, slender fingers "because they can dispel heat quicker" (Encyc. Brit.1974, 2:1044). Orientals were designed for extremely bright, yet extremely cold, environments. The yellowish skin color is due to "pads of fatty tissue" (Encyc. Brit. 1974, 1:1127) (insulation) between the skin's surface and blood vessels to keep him warm. Orientals live in cold harsh climates. The epicanthic eye-fold therefore provides the oriental with protection against snowblindness, bright water or ice glare. We also read that "the Eskimo has a thick, heavy-set body that seems better adapted to conserve body heat in the Arctic climate" (ibid., 2:1044). "Eskimos retain the finer motor skills even when their hands are exposed to severe cold. Experimental studies bear out some of these suggestions: Eskimo peripheral skin temperatures remain higher than normal in the cold" (Encyc. Brit. 1973, 18:985). "In arctic regions, stocky body build and generally large body size are more common, and these traits apparently help in conserving body heat. Light-colored skin may be less susceptible than dark skin to frostbite. Narrow noses serve better than broad noses to warm frigid air before it enters the lungs. All these advantageous traits are more common in northern peoples such as the Inuit (Eskimo), Lapps, and Siberians" (Funk & Wagnalls, 22:51). "Noses tend to be narrow in northern Europe and Tibet" (Encyc. Brit. 1974, 15:352). Mongolians seem to be best adapted to high altitudes. They "thrive and reproduce quite well in such regions as Tibet, and in the high Andes, where the American Indians seem to be more successful than Caucasian groups" (Acad. Amer. 16:35). "Hair, especially coarse, tightly curled head hair, may provide some protection from direct sunlight" (ibid., p.51). Broad noses are large air ducts designed for efficient cooling of the body. "Noses tend to be ... wide in parts of Africa, New Guinea, and Fiji" (Encyc. Brit. 1974, 15:352). Caucasians were designed for "cool, cloudy climates without much sunshine" (Encyc. Brit. 1974, 4:728) midway between the tropical and polar regions. "American Negro troops experienced more cold injuries than did white during the Korean War" (Encyc. Brit. 1973, 18:985) again showing that light skin is less prone to frostbite. Also, in "temperate climates ... the slanted rays of the sun irradiate the surface with much less intensity, and inhabitants of such regions benefit from transparent skin, which allows sufficient amounts of vitamin D to be generated" (Encyc. Brit. 1974, 2:1044). Caucasian "skin type burns easily when exposed to strong radiation (particularly ultraviolet) from sun and sky. The brown and black races possess a skin that is not at all vulnerable to this type of damage" (ibid. 4:729). Whites have the narrow noses to warm cold air.
Concerning METABOLISM, black people of both sexes have a slower metabolic rate, especially during sleep, than whites. Given the same diet, people with slow metabolisms GAIN WEIGHT more EASILY. In a controlled, laboratory setting, scientists recorded the sleeping metabolic activity, the 24-hour fat-oxidation rate, and physical energy expenditure of groups of blacks and whites. This is why only 22% of white women, but 37% of black women are obese. Black men are fatter than white men. (from Am. Journal of Clin. Nutr., July 16, 1999)
Of course there are exceptions to all of the generalities above. There is also some overlap between the races. But to prevent these three distinct races from diluting their pedigrees, "the Most High DIVIDED to the nations their inheritance" and "SEPARATED the sons of Adam" and "SET THE BOUNDS of the people" (Deut.32:8). He determined "the BOUNDS of their habitation" (Acts 17:26) by putting mountain ranges and deserts and seas and oceans between them (cp. Gen.10:5,32). Those "east of the Urals primarily MONGOLOID" (Encyc. Brit. 1974, 18:1024), while the population west of the Urals is CAUCASIAN. The Ural Mountains connect with the Turkestan Desert and Himalayan Mountain Range, thus completely enclosing the ORIENTALS on the west and south. The Arctic, Pacific, and Indian Oceans serve as barriers on the east, north and south. BLACKS in Africa are segregated from European CAUCASIANS by the Sahara and Arabian Deserts to the north and the Atlantic and Indian Oceans on either side. South African WHITES are at least partially segregated from the rest of Africa by the Kalahari Desert. In Australia, the BLACK aboriginees are separated from the European WHITES by extensive desert lands (Great Sandy, Gibson, Great Victoria, Simpson). In North America the MONGOLOIDS have inhabited the Arctic wastelands which serve to isolate them from CAUCASIANS. Elsewhere in the Americas, exceptions to the geographic rule of segregation exist due to historic slave trading. But Isaiah 13:14 predicts resettlement as the answer: "And it shall be as the chased roe, and the sheep that no man taketh up; they shall every man turn to his own people, and flee everyone into his own land." (cp. Jer.50:16) Repatriation!
Did Integration Work In Brazil?
About the time Columbus was born, the Portuguese nation began importing Negro slaves. Large numbers were brought from Africa and absorbed into the general population so that today Negroid characteristics are widespread among the Portuguese. During these centuries while amalgamation was taking place, Portugal declined from a nation of first class power and achievement in the world to a nation of little significance. Brazil was settled in 1503, long before the United States. It is bigger than the U.S. by a quarter of a million square miles. It has abundant rainfall, huge forests and vast mineral resources. But it was colonized by the Portuguese who had already started amalgamation back home. The colonists interbred first with the Indians they found in Brazil and then with great numbers of Negroes that they imported as slaves over the centuries. The population today is a highly mixed breed and Brazil remains a backward country. It has one of the lowest economic standards of living in South America. From Sao Paulo to Rio Grande do Sul, the population becomes increasingly White European, with few Amerindian-European hybrids. To the extent that inherited racial traits may influence progress in the arts, sciences, and industries, there is an obvious correlation in Brazil between racial purity and culture. One has only to compare the advanced civilization in White southern Brazil with the backward, relatively primitive conditions in coastal Bahia with its hybrid Negro inhabitants. The difference cannot be credited to climate, natural resources, availability of capital, or any environmental factor. Every opportunity open to the people in southern Brazil has been available in equal or greater measure to those in Bahia. There is no better proving ground than Brazil in which to show that hybridization does indeed "lead downhill."
One of the reasons why the North American civilization is so much more advanced than the South American is because when the white men came to North America, they fought against the Indians and the Indians fought against them. They didn't intermarry. It irretrievably mixes up the good gene combinations. Almost every country in South America is mixed and backward. Argentina, the exception, is the most successful South American nation, and is almost all pure Caucasian. Leviticus 19:19 says, "Thou shalt not let thy cattle gender (breed) with a DIVERSE KIND: thou shalt not sow thy field with TWO KINDS OF SEED."
America -- A "Melting Pot?"
Ezekiel prophesied about America by saying, "Her priests have violated my law (Heb. "torah"), and have profaned mine holy things (including "HOLY SEED" -- Ezra 9:2); they have put no difference (no discrimination) between the holy (SELECTIVE BREEDING; SEGREGATION) and the profane (INTERRACIAL MARRIAGE; INTEGRATION), neither have they shown difference between the unclean (witchcraft) and the clean (Judeo-Christianity), and have hidden their eyes from my sabbaths, and I am profaned among them" (Ez.22:26). Ministers in pulpits preach loudly about the "brotherhood of mankind" and that "all men are created equal" and "there is neither Jew nor Greek" in Christ. "Brotherly love" and smooth preaching are used as an excuse to integrate and hybridize.
Because of these false ministers in the United States, Caucasians are ignorant of God's laws today! This was not always the case. But in 1967 the U.S. Supreme Court affirmed the "right" of people of DIFFERENT RACES to MARRY by overturning the last state miscegenation laws (Loving v. Virginia). At the time of the 1967 Supreme Court ruling, 14 states still outlawed INTERRACIAL MARRIAGE: Alabama, Arkansas, Florida, Georgia, Indiana, Kentucky, Louisiana, Maryland, Tennessee, Texas, Virginia, West Virginia and Wyoming. Many other states had MISCEGENATION laws which were repealed before this time. The Civil Rights Act of 1964 INTEGRATED job sites, universities, theaters, restaurants, hotels and drinking fountains. Discrimination based on race, color, religion and national origin were forbidden in these public facilities. Until 1964, any employer could refuse to hire non-whites and merchants could refuse to do business with whomever they pleased. Until 1965, immigration laws were designed to keep the country white. The mutual attraction and sex appeal shown in courtship among similar people should be regarded as the means of selective breeding.
Affirmative Action Means Preferential Hiring
"Affirmative Action" and "Equal Employment Opportunity" laws have caused "The STRANGER who is within thee" to "get up ABOVE THEE very high" (Deut.28:43) so that "he shall be the HEAD" (v.44) in government and business. This prophetic curse describes our land today! "No greater injury can be done to any youth than to let him feel that because he belongs to this or that race he will be advanced regardless of his own merit or efforts" -- Booker T. Washington (a former slave who went on to found Tuskeegee Institute).
RACIAL QUOTAS must be abolished. The rate of DETERIORATION is proportionate to the rate of INTEGRATION. Companies that follow HIRING QUOTAS lower their intellectual and moral standards. The Supreme Court's subversive decision in Griggs v. Duke Power (1971) ruled that requiring management trainees to be high school graduates and to score above a certain level on an intelligence test was discrimi natory against BLACKS. This made it illegal for U.S. companies to set HIGH STANDARDS. Then in 1987, the Supreme Court ruled in the case of Johnson v. Transportation Agency that it was alright to discriminate against WHITE men simply to increase hiring from an 'UNDER-REPRESENTED" class. This throws SENIORITY and EXPERIENCE out the window.
What's Wrong With RACIAL PROFILING?
Assume that there is credible information that terrorists are planning new attacks here. Airports are on heightened alert. You, a law enforcement officer, are told to scrutinize incoming travelers. As thousands stream by, you focus only on YOUNG MALES because most terrorists are neither women nor old, and gender and age can, as a rule, be established at a glance. Does this offend all innocent YOUNG MALES? Of course not. They recognize that this is a NECESSARY INCONVENIENCE done in the interest of THEIR SAFETY! Another easy-to-spot characteristic is RACE. Black people commit a disproportionately large number of violent crimes. Policemen know this fact. Therefore, BLACK people become suspects. Rights are proportional to responsibilities. It was liberal stalwart Jesse Jackson who said, "There is nothing more painful to me at this stage in my life than to walk down the street and hear footsteps and start thinking about ROBBERY, then look around and see somebody WHITE and feel RELIEVED." If police dropped racial profiling (say, by stopping eight whites for every black), the results would be much WORSE than a WASTE of police resources. It would PENALIZE those African-American communities with high incidences of violent crime. The only reason George W. Bush is working to end racial profiling is because African-Americans voted against him 9-1 in the presidential elections. He wants their vote. (see USA Today, 16A, Monday, May 21, 2001 "Another side of racial profiling").
Race And CRIME
Regarding the MORALITY of the races, Pat Buchanan's column of May 7, 1989 presented these statistics for America: Blacks commit 8 times more assaults than do whites. Blacks commit 9 times more rapes than whites. Blacks commit 14 times more murders. Blacks commit 19 times more armed robberies. Black neighborhoods are 35 times more violent than white communities ("The Truth At Last," issue #335, p.33).
The chance that any American will be the victim of BLACK crime in his lifetime is 14.7%. That is about one in six Americans. HISPANICS are roughly three times more likely than whites to be arrested for violent crime. These are only the REPORTED statistics for BLACKS and HISPANICS. Unreported crime or crime where the race of the perpetrator is unknown raises the percentage much higher.
To those who say that morality is determined by environment rather than heredity, we respond that BOTH factors have about "an EQUAL role" (p.42, The Biology of the Race Problem). Crime does run in families but also many black children get off to a bad start environmentally since 70% of black babies are born out of wedlock in the U.S. However, a large percentage of American Negroes are hybrids, not pure Negroes. Hybrids have a greater tendency toward crime than purebreds.
In Barbados, for instance, the white British settlers have lived in peace, friendship, and mutual respect with the pure Negroes for three centuries. These Negroes have strength of character and mental stability. Compared with hybrid Negroes from Trinidad ... it was invariably the Barbadian Negroes who displayed the greater stamina and courage. Their outstanding qualities, in addition to superior physical strength, are relative immunity to disease, cleanliness, temperance, honesty, reliability and common sense" (p.13, Hybrid Race Doctrine, by Bela Hubbard).
Because of the fact that blacks are so much MORE LIKELY to commit murder and robbery than any other racial group, the PERCENTAGE of BLACKS in the local population is probably the BEST single INDICATOR of a HIGH CRIME area. When we plot the MURDER rate against the BLACK percentage of the POPULATION for the fifty states and the District of Columbia, the parallel is clear. In fact, drug traffic, fornication, illegitimate children, abortion, divorce and violence are all more likely in a BLACK neighborhood.
The Civil Rights Act of 1964 INTEGRATED all American public facilities including the Public School System and exposed white children to this corruption. In order to avoid corrupting white society, the only sensible thing to do is to have TWO SEPARATE SOCIETIES.
Big cities with LARGE BLACK populations had the HIGHEST MURDER rates. In 1992 Washington DC had 122 murders per 100,000 people making it the murder capitol of the world. If we look at other American cities, in 1996, New Orleans had 72 per 100,000 followed by Atlanta (47), Baltimore (46), St. Louis (44), Detroit (43) and Birmingham (42). By contrast, Seattle, mostly white, had a murder rate of 7 per 100,000.
The 1995 American prison population totalled 1,126,287 of which 544,005 were BLACK (48.3%) and 455,021 were WHITE (40.4%). About 110, 602 prisoners were HISPANIC (9.8%). There were 10,176 INDIAN/ESKIMO (.9%) and 6,483 ASIAN (.58%). Black people are only 14% of the U.S. population but 48.3% of the prison population.
In the last 50 years, WHITE America has declined from 90% to 72% of the total U.S. population. By the year 2050, WHITE Americans will be a minority -- just 49%. Why is this being allowed?
The parable of the wheat and the tares or weeds (Matt. 13) illustrates the biblical teaching on INTEGRATION and IMMIGRATION. We lack IMMIGRATION LIMITS to preserve our security against foreign aggression and domination. In 1965 Congress passed a new immigration law that cut the flow of immigrants from EUROPE and dramatically increased the flow from LATIN AMERICA and ASIA. Now 90% of all legal immigrants are NON-WHITE. A 1986 law gave amnesty to 3 million illegal aliens in the U. S. Every day 6,000 more immigrants arrive -- not counting illegals. "Yet I had planted thee a NOBLE VINE, wholly a RIGHT SEED. How, then, art thou turned into a DEGENERATE PLANT of a STRANGE VINE unto me?" (Jer. 2:21).
BALKANIZATION can only be avoided by screening all immigrants to make sure they arePUREBRED and of the WHITE race and the JEWISH or CHRISTIAN religion, can speak ENGLISH, are HEALTHY, can hold a JOB and have no CRIMNINAL RECORD. Laws must be passed to make INTERRACIAL MARRIAGE illegal again.
"Send thine hand from above; rid me and deliver me ... from the hand of STRANGE children" (Ps. 144:7). "Spare thy people, O Lord, and give not thine heritage to reproach, that the HEATHEN should rule over them" (Joel 2:17).
Heredity Is Not Salvation
"Think not to say within yourselves, We have Abraham to our father: for I say unto you, that God is able of these stones to raise up children unto Abraham" (Matt. 3:9). Let the Bible examples of JUDAS ISCARIOT and the WICKED KINGS of ISRAEL and JUDAH testify that Israelite descent does not and cannot save any man. Jesus said about a gentile Roman centurion: "Verily I say unto you, I have not found so great faith, no, NOT IN ISRAEL. And I say unto you that many shall come from the east (China & India) and west (Red Indians), and shall sit down with Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, in the kingdom of heaven; But the CHILDREN of the KINGDOM (Jews & Christian Israelites) shall be CAST OUT into outer darkness; there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth" (Matt. 8:10-12). The account in Luke adds a few more details: "and from the north (Mongolians and Eskimoes), and from the south (Africans), and shall sit down in the kingdom of God. And behold, there are LAST (gentiles) who shall be FIRST, and there are FIRST (Jews and Israelites) who shall be LAST" (Luke 13:28-30). But "God made of one blood ALL nations of men" (Acts17:26) and "God is NO RESPECTER of PERSONS; but in EVERY NATION he that feareth him, and worketh righteousness, is ACCEPTED with him" (Acts 10:34-35). The reason Jesus forbade his disciples from going to the Gentiles RIGHT AWAY is because they were too FEW, too POOR and too PERSECUTED to preach WORLDWIDE. Remember, Jesus prophesied that "this gospel of the kingdom shall be preached in ALL the WORLD for a witness unto ALL NATIONS" (Matt. 24:14).
Philip helped "a man of ETHIOPIA, an eunuch" (Acts 8:27) to understand Isaiah 53 (cp. Isa. 56:4). The Falashas, or ETHIOPIAN Jews in Israel today, don't recognize the Talmud because their Jewish religion came from Solomon rather than from the later Orthodox Talmudic Jews.
Jesus later commissioned his disciples to make "disciples OF ALL nations" (Matt.28:19; ASV; cp. Rev.14:6). In the church at Antioch there was a prophet and teacher named "Symeon, who was called NIGER" (Acts 13:1) who helped ordain Barnabbas and Saul. We should "not call any man COMMON or UNCLEAN" (Acts 10:28) just because of his race. Since God is "the God of Abraham ... Isaac and ... Jacob" (Ex. 3:6), ALL RACES must become "spiritual ISRAELITES" (Gal.6:16; Rom. 11; Eph. 2:11-19; Rom.2:29) and "children of ABRAHAM"(Gal.3:7; 3:29; Rom. 4:11). "He is a JEW who is one INWARDLY; and CIRCUMCISION is that of the HEART, in the SPIRIT (also) and not in the LETTER (only)" (Rom. 2:29). "For they are not all ISRAEL who are of ISRAEL ... That is, They who are the children of the FLESH, these are NOT the children of GOD, but the children of the PROMISE" (Rom. 9:6-8) are the children of GOD. "Know ye, therefore, that they who are of FAITH, the same are the children of ABRAHAM. And the scripture, foreseeing that God would justify the HEATHEN through FAITH, preached before the gospel unto ABRAHAM, saying, In thee shall ALL NATIONS be blessed" (Gal. 3:7-8). "And if ye be CHRIST'S (Bible followers), then are ye ABRAHAM'S SEED, and HEIRS according to the PROMISE" (to inherit the earth) (Gal. 3:29) (cp. Gen. 13:14-16; Matt. 5:5; Rom. 4:13). But "If ye were ABRAHAM'S children, ye would do the WORKS of ABRAHAM" (John 8:39) and OBEY God's LAW. "Neither let the son of the STRANGER (foreigner), that hath JOINED HIMSELF to the ETERNAL, speak, saying, The Eternal hath utterly SEPARATED me from his people (cp. Eph. 2:14) ... the sons of the STRANGER (foreigner), that JOIN themselves to the ETERNAL, to SERVE HIM, and to LOVE the name of the ETERNAL, to be his SERVANTS, every one that KEEPETH the SABBATH from polluting it, and taketh hold of my covenant, Even them will I bring to my holy mountain, and make them joyful in my house of prayer ... for mine house shall be called an house of prayer for ALL PEOPLES" (Isa. 56:3-7). Yes, "the STRANGER that dwelleth with you (as a tourist, importer, ambassador or student) shall be unto you as one BORN among you, and thou shalt LOVE him as thyself" (Lev. 19:34) if he OBEYS Israelite LAW. "ONE LAW shall be to him that is homeborn, and unto the STRANGER that sojourneth among you" (Ex. 12:49). The STRANGER doesn't get PREFERENTIAL treatment or INFERIOR treatment. "God is no respecter of persons; But in EVERY nation he that FEARETH him, and worketh RIGHTEOUSNESS is ACCEPTED with him" (Acts 10:34-35). In Revelation 7:9 we read about "a great multitude, which no man could number, of ALL NATIONS, and KINDREDS, and PEOPLES, and TONGUES, (that) stood before the throne, and before the Lamb, clothed with white robes, and palms in their hands." "For ye were STRANGERS (foreigners) in the land of Egypt" (Lev. 19:33-34) yourselves. "Turn ye from your evil ways, and KEEP my COMMANDMENTS and my STATUTES, according to all the law which I commanded your fathers" (2 Ki. 17:13). "Moreover concerning a STRANGER, that is not of thy people Israel, but cometh out of a far country for thy name's sake ... when he shall come and pray toward this house; Hear thou in heaven thy dwelling place, and do according to all that the STRANGER calleth to thee for: that ALL PEOPLE of the EARTH may know thy name, to fear thee, as do thy people Israel" (1 Ki. 8:41-43).
R. Alexanderi taught: "God saith to the Gentiles: 'Be not afraid to come near Me even if thou hast offended greatly. Have I not accepted in My fold RAHAB, the harlot, who married Joshua and had fine descendants? Have I not received JETHRO, the Pagan Priest, whose daughter married Moses, our greatest man? Have I not promised that the Messiah will descend from RUTH, the Moabitess?'" (Pesikta Rabbati 41:3).
Rabbi Meir said: "'Ye shall therefore keep My statutes and My ordinances, which, if a MAN do, he shall live by them' (Lev. 18:5). It is not said that priests, Levites and Israelites shall live by them, but 'a MAN'; therefore, even a GENTILE." (Sanhedrin 59a). Again it is said: 'This is the Torah of MANKIND, Lord God' (2 Sam. 7:19; not 'This is the Torah of priests, Levites and lay Israelites,' but 'of MANKIND.' Again, 'Open the gates that a RIGHTEOUS NATION may enter' (Psalm 118:20); not Israelites etcetera. The Torah was given in the desert, in a place NOBODY had a claim to, and in SEVENTY LANGUAGES, so that NO NATION could claim exclusive right to it (Mekilta on Exodus 19:2 & Seifre, Dent., Friedman, 14).
1. Afghanistan -Joktan, Esau, Ishmael, Uz, Israel