Circle one option A, B, C or D that best rewrites each of the following sentences:
Câu 1: " That's a lovely new dress, Jean" said her mother.
A. Jean's mother said she liked her dress.
B. Jean's mother complimented her on the lovely new dress.
C. Jean's mother wanted to buy a lovely new dress.
D. Jean's mother told her to buy that lovely new dress.
Câu 2: " A Cigarette? " he asked. " No, thanks, " I said.
A. He asked if I was smoking, and I denied at once.
B. He mentioned a cigarette, so I think him.
C. He asked for a cigarette, and I immediately refused.
D. He offered me a cigarette, but I promptly declined.
Câu 3: Unlike her friends, Jane prefers an independent life.
A. Jane doesn't like her friends because she prefers an independent life.
B. Her friends live in an independent life and Jane doesn't like it.
C. Jane doesn't like her friends to live in a dependent life.
D. Jane prefers an independent life but her friends do not.
Câu 4: Jack bought that second- hand car and he then recognized that he shouldn't have done that.
A. Jack wished that he has not bought that second- hand car.
B. Jack regretted to have bought that second- hand car.
C. Jack wished that he didn't buy that second - hand car.
D. Jack regretted having bought that second- hand car.
Câu 5: Because Sandra had informed us, we found the contract quite normal.
A. The contract was quite normal because of Sandra informed us.
B. Being informed by Sandra, the contract was quite normal.
C. But for Sandra's information, we couldn't find the contract quite normal.
D. We could find the contract quite normal thanks to Sandra's informing us.
Identify one underlined part that is incorrect in each of the following sentences by circling the corresponding letter A, B, C or D
Air pollution, together with littering, are causingmany problems in our large, industrial cities today.
With his father's guidance, Mozart began playing the clavier at the age of three and compose
A B C D
at the age of five.
Not having been to New York before, Susan found the city such attractive.
A B C D
School children in the same grade in Vietnamese schoolsare usually the same old.
A B C D
Read the passage then circle the best option A, B, C or D to complete the following questions or statements:
Since the dawn of time, people have found ways to communicate with one another. Smoke signals and tribal drums were some of the earliest forms of communication. Letters, carried by birds or by humans on foot or on horseback, made it possible for people to communicate larger amounts of information between two places. The telegram and telephone set the stage for more modern means of communication. With the invention of the cellular phone, communication itself has become mobile.
For you, a cell phone is probably just a device that you and your friends use to keep in touch with family and friends, take pictures, play games, or send text message. The definition of a cell phone is more specific: it is a hand- held wireless communication device that sends and receives signals by way of small special areas called cells.
Walkie - talkies, telephones and cell phones are duplex communication devices: They make it possible for two people to talk to each other. Cell phones and walkie- talkies are different from regular phones because they can be used in many different locations. A walkie- talkie is sometimes called a half- duplex communication device because only one person can talk at a time. A cell phone is a full- duplex device because it uses both frequencies at the same time. A walkie-talkie has only one channel. A cell phone has more than a thousand channels. A walkie- talkie can transmit and receive signals across a distance of about a mile. A cell phone can transmit and receive signals over hundreds of miles. In 1973, an electronic company called Motorola hired Martin Cooper to work on wireless communication. Motorola and Bell Laboratories ( now AT& T) were in a race to invent the first portable communication device. Martin Cooper won the race and became the inventor of the cell phone. On April 3, 1973, Cooper made the first cell phone call to his opponent at AT& T while walking down the streets of New York city. People on the sidewalks gazed at cooper in amazement. Cooper's phone was called A Motorola Dyna- Tac. It weighed a whopping 2.5 pounds ( as compared to today's cell phones that weigh as little as 3 or 4 ounces)
After the invention of his cell phone, Cooper began thinking of ways to make the cell phone available to the general public. After a decade, Motorola introduced the first cell phone for commercial use. The early cell phone and its service were both expensive. The cell phone itself cost about $ 3, 500. In 1977, AT & T constructed a cell phone system and tried it out in Chicago with over 2, 000 customers. In 1981, a second cellular phone system was started in the Washington, D.C and Baltimore area. It took nearly 37 years for cell phones to become available for general public use. Today, there are more than sixty million cell phone customers with cell phones producing over thirty billion dollars per years.
Câu 11: What is the main idea of the passage?
A. The increasing number of people using cell phone.
B. the difference between cell phones and telephones.
C. the history of a cell phone
D. how Cooper competed with AT& T.
Câu 12: What definition is true of a cell phone?
A. The first product of two famous corporation
B. A hand- held wireless communication device
C. Something we use just for playing games.
D. A version of walkie- talkie
Câu 13: What is wrong about a walkie- talkie?
A. It has one channel B. It was first designed in 1973.
C. It can be used within a distance of a mile. D. Only one person can talk at a time.
Câu 14: The word" duplex" is closest meaning to.....................
A. having two parts B. quick C. modern D. having defects
Câu 15: To whom did Cooper make his first cell phone call?
A. his assistant at Motorola B. a person on New York street.
C. a member of Bell Laboratories. D. the director of his company
Câu 16: How heavy is the first cell phone compared to today's cell phones?
Câu 17: When did Motorola introduce the first cell phones for commercial use?
A. in the same years when he first made a cell- phone call
B. in 1981
C. in 1983
D. in the same year when AT& T constructed a cell phone system.
Câu 18: When did AT& T widely start their cellular phone system?
A. in 2001 B. in 1977
C. in 1981 D. 37 years after their first design
Câu 19: What does the word" gazed" mean?
A. looked with admiration B. angrily looked C. glanced D. started conversation
Câu 20: The phrase " tried it out" refers to
A. made effort to sell the cell-phone B. reported on AT& T
C. tested the cell-phone system D. introduced the cell-phone system
Read the passage then circle the best option A, B, C or D to complete the following questions or statements: During the 19th century, women in the U. S organized and participated in a large number of reform movements, including movements to reorganize the prison system, improve education, ban the sale of alcohol, and most importantly to free slaves. Some women saw similarities in the social status of women and slaves. Women like Elizabeth Cady Stanton and Lucy Stone were feminists and abolitionists who supported the rights of both women and blacks. A number of male abolitionists, including William Lloyd Garrison and Wendell Phillips also supported the rights of women to speak and participate equally with men in anti- slavery activities. Probably more than any other movement, abolitionism offered women a previously denied entry into politics. They became involved primarily in order to better their living conditions and the conditions of others.
When the Civil war ended in 1865, the 14th, and 15th, Amendments to the Constitution adopted in 1868 and 1870 granted citizenship and suffrage to blacks but not to women. Discouraged but resolved, feminists influenced more and more women to demand the right to vote. In 1869, the Wyoming Territory had yielded to demands by feminists, but eastern states resisted more stubbornly than ever before. A woman's suffrage bill had been presented to every Congress since 1878 but it continually failed to pass until 1920, when the 19th Amendment granted women the right to vote.
Câu 21: What is the topic of the passage?
A. Women's suffrage B. Abolitionists
C. The Wyoming Territory. D. The 14th and 15th Amendment
Câu 22: What is not among the reformation movements of women?
A. reorganizing the prison B. passing the laws
C. freeing the slaves D. prohibiting the sale of alcohol
Câu 23: According to the passage, why did women become active in politics?
A. to improve the conditions of life that existed at the time.
B. to support Elizabeth Cady Stanton
C. to amend the Declaration of Independence
D. to be elected to public office.
Câu 24: The word" primarily" in the first paragraph is closest in meaning to .................
A. somewhat B. above all C. always D. finally
Câu 25: What had occurred shortly after the Civil War?
A. The eastern states resisted the end of the war.
B. Black people were granted the right to vote.
C. The Wyoming territory was admitted to the Union.
D. A women's suffrage bill was introduced in Congress.
Câu 26: The word " suffrage" could be best replaced by....................
A. citizenship B. right to vote C. pain D. freedom
Câu 27: What does the 19th Amendment guarantee?
A. Citizenship for women B. Citizenship for blacks
C. Voting rights for women D. Voting rights for blacks
Câu 28: When were women allowed to vote throughout the US?
A. After 1920 B. After 1878 C. After 1870 D. After 1866
Câu 29: What is wrong about William Lloyd Garrison?
A. He was living at the same time with Lucy Stone and Wendell Phillip.
Câu 30: What can not be inferred from the passage?
A. The blacks were given the right to vote before women.
B. The abolitionists believed in anti- slavery activities.
C. A women's suffrage bill had been discussed in the Congress for 50 years.
D. The eastern states did not like the idea of women's right to vote.
Read the passage and choose one word or phrase marked A, B, C or D that best fits each of the gaps:
CARE (Cooperative for American Relief Everywhere) was (31)______ in 1945 to help people after World War II. It (32)______ over one hundred millions food packages. Meanwhile, it started self-help programs. Today, it has development programs in thirty-seven countries.
CARE gives equipment and teaches people how to build water systems, roads, schools, houses and (33)______ centers. It also teaches people how to increase (34)______ on their farms, how to (35)______ areas, and how to start small village industries.
Doctor and nurses (36)______ to go remote villages. They provide health (37)______ for the villagers. They also teach them how to (38)______ their health. They train people to provide simple medical care.
CARE also provides food for about thirty million people each year and (39)______ of them are children. It gives special help when there is a flood, an earthquake, a (40)______, or a war.
Câu 31: A. established B. undergone C. organized D. deleted
Câu 32: A. distributed B. overused C. improved D. parachuted
Câu 33: A. healthful B. healthiness C. healthy D. a. health .
Câu 34: A. consumption B. collaboration C. contribution D. production
Câu 35: A. restrain B. reforest C. recover D. refresh
Câu 36: A. defend B. eliminate C. volunteer D. compete
Câu 37: A. beat B. care C. mention D. limitation
Câu 38: A. solve B. improve C. establish D. conserve
Câu 39: A. most B. either C. almost D. altogether
Câu 40: A. shower B. stream C. brook D. drought
Choose from the four options given ( marked A, B, C or D) one best answer to complete each of the following sentences.
Câu 41: Only by buying 5 items at the same time.............................................. .
A. can you get the reduction B. get reduction
C. can you got the reduction D. you can get the reduction
Câu 42: Intelligent as Martha was, .........................................
C. a nice weather D. nice weather is it
Choose one word marked A, B, C or D whose stress pattern is different from the others in each groups. Câu 76: A. engineering B. compulsory C. communicate D. philosophy
Câu 77: A. agree B. prepare C. Summer D. await
Câu 78: A. renovation B. responsible C. renovation D. regulation
Câu 79: A. recent B. answer C. fertile D. remove
Câu 80: A. advertise B. consumption C. influence D. history
--------------- Hết --------------