"What's coming next...."
Greater Latrobe School District offers a state of the art educational facility incorporating the best academic and technological initiatives currently available. We also understand the importance of providing well-rounded experiences that can help students on the path to career-readiness when they graduate from Greater Latrobe. We are proud to incoporporate our career-focused program, NEXT, to the abundance of opportunities we have for our students to utilize. Students have the opportunity to work with our NEXT Coordinator, who is a full time staff member available to students and can help explore career interests, develop a plan, and prepare for their next steps after high school. Students are given the opportunity to learn about five suggested career pathways:
These categories are broad, encompassing many different careers, and they are reflective of our curriculum and local economy. Our main focus is to intentionally get students to start thinking about their future. We start the conversation in Junior High, and we offer many opportunities through our curriculum and programs for students to explore each of these pathways. Starting in seventh grade, students are encouraged to take a career pathways elective course in 7th grade, as well as other electives in 8th and 9th grade that reflect each of the pathways, as shown below:
As they progress through junior high, they are given more opportunities to learn about different career paths. In 9th grade, all students are given the opportunity to visit a college or technical school based on the career pathway they are most interested in. This gives them an in-depth look at what education looks like at the college level or technical school level. Once in high school, students will begin to align the courses they take with their career pathway. In addition to their Core courses, students have many electives and Advanced Placement courses to choose from that are aligned with the five pathways. Students are also given the opportunity to apply for Dual Enrollment, in which certain courses are accepted by six local colleges we partner with for college credits, giving students a head start on their post secondary education. Students also participate in our Compass period, every Tuesday during Lunch and Learn, which is a curriculum designed to promote socio-emotional learning and life skills. Below is a visual of the opportunities students have in every grade:
Students are also encouraged to meet with their NEXT Coordinator to start exploring careers within the pathways they are interested in. The NEXT Coordinator will provide ample information regarding job data, educationor training requirements, job outlook, and more, as well as provide the students opportunities to observe and job shadow the occupations they are interested in most. Students are encouraged to complete at least one job shadow during their sophomore or junior year, and we hope to provide mentorship opportunities in their junior or senior year where they can be more involved in their selected career path.
During the 2018-2019 school year,
we had 150 students participate in job shadows and mentorships.
Our goal is to increase this number every year until we get to 100%
of our students participating in NEXT!
One of our most useful tools that we utilize is our career pathways software program, called pathwayMANAGER, which allows students to take a career assessment survey and build their individual profile based on their interests. They can select careers and schools that they are interested in, and they update this profile frequently during their Compass period, which is a curriculum designed to promote social-emotional learning and life skills. Students can also use the software to browse careers and relevant job data, provided by the U.S. Bureau of Labor and Statistics. They can also view current opportunities for job shadows and mentorships that are available to them, although we also work with students individually with specific requests and we can tailor an individualized plan to meet their unique interests.
Our NEXT program is successful because of our community partners - local businesses, industries, and organizations that work with us and our students to develop these unique and educational career experiences.
In addition, we also partner with the Westmoreland County Forum for Workforce Development, the Westmoreland County Chamber of Commerce, and the Latrobe-Laurel Valley Regional Chamber of Commerce to engage students and advocate for local businesses and industries to meet the needs of our regional economy. We currently work with the following partners:
Greater Latrobe High School has the goal of involving all tenth and eleventh grade student in a job shadow experience and all eleventh and twelve grade students in a mentorship. We need your help in that there are 300+ students per grade! We want students thinking and having conversations about what they want to do after high school. In addition, we want students connecting their future goals to classroom experiences. If you are interested in becoming a community partner, please use the links below. If you have any questions - please contact email@example.com for more information.
Please use the links below to proceed: