Thanks to you, $26,000 has been donated to support manatees!
Save the Manatee Club
Save the Manatee Club is an award-winning national nonprofit and membership-based organization established in 1981 by renowned singer/songwriter, Jimmy Buffett, and former U.S. Senator, Bob Graham. Their mission is to protect manatees and their aquatic habitat for future generations, and their objective is the recovery and protection of manatees and their ecosystems throughout the world.
Mote Marine Laboratory
Mote is an independent, nonprofit marine research institution committed to the belief that the conservation and sustainable use of our oceans begins with research and education. Some of the issues their marine research focuses on includes understanding the population dynamics of manatees, dolphins, sea turtles, sharks and coral reefs and on conservation and restoration efforts related to these species and ecosystems.
Why We Care
Human activities are harming manatees, and only our compassion and action can protect them.
Manatees are Florida’s official state marine mammal. They are listed as threatened at the federal level by the U.S. Fish & Wildlife Service and at the state level by the Florida Fish & Wildlife Conservation Commission (FWC). Their listing status is largely due to human activity. Since record-keeping began in 1974, more than 41% of manatee deaths were identified as human-related – and almost 34% were due to watercraft collisions (the largest known cause of manatee deaths). With increased awareness, education, regulations, and enforcement, manatee deaths caused by humans could be substantially reduced, and the eventual recovery of the species could be realized.
The FWC reported a preliminary count of 6,620 manatees in Florida waters. These “gentle giants” are known for their peaceful disposition and are about 10 feet long, weighing up to 1,200 pounds. Manatees are challenged by changing breeding and feeding habitats, and are very susceptible to cold weather. Injuries from boaters are also very common.
How You Can Support the Cause
Issues Require Action
Help Support Mote
From protecting endangered and threatened species, to rebuilding damaged reefs, to finding ways to mitigate the effects of climate change on marine life, your support preserves our most precious resources for future generations.