|Chestnut-fronted Macaw or Severe Macaw (Ara severa) |
(Photo credit: Wikipedia)
Both sexes are monomorphic, meaning they are identical in appearance. A DNA test should be carried out to identify the gender. Severes are mostly green in color, with a blue crown, brown forehead band and chin. The flight feathers are blue and the tail has a red-dark chestnut underside. The carpal edges are red and the iris in sexually mature birds is orange.
As Companion Pets
The Severe Macaw is a lot like the large macaws when it comes to intelligence and its child-like personality. They play like conures.
They are very social, playful, affectionate and generally enjoy being petted. They are quite vocal and like climbing and hanging upside down. Severe Macaws are quite smart and many owners have successfully toilet trained their bird.
Severes need suitable items for chewing on as they may be destructive if bored. They tend to also enjoy ropes to swing on. Don't provide toys designed for small birds as these are not strong enough to handle a Severe's beak. Like many birds, they love baths and showers.
If you want a Severe Macaw as a companion bird, it is best to acquire a hand-reared individual. If well socialized at a young age, Severes tend to quite sociable and not a one person bird, however, they will have a favorite person. Like all parrots, they need a quality time out of their cage every day.
Diet and Health
Macaws have a higher fat requirement compared to other species of parrots. High level of fat (usually in the form of nuts) should also be accompanied with an adequate level of dietary protein if the fat is to be metabolized properly.
A good Severe Macaw diet consists of seed, nuts, vegetables, fruits, and commercial parrot pellets.
Their lifespan is listed from anywhere between 30 to 80 years old, but it is generally considered to be 40 years.
* There are no established mutations of this species. However, a color has come up in one female individual, labeled as 'red pied'. The bird has not reproduced yet.
* Severe Macaws are the only mini-macaw to have feather lines on the bare patches on its face.