Doctor insights on:
National Programmes Related To Child Health And Welfare
That : That is very dependent upon the individual situation for that child. Any time that a family can give the patient a loving, stable home and the services they require will be beneficial for that child. That is wonderful that you are looking into providing that care. ...Read moreSee 1 more doctor answer
Global health organisation warns families to prepare emergency family plan: what medicine and supplies.?
Six basic supplies: 1 water mke sure you have water for basic needs for 3 days 2 food non perishable for st least 3 days 3 first aid and supplies 4 clothing and beddings appropriate 5 tools and special items like flash lights and fresh batteries 6 battery powered communication devices and dont forget copies of important documents like drivers licence, passports. Prescription medicines and over the counter meds. ...Read more
Confusing question: Why would physicians based in the US have any knowledge of the Indian health system ?Try a site based in your country. ...Read more
Do societal problems like abortion, divorce, ban of child discipline and others contribute to violence in the nation?
Do live-in mental institutions help children who are mental retarded more than living at home and going to public school?
Nearly all gone: Separate institutions for mentally retarded (or seriously mentally ill) individuals have nearly vanished in the U.S. Those with mr have quite different needs, depending on the severity of delay. People with mild delays live at home as children and may live indpendently as adults. Adults with severe mr typically live in group homes. Life quality depends on quality of services, not location. ...Read moreSee 1 more doctor answer
I want to get info on the world health organization or any other un agency involved in providing health care?
Global health organisation warn families to prepare emergency family plan with medicine and supplies.?
Six basic supplies: 1 water mke sure you have water for basic needs for 3 days 2 food non perishable for st least 3 days 3 first aid and supplies 4 clothing and beddings appropriate 5 tools and special items like flash lights and fresh batteries 6 battery powered communication devices and dont forget copies of important documents like drivers licence, passports., list of phone numbers prescription medicines. ...Read more
WHO and health: Great question. Let's do 2nd opinion and discuss in detail. ...Read more
Everyone wins: The program matches individuals with elderly, sometimes nursing home residents for the mutual benefit of both the adoptee and adopter. Both get the joy that comes from a meaningful relationship with someone from another generation. A beautiful Swedish film years ago illustrated this "Kannst du pfeifen, Johannes" in which a child adopted a man in a nursing home telling him he was his grandson. ...Read moreSee 1 more doctor answer
What constitutes interference of health care? Facility wants to evict elderly resident due to visits from friend allegedly interfering with her care.
The answer: is a LEGAL one NOT a "medical" one! 'Interfering" needs definition and more information needed to define! Forcing the RESIDENT out does NOT seem "fair"!! Hope this helps! Dr Z ...Read more
Are mental health services, dental and normal gp visits free and covered by the nhs? Where can I find information about health services?
Not increasing: I don't know about uk, but in the us there has been an overall decrease in mental hospitals over the past 30 years. There is also a sparsity of outpatient mental health facilities all over the us. Unfortunately, there is an under supply of psychiatrists and other mental health providers. ...Read more
Sticky issue: This is a huge question. On one hand, online records can be transmitted quickly when medically needed. This could save a life. On the other hand, this quick transmission can also allow breaches of privacy that are potentially painful, embarrassing, and invasive. Balancing these things is precarious! electronic records seems to be where we're going, so we need safeguards to do it well. ...Read moreSee 1 more doctor answer
Are there any programs in u.S. To help young adult aspbergers patients master skills for healthy living? Health, socialization, self care, work, etc?
Certainly no help: Whether or not this constitutes mental abuse is probably a matter of degree and definition. The obvious question is why this conversation was begun in the presence of the children, and how it degenerated into an argument. Neither party appears to be acting like thoughtful adults, and the children will certainly not benefit from observing and then potentially copying this behavior. ...Read more
Please explain which developments occurred with mental health institutions that helped mental health patients?
Mental Health: Are you asking a historical question?Get a more detailed answer ›
Most attention is on the govt role to improve health care, but what can we individuals do to improve health care?
Be healthy!: The most important thing we can do to improve healthcare it to be healthy. Eating clean, exercising daily, avoiding excesses, avoiding smoking and tanning, and maintaining a healthy weight and body fat would eliminate billions from healthcare costs if everyone would subscribe to these basic ideas, improving hypertension, diabetes, hypercholesterolemia... Education of good lifestyle is crucial. ...Read more
Stress, Depression..: Self-Esteem...In today's culture so much rides on our financial ability-our own self image, how other's see us, our ability to make ends meet, keep our homes and our lifestyles. The truth is, without money to pay the bills, the physical and mental stress can take an enormous toll, causing anxiety, depression and even lowered immunity to physical ailments.Best measure of wealth:relationships ...Read more
- Talk to a doctor live online for free
- Maternal and child health programme
- National health
- Work related health issues
- Ask a doctor a question free online
- Health issues related to mold
- Diet related health problems
- Questions related to health dieseases
- Research article related to child development
- Talk to a pediatrician online