Ignoring hearing loss is riskier than you might think
People with untreated hearing loss are at a higher risk of being dependent on help from other people in their daily lives. That is the stark warning of a new study on hearing loss, presented to European Union (EU) lawmakers on March 6, 2018.
More than 466 million people worldwide live with disabling hearing loss, according to the World Health Organization. But only around one in three people living in the EU, for example, who could benefit from hearing aids decide to wear them. And the number of people with hearing loss will increase, not only because we are living longer than previous generations but also because many of us are exposed to noise in our daily lives. Untreated hearing loss carries increased health risks related to hearing loss itself as well as associated medical conditions such as depression and cognitive decline.
Same chance of staying independent as people with normal hearing
In the study, Neuropsychologist and Epidemiologist Professor Hélène Amieva finds that people with hearing loss who use hearing aids have the same chance of staying independent as people with normal hearing.*
People living with hearing loss improve their health and increase their quality of life simply by wearing hearing aids. Thankfully, modern hearing aids are not the cumbersome medical devices that some people still believe them to be. They range from ultra-tiny hearing aids hidden inside your ear where no one notices them to sleek and elegant devices hidden behind your ear that also double-up as clever wireless headphones to stream phone calls, music and TV sound directly into your ears.
New Signia hearing aids give you back the sound that nature intended
Now you can improve your hearing to a remarkable new level and preserve the familiar sound of your natural own voice – thanks to the new range of Signia hearing aids with Own Voice Processing (OVP™). These state-of-the-art hearing solutions replicate the natural experience of hearing everything in harmony.
Our latest innovation, Signia Pure Charge&Go hearing aids, provides a natural sounding own voice with convenient rechargeability and direct streaming via Bluetooth. True to its name, Pure Charge&Go can be charged up while you sleep so that it is always ready to go when you are. The hearing aids come with a small, highly reliable portable charger instead of conventional batteries. Simply place the hearing aids into the charger and they start filling up with power automatically. When you take them out, they turn on automatically so you can wear them straight away. Plus our myControl App provides discreet remote control on your smartphone, while our myHearing App serves as the hearing care professional in your pocket to help you get used to your hearing aids in no time at all.
In an effort to combat the epidemic of untreated hearing loss, Signia provides a wide range of hearing solutions to suit your personal hearing needs and help you maintain your independence. For more information, please visit our website. There you will also find our quick and easy hearing test and our store locator to find a hearing care professional near you.
* Study published in the Journal of Gerontology: Medical Sciences, based on data from 3,777 individuals aged 65 and older who were followed over a 25-year period. Death, Depression, Disability, and Dementia Associated with Self-reported Hearing Problems: A 25-Year Study, by Hélène Amieva, PhD, Camille Ouvrard, PhD, Céline Meillon, MSc, Laetitia Rullier, PhD, and Jean-François Dartigues, MD, PhD, was The Journal of Gerontology in January 2018 (J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci, 2018, Vol. 00, No. 00, 1–7)