Ever since its discovery in 1998, various health organizations and universities created scenarios in which the Nipah virus had been used as a bio-weapon. The outcome in all exercises was the death of thousands or millions of people. According to some recent news, Canada sends lethal viruses to China.
The Nipah virus infection is a viral infection caused by the Nipah virus. The symptoms of this infection can fluctuate from none to fever, cough, headache, shortness of breath, and confusion. Worst case scenario, it can lead to coma. The virus is spread by direct contact between people and also between animals, especially bats and sick pigs, and humans. There is no vaccine or treatment for this virus.
Taking all these things into account, it results that this type of virus that is a species of the genus henipavirus is something researchers and people alike have to be concerned about, mainly because it was discovered that the virus has the potential to create an endemic worldwide. So one question arises: why did Canada send samples of the henipavirus and Ebola to China?
Canada Reportedly Sends Lethal Viruses To China
Let’s take all the information we have into account. Firstly, in March, Canada was exposed to have sent samples of a variety of lethal viruses to China. Secondly, China is long believed to have a secret program that deals with biological warfare (BW).
Canada explained that their act was nothing more than sustaining international public-health research. China vehemently negates the secret biological warfare program. Interested parties are having doubts and call into question the impeachment of a prominent researcher at the Winnipeg-based NML, together with her team, husband and another biologist.
China is known for having loose ethics when it comes to bio-science and gene-editing. Therefore it is not hard to also suspect them of BW. What’s more, during the years, more and more proof and declarations arise that China is lying about the BW programs. Many believe, with good reason that China is the leader in toxin ‘threats.’ This idea also comes after China divulged that the Academy of Military Medical Sciences created an Ebola drug, but refused to give further details.