Poly Sheeting for Greenhouses
Factors to consider when choosing a greenhouse film:
Film Lifetime: Depends on where the film will be used and film characteristics such as UV-stabilizers and antioxidants that protect from the harmful effect of UV light and heat.
Thermic Effect: Special additions can absorb the Infra-Red radiation to provide protection from frost and low temperature.
Disease Control Effect: Special disease control films can reduce the use of pesticidesand work with other parameters, such as temperature and humidity, to help control diseases when used in conjunction with other suitable methods.
“Cooling Effect”: Special types of films can reflect and/or absorb the Near Infra-Red (NIR) Radiation, the part of solar spectrum carrying most of the heat entering a greenhouse in day-time to reduce the heat inside the greenhouse during the day. In general, the higher the outside temperature, the larger is the temperature difference achieved by use of “cooling” films.
Anti-Mist Effect: A special anti-mist function reduces or prevents the formation of mist (fog) that is sometimes formed during dusk and dawn.
Anti-Drip Effect: Droplets formed at the inside surface of greenhouse films due to water-condensation have negative consequences on plant quality and growth, as they reduce light-transmission by 15-30% and increase the incidence of certain diseases. “Anti-dripping” films that contain special additives eliminate droplets and form instead a continuous thin layer of water running down the sides.
Light Diffusion: Reduces shadows, which ensures more uniform distribution of light in the greenhouse so that it reaches even the lower parts of the plants. Additionally, it prevents burnings and offers a moderate cooling effect.
Standard widths are:
Tubes: 12′ 14′ 16′ 18′ 20′ 21′ 24′
Sheets: 12′ 14′ 16′ 18′ 20′ 21′ 24′ 28′ 32′ 36′ 40′ 42′ 48′
Standard Lengths: 100′ 110′ 150′
Custom lengths: in 5′ increments. Contact your local office for availability
Depending on the additives, most films are available .03 mil, .04 mil or .06 mil in white or clear
Resources & Articles
Which Basket fits My Tree Spade?
This guide helps you determine which wire basket will fit your specific tree spade.Read More
How to Harvest Shade Trees for Replanting
When harvesting shade trees you can increase the chances of a tree surviving transport by using the proper techniques. In this article we will show you how!Read More