5 Most Common Metabolic Disorders and How to Fight Them
Metabolic disorders are commonly inherited from a person’s parents, and affect the state and function of the metabolism.
Our metabolism is a dynamic array of chemical processes that help maintain equilibrium, energy, and life. This, simply put, deals with enzymes that break down chemicals, food, and other substances that our bodies need. Additionally, our metabolism eliminates elements of those substances that we no longer need.
When enzymes or hormones are lacking or aren’t working properly, we experience metabolic disorders. The list of these disorders is long, but many are rare and caused by genetic defects.
How to Fight the Most Common Metabolic Disorders
We’re going to discuss the 5 most common disorders and how to fight them. Let’s get started:
1. Type 1 Diabetes
Type 1 and Type 2 diabetes are two of the most common metabolic disorders. The problem with Type 1 diabetes lies in the pancreas, where cells that produce insulin are killed.
Insulin is used in the body to break down glucose. Type 1 diabetes, then, results in an excess of blood sugar which can cause a wealth of serious health problems.
The most common treatment of this disorder is a daily intake of insulin and close monitoring of one’s blood pressure.
2. Type 2 Diabetes
Type 2 diabetes occurs when a person’s body can’t process the insulin it does have. So, instead of a lack of insulin, there is an inability to process insulin.
The body then takes energy sources from elsewhere, and that imbalance can cause very serious complications. The most common treatment for Type 2 diabetes is a carefully controlled diet, exercise, and sometimes insulin if there are additional complications.
3. Familial Hypercholesterolemia
This disorder is inherited and prevents the body from processing bad cholesterol correctly. This means that excess cholesterol can clog arteries and lead to fatal heart disease.
The most common treatments of Familial Hypercholesterolemia are reducing saturated fat intake, consuming more soluble fiber, exercise, and weight management.
Healthy lifestyle choices and supplement options like OxyShred can help get you to a point where your metabolism is operating within a normal range.
4. Gaucher’s Disease
Gaucher’s Disease is a genetic disease that prevents a person to break down fats that build in the bone marrow, liver, and spleen. The result is extreme pain, bone deficiencies, and sometimes death.
The best-known treatment for this is enzyme replacement therapy, seeing as the condition is affected less by lifestyle habits and more by the metabolic system itself.
5. Hereditary Hemochromatosis
This condition is caused by an inability to properly dispose of excess iron. Consequently, excess iron gets distributed to various organs, leading to cancer, cirrhosis of the liver, diabetes, and more.
Treatment for hereditary hemochromatosis requires that a person have varying amounts of blood removed from their body regularly.
Want to Know More?
There’s a lot to learn about metabolic disorders. If you have a metabolic disorder or want to know how to prevent one, it’s best to take in as much information as you can.
Explore the rest of our site to learn more about these issues and the lifestyle changes you can make to prevent them.