Nowadays most of the dairies all over India gather the milk from H.F. cow as well as Desi cow. But both of the cows give different kinds of milk. The H.F. cows are not considered as the cows as they are initially a breed of wild animals named as URUS. But, in Germany, they are known as AUROCHS.
Milk is a more excellent source of protein. Well, there are two main proteins available, like Whey and Casein. The casein protein makes up of 80% protein in the milk of cow. The subtype of protein is the alpha and beta-casein protein. In India, 95% of milk is produced by H.F. and Desi cows.
H.F. cow produces more milk as compared to the Desi cows. But the recent research shows that the Desi cows milk is healthier as well as better than H.F. cows as Desi cows produce milk which has A2 types protein. Both the regular cow as well as desi cow produces the milk, but the main thing is that the juice of desi cow is offered without the use of chemicals, antibiotics, and hormones.
Why Desi Cow milk?
Desi cows are the only cows in the world whose products are created for the social and spiritual betterment of human beings since ancient times.
But with the increase in the demand for cow milk, there has been a rise in the production of H.F. cow milk as well as Desi Cow milk.
Well, there are various benefits among Desi cows and H.F. cows which can easily be monitored easily, and both the cows categorized into Indian and European species. The Indian species or desi cows includes Gir cow, Sahiwal, Red Sindhi, Rathi, and Kankrej. In India, cattle farming are mainly done not only for producing cow products but also due to the spiritual importance of the cows.
The H.F. cows are different breed cows, which includes the cattle, namely Jersey cow, Holstein Friesian, Murray, Angus, and Danish Red.
Presently, cattle farming has become the first part of the agriculture and both Desi cows, as well as H.F. cows, evolved differently.
The most popular H.F. cows are Jersey cows and Ayrshire cows. But not like Desi Cows, H.F. cow’s milk nutrition is not healthier. But the only value of H.F. cow is the quantity of milk they produce. Through various instances as well as research, Desi cows are more valuable than H.F. cows.
So, let us briefly discuss the differences between H.F. cow and Desi cow.
H.F. cows have mostly sought breeds. The H.F. cows are native of the Netherlands and mainly known as highest producers of milk. The most sought Desi cow includes Gir and Sahiwal. Both Sahiwal and Gir are not only famous for its milk nutrition value, but they are also renowned for their adaptability and hardiness. Sahiwal and Gir Desi cows are from harsh and dry environment.
Difference Among H.F. and Desi Cows
Desi Cow: The milk of Desi cow contains amino acid such as proline mixed with some other amino acid named Isoleucine which is better for fighting various diseases such as joint pain, asthma, obesity, mental disordered, etc.
H.F. Cow: The milk of H.F. cow contains harmful or poisonous chemicals names casomorphine, and due to this chemical, it is responsible for some diseases named asthma, diabetes, cancer and heart disease.
A1 and A2 milk
Desi Cow: Well, there is not any categorization or standardization of milk in India. Most of the individuals do not know that in foreign countries, cow milk categorized as A1 milk and A2 milk. The milk produced by desi cow is A2 milk, and it is considered better for health.
H.F. Cow: The milk of H.F. cow is known as A1 milk. You will be surprised to know that the milk of H.F. cow in European countries is not consumed directly as it can cause some severe health issues for a long time.
Desi Cows: The desi cow breeds have the availability of hump on their shoulders, which is widely known to absorb Vitamin D from rays of sun and release in their milk. It is the reason. Desi cow contains Vitamin D in their milk.
H.F. Cows: The H.F. cows of the different breed do not have any availability of hump on their shoulders available.
Desi Cow: The milk of Desi cow contains a high level of Omega 3, which can clean the cholesterol from the blood vessel. Also, Omega-3 helps in disposing bad cholesterol from the body and increase good cholesterol level.
H.F. Cows: The H.F. cows do not have any positive effect on the cholesterol. On the other side, it is known to increase bad cholesterol in the blood vessels.
Desi Cows: The desi cows maintain them, and they are amusing enough not to sit at places which are not clean. The desi cows can adapt themselves as per the climate and withstand extreme weather condition.
H.F. Cows: The H.F. cows are highly known to be lazy as well as they are prone to diseases. They can get infected easily and are not hygienic.
Desi Cow: The Desi cows have high therapeutic value. This cow has cerebrosides present in milk that increases brainpower, and that enhances body immunity and prevent the human body from harmful radiations, Not just A2 milk of Desi cow but also other dairy products produced by it has medicinal properties. The products produced by Desi Cows are utilized in Punchgavya Chikitsa to heal various harmful diseases.
H.F. Cows: The H.F. cows milk, urine, and dung does not contain any medicinal properties.
Desi Cows: For organic farming, desi cow dung is utilized.
H.F. Cows: H.F. cows dung are not nutritious so does not use for organic farming.
Desi Cows: The desi cows have a hump on their shoulders. Also, these Desi cows can reach any part of their body by the help of their tongue and tail. The Desi cows loose skin can get free from all the flies by shaking that specific body part.
H.F. Cows: The different breed cows, i.e. H.F. cows, do not have the presence of hump on their back. Also, they do have loose skin, thus cannot get free from the flies.
Desi Cows: The desi cows are from Bos Indicus family
H.F. Cows: Foreign breed cows, i.e. H.F. cows are from Bos Taurus family
Desi Cows: Desi Indian cows can store the energy of the sun through Suryaketinadi (hump) and transfer this energy to their dung, urine, and milk
H.F. Cows: These cows desire to keep themselves away from the sun.
Desi Cows: The A2 milk produced by Desi cows can provide overall diets such as carbohydrates, fats, micro, and macro minerals.
H.F. Cows: These kinds of cows produce A1 milk, which has A1 beta-casein protein which cannot provide any nutrition to the human body.
Desi Cows: The dung and urine of the desi cows are used in pest control
H.F. Cows: The urine or dung of H.F. cows is not cleaned and cannot be used for pest control.
Crucial Features of Desi Cow
The desi cows have the presence of hump on their shoulders, has long ears, and skin gets to hang on the neck. The desi Indian breeds have suryaketu nerve on their back due to this they can absorb medicinal value. Due to this reason, they can make dung, urine, and milk more nourishing. Moreover, they can shake their stomach without shaking any other part of their body. Also, they can withstand extreme climate condition, whether it is cold, hot or raining. Also, they can deliver about 15 to 20 calves throughout their life. Moreover, they can walk more kilometers and work hard in any climate conditions. Throughout the lifespan of Desi cows, they can feed around thousands of individuals and single desi cow is enough for doing organic farming.
Dissimilarity among A1 and A2 Milk
As above we have seen the difference among Desi Cows and H.F. Cows which produces A2 and A1 milk respectively. Now, I will discuss the differences between A1 milk and A2 milk produced by both of the cows. A1 milk and A2 milk is most consumed and available milk produced by the cow. The only significant difference among both A1 and A2 milk is beta-casein. A1 milk produces A1 beta-casein protein, while A2 milk produces A2 beta-casein protein, which is healthier. Also, the desi cow breeds that produce A2 milk contains less BCM-7 as compared to the H.F. cows, which contain BCM-7 protein more.
Various studies show that A1 milk produces by H.F. cows is toxic for human health, and the A2 milk provides by Desi cows are healthier for the health of humans. The individuals who consume A1 milk has higher chances of infected with Type-1 diabetes, but drinking A2 milk helps individuals to cure this diabetes and offers more nutrition.
The milk produced by the cows is always part of the diet of Indians. But there are two kinds of cows, i.e. Desi Cows and H.F. cows. The H.F. cow produces A1 milk, which is highly toxic for health, but Desi cow produces A2 milk, which is healthier for the body. The desi cow A2 milk plays a highly significant role in the health of humans and provides other various health advantages. Thus, A2 milk is safe as well as healthy. Also, it is suitable for health, and along with it, they offer multiple products with various socioeconomic advantages to individuals at both national and global level. So, it is better to consume A2 milk rather than A1 milk.
If you know any more differences about Desi Cows and H.F. cows then, please let us know through your comments below.