History of improved District Mau from the famous and industrial vision of eastern Uttar Pradesh is quite old. Ramayana and Mahabharata cultural and archaeological remains are found every where in the terrain. Although in this direction scientific manner they have not made an effort to research and excavation, but the geographical and historical evidence and confirmed by Kivandtion. It is said that Maharaj Tretayug was Tpobhumi of saints at this location Dasaratha’s reign. Similar lacerated wound etc. poet ashore Maharishi ashram of Valmiki. It is undeniable that one visit to the first night on Tamsa coast Sri Ramachandra G had rested. Mau known archival history is about 1500 years old, when the whole area was thick dense forest. Nearby flowing river here were wild and aborigines inhabit. Here is considered the oldest inhabitants nuts. The area was ruled by them.
In this area thousands of years ago settled on Tamsa coast around the year 1028 saw the introduction of Baba Malik Tahir. He was a Sufi saint and his brother came here with a detachment of troops with Malik Qasim. These people then Hukmra Syed Shalar Muud Ghazi was sent here to take over the area. Ghazi in capturing other parts of the country Barabanki came to Satrik and from there he was sent to military Tukdihya to capture different parts.
In those days was ruled Mau nuts in this field. The occupation Mau nuts and seeds Malik brothers fierce battle, Mau nuts was breaking (killed) and the area was breaking the Mau nuts which are breaking maunath in due course of time. From the naming of maunath break too many ideas. Some scholars have considered it to be a corruption of the Sanskrit word ‘Peacock’, some consider it to be the voice of Turkey language.’Mou’ word means stop or camp in Turkey. There are many places of Mau name, but with them not engaged local adjective like Phaphamau, Mau Aima jazz Mau, maunath breaking etc.
Having dominated the territory Baba Malik Tahir made today where check her answers your center gang known as Malik Tahirpura today. Similarly, the population in the name of Casimpura the south of his brother Malik Qasim check out. Malik joined Tahir army non-commissioned officer soldiers are present in some-populated areas on their name at some distance, which is still as Husanpura, Bulakipura, Mirjahadipura, Casimpura, Mohsinpura, Nyaj Muhammdpura, Ptantola, etc. localities. After the arrival of Malik brothers region has gradually moved slowly settled.
After the Mauryan and Gupta kings Deep Nirvana Mughal rule this place Jaunpur was under the state. In the East 1540-1545 between the then king twice arrival of Sher Shah Suri in this area. Sher Shah lived in Surrey shrine was Sufi saint came from Mirashah. Her daughter was living in the presence of Mahabano Mirashah. Mau town of Old Bridge which was Dharashahi flood of 1956, was built by Sher Shah Suri. Points out that due to the delay in bridge construction is built from Peshawar by Sher Shah Suri to Kolkata historic route (Grant coin Road) could not pass through here.
In 1629 the region during the reign of Mughal emperor Shah Jahan had her daughter jahanara. The foundation of the present city was only during the reign of jahanara. Jahanara Begum was brought here built hotels and the royal mosque in Katra and transformed it into a military camp for his safety. Army remnants of barracks were created to live exists to this day. Jahanara had built underground tunnel below 16 to 17 feet in royal Katra area, Whose remains are found every where during the digging in the ground today. Last year was been made boring of wells at the two locations of the Katra area of the local municipality that fell by 17-18 feet. In Katare was the residence of the royal family in the south-west part of the royal chambers. Here the remains of Imam food was far past. Loaded on logistical mules of the royal family were brought here. They bring those generations that their living by working in the transportation today is inhabited here and mules. Workers, artisans and other professionals working with the Mughal family also came, Who gave birth to weave art here. People associated with handloom weaving spinning the coming manned Gorakhpur here. Two Parish Ktuapura for their living built east and west Ktuapura. Points out that the brother’s name used to populate a new Parish Aurangabad by Begum Jahanara named after Aurangzeb and maunath bhanjan been Jhaannabad his name, but the name was not popular and maunath bhanjan been gradual progress.
It is noteworthy that jahanara became queen when he came here there was undergoing construction people found that workers with them here, many of them artisans and they had those main square cloth that populate the city permanently. Here come the most artisan Iranian, Afghan or Turkish origin. Most Mau local language which is considered nirali his manner, the words are found in Persian, Turkish and Iranian languages, which have now lost their true meaning.
Atrtarhvin separated by rule began in Jaunpur century the land was given to the king Ajmshah to Azamgarh. Ajmshah and Azmat Shah were two brothers. Ajmshah built by Ajmtgdh the Azamgarh Azmat Shah.
In 1801, in the middle of the Azamgarh and maunath bhanjan East India Company and was involved in Gorakhpur district. In Azamgarh in 1932 was made independent district after independence lasted until 1988. Former District received the most revenue in Azamgarh District was the Mau, but had negligible effort of its development. District headquarters was facing immense inconvenience to the people due to the 45 0 0 m from here. At the Mau for many years sought to create districts that ultimately completed on 19 November, 1988 and was created as a separate district in the state of map Mau.
Since the formation of the new district in 1988. The terrain of the rejuvenation and it is moving towards the district Nintr progress.
Mr. kalpnath rai, former MP had played an important role in the creation of Mau district.