Most of us know that aerobic sports activities like walking, cycling, and swimming can help keep our heart healthy. However, researchers at the University of Iowa have found that certain anaerobic activities may be equally important and can reduce the chances of a heart attack. In addition, one of the conclusions of the study is that you’ll need to do this activity for only one hour a week to prevent fatal medical problems in the cardiovascular systems. Read on and discover the risk factors for heart disease, understand how you can identify them, and of course, know the anaerobic activity that will help you keep your heart healthy.
There are quite a few diseases that affect the heart and blood vessels leading to it, and their causes are divided in two. Non-changeable risk factors and risk factors that can be changed. The risk factors that can’t be changed can be found in age, sex and heredity - when older age increases the risk of disease, and morbidity rate is higher among men and children whose parents suffered from early-onset heart disease. On the other hand, there are a number of risk factors that can be judged and paid attention to such as smoking, hypertension, diabetes, poor nutrition, obesity, lack of exercise and stress. Therefore, if you fall into one of the categories of potentially distressing factors, it is very important to start making necessary changes to your lifestyle.
It is also important that you learn to recognize whether you or someone close to you is having a heart attack; Chest pain, chronic fatigue, shortness of breath, pain in the arm and jaw, dizziness, pallor, nausea, vomiting, and excessive sweating - if you experience any of the obvious symptoms listed above, you should contact your family doctor or hospital as soon as possible. Whether you know this or not, it is worth understanding that heart disease is the number one cause of death worldwide, making it a common topic of debate. As a result, hundreds of studies are conducted on it, one of which has turned out to be quite encouraging.
In a study conducted at the University of Iowa and published in the medical journal "Medicine and Science in Sports and Exercise," researchers analyzed the health, heart function, and training habits of more than 13,000 different adults. During the analysis of these characteristics in each of the subjects, the researchers chose to focus on three health problems: heart attack, stroke and non-fatal events in the vascular and cardiac systems. During the study, the researchers found that people who performed frequent anaerobic exercises suffered less from one of the problems mentioned above. In fact, the researchers came to the conclusion that anaerobic exercise, such as weightlifting for about an hour once a week, could reduce the risk of a heart attack or stroke by 40% to 70%! Dr. Duck-chul Lee, a professor of kinesiology - the study of the human body and animal movement - points out that many people make the mistake of thinking they should spend a lot of time weight training, but in fact, performing two daily weightlifting exercises lasting less than five minutes may be very efficient.
The surprising and fascinating research findings suggest that in order to reduce the risk of heart disease, you don’t have to meet the recommended training guidelines of 30 minutes a day, five days a week. Dr. Lee is encouraged by the results of the study but argues that the million-dollar question here is whether people will decide to engage in anaerobic exercises, such as regularly lifting weights continuously and stick to it for a while. It's true that aerobic exercise is easier to integrate into today's lifestyle however it is no less important to find ways to integrate anaerobic activities as well. Daytime activities such as gardening, lifting heavy shopping bags, and more, are considered anaerobic activity, however, keep in mind that they should be done at least once a week and for one consecutive hour.
The new study, which revealed that anaerobic exercise of weightlifting for about an hour a week can reduce the chance of various heart diseases, encourages and gives immediate motivation. Take advantage of the boost you've just received from the results of this study and add some weight training exercises to your fitness routine to tone your body or simple household weight training to keep your heart healthy. In addition, it is important that you understand how you can stop a heart attack in the last few seconds and share the important information that you have read about it with your friends and family so that they too can keep their heart healthy.