Day after day your body feels an influence of numerous environmental factors, which can significantly change its functioning. Owing to integrity and adaptive mechanisms, your organism can overcome high amount of diseases and infections.
You may not even know that something goes wrong inside your body. But is it so good, as it seems? In short, not always. In fact, wide variety of dangerous and even potentially life-threatening disorders may exist in the body, without causing any specific symptoms.
We don't pay much attention on the headache (if it doesn't disturb performance of our daily tasks), muscle aches or lack of energy. That's why many diseases get diagnosed on the late stages, when it can be difficult enough to find appropriate treatment.
READ MORE: 5 things every woman should do in her 40's
Specialists say that it’s even sometimes possible to avoid surgical intervention, if detecting disorder on the early stage, when it can be treated with pills.
Here are the most common signs of diseases you shouldn't ignore:
#1. Lightheadedness – feeling dizzy or unbalanced can be a result of abrupt drop of blood pressure or blood glucose level. Lightheadedness may be also caused by stroke, heart disease, anemia and ear infection.
#2. Eye twitch – medically called blepharospasm, involuntary movements of the eyelid muscles can indicate certain health disorders like conjunctivitis, glaucoma, dystonia etc. It’s not uncommon for eyelid twitching to appear after emotional stress, physical exertion, excessive caffeine or alcohol consumption.
#3. New rash – pay attention on the new lesions and rashes on your skin. They can be a sign of infection, allergy, autoimmune disorder or inflammation of the liver, thyroid and some other organs.
#4. Gassiness – flatulence is an uncomfortable symptom, which is commonly caused by dietary choices (beans, apples, cabbage, raisins) or can be a result of air swallowing (in smokers and those, who eat too quickly). But be aware that gas can be also a sign of lactose intolerance, gastroenteritis, Crohn's disease and peptic ulcers.
#5. Frequent urination – there is a high number of reasons that can cause increased urge to urinate. The most frequent of them include diabetes, vaginal or bladder infection and malignant overgrowth.
#6. Back pain – each of us have experienced back pain at least once in the life. Remember that long-lasted back pain may be a result of herniated vertebral discs, spinal stenosis, kidney problems or even cancer.
#7. Slight fever – you may not even notice low-grade hyperthermia existence. Short-term increase of body temperature may be caused by infection or poisoning. Be aware that slight fever that lasts for a long time, may indicate serious disorders like cancer, HIV and autoimmune diseases.
#8. Dry and itchy skin – your skin is a mirror that reflects your state of health. Dryness and itchiness of the skin may be caused by kidney failure, hypothyroidism or atopic dermatitis.
READ MORE: 10 early signs you may have HIV
#9. Swollen legs – if fluid tends to accumulate in your lower extremities, you may experience peripheral edema. It usually becomes apparent because of blood clots, venous insufficiency, heart problems or hepatic failure.
#10. Decreased appetite – it's normal to lose appetite, when having common cold or experiencing emotional stress. But if your appetite is poor for a long time, it may be a sign of kidney problems, liver disease, underactive thyroid gland or malignancy.
Hear to your body and pay attention on the signs, it sends to you. Early detection of disease can significantly increase chances of successful treatment.
READ MORE: Look out for these skin cancer symptoms
The BetterMe Team wants you and those close to you to live a healthy, happy life! Your health is a valuable thing; look after your body and your mind so that you can live your life to the fullest – Remember you only get one!
Please share this with your friends and family and let us know what you think in the comments below.