Even if you suffer from both vertigo and high blood pressure, you may not be aware there is a connection between the two. You might write each one off as separate conditions that need to be treated separately.
But as with so many other conditions, a high percentage of people experiencing vertigo regularly also have high blood pressure. And the fact is, long lasting hypertension very often causes chronic vertigo, dizziness and lightshades.
You see, vertigo is not a subject that should be taken lightly. It’s the third most common symptom in primary care and even more common among elderly. It’s also a condition with apparently many different causes but no cure (at least from the traditional medical system – more on natural solutions in a bit).
Vertigo is most often blamed on some kind of dysfunction in the balance system. Either the the inner ear, eyes or nerves are typical suspects. However, I have found that more often it’s caused by lack of blood flow and oxygen delivery to the brain. This causes lightshades, vertigo and dizzy feelings.
Our vertigo and dizziness exercises have worked wonders to permanently cure vertigo by loosening up the muscles associated with balance, which both fixes misalignment between the eyes and the inner ear as well as increasing blood flow up to the brain.
High blood pressure, however, also causes lack of blood delivery up to the brain. When the arteries leading up to the head are constantly hit with high blood pressure, they harden and narrow and less blood can be delivered through them. This is the reason why high blood pressure increases the risk of stroke and heart attack.
You may think that a small reduction of blood flow is not such a big deal but think again. Although the brain only counts for about 2% of our body weight, it uses 20-40% of all oxygen we inhale. Even if we can live five minutes without breathing, our brain continues to receive oxygen we still have in our lungs and blood stream.
However, within 10 seconds of cutting off oxygen delivery to the brain, we lose consciousness. And brain damage begins to develop within seconds more. It’s the most important “nutrition” our brain gets.
So you can imagine there are serious consequences even if your brain is only slightly deprived of oxygen. Studies have shown that mice that received 85% of normal oxygen began to develop dementia symptoms within days. That’s how Alzheimer’s (again condition mostly associated with aging) has been linked to long-term lack of blood flow into the brain.
Another warning sign is if you experience tension in the neck. Hardening of the arteries and lack of blood flow leads to tension in the neck, jaw and other muscles surrounding that area. People compensate by physically tilting their heads, which leads to a misalignment between the eyes and the inner ear. This worsens vertigo and dizziness.
Watch this Video – Can you get vertigo from high blood pressure ? | good Health for all
The good news is that new studies have shown that if you manage to lower your blood pressure using natural methods, diet changes, lifestyle changes or our high blood pressure program, your arteries will begin to soften up again, delivering more blood flow throughout the body.
Interestingly, the same benefits do not seem to appear when using drugs.
And if you do have high blood pressure, our high blood pressure program has helped thousands of people to drop their blood pressure down to normal- usually within a week. Learn more about this program here…
This post is from the Vertigo and Dizziness Program, which was created by Christian Goodman. This is an all-natural system that utilizes the power of exercises to permanently cure your vertigo and dizziness. This will help to eliminate tension and improve your blood flow and balance.
From this Vertigo Relief Program, you will learn to strengthen your tongue, achieve whole-body balance, relieve tension and enhance your overall well-being.
To find out more about this program, click on Vertigo and Dizziness Cure