3D safety planning
By using 3D models linked to the construction programme we can visualise sites at each stage of the process. Risks such as groundwork penetrations or temporary changes in levels are accurately included. With these visualisations we are able to develop site-specific safety plans.
The 3D models are also incredibly valuable for exploring 'what-if' scenarios. If we can visualise we can better understand where problems might arise and how these scenarios can be best managed to reduce risk.
Removing people from risky environments
New technologies powered by building information modelling (BIM) are reducing instances where people and machinery must work in close proximity; situations that are inherently high-risk to site operatives.
In our infrastructure services and civil engineering businesses, we are working with excavators equipped with mobile devices that link back to the model on highways and rail projects. The excavator's location is tracked and the operator is guided through grading and excavation works according to the information in the model. This reduces the requirement for personnel to work alongside the machinery to set the boundaries for excavation.
Where possible, we equip our teams to construct components in offsite factories, which is far safer than an onsite environment. Looking to the future, we are leading on a number of research projects – including robotics that have the potential to further improve safety standards.
The common data environment (CDE) makes all documentation, such as maintenance plans and safety checklists, available to everybody through mobile devices. As well as being able to access this documentation, operatives can also share information on identified hazards.
We are seeing even greater results when we immerse people in the 3D model. Risks can be viewed in context helping staff understand the safety hazards before going on site.
Our approach to safety
Fostering a culture of care and concern for others is the mission of our Injury-Free Environment (IFE) programme. We empower everyone to challenge unsafe behaviour. We have a no-blame culture; learning from accidents and incidents, however they occur, is key to protecting people in the future.