by Roger Sams and Beth Ann Hepburn.
Edited by Jill Trinka.
“Purposeful Pathways: Possibilities for Elementary Music Classrooms” is an extensive collection of curricular materials for learning music by making music. Based on the philosophies of Orff Schulwerk, Kodály, and eurhythmics, this collection of developmentally sequenced learning activities offers elementary general music educators diverse choices for how to present folk song from diverse cultures and original material, including lessons in singing, literacy, movement, improvisation, composition, and instrumental ensemble. Each lesson is a collection of learning pathways, to be selected by the teacher, that unfold over time offering possibilities for differentiated instruction and flexibility in diverse classroom settings. This flexible design makes this resource helpful to all teachers, first year to seasoned educators!
Printable manipulatives for composition activities are available as a free digital download with the purchase of the book.
Electronic visuals (in SMART Notebook, Promethean ActivInspire, and PowerPoint formats) are available as an additional purchase in CD-ROM and digital download formats.
Purposeful Pathways 2 Curricular Content
two eighth notes
dotted half note
do re mi so la do’ (Do Pentatonic)
The King’s Land
Little Robin Redbreast
I See the Moon
Hipperty, Clipperty, Clackerty, Bang
Frog in the Meadow
Hop Old Squirrel
Queen, Queen Caroline
Needle and Thread
Who’s That Tapping on My Window?
Let Us Chase the Squirrel
I’m Gonna Sing
Old Mother Brown
Bow Wow Wow
Here Comes a Bluebird
I’m an Acorn
Synthesis and Assimilation #1
Great Big House
Whenever I Go Out to Walk
Synthesis and Assimilation #2
Chick, Chick, Chatterman
Sixteenth Note Percussion
Little Tommy Tinker
Purposeful Pathways is endorsed by leading experts in all three pedagogical approaches utilized. Here’s what the experts are saying:
“What a pleasure to look through the latest collection in the Purposeful Pathway series! Roger Sams and BethAnn Hepburn, two noted music educators, have assembled a collection of teaching materials that incorporate important concepts and skills from the educational doctrines of Carl Orff (1895-1982), Zoltan Kodaly (1882-1967) and Emile Jaques-Dalcroze (1865-1950) and have fused them into a cohesive approach to teaching musical literacy in elementary music classrooms. The detailed teaching processes outlined in the edition are sure to provide secure guidance to those teachers just beginning their careers in music education as well as offer models that experienced educators can emulate.
Perhaps most valuable is the ëstraight talkí that Roger and BethAnn provide in the Teacher Talk sections of Purposeful Pathways. The distilled knowledge and advice found in these panels reflects the cumulative wisdom of many years of working with both children and adults in music education.
I particularly enjoyed the attractive color scheme used in laying out the materials as well as the access to digital Smart technology images that enliven the lessons. They reflect the planning and thought that have gone into all aspects of the Purposeful Pathways series. This is a collection that exudes quality at all times; a welcome addition to music education source materials for children.”
-Steven Calantropio, Orff Schulwerk Master Teacher
Author/Composer, “Pieces and Processes”
“Roger Sams and Beth Ann Hepburn have done it again: Purposeful Pathways 2 continues, with its varied lesson plans, to lead students to rhythmic and melodic literacy through long-term sequencing. With PATHWAYS to movement, vocal exploration, musical play, improvisation, Orff instrument technique, composition, recorder technique, diction, storytelling, meter, transposition, choreography, and ensemble skills, this collection of time-tested teaching ideas will keep students and teachers alike moving, singing, and playing on their way to musical understanding. The inclusion of songs in various languages, as well as colorful and clear graphics, makes this a stand out collection for elementary music educators. New to this second book, visuals being offered with the SMART Notebook collection now include staff placement only for those who are strong at teaching staff literacy and optional solfa syllables offered in support of staff reading for those newer to the concept ñ a brilliant addition to support music teachers of all experience levels. Everyone who follows these pathways will traverse directly through joy on their way to music literacy!”
-Georgia A. Newlin, DMA, Assistant Professor of Music, Adelphi University
Past President, Organization of American Kod·ly Educators
“This rich, innovative resource for elementary general music teachers expertly blends the approaches of Orff, Kod·ly, and Dalcroze in a user-friendly, authentic format. Meaningful activities focusing on singing, playing instruments, music literacy, creativity, improvisation, composition, and movement are presented to help the music teacher create sequential, cohesive lessons. As a Dalcroze eurhythmics instructor, it was important to see numerous eurhythmics concepts and games such as quick reaction exercises, mirroring activities, and interrupted/uninterrupted canons included and clearly explained.
The authors’ attention to detail make this a must have book for new music teachers as well as an important resource for those teachers looking for more materials employing the various music education approaches. This comprehensive, holistic resource book serves the musical needs of our students and challenges us as music educators to continually seek new ways of strengthening our curriculum.”
-Marla Butke, Ph.D., Associate Professor of Music, Ashland University
Past President, Dalcroze Society of America