Based in Massachusetts, Jessica Bruso has been writing since She holds a master of science degree in food policy and applied nutrition and a bachelor of arts degree in international relations, both from Tufts University. Because a number of factors can affect metabolism, there isn't a particular age when a teen's metabolism slows down -- it varies from one teenager to another. The ups and down in metabolism occur with growth spurts during puberty and can be affected by additional muscle growth, cutting calories in attempts to lose weight or certain medical conditions. Check with a doctor if you have questions about your teen's metabolism. During puberty, teenagers have growth spurts that cause them to use more energy, increasing their metabolism somewhat and requiring them to eat more calories.
Slow metabolism: Is it to blame for weight gain? - Mayo Clinic
Metabolism pronounced: meh-TAB-uh-liz-um is the chemical reactions in the body's cells that change food into energy. Our bodies need this energy to do everything from moving to thinking to growing. Specific proteins in the body control the chemical reactions of metabolism. Thousands of metabolic reactions happen at the same time — all regulated by the body — to keep our cells healthy and working. After we eat food, the digestive system uses enzymes to:. The body can use sugar, amino acids, and fatty acids as energy sources when needed. These compounds are absorbed into the blood, which carries them to the cells.
BURN BABY BURN: Understanding Teenage Metabolism
Probably not. Although there is such a thing as a slow metabolism, it's rare. And it's usually not what's behind being overweight or obese — that's ultimately a result of interactions among genetics, diet, physical activity and other factors. Metabolism is the process by which your body converts what you eat and drink into energy. Even when you're at rest, your body needs energy for functions such as breathing, circulating blood and repairing cells.
I am sure you have heard the excuse of a slow metabolism as a reason for putting on weight as people get older. I waited for that big metabolism slow down to hit me, but it never really happened. Was I just lucky or is something else going on here? I chose this particular photo because I love the lighting and shadowing. Plus this older gentleman looks great!