Shodor Interactivate – interesting website to get lesson ideas. Give connections to CCSSM.
Mr. Nale’s Virtual classroom – Grades 2-4: has links to homelinks for EDM for grades 2-4, online games/activities organized by lesson, EDM family letters, study guides for each unit.
Everyday Mathematics Resource and Information Center– search by grade level for family letter, games, math messages, literature list, classroom ideas, grade level goals and glossary for each unit.
National Library of Virtual Manipulatives – great resource for modeling manipulatives on a large screen.
Mr. Nussbaum – collection of online activities for math practice. Many IPAD FRIENDLY sites.
MAP resource for test practice – this site enables you to search on topics to practice based on a student’s NWEA test score.
Everyday Math Resources-Center School District – this site has links to interactive resources that support the Everyday Math curriculum. If you click on your grade level, it has links listed for each unit in the program. Warning – not all links are still working, but many are.
Mrs. Renz’s 4th grade classroom – this site supports the 4th grade Everyday Math program with online games for each unit that students can practice on.
Word Problem Baseball Game – this game has word problems at a variety of levels. Great classroom practice to look at the vocabulary used in word problems.
AAA Math – Place Value interactive activities
Arrow Cards – great visual to introduce arrow cards
Visualize tens and ones – this activity requires students to figure out the amount of tens and ones and what number that makes.
Place Value Activities – has 6 interactive activities to work on place value
Number Grid location game – challenges students to find the number on a number grid as quickly as possible.
Give The Dog a Bone – interactive game that requires students to find a number on an empty 100 grid.
Place Value Pirates – interactive game to practice identifying the place value of a digit.
National Library of Virtual Manipulatives – great database of virtual, interactive manipulatives you can use to model problems. Great for Smartboard activities.
That Quiz – online site for quick quizzes. After set-up (free), you can add your class list and create quizzes to do some assessing.
Interactive 100 grid with ability to “hide” numbers and change the count.
Ten Frame board – allows you to practice visualizing dots on a ten frame. Includes “what is missing” questions.
5 or 10 frame interactive flash cards – students can practice quick visualizing of 5, 10 or 20 frames. Great group activity – flash card appears and students can write on their white boards.
Barbara Goldman’s site – this site has many smartboard activities ready to use in the classroom
Worksheet Generator for writing numbers and skip counting – with this generator you are able to create worksheets to practice writing numbers and missing numbers.
Worksheet Generator for counting on or back with any number – you can create number grids with empty spaces for students to fill in. You can choose the starting number, the number you count by and how many rows and columns on a sheet.
Place Value Puzzler – correctly identify the place value of each number to unlock the picture. This game can include millions and decimals.
Decimal Practice – this website has multiple activites to practice with decimals, from identifying the decimal to ordering to conversions.
Jumping on the Number Line – this site is useful when modeling adding or subtracting by tens and ones on a number line. It has three options – starting at zero, adding starting at any number within 100 or subtracting any number within 100.
Mrs. Nundahl – Intervention Support – Here are some great games for students to practice the math skills they have learned in Math Recovery or Math Intervention groups.
Math-Aids – a website to create your own worksheets. Has place value, number sentences, coordinates, greater than/less than, etc. Really easy to use!
Grade 2 Math Resources listed by CCSSM standard number
Internet4classrooms – click on your grade level, then skill builder for many interactive games in each domain area.
Graphmasters – create a classroom graph based on your own questions.