British Values at Berridge Primary
School wants to ensure that our children can develop skills and attitudes that will allow them to contribute positively to life in modern Britain. This involves the children’s acceptance and engagement with fundamental British values of
rule of law
tolerance of those of different faiths and beliefs
These values are taught explicitly through Personal, Social, Health and Emotional (PSHE), and Religious Education (RE). We also teach British Values through planning and delivering a broad and balanced curriculum.
The school takes opportunities to actively promote British Values through daily collective worship and whole school systems such as electing and running school council.
At Berridge Primary School, these values are reinforced regularly and in the following ways:
Democracy is an important value at our school. Pupils have the opportunity to have their ideas heard through our school council. The elections of members of the school council are based on pupil votes. Decisions and discussions are passed through school council to ensure views are expressed and decisions made democratically.
The Rule of Law:
The importance of laws and rules, whether they are those that govern the class, the school or the country, are consistently reinforced throughout regular school days. Our system for behaviour is aligned to an agreed set of rules and if children are given verbal warnings this is always set against the agreed school behaviour code.
Pupils are taught the value and reasons behind laws, that they govern and protect us, the responsibilities that this involves and the consequences when laws are broken. Children are encouraged to become ‘monitors’ and ‘referees’ at break times. They learn the value of responsibility, ensure break time games are well managed and contribute to the excellent behaviour at Berridge. Children learn to listen to referees and respect their decisions.
To encourage and promote good behaviour, attitude and work, we have devised a reward system which is consistently followed throughout the school. We are committed to praising children’s efforts. We endeavour to praise the children informally, individually, during group work, in front of the whole class and the whole school. Children are rewarded not only for achievement in curriculum areas, but for behaviour and general attitude towards school life.
Rewards are given in the form of stickers, smiley stamps, ‘golden book’ and certificates. Children’s achievements are also recognised during Celebration Assemblies.
Individual Liberty :
Pupils are actively encouraged to make choices at our school, knowing that they are in a safe and supportive environment. As a school we provide boundaries for our children to make choices safely, through the provision of a safe environment and planned curriculum. Pupils are encouraged to know, understand their rights and personal freedoms and are advised how to exercise these safely, for example through a range of programs taught such as e-Safety, ‘GREAT’ project and IMPS. Pupils are given the freedom to make choices like joining extra-curricular clubs offered.
Part of our school ethos and behaviour policy are based around core values such as ‘respect’ and ‘responsibility’ and these values determine how we live as a community. Our curriculum teaches significant people in history and respect for different cultures/beliefs.
Tolerance of Those of Different Faiths and Beliefs:
Berridge is proud to be a multicultural school serving a diverse community. At present over 80% of our children speak English as an additional language and there is currently over 40 different languages spoken in school. Our RE, PSHE and collective worship are planned to teach about different faiths/beliefs enhancing pupils’ understanding of their place in a culturally diverse society. We use different religious festivals and events such as the World Cup to learn more about life and culture in different countries.