Similar to your digestive system, photosynthesis actively uses sunlight to produce energy for plants. This energy, in the form of glucose, creates the roots, stems, leaves, flowers and fruits of almost all plants. In fact, sunlight is so important to plants that they can suffer greatly from insufficient light exposure, which can be observed by marked changes to the plant's outward appearance.
In general, most plant leaves have a dark green appearance, depending on the plant type. This green color is due to the chlorophyll within the plant's cells; the chlorophyll soaks up the incoming light to photosynthesize. However, insufficient light exposure stops the chlorophyll from working at peak performance. Leaves will slowly lose their dark coloring and become lighter over time. If lighting does not improve, the leaves will eventually become yellow and fall off the plant.
Since photosynthesis provides the energy the plant needs for growth, lack of light will stunt the plant's growth. If you had the plant near a window or potted in a sunny patio area, but moved it recently to a less bright location, you will notice this change. If you see that your plant has stopped growing, or is growing much more slowly than usual, it may be because it is not receiving enough light in its present location.
Extended Internodes and Leaf Size
Plants will naturally fight to stay alive and remain healthy. Insufficient light may still offer some energy to the plant so that its stems can grow slowly. However, you will notice that the spacing between leaves may increase. This space is called an internode. Longer than normal internodes indicate lack of light. Thin leaves and unusually small leaves are other signs that your plants are not getting enough light.
Photosynthesis uses mainly blue and red rays from the light spectrum for the best energy production. As a result, the plant may lean toward a natural light supply compared to an artificial light, such as an overhead incandescent light bulb, for those optimum rays. Stems and leaves will lean as far as possible toward the light; this action is a clear indication of insufficient light on a portion of the plant. You should orient the plant so that all of its stems and leaves can reach the rays of sunlight or use a fluorescent tube artificial light specially made for indoor plants.
- Ablestock.com/AbleStock.com/Getty Images