There are so many amazing places, and this was the result of human activity.
Known for its crystal clear water, Qiandao Lake, or thousand Islands, appeared in 1959, as a result of damming of the Xin’an river for the construction of hydropower plants in Zhejiang province formed the largest freshwater lake in Eastern China — Zandaka (Lake of a thousand Islands). Its name it received because of 1078 small and big Islands on it.
The water is so clean that served as the basis for the creation of a Chinese mineral water brand Nongfu Spring.
This unique artificial lake is 1078 Islands. 81% of the island territory covered with forests – the area is extremely beautiful Islands on the lake and around it represents the largest area of forest Park of China, home to 90 species of birds, 60 species of wild animals. Here was built the first in China hydroelectric. From here were resettled farmers from 1377 villages, 20 thousand hectares of arable land disappeared in the lake area of 573 sq km and with 1078 islets.
Currently in lake Qiandaohu mastered 13 scenic areas. If tourists wish to enjoy the picturesque Continue reading
Big Almaty lake (KZ. Lken Almaty KL) is located in the gorge of the Bolshaya Almatinka river on the height of 2511 m above sea level and 28,5 km South of Almaty. Lies in a hollow, surrounded on all sides by mountain peaks. Like the vast majority of lakes of the Tien Shan, was the result of earthquakes. Above the lake rise the three main peaks that can be seen from the North end of the dam: the peak of the Soviets (4317 m) — in the South-East, lake peak (4110 m) — in the South, upwards on a river valley, the peak Tourist (3954 m) — South-West from the lake. Peak West of Turist is the crest of Bolshoi Almaty peak, a pyramid with a height of Z m, which is visible from the city centre. Depending on the time of year, the lake changes its color from light green to turquoise-blue. Fed by glacial water the lake stretches for 1.6 km long, almost a kilometer wide and 40 m deep.
Big Almaty lake is part of the Ile-Alatau national Park. The length of the path to the lake is 23 km from the city. The rise in the gorge itself is very risky because of the mudflow danger, and according to experts on a descent of mudflows, this lake stand the test of nature to this day. Continue reading
At an altitude of almost 1000 meters above sea level lies the unique lake Arey, on which different sides of the towering mountain ranges of Apple and Malkhanskiy. The length of this lake is more than three kilometers, stretching among magnificent pine and cedar forests, and its width is two miles. No river in the lake, the depth of which is thirteen and a half meters, not flows, and underground water is fed only salt water area.
The lake area has received the status of nature monument in 1980, and for environmentalists it is considered one of the most valuable places in the beautiful nature of the Zabaikalsk region. The keen interest of environmental organizations to the pond by the unique properties of water: salinity area is 250 mg/l – the amount of minerals in water is to a lesser degree, but also the lake water are bicarbonate, slightly alkaline and sodium-calcium-magnesium, which attests to their miraculous healing properties. With the filing of the population living in these places, the lake is planned to assign the status of natural protected state Park. The more that was discovered in the waters of a variety of clams – six species of which are listed in the Red book.
The lake area is surrounded by a picturesque forest, the shores are rich in vegetation where the ants had built a number of anthills. From the swamps, the sandy area fenced walls and bottom Continue reading