Fostering a Safer and More Inclusive Internet
While the internet has been an engine of remarkable innovation and novelty, fundamentally changing the way we interact with one another, it also has a dark side. The same technologies that provide us with entertainment and super-convenient commerce have also facilitated a toxic ecosystem of hate and resentment. The more “wired” our culture becomes, the more vulnerable we become to cyberbullying, exploitation, fraud, misinformation, and other forms of abuse. The law needs to evolve and adapt to protect from new forms of violence and privacy violation.
The internet has matured well beyond the point where we continue to treat the whole enterprise as a “startup” too delicate to regulate. Many Americans conduct business and live their lives primarily on the internet and the internet is now dominated by many large, sophisticated firms with tremendous market power. Companies need to be able to respond to regulation and Congress can and must take strong action to curtail harmful activity on the internet.
To this end, Congresswoman Speier introduced H.R. 2896, the Stopping Harmful Image Exploitation and Limiting Distribution Act of 2019 (the “SHIELD Act”), to prevent the widespread and harmful problem of nonconsensual pornography, often referred to as “revenge porn.” Victims whose private intimate images are shared online often suffer acute emotional harm and catastrophic damage to their professional and personal lives. The SHIELD Act would make it a federal crime to share nude or sexual images of someone with reckless disregard as to their lack of consent and expectation of privacy.
Additionally, Congresswoman Speier supports legislation that would give consumers more control over their privacy. The current privacy regime, created by corporations and forced upon consumers with hardly any consent whatsoever, has led to a situation in which consumers’ valuable personal information is up for sale by data brokers without the consumers’ awareness of how their information is being used. Congress must act to impose requirements on companies that collect personal data to tell consumers how their information is being used and limit the ways in which that information can be utilized without the user’s informed consent.
Congresswoman Speier is equally concerned about toxic disinformation and hate speech on the internet. While always respecting the cherished freedom of speech, Congress can and should take steps to prevent the most serious harms. For instance, the American public faces serious risks from the possibility of hyper-realistic digital forgeries, or “deep fakes,” that falsely depict real people doing or saying things that never happened. Such fakeries can not only harm the individuals that are depicted, they could be used to interfere with official processes and elections. Congress must think of creative ways to address this growing threat.
As we now know, during the 2016 elections the Russian government executed a widespread disinformation campaign using social media that reached millions of American voters before they headed to the polls. More than 10 million Americans were exposed to Russian-purchased political ads on Facebook. Over 100 million Americans were exposed to content posted on Facebook pages designed by the Russians to sow discord and mistrust among the electorate. Congress must take bold action to protect against foreign adversaries weaponizing the internet to interfere in our democracy. For more information, go to our Election Security page.
Protecting Net Neutrality
Harmful and Toxic Consumer Products
Congress must remain active in protecting our physical environment and consumer products. From asbestos-containing talcum powder, which is used in numerous consumer goods, to cancer-causing PFAS, which was used in consumer products and heavily used on military installations as firefighting foam, Congress must raise attention about dangerous chemicals and products that harm our health and environment, and pass laws protecting the public from them.
Especially concerning are products that can cause harm to children and teenagers. In 2015, Congresswoman Speier introduced legislation that would have toughened requirements around liquid laundry detergent pods that have can be deadly when ingested by children and toddlers mistaking them for candy. In response to the Congresswoman’s bill, manufacturers voluntarily established an industry standard geared toward protecting children. Similarly, Congresswoman Speier led the charge to keep children safe from heavy metals in jewelry, recalled toxic McDonald’s cups that contained cadmium, and removed BPA and other endocrine disrupters from children’s products.
In her role on the House Oversight Committee, Congresswoman Speier supports investigations into toxic and dangerous products. This includes inclined baby rockers linked to dozens of infant deaths and the electronic cigarette maker Juul, which has blatantly targeted children and teenagers in an attempt to create a captive consumer class for its highly addictive nicotine-packed product.
Repealing the Pink Tax
Gender-based pricing of goods and services, or the Pink Tax, is another area of consumer protection in which Congresswoman Speier has led the way in seeking a legislative solution. Simply put, the Pink Tax is an insidious form of institutionalized discrimination that affects women across the country and over the course of their lifetimes. It is compounded by the fact that women start off with less money in their pockets due to the gender wage gap. In the U.S., women still make 80 cents on the dollar compared with men’s earnings and the inequality is even worse for women of color. This means income losses from the Pink Tax are even more financially damaging than the raw numbers indicate.
In order to finally put an end to discriminatory pricing practices, Congresswoman Speier introduced H.R. 2048, the Pink Tax Repeal Act which would prohibit differential pricing of consumer products and services that are substantially similar when pricing differences are based on the gender of the consumer. It also allows the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) to treat and enforce a violation of this act as an unfair or deceptive practice and gives State Attorneys General the authority to bring civil action on behalf of state residents in order to compel compliance with the law or obtain damages, restitution, or other compensation on behalf of residents of the State. This legislation builds on the Repeal the Gender Tax Act that Congresswoman Speier passed in the California Assembly.