The white ramus communicans (pl. white rami communicantes), which is also known as the white communicating branch or the white communicating ramus, contains preganglionic fibers of the sympathetic system. The white ramus communicans is a structure that anteriorly connects the spinal nerve to the sympathetic trunk. All preganglionic sympathetic neurons traverse through a white ramus communicans. Though sympathetic neurons emerge from the spinal cord through the ventral root to enter a white ramus, their courses after that can vary in four different ways. Sympathetic neurons follow the pattern of passing through the white ramus as preganglionic neurons, synapsing onto a ganglion, and then innervating their respective organs as postganglionic neurons. Ultimately, these sympathetic fibers target blood vessels, sweat glands, arrector pili muscles, and visceral organs to elicit a "fight or flight" physiological response.
White rami communicantes connect preganglionic sympathetic neurons of the spinal cord to the sympathetic trunk. The sympathetic trunk contains a sympathetic ganglion for each corresponding vertebral level. White rami communicantes bring organization to the sympathetic outflow of nerves. Although white rami communicantes contain both myelinated and unmyelinated axons, they contain a higher density of myelinated axons. Hence, the term “white” in its name. White rami are lateral to the gray rami, their post-ganglionic unmyelinated sympathetic counterpart.
White rami communicantes function ipsilaterally and appear on both sides of the spinal column. As part of the sympathetic system, white rami communicantes originate from the thoracolumbar (T1 to L2) vertebral outflows. Above the T1 and below the L2 vertebral outflows, white rami are absent; only gray rami exist in these regions. In the thoracic portion (T1 to T12), the thoracic nerve divides into the anterior and ventral rami of the thoracic nerve. White rami communicantes originate from the anterior rami of the thoracic nerve, which are also called the intercostal nerves. In the lumbar regions where white rami are found (L1 to L2), the white rami communicantes originate directly from the lumbar nerves.
Nerves of white rami have distinct courses. Neurons that traverse through the white rami originate from the intermediolateral cell column (lateral horn of the spinal cord). The intermediolateral cell column spans from T1-L2. From the intermediolateral cell column, sympathetic neurons exit the spinal cord through the ventral root and merge at the spinal nerve with other neurons. Only sympathetic neurons then enter a white ramus communicans, which branches anteriorly from the spinal nerve onto the sympathetic trunk. The white rami communicantes provide a path for preganglionic sympathetic neurons of the spinal nerve to enter the sympathetic trunk. From here, neurons can take one of four courses:
Postganglionic entrance into a spinal nerve typically involves the gray rami communicantes. Sympathetic innervation to the heart and other visceral organs involves splanchnic nerves that directly emerge from the sympathetic ganglion.
The sympathetic preganglionic neurons supported by the white rami communicantes eventually target blood vessels, sweat glands, and arrector pili muscles. The sympathetic nerves of the splanchnic routes lead to the autonomic control of the heart and visceral organs. The white rami communicantes provide a structure that separates and guides preganglionic sympathetic neurons into the sympathetic trunk and its ganglia.
White rami communicantes derive from trunk neural crest cells. These neural crest cells migrate ventrally from the dorsal portion of the neural tube and give rise to neuroblasts. Some of the sympathetic neuroblasts synapse with fibers of the spinal cord to form the white rami communicantes and other portions of the sympathetic nervous system.
The white rami communicantes are usually close to the intercostal lymph nodes and intercostal lymph vessels.
In addition to holding preganglionic sympathetic outflows of the spinal cord, such as efferent outflows, the T5 to T9 white rami communicantes can also contain general afferent (sensory) visceral inflows. These general afferent visceral fibers classify as neither sympathetic nor parasympathetic; however, visceral afferent fibers tend to associate anatomically with sympathetic efferent fibers. As a result, signals from sensory receptors of visceral organs also travel through the peripheral ganglion, sympathetic trunk, and the white rami communicantes. After traveling through the white rami communicantes and the spinal nerve, these visceral afferent fibers then enter the spinal cord via the dorsal root of the spinal cord. Afferent visceral nerves often synapse onto the preganglionic sympathetic neurons located in the intermediolateral cell column.
White rami communicantes hold fibers that eventually innervate cardiac tissue, arrector pili muscles, and smooth muscle of visceral organs and vasculature.
Physiological variations, especially those located in the upper thoracic regions (T2 to T5), are abundant for white rami communicantes:
Sympathectomy and ramicotomy, the procedures of disrupting the sympathetic trunk and the communicating branches, can be conducted to attenuate the effects of conditions such as hyperhidrosis. Compared to sympathectomy, which has been considered the “gold standard” for the treatment of idiopathic hyperhidrosis, the procedure of ramicotomy requires a longer operation time. It can result in broader variability in the severity of compensatory sweating.
Sympathectomy is the most common surgical treatment used to fix severe hyperhidrosis. Hyperhidrosis is a condition that results in excessive sweating in specific areas of the body, such as the face, hands, and armpits. Several studies have explored the effects of ramicotomy in treating hyperhidrosis. One of the main side effects of both sympathectomy and ramicotomy involves compensatory hyperhidrosis, which is the compensatory sweating in other large areas of the body. Compensatory sweating is typically the chief post-operative patient complaints.
Severe axillary hyperhidrosis, palmar hyperhidrosis, and craniofacial hyperhidrosis have received treatment with ramicotomy. In all types of hyperhidrosis, selective ramicotomy of the upper thoracic region has shown an improvement in the quality of life and reduced focal sweating. Some instances showed that ramicotomy often resulted in a lowered rate of compensatory sweating, while other cases displayed an increased rate of compensatory sweating. Post-operative compensatory hyperhidrosis due to ramicotomy for the treatment of severe hyperhidrosis can display a wide range of severity.
|||Nodera M,Oikawa M,Nakazato K,Ishida T,Takeishi Y, Sympathetic nervous remodeling is induced in the intermediolateral nucleus after myocardial infarction - Role of BDNF-TrkB axis. Neuroscience letters. 2018 Oct 15; [PubMed PMID: 30121216]|
|||Waxenbaum JA,Varacallo M, Anatomy, Autonomic Nervous System 2019 Jan; [PubMed PMID: 30969667]|
|||Ernsberger U,Rohrer H, Sympathetic tales: subdivisons of the autonomic nervous system and the impact of developmental studies. Neural development. 2018 Sep 13; [PubMed PMID: 30213267]|
|||Kaiser JT,Lugo-Pico JG, Neuroanatomy, Spinal Nerves 2019 Jan; [PubMed PMID: 31194375]|
|||Young HM,Cane KN,Anderson CR, Development of the autonomic nervous system: a comparative view. Autonomic neuroscience : basic [PubMed PMID: 20346736]|
|||Jetti R,Bolla SR, Anatomy, Back, Lumbar Sympathetic Chain 2019 Jan; [PubMed PMID: 30969736]|
|||Cho HM,Lee DY,Sung SW, Anatomical variations of rami communicantes in the upper thoracic sympathetic trunk. European journal of cardio-thoracic surgery : official journal of the European Association for Cardio-thoracic Surgery. 2005 Feb; [PubMed PMID: 15691689]|
|||Misiak P,Jabłoński S,Rzepkowska-Misiak B,Piskorz L,Brocki M,Wcisło S,Smigielski J,Kordiak J, Evaluation of the effectiveness of thoracic sympathectomy in the treatment of primary hyperhidrosis of hands and armpits using the measurement of skin resistance. Wideochirurgia i inne techniki maloinwazyjne = Videosurgery and other miniinvasive techniques. 2012 Aug; [PubMed PMID: 23256019]|
|||Akil A,Semik M,Fischer S, Efficacy of Miniuniportal Video-Assisted Thoracoscopic Selective Sympathectomy (Ramicotomy) for the Treatment of Severe Palmar and Axillar Hyperhidrosis. The Thoracic and cardiovascular surgeon. 2019 Aug; [PubMed PMID: 29739022]|
|||Kim DY,Paik HC,Lee DY, Comparative analysis of T2 selective division of rami-communicantes (ramicotomy) with T2 sympathetic clipping in the treatment of craniofacial hyperhidrosis. European journal of cardio-thoracic surgery : official journal of the European Association for Cardio-thoracic Surgery. 2004 Aug; [PubMed PMID: 15296904]|
|||Lee DY,Kim DH,Paik HC, Selective division of T3 rami communicantes (T3 ramicotomy) in the treatment of palmar hyperhidrosis. The Annals of thoracic surgery. 2004 Sep; [PubMed PMID: 15337046]|