How To Prevent Permanent Damage To Your PC By Electro Static Discharge
If your computer had to choose between enduring the most vicious hacker attack or the tiniest jolt of static electricity to its motherboard, it would welcome the hackers every time. As far as hardware is concerned, the worst hackers or viruses can do is force you to reformat your hard drive, but that little shock from your finger can render the system unstable or useless.This is one of the first things most technicians learn in our certification training, and if you regularly work on the inside of your computer, understanding the damage that little shock can cause is critical. But even if you’re only a casual computer user, it’s important to know why you probably should not shuffle across the carpet and grab your friend’s new motherboard.
Short for ElectroStatic Discharge, ESD is one of the few things an individual can do to damage or destroy his or her computer or hardware components. Much like the shock you receive when rubbing your feet on the carpet and touching something metal, ESD can occur when working in your computer and will cause components you touch to no longer work properly. ESD can occur without the user feeling a shock and will only occur while working on the inside of the computer or handling an expansion card.
How to help prevent ESD The best method of preventing ESD is to use an ESD wrist strap or use a grounding mat or table. However, because most Nigerians do not have access to such items, we have included the below steps to help reduce the chances of ESD as much as possible.
Zero Potential – Most importantly, make sure you and the computer are at Zero Potential by continuously touching an un-painted metal surface of the chassis or the computer power supply case.
Standing – It is also very important that you are standing at all times when working on the computer. Setting on a chair can generate more electrostatic.
Cords – Make sure everything is removed from the back of the computer (power cord, mouse, keyboard, etc).
Clothes – Make sure not to wear any clothing that conducts a lot of Electrical Charge, such as a wool sweater.
Weather – Electrical storms can increase the ESD risk; unless absolutely necessary, try not to work on a computer during an electrical storm.
Accessories – To help reduce ESD and help prevent other problem, it is also a good idea to remove all jewelry. Informations like this and more are always available at concept forum. Bulksms as low as 70kobo is possible @ www.websms247.org If you like this share it in any of your social networking platform. To contact us use our contact page or Email email@example.com