Introducing the Wisconsin Standards for Music
We are pleased to introduce this new set of music standards. The Wisconsin Standards for Music has been adopted by the Wisconsin State Superintendent for school districts to consider in their work with music education programs. This site provides a video which highlights the standard's framework and links to a full standards document, as well as individual strand versions. Additional resources will be added over time to support the implementation of the standards. We encourage you to visit this site often to see what is new. Check the Arts Education Professional Development Calendar for online and face to face standards sessions.
The Wisconsin Department of Public Instruction's Wisconsin Standards for Music provides a foundational framework that identifies what students should know and be able to do in music. Here is a full set which includes the standard strands - General Music and Performance Music. Wisconsin Standards for Music - Full Set
The General Music strand provides a conceptual base for your use in the general music classroom for grades K-12. Use this strand for those formal non-performance classes which may include, but are not limited to: "General Music," theory, music composition and improvisation, history, harmonizing instruments, and music technology.
The Performance Music strand provides conceptual based indicators with objectives for onstage student music experiences. Consider using this strand for music courses which may include, but are not limited to: bands, choirs, orchestras, ethnic ensembles, jazz groups, solo work, and other ensembles using instruments and/or vocal groups through performance.
Introduction to the Wisconsin Standards for Music
Wisconsin Standards for Music writing team members - Nancy Fairchild (Platteville), Brandi Hawley (Beloit), Marie Northup (Wausau), and Mike Van Pelt (Milwaukee), along with Julie Palkowski (WI DPI), guide viewers through the new standards and resources. Click video image for the recording.
Resources for the Wisconsin Standards for Music
Wisconsin Standards for Music writing team members - Cathy Houchin (Watertown) and Christine Hulmer (Ashland), along with Julie Palkowski (WI DPI), help participants navigate the standards and resources online. Click video image for the recording.
Learn more about the Wisconsin Standards for Music.