A lovely table of tree pictures and designs was set out by Sue to give us all an idea of what we could produce. Everyone's appetite was whetted and Sue began to teach us. She explained each picture or item of work, one of which Sue had made with Agnes Wilson, who had been a member of Preston Guild and had founded Lytham St. Anne's Guild, to which Sue belonged. Another piece was worked with
machine embroidery and another showed a cottage among the trees on a lampshade ring. There were some bangles using white wool, which used several techniques, including the tree idea. These had been used to decorate a Christmas tree and silver thread had been inserted for a festive look.
Sue told us we should leave room for a foreground and the rest for the forest. Then we set to work and Sue came round to us individually to advise and encourage.
Our next job was to weave the forest floor following the colours in our photo or picture. Some lovely colour combinations began to appear on our frames of work. Paths were included in some and Sue showed us how to link the different coloured threads together in the middle.
We also learned how to weave branches and twigs formed from one and two bundles of warp. Sue emphasised that the woven trees must be pushed down constantly to ensure that no warp could be seen. The branches were difficult because they must be seen to belong to their own tree. The first branches stayed in front and the others behind them. Some branches and twigs would be joined together. If each tree was worked in a different tone of brown or green, it would be easier to see where their branches belonged.
Leaves were covered next and we were shown how to make bobbly wool by running a thin thread through a piece of wool about 3 inches or so and pulling up the thin thread to make a small mass of wool, which could be sewn onto the trees to look like leaves or blossom (bobbly wool itself can also give this effect.) If using 2 colours the darker thread went underneath. These 'leaves or blossoms' would be sewn onto the trees leaving gaps between them.
Our library was on display, the shop showing all sorts of bargains and not forgetting our Treasurer, busy as usual, sorting out the money.