Our Early Years “program” is designed to build a strong foundation for social, emotional, physical and cognitive development. The program is supported by The Early Years Learning Framework that develops curiosity, flexibility, the processes of learning such as problem solving for effective learning in both the indoor and outdoor learning environments.
An integrated curriculum approach is used across all of our campuses. A schedule of ‘integrated themes’ addresses the scope of the learning areas to be covered. The Arts, Science, Studies of Society and the Environment, Technology, and Health and Physical Fitness are integrated to provide a varied and engaging curriculum. We plan and report student progress against the Australian Curriculum. The Aboriginal Literacy Strategy is used to structure daily literacy planning, with a focus on incorporating strategies that address the students’ needs as learners of English as an Additional Language or Dialect. First Steps Maths is being rolled out as the foundation for mathematical understanding.
The school has begun a major initiative to upgrade its secondary programs. New facilities are planned as part of a plan to strengthen the engagement of our secondary students with the school. The current integrated curriculum integrates English as an Additional Language or Dialect across a number of Year 7-10 subject areas, including Literacy, Numeracy, Studies of Society and the Environment, The Arts, Health and Physical Education. Year 11-12 literacy programs have recently expanded to include the delivery of Western Australian Certificate of Education Units in English as an Additional Language or Dialect. We are also developing our suite of Vocational Education and Training courses based on topics that interest youth in the Lands.
Sport plays an important part in the life of the school. The secondary male students participate in a series of football camps during the season based in different communities. Plans are in place to run a separate sports program for secondary female students.
The Arts program is developing and will include the visual and performing arts as well as digital media (radio, film and TV). The arts – especially painting, spinifex (tjanpi) weaving and wooden artefacts (purnu) – are a rich and integral part of Ngaanyatjarra culture and artistic expression. Students have the opportunity to participate in these activities.