EVERETT HALTS FLUORIDATION – URGED NOT TO RESTART
LEAD, ARSENIC, HYDROGEN FLUORIDE, SILICOFLUORIDE
ADDED TO DRINKING WATER
Notice of Liability Served on Seattle and Everett
Federal Court Suits Filed in California and Maryland
Access links at: https://www.fluoride-class-action.com/press-releases/snohomish-health-district
MANY FLUORIDES. Seattle, Everett, and most US cities that fluoridate, do so with silicofluoride (SiF); around 8% use sodium fluoride (NaF). SiF and NaF are much more toxic than naturally occurring calcium fluoride (CaF). CaF can be fairly pure, depending on its source. NaF is industrial grade but relatively pure; SiF is industrial grade toxic waste, highly contaminated with heavy metals. SiF contains and breaks down into hydrogen fluoride, one of the most poisonous and penetrating of all substances.
TOXIC WASTE. The silicofluoride used is the unfiltered and unprocessed scrubber liquor from the smoke stacks of phosphate fertilizer plants in Florida, Louisiana, Mexico, and China. It contains trace amounts of nearly every element on the periodic table. It is not pharmaceutical grade. SiF has never been approved by the FDA, EPA, or any other federal or state agency for consumption in tap water. Fluorides have been approved for topical use, as in toothpaste, but the fluoride is to be spat out. If it is swallowed, one is to call poison control.
TOOTH DECAY. Fluoride is added allegedly to reduce caries, however, documents posted on the CDC website claim only an 18-25% reduction in caries. Other credible studies show no reduction. Tooth decay has dropped just as much in non-fluoridated Europe as in fluoridated United States, so fluoridation cannot be the causal factor. Tooth decay correlates with poverty and bad diet, not with the percentage of the population fluoridated.
BLACKS, HISPANICS, AND THE POOR in general are more sensitive to lead, arsenic, and fluoride than the general population. Alveda King, Bernice King, and Andrew Young lead the Fluoride-Gate movement. They see fluoridation as a new civil rights issue because it hits minorities hardest.
TOPICAL. Documents posted on the CDC website admit that the effect of fluoride on teeth is topical and not systemic, but strangely, CDC still endorses drinking fluoride. Other documents there admit that 41% of children 12 – 15 years old have dental fluorosis, while 8.6% suffer from mild fluorosis (white spots and some brown spots with up to 50% of enamel impacted), and 3.6% suffer from moderate and severe fluorosis (white spots and brown spots and sometimes pitting and chalky teeth and up to 100% of enamel impacted). Fluorosis can be ugly. Fluorosis should not be forced on people just so tooth decay can allegedly be reduced and then only slightly, if at all. The way to cut tooth decay is to quit eating and drinking sugary junk foods, eating more vegetables, to teach brushing and flossing, and to bring basic dental care under the Affordable Care Act.
PERVASIVE. If we add fluoride to tap water, then fluoride is in everything made from tap water – cola, beer, coffee, soup, bread, cereal, restaurant food, and fruit juices reconstituted with tap water.
SiF CONTAINS LEAD. The EPA maximum contaminant level (MCL) for lead is 15 ppb, and the maximum contaminant level goal (MCLG) is zero. Lead permeates all cells in the body, reduces IQ, and causes kidney disease and high blood pressure.
LEAD IN SCHOOL DRINKING WATER. In 2004 Seattle papers reported lead at up to 1,600 ppb (1.6 ppm, a very high level) found in drinking water in old Seattle schools. SiF, more so than sodium fluoride, leaches lead from pipes and faucets.
New brass pipes and faucets contain around 8% lead and older pipes contain as much as 30% lead. Most old schools, old homes, old apartment buildings, old hospitals, old office buildings, and old factories contain pipes with high lead content, which SiF will leach out. When water districts stop fluoridating, lead levels in wate and in blood drop.
Seattle commissioned reports on the subject. Not one report even mentioned the possibility of a connection between lead levels and fluoridation! It is politically risky to mention anything critical about fluoride. Seattle began replacing pipes in schools – at enormous expense. Terminating fluoridation greatly reduces lead leaching and at no cost. Moreover, even if replacing pipes in schools would solve the problem in schools, it would not solve the problem in old homes, old apartment buildings, old hospitals, old office buildings, and old factories.
MONEY, BLINDSPOTS. The PR manipulators who sold us fluoride are the same ones who sold us tetraethyl lead. Chemical, pharmaceutical, fertilizer, and toothpaste companies donate to dental and medical colleges, which indoctrinate dentists and physicians to endorse fluoridation. We trust government agencies and those with MD and DDS after their names. The ADA tells dentists that they need not try to understand the science behind fluoridation. They need only accept the mystery and spread the gospel of fluoridation. Dentists and researchers who question it have been maligned and have had their careers ruined.
CDC, EPA. The CDC is one small branch within the CDC, which is run by pro-fluoridation dentists and pushes fluoridation. But the CDC has no authority whatsoever to approve, promote, or finance fluoridation. The CDC, EPA, and the surgeon general all endorse fluoridation. They say it is one of the greatest health advances of the 20th Century. However, endorsements prove nothing. One must look at the science. The most significant endorsement or non-endorsement to consider is that of the EPA scientists’ union. They disagree with the non-scientist administrators and oppose fluoridation and do so based on the science. Following release of the 2006 National Research Council Report on Fluoridation, it is clear that fluoridation is instead one of the greatest frauds of the 20th Century.
ARSENIC. SiF also contains arsenic, a confirmed Type 1, Class A human carcinogen. For arsenic the MCL is 10 ppb and the MCLG is zero. A zero MCLG for lead and arsenic means that there is no level of lead or arsenic which can safely be added to drinking water.
SiF AND NaF are mutagens, poisons, and probable carcinogens. As little as seven grams of SiF or NaF, the weight of seven paper clips, can kill an adult. It would take a half pound of naturally occurring CaF to do the same. The .8 milligram of SiF per liter which our cities add to water is of course not immediately fatal. However, healthy adult kidneys only excrete half of the fluoride we consume, while the body retains the other half. Fluoride seeks out calcium and is retained in bones and other calcium rich areas of the body. Once in our bones, fluoride cannot be removed.
KIDNEYS AND BONES. Fluoride builds up in kidneys and prevents them from functioning normally and may hasten death. Those on dialysis who quit consuming fluoride may recover and some may be able to quit dialysis. After a lifetime of drinking fluoridated water, bone can be up to 12,000 ppm fluoride, depending on water hardness and diet, making bones brittle. Fractured pelvises are twice as common in fluoridated areas. Fluoride of all kinds affects bones, joints, and tendons and exacerbates arthritis.
ALUMINUM UPTAKE. Water treatment plants add aluminum to precipitate dirt. The fluoride ion binds with the aluminum, and aluminum fluoride passes the blood-brain barrier, delivering aluminum into the brain, which is believed to cause or worsen Alzheimer’s disease.
OTHER SYMPTOMS. Fluoride interrupts and inhibits enzymatic action. It denatures proteins. SiF is an anticholinesterase inhibitor. It damages brain tissue and reduces IQ while the fetus is still in the womb. It attacks the thyroid, pituitary, pineal, and other glands. Fluoride incorporates into atherosclerotic plaque in coronary arteries and the aorta in patients with cardiovascular disease. Around 1% of the population is so hypersensitized to fluoridated water that they have to move to a place where the water is not fluoridated.
BABIES are highly sensitive to lead, arsenic, and fluoride because their cells are still dividing and because they drink so much fluids relative to their body weight. Their kidneys are not mature and excrete only 20% of fluoride consumed. CDC, ADA, AMA, and the surgeon general have advised that if formula is mixed using fluoridated water fluorosis will result. The poor are unable to buy fluoride-free water home or filter out the fluoride. Only an expensive reverse osmosis filter, ionizer, or distiller can remove the tiny fluoride ion. The poor are definitely being harmed, poor babies in particular. All are harmed; some more quickly than others.
ATHLETES, HARD LABORERS, DIABETICS, and those with kidney disease are highly vulnerable because they drink up to ten times as much water as typical people. Fluoride is a drug, but the dose cannot be controlled.
IN WESTERN WASHINGTON, we are especially susceptible to the slow but certain ravages of fluoride because our snow melt water is exceptionally soft and contains little calcium, which would bind with and tie up fluoride to some extent.
THE NATIONAL SANITATION FOUNDATION – NSF – is a chemical company trade association, funded by EPA to certify fluoride as safe and to approve its use. Some 47 states require that only NSF 60 fluoride be used, including Washington. WAC 246-290-220(3), says: “any treatment chemicals … added to water intended for potable use must comply with ANSI/NSF Standard 60. The NSF web site and the NSF Standard for Drinking Water Additives, say: “Standard 60 … requires a toxicology review to determine that the product is safe at its maximum use level and … to determine if any contaminant concentrations have the potential to cause adverse human health effects. …” However, NSF official Stan Hazan admitted under oath in deposition that toxicological studies are not being done. (See Hazen deposition, pages 22, 67). Thus fluoridation materials do not “comply” with NSF 60 and fluoridation with them is illegal.
SCRUBBER LIQUOR. Cities buy SiF by the tanker truck load and pour it at a steady rate, day after day into our water. Everett buys around 18 loads per year at around $16,000 per load. SiF particularly corrodes equipment and shortens its useful life. Hazmat suits must be worn to handle SiF. When the liquid is spilled on concrete, it burns a hole through it, as it will do to steel and glass. When fluoride is added to water, extra sodium hydroxide or sodium carbonate – Draino® or soda ash – must be added to reduce acidity.
NO INFORMED CONSENT. Fluoride is not a mere additive such as chlorine, which is there to kill microbes. The FDA and the Washington Board of Pharmacy say that fluoride when used to prevent dental caries meets the definition of a drug. Although it is an unapproved drug and in reality a poison, its administration is medical treatment. Informed consent before treatment is a fundamental principle of law. Administering it without prior consent is a violation of ethics and freedom of choice.
NOTICE OF POTENTIAL LIABILITY have been served on Seattle and Everett in connection with the lead, arsenic, and fluoride which they add to our water. Cities should consult with their insurance carriers to confirm they will be covered when the class action and mass toxic tort actions come. Failure on the part of these cities to look at the science regarding fluoridation constitutes reckless indifference to the harms caused and expose cities and water districts to liability. If the FDC chooses to assert its jurisdiction over this area, there could be individual criminal liability.
CAPTIVE WATER DISTRICTS, those which buy fluoridated water from Seattle and Everett never voted on fluoridation. In the meantime they should demand that they be held harmless from liability.
LEGAL FRONT. fluoridation lawsuits which have been filed in federal courts in California, Maryland, and in the Washington courts. Three safe water groups presented their case to the Seattle City Attorney’s office on January 9. Fluoride Class Action has written to Jenny Durkin, US Attorney in Seattle, asking her to bring appropriate action to stop these violations of law.
CLEAN AND PURE WATER is a fundamental human right. Forcing us all to take a toxic waste drug such as fluoride violates our right to control our own bodies. It should not be our duty to remove the toxic waste. Water departments should stop adding it. Those who want to consume fluoride can swallow a little toothpaste or get a Luride prescription.
Contact form more information:James Robert Deal, Attorney WSBA Number 8103, President, Fluoride Class Action James@Fluoride-Class-Action.com 425-771-1110