Some diets out there are perfect for those who wish to shed off unwanted body pounds. Others appeal more to those who wish to stay in the pink of health by lowering their risk of suffering from certain illnesses or conditions.
But then there are a few diets in our midst that appeal to individuals who are conscious not only about their figure but health, too. One of those is what’s called the rainbow diet.
If you’re someone who is constantly on the hunt for a diet that can address issues that have something to do with the size of your waist and your mental and physical wellness, keep reading.
Got family members and friends who tend to try one diet after the other? Then make sure that you repost this afterwards so that they, too, may give the rainbow a diet a try.
Based on the name alone, it’s quite obvious that the rainbow diet entails the consumption of fruits and vegetables belonging to many different color groups, and they are red, orange, yellow, green, blue, indigo and violet — the various colors that make up a rainbow.
We all know that it’s a good idea to steer clear of white foods as they are made from white grains which are also sometimes referred to as refined or processed grains or flour. Grains are actually healthy, but processed ones are not because they contain nothing but calories.
However, the rainbow diet encourages the consumption of white-colored foods — not the white ones that you can find at supermarkets and fast food joints, but the kinds that are found in nature. Some examples are onions, mushrooms, cauliflower and scallions.
Making fruits and vegetables sport different eye-catching colors is the presence of phytonutrients. The fact is these are chemicals (hence, they are sometimes referred to as phytochemicals) found naturally in fruits and vegetables that provide protection from the sun’s UV rays, bacteria, bugs and other threats.
In plants phytonutrients serve as weapons, but in humans they offer a wide variety of health perks. That’s because phytonutrients have antioxidant properties. Meaning to say, they have the ability to neutralize excess free radicals before they have the chance to wreak havoc on your healthy cells and tissues.
Needless to say, the rainbow diet can help you stay in the pink of health. According to numerous scientific investigations, it’s something that can help considerably lower one’s risk of suffering from deadly cancer. Such is due to the fact that phytonutrients can put under control inflammation, which is something that’s associated with cancer development.
The addition of fruits and vegetables from various food groups helps ensure that you get to enjoy the respective health perks they’re known to offer — yes, every color has something unique to impart!
For instance, yellow- and orange-colored fruits and vegetables are known to keep your vision 20/20, your skin healthy and young-looking, and your immune system running smoothly. On the other hand, blue and violet fruits and vegetables have the ability to fend off urinary tract infection or UTI, high bad cholesterol levels and obesity.
Speaking of which, going on the rainbow diet is also recommended for those who wish to lose weight. Compared to processed, junk and fast foods, fruits and vegetables have considerably lower calorie and fat content. They also contain water and fiber, both of which can help save you from eating more foods than you should.
Unlike most other diets out there that entail all kinds of rules that can easily leave you confused and exhausted, the rainbow diet has one very simple rule only: every single day, eat 5 cups of fruits and vegetables from 5 color groups of your choice. Because it’s so easy to remember, you get to stick to the diet without trouble!