Packs available per subject for 11+ independent school and grammar school examinations, including CEM.
Full 11+ curriculum covered and all packs include answers.
"We have been using the 11+ independent school range to help prepare students at our after-school club. The papers focus on the specific skills required for these exams and have proved immensely beneficial." Maggie Chun, Igloo Learning
"The 11+ grammar school range is highly recommended if your child is taking exams set by GL Assessment." Shahid Khan, father of 11+ student
The 11+ examination is used to select students for Year 7 entry into schools across the country. We recognise the general difference in format and style between independent and grammar school testing as well as the more recent introduction of exams created by the Centre for Evaluation and Monitoring (CEM). For this reason, we have developed specific test papers for each exam type for Mathematics, English and Verbal Reasoning that reflect these differences. Our grammar school resources are especially useful for those sitting tests set by GL Assessment.
Our papers cover every aspect of the written examination process for Mathematics, English and Verbal Reasoning.
A great way for children to familiarise themselves with the exam format and question styles, whilst perfecting their exam technique. Designed to be challenging and engaging.
Accurate reflection of the actual exams. Reviewed and updated regularly to ensure they are current and up to date.
Very much like the real csse paper and gives good indication of child’s level
These papers are very closely aligned in content, format and level of difficulty to the CSSE exams. They are perfect preparation. Detailed answers given and especially useful, are the examples of the creative writing tasks, so you can see how the marks are allocated and use as exemplars. Very impressive.
I would highly recommend these papers most useful and have been pitched at the right level x
GRAMMAR SCHOOLS (CEM)
© 2020 All rights Reserved.
Y.W in LONDON, purchased The Complete Guide to 11+ Comprehension About 1 hour ago