When you take a step back to consider the advances that have been made in broadband technologies, you will surely be nothing short of amazed. It is no secret that the daily routines of most of us involve some sort of activity or process that is powered by one of these wireless data communication technologies. By utilising cell phone networks such as EE, Vodafone, Sky, BT, Virgin Media, Three, TalkTalk, Plusnet, and O2, broadband users now have the possibility to access the Internet from, essentially, anywhere and everywhere. Considering the fact that the first Internet access required a dial-up in the 1990s, and that the first broadband Internet access technology was utilised in the UK only 2000, this is pretty amazing. Am I right?
Today, mobile telecommunications technologies are ever on the rise considering the number of users, and ever on the rise considering their constant improvements in capacities and capabilities. While many around the world are utilising the third generation of the broadband communication technology, the fourth and fifth generation have been created and are succeeding the 3G system.
4G, or fourth generation broadband, provide capabilities that can be defined as ITU in IMT Advanced. What does all that jargon mean? The important thing to know here is that users of this fourth generation system can enjoy modified and improved mobile web access, IP telephony, gaming services, high-definition mobile TV, video conferencing, 3D television, and cloud computing. Considering this, I think it is safe to say that the improvements that have been made are outstanding.
Like I said before, in addition to the fourth generation mobile broadband technology, users of mobile internet access services can also look forward to the upcoming benefits and improvements that will come along with the fifth generation mobile network. This wireless system is expected to come along with data rates of tens of megabits per second, several hundred thousand connections, supported by sensory deployments, special efficiency, expanded coverage, signalling efficiency, and reduced latency. Expected to make an appearance in 2020, this 5th generation wireless system is expected to provide even greater and satisfactorily improved mobile web access to its users.
Though most users are still carrying out their mobile web access endeavours with the 3G systems, it is only a matter of time before the majority of populations transfer over to the 4G system, while simultaneously waiting the arrival of the fifth.