Root Canal Treatment
Root Canal Fillings
When the root of your tooth becomes severely damaged or suffers from decay, the nerve and blood supply will also be harmed and infected. The effect can be one of severe discomfort, involving swelling and, in some cases, abscesses. By sterilizing, shaping and filling the root area of the tooth and either sealing it with a filling or covering it with a crown, the tooth is protected from further infections and causes no more pain. In order to keep the tooth free from further infections and pain, the root of the tooth is sterilised, shaped, filled and sealed with a filling or covered with a crown.
What is endodontics?
When the blood or nerve supply of the tooth - the soft, sensitive inner part known as the pulp - is infected through decay or injury, endodontics, which is more commonly known as root canal treatment, is required.
Why are root canal fillings required?
Once the pulp has become infected, the infection can spread and may cause an abscess. Either of these things will eventually result in the loss of the tooth.
Root canal treatment is necessary to halt the spread of infection and avoid the possibility of the tooth needing to be removed.
Is it painful?
Undergoing root canal treatment is not painful. It involves the use of a local anaesthetic and should feel the same as having a conventional filling done.
What does a root canal filling involve?
The purpose of the treatment is to rid the root canal of all infection, and will involve cleaning and filling the root in order to guard it from further infection. Root canal treatment is a lengthy proceedure and requires expert experience. Usually, it will require two or more visits to the dentist.
Firstly, the infected pulp is removed. This will occur at the first appointment and if you have any abscesses at this time, these will also be drained. Next, the root canal is cleaned and shaped in preparation for the filling. The tooth is then left to settle, with a temporary filling in place to protect it.
The dentist will book to see you at a second appointment to chesk whether the infection has come down. When the dentist is satisfied that all the infection has cleared, the tooth is permanently filled.
What will it look like afterwards?
With the modern techniques that are now available, it is unusual for discolouration of the tooth to occur. Darkening of the tooth following root canal treatment was common in the past, but is rare today. If discolouration does happen, various are available to renew the natural appearance of the tooth.
What if the infection returns?
Root canal fillings are normally highly effective. If the infection does return, however, treatment can be started again.
What happens if I don’t have a root canal filling?
The alternative to having root canal treatment is to have the tooth removed. Pulp that has been destroyed cannot rebuild itself and an infected tooth should not remain in the mouth. Although an extraction may seem preferable, it is usually advisable to have as many natural teeth in your mouth as you can.
After treatment, will the tooth be safe?
Yes, your tooth will be safe after treatment. However, it is worth considering having a crown to restore your tooth and to give it extra strength and support.
Where can I have the treatment done?
All our dentists at all our practices are able to carry out root canal treatment.
What aftercare is necessary?
Teeh that have been filled with a root canal require the same care as your other teeth. Always clean your teeth on a daily basis, ideally with a fluoride toothpaste. Keep sugary snacks to a minimum, and if possible don't snack between meals. Remember to visit your dentist regularly for a check-up.
What is it?
The aim of an apicoectomy is to completely extract the root tip and the entirety of the infected tissue.
Why is an apicoectomy needed?
If a root canal treatment fails, or if it is not recommended for you by your dental specialist, an apicoectomy will become necessary. Occasionally infected tissue is left behind in the tooth following root canal treatment. This obstructs healing and can cause another infection.
What does it involve?
The aim of this treatment is to completely remove the root tip and all of the infected tissue. The procedure entails a small incision into your gum and the removal of the infected tissue along with the remaining few millimetres of the root tip. The root end is then sealed with the placement of a filling.
Treatment lasts 30-90 minutes, which is determined by the tooth’s location and the complexity of the roots.Contact Us