Master Gardening: All about conifers
Because of their popularity as windbreaks and visual screens, we often see many conifers in the home landscape. Conifers are cone-bearing plants and do not flower. A few are deciduous and drop their leaves in autumn, like the gingko and larch, but many are evergreen. Think fir, pine and spruce. You could win at Jeopardy if you knew that conifers were a main food of dinosaurs, and the oldest living tree is a 5,000-year-old bristlecone pine (Pinus longaeva)!
Conifers can be easy to care for if the right plant is chosen for the site and if some simple care is taken. When we have cold, snowy winters, evergreen conifers can use some help from us. For example, most naturally occurring conifers have lateral or drooping branches that readily shed snow and ice. But the multi-stemmed conifers, like arborvitae, junipers, and yews are susceptible to damage when heavy snow and ice accumulates. Also some conifers developed by nurseries have lovely rising branches, such as the Hetz Juniper (Juniperus chinensis ‘Hetzii’) that can be damaged by the weight of ice and snow.
You can take simple steps to keep weighty wintry accumulations from damaging these plants. For smaller conifers, simply spiral coated twine or a three- to six-inch-wide burlap strip around the plant. Wind from the base, around the branches, to the top, and back to the base. This will keep snow and ice out of the open branches. Another approach is to wrap the entire plant in burlap. (These winter wraps should be removed at the beginning of spring.) For larger plants, gently broom off accumulations after a storm.
Also, unless your conifer is known to be salt tolerant, be sure to keep deicing salts away from them. If that can’t be avoided because the plant is located near roadways and may receive salt spray during snow removal operations, use a burlap wrap to help the shield the plant.
Once established, conifers usually need watering only during prolonged drought. Winter is the perfect time to check for any bare spots or thin mulch underneath the plant. Add mulch to improve water retention. A good layer of mulch has the added advantage of protecting roots susceptible to damage when temperatures dip below 15 degrees Fahrenheit. The insulating mulch layers help keep soil temperatures higher. As an additional note, if you mulch in late winter, you could apply some humus or 10-10-10 fertilizer under the mulch to help your conifer get a good start in spring.
Even with these protections, winter winds and sun glare may cause the plant to naturally give up its water. Signs include browning over the most or all of the plant and browning from the needle tips inward. The browning may have a reddish or purplish tone. This winter burn occurs more frequently on conifers that have narrower needles, for example, hemlock, juniper, pine and yew. Help such conifers to retain their water under glaring winter sun and harsh winds, apply an anti-desiccant (available from your garden center). Do it in December and in February for the fullest winter protection.
If you see reddish browning only above the snow and on the south and west sides of the plant, you probably have discovered sunscald. It occurs on the parts of the plant that have the greatest sun exposure but no protecting snow cover. When temperatures rise with the warmth of the sun and then quickly drop, especially at sunset, ice crystals can form in the plant needles. It can cause plant tissue to die, but in this instance, it is best to wait until bud break in the spring before clipping out dead plant material.
Alas, young conifers are tasty to mice and rabbits during winter! You can take these protective steps: First, keep weeds and grass at least two feet away from the trunk. In addition, insert a screening or hardware cloth barrier into the ground to surround the trunk and lower branches.
Most conifers are best planted between November and April. Before planting, consult these websites and follow the guidelines for the right time and place to plant.
Enjoy your conifer specimen with its four-season interest.
Donna Fuchsluger is a York County Master Gardener. Penn State Master Gardeners are volunteers for Penn State Cooperative Extension. For more information, contact the Master Gardener office at 717-840-7408 or YorkMG@psu.edu.