To shoot a simple sequence you need at least three shots -
- A master shot showing the person engaged in their activity
- A shot of the person's face
- A close up of the activity
CLOSE UP ON ACTIVITY
- If you are covering an activity that can be repeated, I'd suggest
your first shot is the "Master Shot". This is a good insurance
shot. Then, if all else fails, you can just use the master!
- The master shot should be wide enough to show the whole action – which
(if repeatable) should be recorded from beginning to end.
- As you get better at sequences you won't need to record the action
from beginning to end. You'll know where you want to cut and therefore
know when to: stop the action; change shot; and restart the action with
- Keep a close eye on what the subject is doing – which hand did they
use to pick up the phone – continuity errors can spoil a good sequence.
- You must offer the editor a variety of shots (at least three remember)
– this entails changing either:
» the camera lens angle e.g. wide
shot, mid shot,close up
» camera position e.g. over the shoulder, profile, head
» camera height e.g. high angle, eye height, low angle
- The average shot is about 4 seconds long. BUT, you must shoot enough
to leave the editor some flexibility- as a general rule record shots
that are at least 10 seconds long.
- Ensure that you record the complete action e.g. Frame up on a telephone,
start recording and keep recording as the hand comes in to pick up the
receiver - then put the receiver back - the hand goes out of shot -
hold - then stop recording. Now your editor has flexibility to start
(or end) the shot at any given point in the action.
- You must try not to cross the line.
Be clear in your mind where the line of action runs and stay one side
of the line.
- Don't forget to shoot the cutaways, e.g. if someone is using the photocopier,
appropriate cutaways might be:
» the buttons being pressed
» the copy coming out of the machine
- Of your three sequence shots, the shot of your subject's face concentrating
on what they are doing is very important. This can be edited in almost
anywhere – and may get you over a continuity problem.
- If your subject is concentrating hard, then get in close. For simpler
activities, an MCU will probably be
- It doesn't look good to edit into or out of moving shots. Keep zooming,
panning and tilting to a minimum. Hold the camera steady and let the
subject provide the movement and visual interest.
- Letting your subject enter shot or exit, acts as a reason to edit.
A kind of visual full stop.
- If you let your subject leave shot, then you can change location and
see them enter shot for the next sequence.
- If the sequence is being used to introduce an interviewee - make sure
they leave the last shot (eg their hands leaving shot after putting
down the phone). It will look strange if you go from a shot of a person
on the phone straight to a shot of them being interviewed.
Back to the top.
CROSSING THE LINE
When I ask people who come on my course whether they understand crossing
the line - most look back with an expression that says I think so - but
don't expect me to explain it. One person summed it up brilliantly. It's
like the off side rule in soccer, we under stand it is important but couldn't
really explain it.
To do crossing the line justice I'm going have to take some pictures
and make sure I get the words right. Please be patient. The answer will
be here soon - it is so important I really want to make the effort to
explain it well.
2000 - 2010