CHILDREN ARE CONSTANTLY CHANGING. And while you as parents can’t anticipate every change, these Well Child Tips can prepare you for what lies ahead and help you raise a healthy and safe child.
Hundreds of children die each year because of preventable injuries. Many of these injuries occur because parents are just not aware of what their young child can do. Learn tips to keep your child safe.
Here you will find the recommended immunization schedule for persons aged birth through 6 years old. It includes vaccine-preventable diseases and the vaccines that prevent them. These guidelines are approved by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, the American Academy of pediatrics, and the American Academy of Family Physicians.
Parenting is a life changing experience, filled with joy and even uncertainty. Learn tips to help you with the ups and downs of having a newborn.
Georgia law requires that all children who attend child care and enter school be up to date on immunizations to be protected against these diseases: diphtheria, hepatitis A, hepatitis B, Hib, measles, mumps, rubella, pertussis, tetanus, varicella (chickenpox), polio, and pneumococcal disease. The following information lists specific Georgia state immunization requirements for children entering child care and school.
Your child may need extra love and care after getting vaccinated. Some vaccinations that protect children from serious diseases also can cause discomfort for a while. Here are answers to questions many parents have after their children have been vaccinated.
Kennesaw Pediatrics and the American Academy of Pediatrics want you to be aware of the dangers of shaking a baby. Taking care of a fussy baby can be frustrating and can sometimes lead to unexpected behavior. Learn why shaking a baby can be deadly.
The user friendly patient portal offers many benefits, including private access to your child’s medical information online. Learn about the many reasons to sign up and how to get started.
The comprehensive developmental screening should be completed online prior to all well visits from age 1 month to 6 years, ADHD/ADD visits, and visits with behavioral concerns. This type of enhanced developmental screening is recommended by the American Academy of Pediatrics and hailed as a major advancement in preventive care for kids.