Do you have a damaged tooth. Are you wondering if a dental crown is right for you. A dental crown may be needed to restore a damaged tooth when a tooth has structure damage, broken or cracked and too large for a filling. This is a better option than removing the tooth completely. A crown may also be needed if you had a root canal or a large filling fall out.
What is a dental crown
A dental crown (sometimes called a cap), is a hollow protective covering used to cover the damaged or decayed tooth. The crown restores the tooths strength to protect it from further damage. A crown will improve the function and lifespan of your tooth. A crown acts like a normal tooth and can be colored to look natural and blend in with your other teeth.
Crowns can be made using noble alloys like gold for strength and ceramics for natural looking aesthetics. We offer beautiful, metal-free all ceramic crowns for superb natural aesthetics and translucency – they look just like your own teeth!
How does a dental crown procedure work
Step 1. Preparing the tooth
During the first step, the dentist files and prepares your natural tooth’s structure to accommodate the new crown. The idea is to prepare a solid foundation for the crown to be attached.
Step 2. Creating the new dental crown
An impression is made of the newly created foundation and measurements or pictures are taken so your new dental crown can be created. Sometimes a temporary crown is installed until your permanent crown is ready. This temporary crown will be made from a tooth impression and is used to protect your tooth until the new dental crown is ready.
Step 3. Installing the new crown
You return to the dentist’s office when the new crown is ready for the final step. Now the temporary crown is removed and your new, custom dental crown is securely bonded in place. Your dentist will check to make sure the crown fits perfectly. They make sure the shape, tooth color and your bite is perfect! If needed some adjustments will be made at this time for a perfect fit and finish to your new dental crown.
Dental crowns are strong and durable just like your real teeth. Crowns can be made to protect or enhance front or back teeth. They can also be a vital aspect of dental implant restoration.
There are several types of dental crowns available. They come in various materials such as:
- Metal Crowns: These can be actually made of gold, last a long time and wont chip or break. You may or may not like the idea of having a gold colored tooth.
- Composite Crowns: These are made of composite materials, just like a filling. They can be made to the exact color of your natural teeth. These crowns don’t chip easily, but can stain over time.
- Porcelain Crowns: These are the most natural looking crowns. They are strong but are a little more brittle and can chip over time. These are better used on the front teeth.
Upon examination we can help you decide which type of crown is best for you.
If you may be a candidate for a dental crown or have any questions please contact our office to make an appointment.