Falling temperatures can drive all kinds of pests indoors, including rodents. Take time during Rodent Awareness Week (November 15 through 21) to learn more about these pests and take steps to prevent them from making your home their winter vacation spot.
Threats to your health and property
Far from being a simple nuisance, mice and rats can directly and indirectly transmit a number of diseases, including Lyme disease, several forms of typhus, West Nile virus, Salmonellosis, and many more. They can also introduce fleas and ticks — and their diseases — into your home.
Once inside, rodent droppings and urine can contaminate surfaces and equipment, particularly in your kitchen, and trigger asthma and allergies. Mice and rats can also do extensive and costly damage to your home by chewing through wood, insulation, drywall, and electrical wiring, which can raise the risk of fire.
Signs that you may have rodents
Small rodent problems can become serious infestations in just a matter of days, so it’s important to take action at the first sign of mice or rats. You may first notice droppings in your kitchen cabinets or see food packaging that they’ve chewed on to get at the contents. Noises are a good clue, too, especially at night when they’re on the move and building their nests.
Rodent prevention to-do list
Regular inspections and taking care of a few chores can greatly decrease the chances that rats and mice will find their way inside:
Check access points. Rodents can fit through a surprisingly small opening, so look closely for every possible entry point, especially openings for utilities. Use silicone caulk to seal small cracks and crevices. For larger gaps, fill them with steel wool; it acts as a deterrent and can’t be chewed through.
Maintain your landscaping. Keep plants, branches and mulch at least 20 inches away from your home’s foundation. This keeps rodents from nesting near the foundation and eliminates the “bridges” they may use
Remember the roof. Take a look at your chimney and check vents under your eaves and in your attic. Prevent the entry of mice and rats by screening these openings.
Seal doors and windows. Weather-stripping is not only important for energy efficiency — it also keeps out rodents and other pests.
Reduce clutter. If you have piles of clothing, seasonal decorations, old papers, or other items that you have stored out of the way in an attic or spare room, you could be providing places for rodents to nest. Clean out things you don’t need to keep, and seal the items you want to retain in rodent-proof containers.
Call now for professional rodent control service
It doesn’t take long for a mice or rat problem to get out of control. At Turner Pest Control, our expert technicians will thoroughly inspect your property and recommend the best treatment for you. Keep your home and family safe from a rodent invasion — get in touch to learn more about our affordable, professional pest control services.