History of Bangladeshi Newspapers and Magazines
Newspaper is a general term used to refer to publications occurring daily or weekly postulating general news about a specific region, topic or niche. They are made available to the public at large for a fee. The news items are presented in form of articles of varying lengths presented by reporters who gather them from different places. The newspaper’s editor in chief is in charge of the headlines, layout and other features of the newspaper such as graphics, photographs and advertisements.
The earliest newspaper or what one can describe as a publication closest to the newspaper happened in Rome in 59 B.C. The Acta was a formal government release with handwritten news about the latest happenings in Rome. China soon followed suit with the tipao, a Chinese version of the Acta around 202 B.C. However, the modern print out we today call a newspaper has its origin in Europe.
The Gazzettes or Avvisi as they were then known in Venice reached a greater audience and were being produced on a weekly basis. This was in 1556, where the news was printed on one page that was folded twice. The Daily Courant an English newspaper was first published in 1702. Prior to the establishment of this publication, the newspaper had undergone further improvements to better its appearance and quality. This daily publication attracted huge audiences and became a great success to its founders. In Bangladesh, newspapers became an important element by the time. Bangladesh News Cafe is one of those websites that let the users read most of the bangla newspapers online without any cost.
By the nineteenth century the industrial revolution changed the face of newspaper publication. Improvements such as the printing press and press freedom further contributed to the success of the newspaper. The newspaper now becaame a widespread phenomenon and people published news that matched their cultural and geographical preferences. Many more people had access to the newspaper and it became a popular means of communication. In the early 1910’s, the newspaper had already reached the standards of today’s modern paper. News articles had now moved away from the view that they were used for political gain and publishing only what the state permitted.
Modern technology such as television, radio, cellphones and the internet have made the newspaper an almost unnecessary means of communication. This modern technology relays news as soon as it happens as opposed to yesterday’s news presented by the newspaper. All those new media pushed the Bangladeshi newspaper industry to a corner. But still newspapers like Prothom Alo, Ittefaq, Kaler Kantho are thriving. History of Bangla Newspaper However, this has not killed the newspaper because its stakeholders strive to keep this important bit of history alive for generations to come. Consequently, newspapers today have adopted digital production processes and online publications to enable it remain relevant in today’s fast changing world.