Salt Lake City, Utah
June 23, 2018
June 23, 2018
July 27, 2018
Design in Engineering Education
This research paper describes the results of a study exploring how user backgrounds can systematically be considered in design activities and how this can be used to enhance engineering design courses. In human-centered engineering design, understanding what users desire and need is key for creating innovative solutions. Uncovering insights of users is needed as a backbone to provide the best possible solution for real customer needs. In this process, it is important to consider the background of users such as their culture, gender, education, or socio- economic class. Indeed, many project-based engineering design courses have been developed over the years to explicitly address user needs. However, little is known on how influential these exercises are on the subsequent design decisions. In order to move towards evidence-based education, we need to be able to understand the impact of these exercises to improve students’ ability to consider user backgrounds. This study is based on a multiple case study of eleven student projects sampled within the past four years of a master's level engineering design course spanning three quarters. First, mid- and end-of project reports ranging from 50 to 250 pages were coded from seven projects, chosen after a teaching team session in which the projects were ranked. Four high-performing and three low-performing projects, in which people were seen highly pertinent to the design brief, were chosen for the analysis. A systematic comparison of the methods and strategies reported in each project was performed. Second, four ongoing projects from 2016 were chosen for further study in which people played a large part in the design brief. Students from these four projects were interviewed mid-course on how and why they considered user backgrounds. The interviews were audio recorded and transcribed for analysis, coding each interview for the reported problems and influences for considerations regarding user backgrounds. The analysis revealed that challenges in considering user backgrounds occur on three different levels: First, teams are not aware of the background of the user as they do not consciously think about it (lack of awareness). Second, they do not understand the user background, even if they are aware of it (lack of empathy). Third, some teams are aware of the background and understand it but do not integrate the knowledge into the design (lack of integration). Especially methods with direct user contact and ones, in which designers immerse themselves in the user perspective are effective as hereby designers rely less on stereotypes and the empathic process is facilitated. We develop a set of methods called “Contextual Empathic Design (CED)” based on the identified successful patters of the student design projects to counteract problems occurred in user considerations. These guidelines enhance the education of engineers by improving their needfinding capabilities leading to an advanced overall ability to innovate. Further, this paper marks a novel way of human centered design and provides concrete recommendations on how CED can be translated into modern engineering education.
von Unold, B., & Böhmer, A. I., & Björklund, T. A., & Ledl, N., & Lindemann, U., & Toye, G., & Sheppard, S. (2018, June), Implications of Contextual Empathic Design for Engineering Education Paper presented at 2018 ASEE Annual Conference & Exposition , Salt Lake City, Utah. https://peer.asee.org/30626
ASEE holds the copyright on this document. It may be read by the public free of charge. Authors may archive their work on personal websites or in institutional repositories with the following citation: © 2018 American Society for Engineering Education. Other scholars may excerpt or quote from these materials with the same citation. When excerpting or quoting from Conference Proceedings, authors should, in addition to noting the ASEE copyright, list all the original authors and their institutions and name the host city of the conference. - Last updated April 1, 2015