Seasonal Allergies….Do you have them?
What are Allergies? Allergies, also known as allergic diseases, are a number of conditions caused by hypersensitivity of the immune system to something in the environment that usually causes little or no problem in most people. These diseases include hay fever, food allergies, atopic dermatitis, allergic asthma, and anaphylaxis. Symptoms may include red eyes, an itchy rash, runny nose, shortness of breath, or swelling.
What are seasonal allergies?
Seasonal allergies, sometimes called “hay fever” or seasonal allergic rhinitis, are allergy symptoms that occur during certain times of the year, usually when outdoor molds release their spores, and trees, grasses, and weeds release tiny pollen particles into the air to fertilize other plants. There are steps you can take to reduce your exposure to allergy triggers. For example you can stay indoors on dry or windy days, delegate lawn mowing and other gardening chores that have a tendency to stir up allergies, you should even go as far as wearing a pollen mask when outdoors. Seasonal allergy signs and symptoms can flare up when there’s a lot of pollen in the air. You can stay indoors on high pollen days and start taking allergy meds before symptoms start. Its also important and beneficial to keep indoor air clean. For instance; use air conditioning in car or home, use high efficiency filters, use a dehumidifier, and use hepa filters in the home.
By following these suggestions you may increase your defense against seasonal allergies and become educated about allergy trigger prevention. As with any medical condition if you find you have tryed these remedies and have take allergy medications and are still suffering you should consult your health care provider who can help you find the treatment option that is best for you. ONce your doctor has given you a treatment outline it is best to follow the advice of your doctor.
If you have questions about seasonal allergies or would like to discuss it with your Dr. please call us at (904)513-3240