VIsit to Liverpool to see the Calderstones.
On Saturday 21ST September 2019 a group from the Bolton Earth Spirit Network came to see the Calderstones now redisplayed in the Mansion House of Calderstones Park. The oldest stones are about 5ooo years old having been assembled to form what appears to be a passage grave of the Neolithic period and later to the Bronze Age. The corpses had been cremated and pottery urns were dicovered. There are curious marks on the stones which were of local sandstone. Footprints of varied size have been cut into some. The most important and oldest marks are in spirals several inches in diameter and small round scooped out hollows. There is a little of more modern graffiti too.
Originally the stones were found during road building outside the parks ‘ suburban roads in the late 1800s?
The Mansion House is a grand villa in the former private park of industrialist Joseph Need Walker. When the stones were discovered he took took charge and saved them. Later the stones were cared for by the city concil.
Today the stones are properly preserved. There are six and are now arranged in parallel lines but in past side after they were discovered they were displayed by in a circle which was not their original layout by the Neolithic folk, They were moved around a lot when acquired by the Corporation in 1900s. They are now in are of the Reader Charity in Liverpool who now occupy the Mansion House and much land in the park which has been a good improvement.
Similar stone graves with similar markings have been seen in Northern Ireland which leads us to think there must have been trade between Liverpool and Ireland in Neolithic time.The idea may have come from this as people travelled in boats across the Irish Sea.
Astronomy was practised by the ancient people and may have influenced the placing of the stones on the sandstone rising from the Mersey (which later became an attractive area for wealthy trading Victorian families who built their villas looking across the Mersey)
The community who built them must have been a settled one doing simple farming on these slopes.
by Ann Margaret Jones who noted these facts on the day given to us by