An urban district is a district that covers an urban area.
- Urban district (Great Britain and Ireland) were types of local government covering smaller towns. They were gradually abolished by 2002.
- Urban districts of Germany are land subdivisions comprising cities equivalent to districts.
- Urban districts of Russia are cities not belonging to any district. Their status is equivalent to that of a district.
Other articles related to "districts, urban district, district":
... county boroughs of Bradford and Leeds, the amalgamation of a number of county districts to form three new districts, and the creation of a new non-county borough ... Bradford county borough was to absorb part of Queensbury and Shelf urban district, but was to lose the Tong area Halifax county borough was to take in part of Sowerby Bridge urban district Leeds and ...
... South Hornsey was a local government district in Middlesex, England from 1865 to 1900 ... The district was formed in 1865 when the Local Government Act 1858 was adopted in the southern part of the parish of Hornsey ... The majority of the district (172 acres) consisted of the Brownswood Park area south east of Finsbury Park ...
... Sedgley Urban District was a local government district within Staffordshire, which was created in 1894 from the western half of the manor of Sedgley (t ... The Urban District, formed in 1894, consisted of the historic villages of Sedgley, Cotwall End, Gospel End, Upper Gornal, Lower Gornal and Woodsetton ... By 1966, the district had developed into a town due to extensive housebuilding (private and council) since 1920, and was dissolved to be absorbed into three neighbouring authorities ...
... The rural district was altered as follows The County of Lancaster (Lees and Crossbank) Confirmation Order 1914 abolished the parish of Crossbank and transferred. 605 acres (2.45 km2) to the County Borough of Oldham On abolition in 1954 the rural district was divided between the Borough of Ashton-under-Lyne (1,154 acres), County Borough of Oldham (1,052 acres ...
... The boroughs of Harrogate and Ripon The urban district of Knaresborough The rural district of Ripon and Patley Bridge Most of the rural district of ... Hull to take in most of Haltemprice urban district and parts of the rural districts of Beverley and Holderness Derby would expand greatly with parts of the rural districts of South East Derbyshire, Belper ...
Famous quotes containing the words district and/or urban:
“Most works of art, like most wines, ought to be consumed in the district of their fabrication.”
—Rebecca West (18921983)
“I have misplaced the Van Allen belt
the sewers and the drainage,
the urban renewal and the suburban centers.
I have forgotten the names of the literary critics.”
—Anne Sexton (19281974)