Is your tooth unbearably painful? You may want to see a dentist because you have a tooth abscess.
A tooth abscess is dangerous, and you shouldn’t ignore it. We explain its causes, symptoms, and introduce you to a few natural ways to treat it.
What is tooth abscess?
A tooth abscess develops when pus collects around the tooth, causing it to become infected.
The most common type of tooth abscess is the periapical abscess, while the next most common is periodontal tooth abscess. The origin, according to this study, is a variety of bacteria that gathers in soft, dead pulp tissue.
Causes of Tooth Abscess
A tooth abscess occurs when bacteria invade the dental pulp, or the innermost part of the tooth which contains sensitive, connective tissue and blood vessels. They enter through cracks in the tooth.
Consequently, risk factors for this condition are decayed or broken teeth. You are likely to have the disease if you have poor dental hygiene practices.
A poor diet makes you more likely to develop a tooth abscess. Frequently eating chocolates, ice cream or other foods high in sugar will increase the likelihood of an infection.
Symptoms of Tooth Abscess
You may have an infected tooth if you have a throbbing headache that doesn’t seem to go away. It may reach your ears or jawbone. An infection might have set in if your teeth are suddenly sensitive to temperatures. You will find it challenging to eat ice-cream, which numbs your gums. It will also taste foul.
Visit your dentist if a fever or a swollen cheek accompanies these symptoms.
Why you shouldn’t ignore an infected tooth
People who experience these symptoms may avoid the dentist in the hope that the pain will go away. But it doesn’t. If left untreated, an abscess may spread into the jaw bone and weaken it. Your dentist may recommend a root canal or crown therapy.
The roots of several upper teeth extend into the sinus area. Therefore, a tooth infection could lead to sinusitis. It could even lead to septicemia when the entire bloodstream becomes infected. Brain infection is also possible.
Tooth Abscess: Natural Remedies
An abscess is painful, but there are natural remedies that help. You may find them surprising.
You use garlic in stir-fries, but probably don’t know that it has anti-inflammatory properties. Here’s how you can use it to heal tooth decay. Chew on a clove of fresh garlic until the pain reduces. Then rinse your mouth with warm water.
You may also rub a few drops of clove oil onto the damaged tooth. You could also mix a pinch of table salt with half a teaspoon of garlic powder. Put this mixture on the infected tooth for about ten minutes, then rinse with mouthwash.
Cloves have analgesics that ease a toothache. They also control inflammation. Dip a cotton ball and leave it on the infected area for a while,
You could also put a whole clove between your cheek and infected tooth. Chew on it for about half an hour, then rinse your mouth.
3: Apple Cider Vinegar
Apple cider vinegar is another very effective home remedy for a tooth abscess. It has anti-inflammatory and disinfectant properties that help reduce pain and inflammation while disinfecting the affected area.
Swish 1 tablespoon of raw, unfiltered apple cider vinegar in your mouth for a few minutes. Spit it out completely, being sure not to swallow it. Rinse your mouth with warm water. Repeat this process a few times a day.
Another option is to mix one teaspoon of raw, unfiltered apple cider vinegar in a glass of water and drink it twice daily. Another efficient home remedy for tooth abscesses is apple cider vinegar. Its anti-inflammatory properties make up for its sour taste.
Swish a teaspoon of it in your mouth for a few minutes, then spit it out. Then, use warm water to rinse your mouth. Do this a few times daily. You can also mix water and apple cider.
4. Black Tea Bag
Another excellent remedy for tooth decay is black tea. The tannins in it lessen inflammation and pain. Black tea also contains antioxidants that limit infection.
Just put a black tea bag in water for a few minutes. Take it out of the water and wring it. Put it on the infected area and leave it for a few hours. Rinse your mouth with saltwater.
5. Oil Pulling
Oil pulling, an ancient Ayurvedic practice, treats dental abscesses. It decreases toxins, bacteria in the mouth and the rest of the body. Swish some oil in your mouth for about 15 minutes but don’t swallow it. Spit it out and rinse your mouth with warm water. Do this twice daily.
In all, you’ll need to cure a tooth abscess before the infection spreads throughout your body. These natural remedies will boost healing.
Copyright © 2014-2020 Life Advancer. All rights reserved. For permission to reprint, contact us.