What Are Haemorrhoids?
Haemorrhoids or hemorrhoids are commonly known as piles and sometimes people do call them hemroids as well. These names or terms refer to a troublesome condition that affects the lower part of the rectum and the anus.
Why Do You Get Hemorrhoids?
The most common doubt arising in the minds of people being tortured by hemorrhoids is about the cause. Why do you get hemorrhoids? Many patients email us demanding a detailed and comprehensive answer.
Hemorrhoids may be caused by different factors. The most common cause of hemorrhoids is repeated pushing and straining on the rectum and anus while attempting to pass stool. Straining obstructs of blood circulation into and out from the area, which leads to collection of blood and swelling of the vessels in that spot.
For similar reasons, severe cases of prolonged constipation or diarrhea could also cause hemorrhoids. In addition to that, pregnant women may be at a greater danger of developing hemorrhoids because the enlarged uterus presses and puts a great deal of pressure on these veins.
Am I At Risk of Getting Hemorrhoids?
If your family has a history of hemorrhoid patients in the past, you may be likely at higher risk to be suffering from them as well.
Hemorrhoids may also be triggered by other causes, such as pregnancy or aging. Your doctor can pinpoint the primary reasons that are causing your hemorrhoids.
Anything causes pressure during bowel movements can contribute to external hemorrhoids.
What are the Symptoms of Hemorrhoids or Piles?
There are a range of symptoms that can affect a person with hemorrhoids. Symptoms tend to vary depending on the intensity of your hemorrhoids. Some of the symptoms that you may experience are listed below:
- Itching near the anus or rectal area
- Pain around the anus
- Lumps near or around the anus
- Passing stool that is mixed with blood
You may notice blood loss when making use of the bathroom, such as observing blood on toilet paper or in the toilet. Lumps around the anus can be felt to be enlarged.
These symptoms could even come up because of other health problems as well. If you believe that you may be suffering from hemorrhoids, you ought to plan an examination session with your doctor.
What Do Hemorrhoids Look Like?
Hemorrhoids are very common but you may not know if you are suffering from it. There are many who do not know how to confirm if they or their loved ones are suffering from hemorrhoids.
The first question to ask in such a case is ‘what do hemorrhoids look like’? Here are the some graphic hemorrhoid pictures that will help to confirm the diagnosis at home.
How to Diagnose If I Have Hemorrhoids?
Many of the indications found in cases of external hemorrhoids could also be caused by other ailments. So it is essential to have a comprehensive medical examination to find out if your symptoms are produced by hemorrhoids or some other medical condition.
Your doctor may use a series of tests to confirm the existence of external hemorrhoids near the anus. These tests may include:
- Examining you internally with a Proctoscope
- Examining your rectum digitally
- Using a Colonoscope
- Using a Sigmoidoscope
- Using an Anoscope
- External Examination
Your doctor may begin with a physical exam to find out if there are any swollen veins that may be causing the external hemorrhoids. In case of external hemorrhoids, your doctor will be able to confirm the diagnosis by taking a look at the hemorrhoids during this kind of physical assessment.
Procedures such as a colonoscopy, anoscopy, sigmoidoscopy, or proctoscopy will make it possible for your physician to examine any possible problems. If your physician suspects that you have internal hemorrhoids rather than external hemorrhoids, he or she may use an anoscope to inspect the inside of the anus.
If You Are Now Anywhere in India: 07666955917 Click to Call (Book Appointment)
If You Are Now Outside India: +917666955917 Click to Call (Book Appointment)