About This Chapter
ASSET Reading Skills Test: Interpreting Ideas - Chapter Summary
This unique chapter covers effective methods for interpreting different types of ideas from a reading selection. It will also address:
- Explaining the main point through supporting ideas
- Implied main ideas
- Conclusions drawn from a reading selection
- Examples and the definition of reasoning
- Understanding and using inference
- Ways to evaluate reasoning in an essay
The purpose of the lessons in this chapter is to help you learn and remember details that will be covered on the ASSET exam. After being equipped with analysis skills, you will be capable of performing at your optimal level on the exam.
ASSET Reading Skills Test: Interpreting Ideas Chapter Objective
The purpose of the ASSET Reading Skills exam is to assess your skills and knowledge of different areas for proper placement in postsecondary classes. The questions on this exam are multiple-choice, and you will have to read through different passages before answering them.
All of the content covered in this chapter is part of the Reasoning portion of the exam, which makes up 50% of the test. In order to be prepared for this portion, you need to learn the strategies and concepts that are outlined in this chapter. If you have any problems, reach out and get help from one of our knowledgeable instructors.
1. Drawing Conclusions from a Reading Selection
When someone drops hints, we're able to draw conclusions about what they're really trying to say. Similarly, as readers, we use clues to draw conclusions from texts. This lesson explains how to draw conclusions and how to teach this important skill.
2. How to Explain the Main Point through Supporting Details
In this lesson, you'll learn how to identify the supporting details that explain the main idea being presented in a piece of literature. You will also learn different strategies that can be applied to future questions about the main idea.
3. How to Compare & Contrast Ideas in a Reading Selection
The ability to compare and contrast the many ideas in one reading selection can be an overwhelming task. This video lesson gives a step-by-step method of how to successfully compare and contrast ideas in a reading selection.
4. Implied Main Idea: Definition & Examples
What's the point? If you're having trouble answering this question, you might need to learn more about implied main ideas. This lesson gives a definition and examples, along with explanations on how to identify them!
5. Reasoning: Definition & Examples
In this lesson, we will examine what reasoning is and how it's applied to literature and composition. We will look at some examples, and then you will take a short quiz to check your understanding of the concept.
6. Evaluating Reasoning in an Essay or Article
Being able to effectively evaluate reasoning can be helpful to you as you develop your own deductive and inductive reasoning skills and put those skills to work in persuasive essays. This lesson sheds some light on how to evaluate reasoning.
7. What is Inference? - How to Infer Intended Meaning
In this lesson, we will define the terms inference and intended meaning. We will then discuss what steps to take when making inferences in literature.
Earning College Credit
Did you know… We have over 200 college courses that prepare you to earn credit by exam that is accepted by over 1,500 colleges and universities. You can test out of the first two years of college and save thousands off your degree. Anyone can earn credit-by-exam regardless of age or education level.
To learn more, visit our Earning Credit Page
Transferring credit to the school of your choice
Not sure what college you want to attend yet? Study.com has thousands of articles about every imaginable degree, area of study and career path that can help you find the school that's right for you.
Other chapters within the ASSET Reading Skills Test: Practice & Study Guide course