Our collection of children's picture books featuring Black and Indigenous people and People of Color (BIPOC) is available to the public. You can use the Search Tool below to find titles. *Inclusion of a title in the collection DOES NOT EQUAL recommendation.* See our related readings page for suggested tools for evaluating books.
You can find titles by typing a keyword into the search bar below (e.g. adoption, birthday, holidays, princess, dinosaur, etc.), or by selecting one or a combo of filters on the left.
First time here? Start here!
22 matching booksShow Filters
While visiting the science museum with his mother and sister, Jojo finds himself on a journey through space as the retired space shuttle Endeavour describes her missions and the people involved. Includes "fun facts" about Endeavour, "famous firsts" of five space shuttles, quizzes, and a glossary.
This colorful and empowering bilingual book teaches all of us that we are all unique and special, just like our hair! Meet Kiara, a smart, happy, creative and beautiful little girl who learns to love her curly hair, enabling her to develop self-acceptance and self-respect. -- from publisher
"Mira lives in a gray and hopeless urban community until a muralist arrives and, along with his paints and brushes, brings color, joy, and togetherness to Mira and her neighbors"--|cProvided by publisher
Almost 10 years before Brown vs. Board of Education, Sylvia Mendez and her parents helped end school segregation in California. An American citizen of Mexican and Puerto Rican heritage who spoke and wrote perfect English, Mendez was denied enrollment to a "Whites only"; school. Her parents took action by organizing the Hispanic community and filing a lawsuit in federal district court. Their success eventually brought an end to the era of segregated education in California.
Before Pedro Martínez pitched the Red Sox to a World Series championship, before he was named to the All-Star team eight times, before he won the Cy Young Award three times, he was a kid from a place called Manoguayabo in the Dominican Republic. Pedro loved baseball more than anything, and his older brother Ramón was the best pitcher he'd ever seen. He dreamed of the day he and his brother could play together in the major leagues. This is the story of how that dream came true--Dust jacket
A little girl discovers all the bright colors in her Hispanic American neighborhood.
"Six months before the famous Wright Brothers' first flight, Aída de Acosta became the first woman to fly a powered aircraft."--Provided by publisher
Musician, botanist, baseball player, pilot—the Latinos featured in this collection come from many different countries and from many different backgrounds. Celebrate their accomplishments and their contributions to a collective history and a community that continues to evolve and thrive today! Bold, graphic portraits and beautiful poems present famous and lesser-known Latinos from varied backgrounds who have faced life's challenges in creative ways. -- Provided by publisher
A boy helps his father keep their very old car running as they make a trip to Havana for his newborn cousin's zero- year birthday. Includes author's note about cars in Cuba
"Tata Gus teaches his grandson Aaron how to use natural healing remedies, and in the process helps the members of his family and his neighbors"--|cProvided by publisher