American Heritage® Dictionary of the English Language, Fourth Edition
- n. A place where an extensive variety of woody plants are cultivated for scientific, educational, and ornamental purposes.
Century Dictionary and Cyclopedia
- n. A place in which trees and shrubs, especially rare ones, are cultivated for scientific or other purposes; a botanical tree-garden.
- n. A place where many varieties of trees are grown for research, educational, and ornamental purposes.
GNU Webster's 1913
- n. A place in which a collection of rare trees and shrubs is cultivated for scientific or educational purposes.
- n. a facility where trees and shrubs are cultivated for exhibition
- From Latin arborētum ("place grown with trees"), from arbor ("tree"). (Wiktionary)
- Latin arborētum, a place grown with trees, from arbor, tree. (American Heritage® Dictionary of the English Language, Fourth Edition)
“So having ramps connecting from SR 520 in/out of the arboretum is "paving it"?”
“Unless you're willing to trade in your nice job and weekend trips to the mountains on your Subaru Outlook for a monastic existence, quit playing the rest of us about how we humans are supposed to have zero impact on our surroundings. revroux also pine grove, the environmentally sensitive area "the arboretum" is a urban park but is not an urban place.”
“An arboretum is a collection of all the different species of a natural order of trees and shrubs planted together; and it does not necessarily imply that these orders should be arranged in any particular manner; as indeed botanists disagree as to how they should be placed, Jussieu having adopted one plan, De Candolle another, and Dr. Lindley another.”
“On the east side of the arboretum was a beautiful rose garden with a vine-covered gazebo, the back of the structure overhanging a pond filled with koi and lily pads.”
“The arboretum was a serious ongoing project dedicated to cultivating and growing plants from all three worlds, but it was also designed to be enjoyed.”
“The arboretum is a public botanical garden and a scientific research facility of the Agricultural Research Service.”
“Then they saw the enormous hangar bay and something called an arboretum—a strange place where the Earthers kept plants, intentionally.”
“Nittolo said that in coming years he hopes to turn his attention to the creek downstream from the arboretum, which is overgrown with non-native plants.”
“He called the arboretum "a world-class institution" and said that the new post "allows me to combine my two passions, teaching and directing a world-respected garden.”
“Another central feature of the arboretum will be the Biodiversity Center, she said.”
These user-created lists contain the word ‘arboretum’.
A complete Barron's Wordlist for GRE preparation. Your online flashcard replacement.
Words that sound like they might be the names of elements of the periodic table, but that aren't. Many of the words listed here were actually proposed as names for substances their creators thought...
A list of words that are odd or words that I have looked up.
Band names that are also common words or phrases.
Interesting, there is a traditional vocabulary of an Ukrainian, that differs from vocabulary of average American. It would be nice to explore it.
Words as I learn them.
List? What list?
This is the list that makes up the world.
Looking for tweets for arboretum.