Junior year is a great time to start the college search process. With this is mind, your student should plan to visit colleges and take advantage of college fairs for opportunities to speak with many different schools. When visiting colleges or speaking with college representatives, your student should think about the questions to ask that will help him or her make future decisions.
Schedule a campus visit with Stanislaus State!
College Entrance Exams
Your student can register in September for the October PSAT. Scores are important, as they are used to qualify for the National Merit Scholarship Competition and the National Achievement program; plus, it is good practice for the ACT. PSAT results should arrive in December, which will give your student an opportunity to consult with the guidance counselor to discuss the best way to prepare for the ACT and SAT.
The ACT and SAT should also be included in the plan for this year. Keep in mind that Stanislaus State looks for students to meet a qualifiable eligibility index, as part of the admission requirements. Encourage your student to take advantage of the testing opportunities throughout the year to ensure more chances at getting the best possible scores. For more information on the SAT and ACT tests, visit the Websites or your student can speak with his or her guidance counselor.
Choosing a Career
This can be a fun and challenging process. As a junior in high school, your student can begin to explore many career options by checking out some of these links:
A-Z Majors provides information about Stanislaus State majors, including catalog information, and links to the respective department's Website.
Career Services at Stanislaus State has several links to assist your student in finding out more information on careers such as nature of the work, working conditions, job outlook, salaries, skills required and more!
Stanislaus State Library provides access to online catalog, a powerful interface to located books and other library materials. Start by using the keyword "career" and read available resources related to specific careers and career exploration online!
And there's always Google.