"Teachers are not only in the school, they are everywhere" said the outstanding scholar.
I agree that everything in the world can be our teacher and can teach us something. It simply depends on whether or not we can see it.
Think about the story of Newton when he saw the apple fall down from the apple tree. He learned the lesson. When the Buddha saw the old man, the sick man, the dead man and the monk, he also learned a lesson, which is the lesson of life.
The Virginia Living Museum in Newport News is a wonderful place to spend time with family and friends and learn about the world around us. There is a lot to learn from such a visit, such as the life of the butterfly.
Everyone in the world prefers the butterfly because they are so beautiful and amazing. Let's take a look at the butterfly's life cycle, which begins with an egg and progresses to caterpillar, chrysalis, adult, and then finally ends with the natural transformation of the butterfly.
If we look closely at the process of transformation from one state to another state, we see it is not an easy process. It takes time. It is very hard for every egg to go through the state of the caterpillar. After that, the caterpillar may die before even becoming a chrysalis or before changing into the beautiful butterfly. But when it transforms into the butterfly, it is attractive and beautiful for everyone to see.
In Buddhism, if we compare life to the life cycle of a butterfly, a great transformation also can exist within us. When human beings transcend from ordinary people (in Pali: Putuchana, the person who is full of greed, hatred and delusion) to a good person (Kallayanachana, the person who is good, and knows what is right and wrong) then transforming into the noble one (Ariyachana, he who gets rid of greed, hatred, and delusion) we can see all these steps as similar to the process a butterfly must undergo. We have a firm belief that every human being has the capacity to become a better person or the noble one, but they have to train themselves.
To transform oneself from an ordinary person to a good person and finally to a noble human being is not easy. To me, an ordinary person (putuchana) is like the caterpillar, because caterpillars do not look pretty — right? When we see them, some of us fear them; some do not want to touch them and try to escape from them. On the other hand, an ordinary person (putuchana) does a lot of good and bad things, such as following their own desires and cravings.
In the Buddha's time, Anathapindika is the business man who offered the temple to the Buddha. He was a very good lay disciple; however he had a son who was so bad that he feared that he would go to hell in the afterlife. He gave a lot of money to his son to return to the temple. His son went and slept somewhere in the temple and in the evening came back to get the money from his father. Everyday his son went to the temple but one day, his son got bored with sleeping and didn't have anything to do. So he went to the chanting hall and listened to the Buddha teach, and then realized the truth. His transformation is one from an ordinary person to the noble one. Soon after he began his own spiritual transformation.
To transcend to a good person and the noble person is like the butterfly's transformation. The Buddha shows each one of us the technique to transform our own mind from an ordinary state to the noble mind. One important thing we should remember is that every human being has the capacity to become a noble person since each one of us has the Buddha within us. But we all need training. In order to transcend from an ordinary person to good person and finally to a noble person, we need three techniques to transform ourselves.
The first technique is self-discipline, we have to control our anger to not harm and kill any beings, control our greed to not get anything that is not belong to us, control our lust or desire to not have sexual misconduct, to control our mouth to not speak what is not true, to control our desire to not drink or have something that we damage our consciousness.
The second technique is concentration, whatever work or thing we do, put our full energy to and try to concentrate and enjoy with that.
The third technique is being mindful or know when we stand, walk, sit, sleep, eat, drink, work, speak, think and so on. This is the way to transcend ourselves. We can become more beautiful like the butterfly.
Phramaha Piya Uttamapanno(Jundadal), a Buddhist Missionary Monk of Wat Pasantidhamma temple in Carrollton. He can be reached by e-mail at email@example.com.