Lipids and carbohydrates are the energetic molecules and one of the main components of the metabolic system. These molecules circulate in the blood stream and between the metabolic tissues and transfer energy throughout the body. They are degraded and release their energy in the form of Adenosine Triphosphate (ATP) to be used in anabolic reactions. Anabolic reactions are the energy consumer reactions for synthesis of molecules or energy storage. These include glycogenolysis, glycolysis, Tricarboxylic Acid (TCA, citric acid or the Krebs) cycle, electron transfer chain and fatty acid beta-oxidation and protein breakdown. In excess consumption of carbohydrates are converted to lipid molecules and stored in the adipose tissue. Lipid-carbohydrate interaction is one of the fundamental parameters in the regulation of the energy metabolic system (1).
Adipose tissue or fatty tissue is a connective tissue consisting mainly of fat cells (adipose cells or adipocytes), specialized to synthesize and contain large globules of fat, within a structural network of fibres. The fat stored in adipose tissue comes from dietary fats or is produced in the body (2).
Adipose tissue deposition leads to increase in cardiometabolic risk factor, the risk of diabetes cardiovascular diseases and obesity (3).
An antioxidant is a molecule that inhibits the oxidation of other molecules. Oxidation is a chemical reaction that can produce free radicals, leading to chain reactions that may damage cells (4).
Antioxidants may play a role in the management or prevention of some medical conditions, such as some cancers, macular degeneration, Alzheimer's disease and arthritis-related conditions (5).
Life On Acai-Life is a perfect blend consists of Acai Berry Extract, Green Tea Extract, Catechins and Chromium. Acai berries are widely touted as a so-called superfood, with proponents claiming that they are helpful for a variety of health concerns, including arthritis, weight loss, high cholesterol, skin appearance, detoxification and general health. Acai berries contain antioxidants, fiber and heart-healthy fats. They may have more antioxidant content than other commonly eaten berries, such as cranberries, blueberries and strawberries (6).
Acai berry is extremely high in anthocyanin, a form of plant antioxidant associated with the ability to lower cholesterol levels in the bloodstream. It is also rich in plant sterols that help in lowering cholesterol. It occupies the space that cholesterol would take in the body, preventing the risk of heart ailments (7).
Acai berry helps in improve digestion; Regular intake of the acai berry keeps your digestive system clean and helps it in functioning well. The fruit is a natural source of dietary fibre, which aids healthy digestion keeping problems like bloating, constipation and diarrhoea away (7).
Green tea is made from unfermented leaves and reportedly contains the highest concentration of powerful antioxidants called polyphenols. Antioxidants are substances that fight free radicals -- damaging compounds in the body that change cells, damage DNA and even cause cell death. Antioxidants like polyphenols in green tea, can neutralize free radicals and may reduce or even help prevent some of the damage they cause (8).
Chromium is a mineral our bodies use in small amounts for normal body functions, such as digesting food. Chromium helps to move blood sugar (glucose) from the bloodstream into the cells to be used as energy and to turn fats, carbohydrates and proteins into energy (9).
Chromium helps in Weight loss, obesity and a way to improve lean muscle and reduce body fat it helps people in lose weight and build muscle, plays an important role in strength training and commonly found in sports nutrition supplements chromium supplements help in treatment of type 2 diabetes, it reduces the blood sugar levels, as well as the amount of insulin (9).
2.Adipose tissue Anatomy, www.britannica.com/science/adipose-tissue
3. Causes and consequences of human variation in visceral adiposity, Am J Clin Nutr January 2010, vol. 91 no. 1 1-2,
6. What are acai berries and what are their possible health benefits?, www.mayoclinic.org/healthy-lifestyle/nutrition-and-healthy-eating/expert-answers/acai/faq-20057794
7.Acai berry and its benefits,
8.Green tea overview, https://umm.edu/health/medical/altmed/herb/green-tea
9.Chromium - Topic Overview, www.webmd.com/digestive-disorders/tc/chromium-topic-overview