A crown is an artificial restoration that fits over the remaining part of a prepared tooth, making it strong and giving it the shape of a natural tooth.
A crown is sometimes known as a ‘cap’. Crowns are an ideal restoration for teeth that have been broken, weakened by decay or include a large filling.
A crown could be used for a number of other reasons, for instance:
- you may have discoloured fillings and would like to improve the appearance of the tooth
- you may have had a root filling which will need a crown to protect it
- it may help hold a bridge or denture firmly in place.
Crowns may be made of the following materials, the choice of which is used is often decided by what the tooth does and where it is in the mouth
A. Porcelain fused to a metal base which may be gold or a non precious metal.(known as a bonded crown)
This gives a good aesthetic result from the porcelain whilst the metal base confers strength to the restoration. It is a good general purpose crown for all areas of the mouth. They look good and are capable of heavy chewing. Their main drawback is that with time, a black line can appear around the margin of the crown and the aesthetics can suffer as a result. This is a problem in the front of the mouth which is more visible and noticeable.
B. All Porcelain crown. (examples are Emax crowns or Zirconium Crowns)
This type of crown fuses porcelain to a strong ceramic base such as zirconium or lithium disilicate. They are incredibly hard wearing but as they are made in tooth coloured materials look natural and remain so for a long time. They are ideal where it is important for the tooth to look completely natural and indistinguishable from its neighbours.
C. All metal crowns (eg Gold crown)
Metal crowns are the least aesthetically pleasing crowns and as such are limited to the back teeth only. Here they provide an excellent surface for chewing and during their preparation, less of the underlying natural tooth is removed which means the core on which they sit is stronger. Gold crowns have been used in dentistry for over 100 years and are still used when the over-riding concern is for the ability to chew properly rather than how something looks.
All our crowns are manufactured in a British laboratory and come with a one year guarantee.
Would you like to discuss this treatment?
For more information or to book an appointment please call 0151 525 2992.