Common Health Concerns
Understanding common health concerns and what can be done to prevent or treat them can go a long way towards reducing the stress you feel when it comes to your health and the health of those in your care.
Whether you have seen a health story on the news, your child has come home from school with a note about immunizations, or your teenage daughter wants to go to another country on an exchange program, you are looking for information to guide you through the steps toward making informed health decisions. Having easy to understand health information at your fingertips will help you to focus on the key facts and save time.
In this section, there are information topics about some of the most common health concerns, so it is easy for you to find what you are looking for as quickly as possible.
Information in this section:
Diseases and Conditions
From asthma to sleep problems, this section covers a variety of diseases and conditions, including information on causes, symptoms, treatments, and some prevention guidelines you can use to maintain or improve your health.
Whether you burned your finger while cooking or got an insect bite during a camping trip, you will find useful first aid information in this section.
Children & Teens' Health
The health of your children is likely something you think about on a regular basis. In this section you can find topics that help explain some of the basics of keeping your children or teens healthy and happy.
Women’s health covers topics about the body and mind. From reproductive health to issues of day-to-day stress, we have gathered topics that are important to women.
More than ever, men are thinking about their health and well-being. There are topics that concern men of all ages, and in this section we have brought them together in one place.
As our population ages, seniors’ health is becoming a more significant topic. Decisions affecting quality of life and injury prevention are easier to make when clear information is available. In this section we have topics that are important to seniors and their care-givers.
The Aboriginal people of British Columbia have their own unique health care needs and in this section, we have provided health information and topics that are important to Aboriginal people and their communities.