Liver Cirrhosis And Alcoholism
Cirrhosis of liver is a reference to any kind of liver disease. It is evidently a serious problem if this organ is affected because it performs many critically important functions of the body. When affected, the liver shrinks and becomes hard.
These are sure signs of the fact that something is wrong with the liver. This change in the liver’s structure affects the cells of the liver. If not cured immediately, this condition can lead to hepatic failure and ultimately, death.
The liver is among the most important parts of our body. Located in the right part of the alimentary canal, the liver is so important because it manufactures bile, blood albumin, and cholesterol. The secretions of the liver are required for the removal of bodily wastes.
Another thing that the liver produces is prothrombin, which is necessary for the clotting of blood. Given below are few other important functions of the liver:
- inactivating certain hormones
- breaking down proteins into fat and sugar
- removing poison from blood
These functions make it evident that the liver is a very vital organ of the body. Thus, any kind of damage to the liver can be a great source of trouble.
There are other things that also lead to cirrhosis of the liver. They include damaged bile ducts, weak immune system, or incessant exposure to toxins. If you are diagnosed with any of these things, you must avoid alcohol, because alcohol damages the liver like nothing else.
Intake of too much alcohol, Hepatitis B and Hepatitis C (which damage the liver badly if not treated immediately) have been identified as the most common causes of cirrhosis of the liver. Continuous usage of other drugs (remember alcohol is a drug – albeit a socially acceptable one) can also lead to liver damage.
In case you are suffering from constant fever, a definite loss of appetite, skin irritation, yellowing of skin and eyes, personality changes, sudden weight loss or gain, nausea, fatigue and vomiting, you need to be careful.
These symptoms are not a healthy sign at all and if you experience one of these or a combination of these over a sustained period of time, you should go to a good doctor sooner rather than later. The reason why you should go and see a doctor is that the things mentioned above are the most common symptoms of cirrhosis.
You should be aware that chronic damage to the liver ultimately leads to the loss of the liver tissue, which can lead to organ failure. Thus, good care of the liver is very important.
In case of extreme scarring and damage, there is only one way out and that is a liver transplant. However, a liver transplant is a very expensive and risky affair.
Sometimes, where the damage is not too severe, changes in your lifestyle can help you restore your liver back to health. When faced with liver problems, let go of alcohol and drugs.
It goes without saying but I’ll say it anyway, follow a healthy lifestyle to maintain a healthy liver.