Sure! Hawaii is a melting pot of cultures, and it is reflected in the types of foods available there. Here is a list of 5 foods that you can eat while you're in Hawaii:

1. Laulau - This tasty entree is made from a generous portion of pork, along with tiny bits of butterfish, wrapped in the leaves of the taro plant and steamed until well cooked. Laulau is a staple of Hawaiian cuisine that is usually served with side dishes such as white rice, macaroni salad, and lomi salmon (diced tomato, salmon, and onions).

2. Kalua pork - Kalua pork is another delicious entree that consists of pork that has been seasoned and smoked. A whole pig is placed over a spit and cooked over Kiawe (mesquite) wood until the meat is tender and falls off the bone. Like laulau, kalua pork is served with side dishes as part of a complete meal.

3. Shaved ice - Also known as ice shave in certain parts of Hawaii, shaved ice is a snowcone that is served in a paper cone cup and flavored with different syrups. Most places in Hawaii that serve shaved ice have numerous flavors such as vanilla, cherry, lemon, strawberry, and even cola. If you're feeling adventurous, try rainbow shaved ice (all the flavors mixed into one snowcone) or shaved ice with ice cream at the bottom of the cone!

4. Spicy garlic shrimp - Many food trucks around Hawaii serve spicy garlic shrimp plates. Spicy garlic shrimp is made with shrimp that is cooked with garlic, Sriracha sauce, and butter and served on a bed of white or brown rice and a leafy green or macaroni salad. Typically served in styrofoam or cardboard food plates, spicy garlic shrimp plates are well portioned and guaranteed to fill you up.

5. Poi - While this particular dish might be polarizing (you will either love it or hate it) it is definitely a Native Hawaiian dish that those who love swear by. Poi is a lavender-colored paste that is made from the corm (root) of the taro plant which is steamed until soft and mashed into a paste. The paste is then mixed with milk and sugar until it has a yogurt-like consistency and served either immediately or a day or two later when it has fermented (some people swear by this!)
