Protecting precious resources
A solution to a national crisis more than 80 years in the past remains in place today, helping preserve Madison County’s agricultural future.
Spurred into action by the Dust Bowl, the federal government formed the Soil Erosion Service in 1933. Led by North Carolina native Hugh Hammond Bennett, the offshoot of the Interior Department introduced programs operated at the local level to help landowners protect two precious natural resources: soil and water.
Today, the program exists across the U.S. and in Madison County as Soil and Water Conservation Districts.
“We give free conservation technical assistance to any and all residents of Madison County,” said Tyler Ross, Director of Madison County’s Soil and Water Conservation District. “We’re very much a starting point. We tell landowners, ‘If you’ve got an issue and we can’t help you, we’ll find someone that can.’”
Ross and Brandon Young, the local district’s only employees, visit at least six properties across the county each week, consulting with landowners on ways to protect water quality and prevent soil erosion.
“We can do our part to help anybody,” said Ross. “We live in the most beautiful place in America, our job is to conserve it.”
Cost sharing programs
Soil and Water is not an enforcement agency – they do not issue citations or fines. Instead, they help address environmental threats by sharing best practices with landowners. Backed by federal, state and county funds, Soil and Water operate cost sharing programs to empower landowners to protect resources that benefit the public. In the 2016/17 fiscal year, Madison County’s district has more than $60,000 to allocate towards conservation efforts like the installation of livestock exclusion fencing and watering sources. The cost share programs cover as much as 75 percent of costs for projects on private land that help protect soil and water.
Tony Kent applied for cost sharing funds in 2015 for his family’s nearly 16 acre cattle farm in the Grassy Creek community. A visit from Soil and Water to his 12-head operation identified water quality and soil erosion concerns on the property. Staff encouraged Kent to apply for a cost sharing program for his family farm that would help pay for a well for his Angus and Herford cattle and a road that would help prevent soil erosion. The application was accepted, with the program ultimately covering 75 percent of the nearly $6,500 needed to make the necessary improvements.
“I’m telling you, if it hadn’t been for Soil and Water accepting us in that program, we wouldn’t be able to have cows out here,” said Kent. “It helped us tremendously.”
By saving on the conservation measures, the family farm could make additional investments into their operation. “We’ve been able to build a feed shed. They’re much easier to feed now,” he said, adding that the road and the water infrastructure for the cattle has made his land more stable, slowing soil erosion. “It is a great program, a super program for someone really struggling. We really depend on that supplemental income. We’re just trying to build our herd.”
Applications for cost sharing programs are scored by a complicated points system and reviewed the county’s five-member board before a final decision on any funding. Harold Hunter, a cattle farmer in Spring Creek, has sat on the board as one of three elected representatives for nearly 12 years; the other two are appointed.
“Water quality and keeping soil in place are the two most important things when considering applications,” said Hunter, who served for 22 years in the Marine Corps. “We always have a backlog of projects that we go back and visit. We only get so much funding.”
That reality means some applications are not approved each year. As a program beneficiary, Kent says applicants should not get discouraged if their submission is not accepted the first time around. “If anyone applies and they don’t get it, they should keep applying until they can help,” said Kent. “It is a great thing.”