Food technology course aims at imparting knowledge on food processing, packaging and preserving in clean, healthy and tasty state. The course provides hands on experience in food chemistry and packaging. Theory subjects includes food microbiology, nutritional biochemistry, aromatic and medicinal plants. Focus is laid on biotechnological methods, fruits and vegetables, technology grain and baking technology. Curriculum includes theory practical, workshops, demonstrations, internships and visits to food industries. The program trains students in techniques and technologies involves in food industry to become efficient professionals to make a mark in their career. Students develop skills in handling various processes to transfer their knowledge in relevant areas.
Eligibility for the Course
Candidates should have completed degree in B.E/B.Tech/Food Tech/Dairy Technology/M.Sc Food Science. Selection is based on valid GATE score and personal interview. Students who possess a sense of responsibility and have high standards of cleanliness can opt for this course.
Additional description of the Course
The advanced program exposes students for challenges in food industry and equips them with strong knowledge about applied concepts for problems solving issues. Food processing industry is a major driving source for economy. The course delivers intensive knowledge on food processing industry, reducing wastage, improving rural incomes for farmers, ensuring value and quality of food. The program equips students with knowledge of crop diversification, helps them in developing innovative ways for employment opportunities and for exploring foods. Food processing industry is the largest industry in India. The food producing units includes products of various foods, such as fruits, vegetables, meat, dairy products, grains, aerated water, soft drinks, fishery etc.
The course is concerned with study of all aspects of food. The program is multidisciplinary and incorporated with concepts from varied fields. The course is a blend of different sciences chemical, biochemistry, nutrition, physics, biology marketing and other subjects. Training equips students with skills of plant designs product innovation and usage of food technologies in the relevant fields. The concepts on harvesting technology, seed technology. physical and biological properties of food products are imbibed by students during the course. The program creates an awareness of production of safe wholesome foods.
Job opportunities for the food technologists
There are ample job prospects in sectors of food industry, research industry, packaging sectors, educational institutions. Job profiles includes food- analyst, processing engineer, microbiologist,chemist sensory scientist, research scientist, food ingredient manager, product development specialist, quality control supervisor, nutrition specialist, entrepreneur.
M.Tech Food Technology - Food Quality Management Admissions for 2020 - 2021 Academic Year
Are you looking for admissions for M.Tech Food Technology - Food Quality Management for the academic year 2020 - 2021? We can connect you with the right colleges and universities offering M.Tech Food Technology - Food Quality Management courses in your preferred locations. Apply Now for M.Tech Food Technology - Food Quality Management