A routing is a description of which operations (process steps) have to be carried out and in which order to produce a material (product). As well as information about the operations and the order in which they are carried out, a routing also contains details about the work centers at which they are carried out as well as about the required production resources and tools (includes jigs and fixtures). Standard values for the execution of individual operations are also saved in routings.
Routings (generic) consist of the following objects:
A routing is used as a source for creating a production order or a run schedule header by copying.
A routing is composed of a header and one or more sequences. The header contains data that is valid for the whole routing. A sequence is a series of operations. Operations describe individual process steps, which are carried out during production (see Routing graphic)
A routing is identified by its group and group counter.
Group and Group counter
Routings within a group are distinguished by their group counter.
In the graphic the three routings in group A are identified by their group counter 1,2 or 3.
Assignment of a material to be produced to a routing
Before you can produce a material with a routing, you have to assign the material to the routing. The routing and the material can exist in different plants.
According to the task list type, a routing can
(This is relevant for normal routings and rate routing that are used directly for producing a material.)
You do not have to assign a material to a routing. However, you cannot use the routing (rate routing) in a production order or run schedule header, until you have done so.
This applies to reference operation sets and reference rate routings that can only be used as part of a routing or rate routing.
Assignment of material components to operations
If a bill of material (BOM) has been assigned to a routing, you can assign its components to the routing operations. In general the BOM assigned to a routing is the material BOM for the material to be produced by the routing (see Assignment of Materials graphic)You can also assign BOMs to reference operation sets or reference rate routings.
Assignment of Materials to be Produced and Material Components