Our editors will review what you’ve submitted and determine whether to revise the article.Join Britannica's Publishing Partner Program and our community of experts to gain a global audience for your work!
Giacomo della Porta
Giacomo della Porta, (born c. 1537, Rome, Papal States [Italy]—died 1602, Rome), Italian architect whose work represents the development in style from late Mannerism to early Baroque. He was the chief Roman architect during the latter third of the 16th century and contributed to most of the major architectural projects undertaken in Rome during that period.
Della Porta was a follower of Michelangelo and continued two of his greatest architectural projects, the Piazza del Campidoglio and St. Peter’s in the Vatican at Rome. Working with Domenico Fontana, the architect to Pope Sixtus V, Della Porta gave a higher, more pointed profile than Michelangelo had intended to the dome of St. Peter’s; it became the prototype of the Baroque dome. He also added the facade to Giacomo da Vignola’s Gesù, mother church of the Jesuits, which was widely copied by Jesuit missionaries and became the model of many Baroque church facades. Della Porta made Il Gesù’s facade dramatic and lively by gradually increasing the number of architectural elements toward the centre of his design, thus creating a sense of tension released by entrance into the building’s seemingly vast interior. He designed a number of palaces, the most famous being the Villa Aldobrandini (1598–1604; Frascati), his last work, notable for its huge broken pediment and elegant fenestration.
Learn More in these related Britannica articles:
Western architecture: Italian Mannerism or Late Renaissance (1520–1600)…16th century by Michelangelo’s follower, Giacomo della Porta, who gave a more vertical expression to the dome by raising it about 25 feet (8 metres) higher than a semicircle. In the early 17th century, the Baroque architect Carlo Maderno added a large nave and facade to the front of the…
Mannerism, (from maniera,“manner,” or “style”), artistic style that predominated in Italy from the end of the High Renaissance in the 1520s to the beginnings of the Baroque style around 1590. The Mannerist style originated in Florence and Rome and spread to northern Italy and, ultimately, to much…
Baroque architecture, architectural style originating in late 16th-century Italy and lasting in some regions, notably Germany and colonial South America, until the 18th century. It had its origins in the Counter-Reformation, when the Catholic Church launched an overtly emotional and sensory appeal to the faithful through art and architecture. Complex…