The model is summarized as following:
- Open accessibility to decision making process
- The vital role of technologies in socioeoconomic design
- A unified medium for international economic conduction
- A forum for interaction between humans’ needs and development, and, social and natural capabilities.
- Technical management
1.1.2 Participants of the economy
- All members of all communities
- Feedback to the system
- All activities are conducted via automated system.
- Automation is the common goal.
- All data are automatically exported to frequent reports.
- Center of Knowledge (CK)
- Center of Information (CI)
- Center of Contribution and Distribution (CCD)
1.3 Decision-making paths and control mechanism:
Decisions are not made but arrived at via a triad automated system of CI (Center of Information) – CK (Center of Knowledge) – CCD (Center of Contribution and Distribution). There are also three main industries: material, tool and knowledge, which include all products and services demanded and supplied in the economy. Material industry includes consumer products, tool industry includes machinary products and knowledge industry includes services. Each industry has its own systems of feedback and caculations accessible for all people via user profiles. The backbones formulas are built-in with an automated system while the data are to be provided by active members of the economy.
There are ten formulas following those basis:
(1) To define number products voted in material industry and decisions to allocate manufacture in major or minor factory
(2) To calculate the total products produced in material industry
(3) To calculate how much products to be produced in material industry for every next period
(4) To define capacities of factories and decisions to allocate extra resources in tool industry into R&D projects
(5) To calculate how much back-end tools to be produced
(6) To calculate how much front-end tools are voted to be produced
(7) To calculate total products produced in tool industry
(8) To define total vote on R&D projects in knowledge industry
(9) To caculate natural resources allocated to R&D projects in knowledge industry
(10) To caluclate gross global resource per capita
(11) To define export and import based on factories’ capacity
(12) To caculate percentage of exported products and define allocation
1.4 Decision-converging body:
The institutions are the main centers of decision-converging body. All information is collected at the centers, processed through formula and producing decisions automatically. All activities produce reports that are available for all people to investigate. Responsibilites are share widely among all active members of the economy.
2 DESCRIPTION OF THE MODEL
“The use of knowledge does not consume it. The transferal of knowledge does not result in losing it. Knowledge is abundance but the ability to use it is scarce.” – Kimiz Dakir
Our economy nowadays is operated upon money. The use of money consumes it. The transferal of money result in losing it. Money is universal but the access to it is limited. It also selectively defines the ability to use social knowledge regardless of outcomes. This paper shifts the entire economy to another base, which is knowledge and information, thus, proposes an operational model for it.
The model does not necessarily validate a political system. Instead, it proposes a technical system led by information and knowledge. In details, it is rather a model of a universal mobile application where all people can have personal access to information, knowledge and mechanically produced products and services in the society.
(a) To eliminate the gap among participants of the economy, which either enhances or neglects the accessibility of them to decision making process.
(b) To promote and maintain the vital role of technologies of the 4th industrial revolution in socioeoconomic design.
(c) To provide a unified medium for international economic conduction, whereby individual interests are safeguarded and advanced in a collective mechanism.
(d) To provide a forum for interaction between humans’ needs and development, and, social and natural capabilities.
(e) To trencend politics into technical management that directly address and handle socioeconomic issues.
2.1.2 Participants of the economy
(a) Consist of, but not limited to, all members of all communities who are active in consuming, producing and using materials, tools and knowledge.
(b) Are responsible for, but not obligated to be, contributing feedback to the system every certain period to feed the system with information.
(c) Register for participation via automated system for free, in order to give feedback.
(a) All activities are conducted via automated system, which is built by the best technologies available at the time and fully open-sourced.
(b) Automation is the common goal of all material, tool and knowledge industries.
(c) Amendment to the regulations is conducted automatically at all time based on participants’ feedback.
(d) All data are automatically exported to frequent reports that are available online for all people.
2.1.4 The new angle of the rule
The economic rule between demand, supply, price and quantity should be looked at from another angle:
(a) Endless supply and demand, instead of price and quantity in the market economy (inflated money-based values), should be considered as our society’s motivation.
(b) Available tools, materials and knowledge should be considered as our society’s capability and be the determination factors of the economy. Endless supply and demand as greed in the market economy should not be considered as our society’s capability.
(c) Society’s capability should be led by society’s motivation in synchronicity, instead of contradicting with society’s motivation as performed in the market economy. Valuable and functional products need to be produced continuously when conditions (tools, materials and knowledge) allow. They should not be once-in-a-while sellable products with massive following waste and lack.
Center of Knowledge (CK): CK is an online platform having servers all over world, one in every city. CK contains three segments: R&D Project, Education and Natural Resource Research.
- R&D Project is a segmental channel where all R&D ideas are collected and waiting for prototype and implementation phrase. The decision of further actions for every R&D idea/project is to be arrived at after the information and knowledge have gone through the mechanism and produced outcomes. If the outcomes condition further actions, then the automatic calculation from CK will divide the resources to boost R&D projects, according to social capacity and preference via votes .
- Education is a segmental channel where all people can access to all available knowledge presented in all forms (videos, texts, audios, automated teachers at city-center, educational route trips, etc.) in the system via social medias at anytime and anywhere of individual’s/group’s convenience. Educational materials are contributed by all people and sorted by words/dates/authors without SEO techniques. The education system can offer tests and exact measurement of people’s study results but not comparations for rewarding purpose (unless in case of voluntary requests from groups).
- Natural Resource Research is a segmental channel where all in-time reports are presented and updated automatically from automated web of sensors. All people can access or be exposed to the reports on their new feed. They are also updated with information of available natural resource per capita on their profile.
Center of Information (CI): CI is an online platform having servers all over world, one in every city. CI contains all information in data form contributed by either active members of the economy or automated actors. CI does not purposely operate itself further than organized storage. It leads to or backs meaningful actions conducted in CK and CCD.
Center of Contribution and Distribution (CCD): CCD is the heaviest center in the three. It is an online platform having independent servers all over the world, one in every city. CCD carries out day-to-day decisions on producing and supplying necessities for populations in cities. It strictly relates with CI and CK in operation, maintenance and improvement.
2.3 Decision-converging paths and control mechanism:
Currently, the world is 510100000 square kilometers and the population is 7,125 billion. So, at best and simplest calculation, one can build anything as big as 71592 square meters only for oneself. That is the natural limit. If one demands more, he/she needs to upgrade the quantity and quality of products and services in the entire world via the system.
This model does not advocate political mechanism but economic mechanism. It is strictly relying on calculations and feedback. There are three main departments: Center of Knowledge (CK), Center of Information (CI) and Center of Contribution and Distribution (CCD), which create a triad of cycling tangible and intangible values in the society.
The economy that this model operates on has three main industries: material, tool and knowledge. Those three industries include and generalize all products and services demanded and supplied in the society. Each industry has its own systems of feedback and caculations accessible for all people via user profiles. The backbones formulas are built-in with an automated system while the data are to be provided by active members of the economy.
- Material industry includes consumer products, such as food & beverages and personal items. The character of the products in this industry is to be one-time used and per person. Renewability and sustainability are vital goals of this industry since most products will be disposed frequently. Products in this industry are produced by the mechanism of feedback and calculating systems and reaching consumers via the system of 24/7 check-out groceries . Those groceries are automated, free-of-charge and offering delivering services.
- Tool industry is mostly operating automatically via feedback and calculating systems. It includes machinary products divided into two categories:
o Back-end tools, such as machines that serve manufacturing in factories or serve in public services like transportantion and hospitals, as well as software applications. Back-end tools do not reach consumers. They are designed to last long and automatically upgrading themselves in mechanical contexts once in a while with R&D projects from CK.
o Front-end tools, such as household items and tools for individual use. Front-end tools reach users by the system of 24/7 libraries. Users come to borrow tools and return them so that other users can ultilize near to 100% of the tools’ lives.
- Knowledge industry includes services to upgrade the economy such as education, travel and social development. Knowledge industry produces values via sharing activities among people.
(Formulas and calculation available as requested)
This governance model is provided to all people as a free mobile application. It is accessed and its content is built by all individuals with a mobile device. Our high technologies nowadays allow them all to be decision makers of the society. No one has to be in the position of representing and oppressing others. Equality of opportunity to be alive and leading one’s own life is built-in.
This governance model does not say ‘decision-making’. When everyone is a decision maker, we have decision-converging. Governments as a group of human beings representing others can not avoid crippling delays because they can not process information as a whole with fast speed. Artificial intelligence can. With a properly design of information input, reports would be rendered most shortly and all details of the outcome could totally be trackable by search engines. Any error from half earth away will be addressed efficiently.
The ironic difficulty of the current system is not in handling global challenges and risks. It is in being aware of global challenges and risks because the world’s information is scattered and censored. Surely there will be challenges and risks in the new governance system that this paper proposes. However, with the hyper connection of the “internet nation”, information goes through. People will be aware not only of global challenges and risks but also of local talents and wills to help solve problems, no matter what corner of the world they are from. The implementation of decisions may take enormous time to be fully conducted but it surely will be conducted once there is no more conflict of what decision to make.
Resources and Financing
The disposal of this model needs the entire world to give a hand in. Its requirement for human and material resources could be beyond prediction. However, the decisions in this model are arrived at by all, so the only way for it to come into existence is to be arrived at by all. Nevertheless, this paper proposes a general concept for every individual to get on board together without strictly attempting at a common goal.
Introduction of the 4 forces of transition:
(1) Knowledge community:
Building knowledge in educational institutions of the old system: An individual can be a student or a researcher, discover/introduce alternative systems and expose old system's errors. As long as knowledge keeps being built into the social capital, it will one day be liberated into the mass through social movements such as free education (as in Finland and Germany) and free material (as in MIT’s newest release of academic papers).
Online communities: Within this force, whatever being talked, written, posted onto internet and social media might be taken into research by anonymous researchers. This turns every online community into a data source that shapes the world via researches and publications extracted into the media and again social media. This is a very powerful force that can be practiced by very normal individual. One should be active, positive and creative in publishing (posting and commenting) on social media and forums to contribute to shape the world.
Eco-communities: This is trendy todays among people who have raised their awareness about global issues, especially in damaging nature.
Corporate social responsibility: Almost every corporation has adopted Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR). Some have integrated their sustainability reports into their official annual reports. Even with driven by profits, if the demands changes since customers have higher sense of green consumption, corporations’ reaction to that is still bending towards a more sustainable goal. Individuals, who are working for corporations, should initiate innovative CSR projects. In the long run with CSR, corporations will thrive beyond themselves (as in patent-free electric transportation of Tesla and Nike’s shoes made of plastic thrash). This is a trendy force for people who have certain limits from their current social positions to practice revolutions.
(3) Small and medium enterprises (start-ups) (SME)
This is also a trendy force. People from this trend has great can-do attitude, challenge and innovation orientation, that slowly beat the traditional financial motivation. They are experience seekers and gradually shorten the business life-cycle for new experiences. They have a part of cultural value that is needed to push forth changes in the economic system, especially in term of decentralization.
This is probably the most important force of all. Nowadays, every new invention in high-tech area has potential to revolutionize our lifestyle. If inventions keep being produced, they will push the system beyond its capability to handle, especially, when together with decentralization, old norms will be broken to open the entire new door for creative approaches of solutions.
By playing a role in one of these forces, the force SME to be exact, the launch of a mobile application is completely finance-able. One step at a time and smart attraction towards giant investors are intelligent way to go about. ‘To have a goal and to play a role’ is a useful motto in this case.
Trust and Insight
The model is an open free-of-charge mobile application made by a group of people who can not anticipate its content and outcomes. That is where people stop worrying about censorship and oppression. There is no power structure. There is only an utimate platform where every person is a user with circles of influences of their own.
This model can only be technically revised and it can technically be revised by its own mechanism. Improvements are presented to have a space. According to “The new angle of the rule” mentioned in the regulations, “valuable and functional products need to be produced continuously when conditions (available tools, materials and knowledge) allow”. This applies as well on the model itself. When available tools, materials and knowledge allow, there will be improvements and revisions.
Protection against the Abuse of Power
There is no definition of power so that it can be abused. There may only be the abuse of possibilities of action. However, the design of the model is cycling itself as a whole. Any destructive action will finally fall upon the actors themselves via the mechanism. Besides, the transparency characteristic of the model exposing activities conducted in the economy to all people at once as well as the abundance of choices in a free-of-charge environment will limit the chance of desire to abuse in people.
The model is not charged with tasks. The model is programed with formulas. It will perform what it is built about. As said above, decision makers are always receiving back the results of what they have put in the system and their actions are watched by the world. Moreover, their decisions in the system are made for themselves. They are not representing anyone else and that is why they can not make enormous mistake that can destroy the world at once. Consequently, they are fixable at every next action.