What Is EMF Pollution?
EMF pollution is potentially harmful electromagnetic energy created by modern electronics, appliances, lighting solutions, wireless devices, and more. It is quickly becoming common in homes, schools, businesses, and other settings, and has been associated with a variety of health problems and other issues. It is also known as electrosmog, electromagnetic radiation (EMR), and electromagnetic fields (EMF).
Over the past 25 years, use of modern electronics, appliances, energy-efficient lighting solutions, and wireless technologies has exploded. Both individuals and society have come to depend on dozens of devices for productivity, efficiency, convenience, and entertainment.
Laptops, tablet computers, cordless phones, smart phones, Wi-Fi and Wi-MAX, wearable technologies, big screen TVs, video game systems, digital baby monitors, GPS systems, security sensors, radiofrequency identification (RFID) devices, smart grids and meters, a new generation of smart appliances and energy-efficient light bulbs, and many more devices have become an integral part of modern life.
Unfortunately, all of these devices and many more generate artificial electromagnetic fields (EMF), also known as electromagnetic radiation (EMR). You can’t see or smell this type of pollution, but in today’s technology-rich world, it is all around us most of the time, and has been associated with health problems such as cancer, Alzheimer’s, ALS (i.e., Lou Gehrig’s disease), autism, ADD/ADHD symptoms, sleep disturbances, and much more.
I have no doubt in my mind that at the present time the greatest polluting element in the earth’s environment is the proliferation of electromagnetic fields. I consider that to be far greater on a global scale than warming…
Types of EMF Pollution
There are four main types of EMF pollution common in most homes, schools, and businesses today: wireless radiation, dirty electricity, and power frequency AC electric fields and magnetic fields.
Wireless radiation refers to high frequency electromagnetic fields (EMF) emitted by wireless technologies and devices that transmit and receive communication signals wirelessly.
This type of electropollution has increased dramatically in recent years as cordless phones, cell phones, tablet computers, Wi-Fi and Wi-MAX networks, and a myriad of other wireless devices have become popular in homes, schools, and businesses.
All of these devices send information through the air via radio waves and microwaves, creating a “cloud” of radio frequency (RF) energy around us.
Dirty electricity refers to spikes and surges of electrical energy that travel along the wiring in buildings where only standard (50/60 Hz) electricity should be.
This type of electropollution is created by many modern electronics, appliances, and lighting solutions as they manipulate standard electrical current in one way or another in order to operate.
Dirty electricity circulates throughout buildings, and even between buildings via wiring and power lines. It radiates electromagnetic fields (EMF) into rooms as it travels.
AC Electric Fields (ELF)
Power frequency AC electric fields refer to the extremely low frequency (ELF) electric fields emitted by items that distribute or use standard 60 Hertz, 120 Volt (or 50 Hertz, 220-240 Volt) AC electricity. These fields are produced by VOLTAGE, which is the force or pressure that helps push electrical current through power lines, wires (circuits), cords, etc.
AC electric fields can be present even when electrical current is NOT flowing.
MORE INFO COMING SOON!!
AC Magnetic Fields (ELF)
Power frequency AC magnetic fields refer to the extremely low frequency (ELF) magnetic fields emitted by items that distribute or use standard 60 Hertz, 120 Volt (or 50 Hertz, 220-240 Volt) AC electricity. These fields are produced by the FLOW of electrical current.
Unlike AC electric fields, magnetic fields are present only when electrical current is actually flowing.
MORE INFO COMING SOON!!