Taxobox | name = Hominina
image_caption = Skull of "
subtribus = Hominina
subdivision_ranks = Genera
Kenyanthropus" (extinct)The more anthropomorphic primates of the Homininitribe are placed in the Hominina subtribe. They are characterized by the evolution of an increasingly erect bipedallocomotion. The only extant species is " Homo sapiens". Fossil records indicate this subtribe branched from the common ancestor with the chimpanzeelineage about 3 to 5 million years ago.
Current evidenceFact|date=March 2008 suggests that, about 2.6 million years ago, "Australopithecus" began to diverge into two paths, on the one hand to "Paranthropus", more robust, specialized in an herbivorous diet that required a stronger jaw and molars and powerful facial muscles that required a cranial crest, much like a modern
gorillahas, to unite them. The other track led to "Homo" with a relatively larger brain, more delicate teeth and jaw. Both genera existed at the same time for about a million and a half years.
This subtribe is usually considered to include "
Australopithecus", " Paranthropus", " Sahelanthropus", " Orrorin", " Ardipithecus", " Kenyanthropus", and "Homo". However, the exact makeup is still under debate, as some scientists struggle to determine the order of descent in human evolution.
Key features of this group involve various adaptations for living terrestrially instead of
arboreally. One feature is an erect bipedal stance and the skull placed on top of the vertebral column. The feet are not prehensileunlike the rest of primates, since the first toe is built robustly and aligned with the other four. The hands have a developed opposable thumb and are quite adept at manipulating objects.
fossils belonging to subtribeHominina.]
Wikimedia Foundation. 2010.
Look at other dictionaries:
Hominina — Para otros usos de este término, véase Homínido. Homininos Rango temporal: Plioceno in … Wikipedia Español
Hominina — Hominines … Wikipédia en Français
Hominina — … Википедия
Hominine — Hominina Hominines … Wikipédia en Français
Hominines — Hominina Hominines … Wikipédia en Français
Hominien — Hominini Hominins … Wikipédia en Français
Hominin — Hominini Hominins … Wikipédia en Français
Hominini — Hominins … Wikipédia en Français
Hominins — Hominini Hominins … Wikipédia en Français
Hominini — Hominini Rango temporal: Tortoniense (Mioceno tardío) Reciente … Wikipedia Español