Shiv Joytish Kentra,street no :22,Ajit road Ghora Chowk ,Bathinda.
Lal Kitab is unique in field of vedic astrology because for the first time a book explained how certain planetary positions in one's horoscope should also reflect in the lines of his palm. The books were published in red hard-cover. In Hindi and Urdu languages Lal means the color red and Kitab means a book. Further, in India traditionally, business ledger books are bound in red color. Also red color in Hindu religion is considered to be very auspicious and as symbol of Ganesha and Lakshmi. The red kum-kum is essential in all auspicious occasion and Hindu religious rites.
The Lal Kitab volumes were also given a red binding because these books contain duniyavi hisaab kitaab ( the ledger book of one’s life).
The book is actually a compilation of five books in Urdu. They are based on the Samudrika Shastra and were written in the 19th century. Apart from astrology, the book also deals with palmistry. The book is the first to explain how planetary positions can affect palm lines. The original red binding of the book gave it its name. Several common Hindu practices like feeding grass to cows, throwing coins into a river and offering food to young girls, all originated from this book.
In Lal Kitab, nine planets have been accorded prominence as in the Vedic astrology. In addition, the predictions are based on the planetary position according to the twelve houses. However, there are differences in Vedic astrology and Lal Kitab. In case of Vedic Astrology, the houses are fixed but the zodiac signs are not fixed whereas in Lal Kitab both houses and zodiac signs are fixed.
The book is the first to relate astrology to palmistry. Many of its verses have become common proverbs.
Most important aspect of Lal Kitab is the identification of malefic planets and easy, inexpensive and extremely effective remedial measures for propitiation of their ill effects. It is said that the solutions & remedies given by Lal Kitab are infallible. Lal Kitab remedies are affordable, easy and provide quick results. The effect of remedies is unbelievable. It is said that these remedies are especially suitable for quick results in Kaliyuga as the traditional methods. Mantra, Yagya, Japa, Havana etc. have become very difficult in this period. The remedies are as easy in throwing something in running water or establishing something in home. However, beware that Lal Kitab remedies can also backfire, if not properly studied and performed. That is why one should be very cautious as and when you take shelter of Lal Kitab consultancy. It is advisable to stop performing remedies immediately if you observer any negative side effects.
Pandit Rahul Sharma Astrologer is one of the best Astrologer in the world who has mastered Nadi Astrology. He is one of the best astro consultant who is consulted for accurate life predictions all across the Globe.
Ajit road Ghora Chowk, Bathinda
© Copyright 2019. All right Reserved