Power and Influence
Power is satisfactorily described as the capacity or adeptness to have an effect on verdicts and regulate capitals (McKeown, 2011). McKeown (2011) posits that power provides the authority to modify other people’s conducts and compel to carry out things which they would not have executed. On the other hand, influence is best defined as the capability to change the assessment of others regarding any given state of affairs (McKeown, 2011). McKeown (2011) argues that this tends to revolve more on the creation of a huge control on other persons in a way that it affects the manner in which they perceive or do things. This essay provides a detailed analysis of the ways in which both power and influence compare and contrast to each other. Further, the article also includes the concept of servant leadership as well as a personal experience where I did not agree with the exercise of power and influence.
To begin, the only similarity between power and influence is that they both play an extremely vital position in leadership (McKeown, 2011). Contrariwise, there exists several differences between the two issues under discussion in relation to effective and enduring leadership. First, McKeown (2011) asserts that power tends to be positional thus implying that it is primarily bestowed on the position. On the contrary, influence is subjective meaning that it mainly relates to the person having the rank. Additionally, power is exerted, it impulses, is disliked and it perishes whereas influence is approved, it coaxes, is appreciated and it persists, respectively (McKeown, 2011).
Similarly but a different measure, the concept of servant leadership also involves power and influence. It is refers to a collection of processes that augment people’s lives, create healthier societies and finally generate a more fair and compassionate globe (Hughes, et al. 2012). In comparison to other forms of management, servant leadership splits authority, places other people’s prerequisites at the top and aids the public in evolving and achieving the highest possible levels of success (Hughes, et al. 2012).
From an individual experience, I did not agree with the way in which the director of our company commanded and forced the personnel to carry out his orders. This led to reduced performances, many resignations and a generally disgruntled workforce. Nonetheless, Hughes, et al. (2012) stipulates that with the incorporation of servant leadership, the employees feel more appreciated thus resulting to improved performances and contentment amongst them.
This essay provided a detailed analysis of the ways in which both power and influence compare and contrast to each other. Further, the article also included the concept of servant leadership as well as a personal experience where I did not agree with the exercise of power and influence. Based on the given illustrations, it is evident that power and influence tend to have different impacts on people, whereby the latter is the most preferred.