STELR solar cars are designed to be used in conjunction with the STELR Renewable Energy module for students to apply their knowledge of solar energy and electric circuits.
Focusing on technology and engineering, these kits are ideal for STEM classes.
Schools are encouraged to use the solar car kits to run an in-school solar car challenge at the end of the unit, where students test their designs.
Australian Power Institute
The Australian Power Institute sponsors class sets of solar car kits to a limited number of STELR schools each year. They also provide power engineering students to visit schools to talk to students about careers in engineering.
The solar car program maps to years 7-10 of the Australian Curriculum and covers:
Maths activities are embedded throughout.
Click here to download the API STELR Solar Car Manual
Click here to download the STELR student booklet: Solar Cars – Mathematics of Gears
A class set of 14 STELR Solar Car kits includes all the equipment required for students to undertake investigations into the construction and modification of solar cars including a teacher jar of spare parts.
STELR equipment encourages both guided and open-ended research. It has been designed and developed in Australia specifically for STELR and is robust, simple and easy to use.
To purchase a class set of STELR equipment and curriculum resources, download and complete the order form below and send it, along with a school purchase order, to STELR.firstname.lastname@example.org
This video shows you how to construct the API STELR Solar Car. It was produced by power engineer, Jarman Stephens, (2014 API Bursary holder) and videographer, Thomas Cotter. >How to Build a Solar Car video.
You can also access a PowerPoint presentation giving step-by-step instructions to construct a basic solar car.
This video shows how to change the gear configuration for your API STELR solar car. It is the second video in the series produced by Jarman Stephens and Thomas Cotter. We suggest students only work on changing the gears once they have constructed and tested their car.