Do you believe that writing scientific reports is even worse than writing essays? This may be true about some aspects; however, there definitely are some parts which are easier to write for a scientific report than for an essay. More than that, alongside a short explanation of what a report is, we will share a couple of insights and tricks that may be helpful for you.
Standard Scientific Report Format
Try following this simple structure to write your scientific report, and the whole writing process will become easier:
- Methods and Materials
- Acknowledgments (optional)
- Appendix (optional)
Let’s discuss some details of each of the parts. The abstract is one of the most influential parts of your paper. It gives you the chance to catch your reader’s attention, so it has to be brief, interesting and to the point. Shortly present your reasons for doing the research work, methods of doing it, and your findings and conclusions.
Introductions in scientific reports perform slightly different functions than introductions in essays or research papers. Here you are supposed to give more information about the problem you are working on – state the problem, establish your opinion, provide justification for conducting the work (why it’s useful) and describe your methods. Now hold on to your seat, an unexpected twist is waiting ahead: you need to state the major conclusions in the introduction. Scientific writing can seem weird at first sight, but the explanation is simple: your report is not a novel with fancy plot twists, and your findings should be clear from the beginning.
Method and materials are the longest, yet the simplest part. Not mentioning some tiny details, all you need to do is provide an extensive description of your experiment with detailed explanations of everything, even if it seems obvious to you. The main part of this section is to provide your readers with guidance, so they will be able to replicate your experiment. Always assume that they are less educated in the field than you are, and mention all the processes and actions that seem implicit to you, especially when it comes to safety measures.
The results section is the second easiest in the format for scientific report writing, and it is also among the shortest. Here you are supposed to present the results of your experiments in an easy to read form, such as comparison tables, graphs, and diagrams. This part is some sort of conclusion, but it can be better described as summing up.
And finally, we move to the real conclusions which, in the case of a scientific report, are called discussions. This is probably the most important part of the work. Here you have to discuss the results and their relation to your initial hypothesis, the shortcomings and long-term implications of your work and provide generalized conclusions supported with evidence. Also, you are supposed to suggest sources for future studies and possible applications of your research.
Are you already confused by thenumber of tiny details you have to care about? Don’t worry, you can always ask for help.
Why Choose Us
You may know what the format of a scientific report looks like, but this still doesn’t make the paper write itself. In case you are too tired to do anything about it, you can always rely on expert help from BuyEssay.org professional writers. Here are a few more features you will be enjoying while cooperating with our team of professionals:
1) Security and confidentiality.
You can be confident that all your personal information is completely secure. We won’t distribute your e-mail or mobile phone number to any third parties. Even within the website, only our payment security team members have access to this information. More than that, we won’t send you any letters or advertisements using your e-mail. It’s just for cooperation and communication on the orders. We respect your privacy.
2) Constant communication with the author.
Life can be unpredictable. Your professor decided to change the due date or the requirements, or you need one part of the assignment earlier than the others – you can solve all those difficulties using a convenient direct chat on your personal profile page. The feature of constant communication with your writer helped us raise the overall customer satisfaction rate and maintain a high pace of completing orders. When you talk to your writer with no intermediaries, he or she understands your demands better.
3) Free revisions policy.
We strive to do our best and provide you with awesome academic paper samples, but sometimes mistakes can slip into the text. If you are not satisfied with the quality of the paper received, go straight to your personal page and press the “revision” button.
4) Money back guarantees.
We want you to feel as comfortable as possible while ordering, and what can be more soothing than knowing that your money is secure? First of all, we cooperate with the world’s biggest payment systems – PayPal and Skrill – to guarantee the safety and convenience of transactions. Secondly, in case you are dissatisfied with the transactions, you can always ask for a refund. Make sure to do so within 14 days of the initial approval of the paper.
5) 100% original papers.
We don’t keep any databases of ready-made papers or resell completed works to such databases. You can be sure that the paper you receive is written from scratch. However, you don’t need to take it for granted; you are always encouraged to check, and then check once again if you want to. First of all, we have an inbuilt plagiarism checker, but you can also use any other checker you find to be reliable. In case they detect a higher amount of plagiarism than desirable, feel free to contact your author and ask for a revision.
Don’t worry if you still have no idea about the format of a scientific report. Our professional writers are capable of creating a great sample paper for you.