If you lose your hair, do not worry. With different forms of cosmetic surgeries available, one can easily go there. Hair transplant is popular among those who face hair loss. This usually leads to baldness and thinning of the hair.
Hair development usually occurs from an organ called a hair follicle. He lives under the surface of the scalp. It gives life and development to locks of hair. The hair follicle is a button-shaped structure, visible at the end of a broken hair. The development of the hair takes place in 3 stages, that is to say, the anagen stage, the catagen stage and the last stage is the telogen stage.
- In the anagen stage, each hair follicle prepares a hair.
- At the catagen stage, it grows to a certain size before disappearing.
- At the telogen stage, another hair develops from the same follicle.
Thus, the hair development cycle is deeply rooted and will continue to grow as long as the hair follicle is healthy. Anyway, the unhappiness of the hair is a major concern. For this reason, people experiment with different medications and also undergo transplant surgeries.
Hair restoration is a term that alludes to the different alternatives and methods to replace lost hair. There are two basic classifications in hair reconstruction. These are surgical and nonsurgical. Non-surgical methods are usually called prostheses. Surgical methods are of two kinds. One is FUT Hair Transplant, and the other is FUE Hair Transplant. Both systems have points of interest and obstacles.
FUT or FUE unit transplantation:
This methodology involves concentrating a thin segment of hair along the skin of the contributory region. Beneficial hair comes mostly from the head/scalp. They are hereditary insensitive to hair loss. They are analyzed, magnifying, in follicular units or in unions. This is then transplanted into the imaginary region called the beneficiary area. Grafted hair begins to develop typically after four months.
FU T or FUE Unit Extraction:
In this method, individual follicular units are concentrated and transplanted to the desired area of the scalp, that is, called the recipient area. This operation does not have to make points of entry on the scalp. Around the follicular unit, a roundabout is cut on the skin with a 1 mm punch before concentrating it. No scar appears on the concentrated territory. It is suitable for those vulnerable to donor scarring and also for those who do not have sufficient laxity on the scalp to experience the conventional FUT strip procedure.
This is the question most of you would like to know. As it sounds costly, it is very important that you can afford to pay for the procedure. So, how much does the hair transplant cost, anyway? In this article, you’ll learn about the latest hair transplant facts and the two most common harvesting methods you can choose from, along with their prices.
Difference Between FUE or FUT Hair Transplant:
FUE unit grafting is the latest invention in hair transplantation. It contains the acronym FUT and has two types of harvesting procedures that you should consider. The first is called strip harvesting, and the second is called FUE. These two harvesting procedures have different costs.
Strip picking is the first technique for performing a natural hair transplant. It involves local anesthesia, a linear scar – a scar that takes time to heal – and stitches that must be removed by a licensed physician. Since it involves seams, scars and some medications, the cost of this process is a little higher than that of the FUE.
While FUE, an acronym for FUT Unit Extraction, is a method in which every hair follicle is removed under the influence of local anesthesia. This is one of the advanced treatments against hair loss and the treatment preferred by many. The session for FUE is longer than expected. If done by an expert, living transplants will surely be an ordinary result. No points will be made, and scars will not occur. Recovery will take just one week or less compared to the other method. However, this procedure can also take your salary for a whole month.