There is a lot of focus right now surrounding the environment and what you can do to help in any small way that you can. Some people, more than others, will do a lot, but often it can feel like taking a more eco approach to things is more hard work and the truth is, can you really make an impact? The answer is yes. You see if everyone did a small bit, then that is a big step worldwide to helping preserve the plant and the environment for our future generations. The easiest thing can be your home and your own personal habits.
But what can you do to make these changes? There is, in fact, a lot of things that you can do to help your home be more environmentally friendly and to help you change some long term habits for greener alternatives. With that in mind, here are some of the options that you can consider to help you do it.
Change your habits in terms of your home
One of the first things that you can consider doing would be to change your habits in your home. You can do this in a variety of ways that will have an impact on the energy you use and the environment in the long term. First up think about the appliances in your home. This can be anything from the television to the kettle. These things are often plugged in with the switch on and left like that until they are used. Tech appliances like computers and TV’s are often left on standby which can also be a huge problem. Make a habit to switch these things off at the mains, and avoid the use of low level energy constantly. Over time this will become second nature to you. Other habits include only boiling enough water for the drinks you want to make and also unplugging this like phone chargers.
Change the light bulbs in the property
The light bulbs in your property may be costing you more than you realise, and that may be because they are not energy efficient alternatives or LED. Switching all of the light bulbs may feel like a big cost, but in time, there will be huge savings. Not just with the cost saving in your energy bill but also because traditionally energy efficient and LED bulbs last a lot longer, so you won’t be buying them as often either. On the subject of lights, how often do you leave a light on in a room that you are not using? It is very common to do and this can be burning unnecessary energy and costing you a small fortune. Start witching lights off when you leave a room and get into a new habit of doing it.
Could you do more recycling day to day?
Maybe now is the time to start thinking about recycling and what you can do to make it better and easier to do. Many people will have separate bins and disposal options for different materials, but you may not utilise them as much as you could. Make it a mission to recycle more in your home. You could have separate bins for different things so that you are more conscious about doing it. It is the small things that can make the biggest difference when it comes to your eco approach, and recycling is one thing that most people have the ability to do.
Collecting rainwater for things like garden maintenance
Rainwater is a common thing that many of us experience, but have you ever thought of collecting it? Many people love to spend time in their garden, and one big part of gardening during the summer months is to think about watering the plants and flowers so that they are hydrated. However, using water from the taps, especially in the summer when the weather is drier, can often mean that you are using up valuable resources. Rainwater is a freebie, and during the winter we get a lot of it, so why not have a water tank set up bin the garden and start collecting it. This can then be used for all garden maintenance to keep your garden look fresh without the additional use of extra water.
Grow your own food or keep animals to be more sustainable
Growing your own food can be a great way to be more sustainable and environmentally friendly. It is things such as avoiding the use of shop packaging because it is coming straight from the ground, and you are doing your bit for the environment. You can grow all sorts of things depending on the space you have. Most fruit and vegetables don’t need too much space though. Another thing to consider if you live in the right area nad have a decent amount of space is to keep some animals. Hens for eggs and even small animals like goats for milk.
Insulating your home
Heat can often be a big expense when it comes to your energy bills, and when it is the depths of winter, we can all be guilty of cranking up the thermostat to get the home a little warmer. But, if your home doing what it can to keep the heat inside instead of it escaping? Heat rises and one of the biggest areas it can escape is through the walls and loft area. So why not invest in getting them insulated? It can be a great way to help you stay on track with your heating bills and also use less energy as the heat will be retained easily inside your home.
Is solar energy a good move to make?
Different sources of energy are a big possibility these days, and they can be a great way to help you make a switch for a more environmentally friendly home and life. Solar panels is one of them. The solar energy is collected and stored and then is used to power your home and heat the water. It may seem like a big investment initially, but overall it can be a very sustainable source of energy and definitely one to consider for the future. It can also be a great selling point for a property with more people having this focus in mind.
Other energy sources that could help
You could also look at other ways that you can use energy and power your home. A wood burner stove, for example, can be a great source of heat for your home as an alternative. You could also look at different materials that can be used to create gas to power your home in different ways. For example, there is a Treatment of livestock manure that can then be used to create a biogas that is a more energy efficient and environmentally friendly approach. Manure is a material that is always going to be around, and can also be an excellent fertiliser for your plants, vegetables and crops.
Investing in your home with windows and doors
Another investment that can give you long term savings is to consider replacing the windows and doors in your home. As we have already mentioned, heat rises and can escape through the roof of your property,but it can also escape just as well through windows and cracks in your doors. Double or triple glazing glass and new frames can be an excellent way to keep the heat in your home, and again enables you to use less energy and be more resourceful.
Making the switch to natural products
Most of our cleaning cupboard supplies are probably filled with chemical products promising to sparkle your oven or sink, or clean up your floors, but is it necessary to use them? Making the switch to more natural products could be a quick and easy way to consider the environment and have a more eco approach. There are some great natural products available to buy, but you could also consider creating some of your own through pantry staples that you already have in. Lemon is a great natural cleaning aid would you believe?
Using public transport more often
Your habits need to change when it comes to having a more eco approach to life in general and one of the things that you could do would be to utilise public transport more often. These are buses and trains that are already running, and with one less car on the road you are doing your bit to reduce the carbon pollution that we are all contributing to. It could even save you money in relation to the cost of fuel.
Finally, if you do need to drive then maybe you could look at how you drive and try and be a little more economical. It’s things such as sticking to speed limits and also changing get when you should do. Small changes to how you drive can have a very little impact, but if we all did it then there would be a greater benefit.
Let’s hope these ideas help you to be more environmentally friendly with your home and lifestyle habits.