Diabetes Prevention Program
The National Institutes of Health came up with the Diabetes Prevention Program (DPP) as a way to find methods to prevent Type 2 Diabetes in adults who are overweight. The DPP discovered that losing five to seven percent of your body weight can help delay or even prevent Type 2 Diabetes. This can be done by completing moderately intense exercise for about 150 minutes a week. Something as small as brisk walking can help prevent the onset of Type 2 Diabetes.
WHAT IS TYPE 2 DIABETES?
Having Type 2 Diabetes means that your blood sugar levels are above normal. High blood sugar levels can lead to major health issues like heart disease, kidney disease, amputations, blindness and stroke. Type 2 diabetes was the seventh leading cause of death in the U.S. in 2009.
Since Type 2 Diabetes is the most common type, there are many factors that contribute to the disease. Genes and family history play a major role as well as low activity levels, extra weight around the waist and a poor diet. In the U.S., Type 2 Diabetes is more common in black, Latino and American Indian communities than in white communities.
HOW IS TYPE 2 DIABETES LINKED TO OVERWEIGHT?
Close to 80 percent of the people with Type 2 Diabetes are overweight, but the reason behind this is unclear. One theory is that being overweight causes cells to change and they can become resistant to insulin, the hormone that carries sugar to the blood cells to make energy. A person gets high blood sugar when cells become insulin resistant and cannot take up blood sugar. On top of that, the cells that produce insulin have to work harder to keep blood sugar levels normal. This can cause cells to gradually fail.
HOW CAN WEIGHT LOSS HELP?
Losing weight has been shown to do wonders in preventing or delaying the onset of Type 2 Diabetes, getting into a weight loss program and becoming more physically fit are both great ways to help yourself stay away from a Type 2 Diabetes diagnosis.
If you have been diagnosed with Type 2 Diabetes or are at risk of developing the disease, call the doctors at Oklahoma Men’s Clinic to get started on a medical weight loss program and get on the road to recovery.
The Oklahoma Men’s Clinic Experience is specially designed to make it as easy, comfortable, and effective as possible to get the help you need to get back in the game, or get you back to being the old you! Once inside, you’ll enjoy the many concierge services and features we have added to make the experience as convenient, fun, and effective as possible, such as:
Big screen TV always on sports channels.
Men’s interest magazines
Same-day and walk-in service
24-hour patient assistance hotline
Possibly the Shortest waiting times you will ever experience at a doctor’s office
Coming Soon Digital patient files with the latest security encryption technology
Newly remodeled State-of-the-art facility
Our Oklahoma Men's Clinic Promise to You
Confidentiality – HIPPA Privacy – Respect – Understanding – The Latest Technology/Services
If you do not see results that first day your office Visit is FREE!!
Remember you have nothing to lose, and everything to gain
Tulsa New Patients: (918) 921-9699
OKC New Patients: (405) 400-9915
4415 S. Harvard Ave. Ste 201
Tulsa, OK 74135
Mo, Tu, We, Th, Fr 8:30am - 5:00pm
Clinic Calls Only
Tulsa Existing Patients: (918) 895-9100
OKC Existing Patients: (405) 622-4747
3727 NW 63rd St. Ste. 100
Oklahoma City, OK 73116
Mo, Tu, We, Th, Fr 8:30am - 5:00pm