It is past time to have a discussion with you concerning the most undervalued plants growing on your property. These uncultivated, unappreciated, demonized plants are all grouped into a single category — weeds. A weed is defined as a plant growing where it is not wanted. It is understandable to object to chickweed stealing water and nutrients from a planting of alyssum, or crabgrass aggressively turning a bluegrass lawn into a rough meadow.
But is a plant a weed if it is holding an unattended banking from eroding or painting a field in with black-eyed Susans, Queen Anne’s Lace and Ox-eye daisies? What if the plant palette is composed of bracken, curled dock, devils paintbrush, horsetail and yarrow, all early colonizers that survive on severely disturbed ground and prevent it from washing or blowing away?
Many weeds develop taproots several feet deep that aid in breaking up hardpan layers, thus improving drainage and aeration. Their deep questing roots bring to the surface nutrients and trace elements that have long been lost or consumed by previous crops. They allow subsequent surface-rooting crops, flowers and vegetables to root and feed and better withstand drought.
Purslane (Portulaca), pigweed (Amaranthus), lamb’s quarter (Chenopodium) and burdock (Arctium) fiberize and condition the soil and provide a supportive environment for beneficial soil micro-flora to prosper. They serve as a “green manure” crop to increase the organic matter content of the soil. Weeds store up nutrients and minerals that otherwise would be washed, blown or leached away from bare ground.
Weeds provide cover and food for wildlife. They can serve as forage for farm animals. Certain weeds serve as indicators of soil or environmental conditions.
Numerous weeds came to these shores from Europe, used as medicinal herbs and food plants. Dandelion, plantain, coltsfoot, stinging nettle, greater celandine and dozens of other plants were used medicinally. Lamb’s quarters, chicory, witchgrass, watercress, along with dandelion were commonly eaten.
Many plants have aesthetic qualities such as milkweed, goldenrod, Joe Pye weed and boneset. At a recent agricultural fair at Old Sturbridge Village, I was privileged to judge a series of dried flower bouquets created from the seed stems, leaves and pods of weeds. Weeds are an important aspect of nature. In the eye of man, they are a plant out of place; in the scheme of nature, they are very much in place.
Gardens have myriad needs (May 5, 2013)
Chilly nights still a concern (Apr 28, 2013)
From garden to plate (Apr 21, 2013)
Spring cleanup on tap (Apr 14, 2013)
Get your grass going (Apr 7, 2013)
Focus indoors (Mar 31, 2013)
Bring on the spring (Mar 24, 2013)
Ready to ditch snow shovels (Mar 17, 2013)
Changes are underfoot (Mar 10, 2013)
Several peas to ponder (Mar 3, 2013)