The data can be found here. Description of region codes:
Cornwall, Devon and Pembrokeshire were pooled to represent the South/West (SW) and the area that could be considered the closest surrogate to the Ancient British. Kent, Norfolk and Lincolnshire were pooled to represent the East (E) and the area most directly influenced by the Anglo-Saxon invasions. Cumbria, Yorkshire and the North East were pooled broadly to represent the North of England (N); Oxfordshire and the Forest of Dean were combined to represent the Central region of England (CN); and Orkney was kept separate from the others, largely because of the known substantial Norse Viking influence in Orkney.
Of interest are the NRY haplogroup data:
The SW seems to have the lowest R1a1 frequency (1.3%). This is in agreement with the Dodecad v3 results for Cornwall (1.8% East European). The E seems to have an intermediate frequency (3.5%), again in agreement with Dodecad v3 for Kent (3.7%). Orkney has the highest R1a1 frequency (34.2%) and also the highest East European component in Dodecad v3 (11%). So, it does seem that R1a1 frequency tracks an eastern population element in the British isles.
R1xR1a1 has its lowest values in E and OR; this is probably consistent with the idea that Germanic invaders from the east possessed less of this haplogroup than the pre-Germanic population.
The minor alleles in MC1R are associated with red hair, and it seems that this is maximized in Orkney.
The admixture estimates are also quite interesting, showing a dependence on the use of local (L) vs. non-local (N) surnames; the results do suggest non-trivial shifts in genetic composition since the adoption of surnames.
Also of interest: A British approach to samplingEuropean Journal of Human Genetics advance online publication 10 August 2011; doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2011.127
People of the British Isles: preliminary analysis of genotypes and surnames in a UK-control population
Bruce Winney et al.
There is a great deal of interest in a fine-scale population structure in the UK, both as a signature of historical immigration events and because of the effect population structure may have on disease association studies. Although population structure appears to have a minor impact on the current generation of genome-wide association studies, it is likely to have a significant part in the next generation of studies designed to search for rare variants. A powerful way of detecting such structure is to control and document carefully the provenance of the samples involved. In this study, we describe the collection of a cohort of rural UK samples (The People of the British Isles), aimed at providing a well-characterised UK-control population that can be used as a resource by the research community, as well as providing a fine-scale genetic information on the British population. So far, some 4000 samples have been collected, the majority of which fit the criteria of coming from a rural area and having all four grandparents from approximately the same area. Analysis of the first 3865 samples that have been geocoded indicates that 75% have a mean distance between grandparental places of birth of 37.3 km, and that about 70% of grandparental places of birth can be classed as rural. Preliminary genotyping of 1057 samples demonstrates the value of these samples for investigating a fine-scale population structure within the UK, and shows how this can be enhanced by the use of surnames.