The following are Sports Injuries that often respond very well to Regenerative Medicine and the common causes of these injuries:
Tennis, racket sports, martial arts or boxing, football, soccer, and any kind of full contact sport.
Often caused by running and sports involving running such as soccer, hockey, basketball, baseball & football as well as weight lifting and gymnastics & ballet & Yoga. Any sport without warm up stretching.
Running and sports involving running particularly football, tennis, golf, weight lifting, Martial Arts and boxing and gymnastics & ballet
Rotator Cuff Tears & Injuries, Impingement Syndrome, Dislocated Shoulder, Separated Shoulder & Frozen Shoulder. These are often caused by baseball, football, Martial arts, tennis and golf & Extreme sports
Wrist injuries caused by racket sports, roller sports (rollerblading, skateboarding), golf, cycling, and any sport which my cause one to fall with outreached hands.
Elbow pain, inflammation and immobility caused by tennis, golf & arm wrestling
ACL & Ligament injuries, torn Meniscus & Cartilage damage, Knee cap pain, Knee Osteoarthritis, Bakers Cyst, Runners knee, including basketball, football, overuse and sports involving jumping such as volleyball & Extreme sports.
Running and sports with running and jumping such as football, baseball, soccer, hockey & overuse.
Ligament trauma from running and jumping sports , as above and gymnastics and ballet.
sports involving running, jumping and weight lifting & Extreme sports
Find the answers here to most frequently asked questions about Stem Cell Therapy
There are two main types of stem cells; adult stem cells and embryonic stem cells.
Adult Stem Cells or Mesenchymal Stem Cells (MSCs) are tissue specific. They typically can only generate different cell types for the specific tissue or organ in which they live. These cells are found in many organs and tissues, including brain, bone marrow, blood vessels, skeletal muscle, skin, teeth, heart, gut, liver and the reproductive organs.
Embryonic Stem Cells are derived from blastocysts created by in vitro fertilization (IVF) for assisted reproduction that were no longer needed. Because these kind of stem cells are undifferentiated and unspecialized, they can give rise to every type of cell in the body. It is not legal in this country to use this type of cell on humans as there is a great health risk associated with the use of this type of cell including Cancer.
Yes, Stem cell Therapy is less expensive than surgery.
Stem Cell Therapy is an outpatient procedure with minimal complications. A less aggressive alternative to surgery with no scarring OR NEGATIVE SIDE EFFECTS.
Yes, PRP and Stem Cell grafts are taken from your own body or placental allograft.
Recovery time is shorter compared to surgery. Usually pain diminishes in about seven to ten days. Motion increases recovery and is encouraged.