CDC a welcome entry in quest to see whether algal blooms harm humans
Amid all the technical talk about cyanobacterial neurotoxins and BMAA at a roundtable discussion hosted by U.S. Rep. Francis Rooney at the Conservancy of Southwest Florida in Naples on May 10, one very human statement stood out:
“Last summer, when I was out on the water taking reporters and scientists out to the epicenter of these red tide and cyanobacteria blooms, both myself and Chris Whitman, our program director, became really sick and we stayed sick for a really long time.”
That was from Daniel Andrews, a Sanibel fishing guide whose livelihood was interrupted by last year’s blue-green algae and red tide events.
It comes as welcome news, then, that the federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention is undertaking a study of the health of fishing guides to determine whether exposure to the harmful blooms — known to kill fish and devastate sea grasses — has any long-term health effects on humans.
Our only nit to pick is that the study, as described to USA Today Network reporter Amy Bennett Williams, focuses on Lake Okeechobee guides.
The CDC is trying to recruit 50 volunteers from the Lake O area to participate in the study.
Why limit it to the lake?
There are plenty of stories like Andrews’ to suggest harmful effects flow downstream with the blue-green algae, which gets its start in the lake and spreads into the Caloosahatchee and St. Lucie rivers as water is released in the rainy season.
Residents of canal-laced Cape Coral reported serious breathing problems last summer when the blooms were at their worst, as did residents of east coast communities such as Jensen Beach.
Other researchers, including those with Florida Gulf Coast University and the University of Miami, have done studies to find and quantify the toxins in the water and the air. However, CDC involvement signals a new level of concern.
Lorraine Backer, senior scientist and environmental epidemiologist at the National Center for Environmental Health, part of the CDC, said she’d like to partner with others researching the blooms.
Backer attended a closed-door session with Rooney, other scientists and local government officials prior to the May 10 public forum.
The CDC was an important “get” for that meeting, Rooney said. "The CDC’s involvement is of critical importance to solving long-term problems associated with harmful algal blooms, red tide and other pollution in Southwest Florida waters," he said.
As Backer describes the study, it will look at the health of the volunteers and measure their lung function before, during and after the next outbreak, which some experts predict will occur this summer.
Much is at stake.
“There are lots of lines of evidence leading in the same direction," University of Miami marine biology professor Larry Brand said at the May 10 session.
"People living next to lakes where there are these blooms of blue-green algae have a 25-fold greater chance of coming down with ALS,” Brand said.
ALS, also known as Lou Gehrig’s disease, is a progressive neurodegenerative disease that affects nerve cells in the brain and the spinal cord.
That and experiences such as the one Andrews described merit the attention of not just the CDC, but everyone else as well.
Brent Batten wrote this for the Naples Daily News editorial board.