Heal The World, Make It A Better Place – The words of this song seem so right for our planet, especially when we talk about Global Warming and its related natural disasters.
Did you know that our planet that is 4.543 billion years, will only survive another 1.75 billion years, but only if we keep global warming under check. But looking at the way we are using our natural sources and cutting away trees to construct concrete jungles around us, there is no doubt, we will come across doomsday very soon. However, if we join hands and follow these minuscule everyday tips, we can surely make a small change and save our planet.
PLANT A TREE EVERY YEAR
For all the pollution we create with our daily activities, it is only right that we plant a tree every year to do our little bit for the planet. Did you know that just a small 1 acre of forest has the ability to absorb 2.5 tons of carbon di-oxide in a year? And a tree reaches its prime stage of absorbing carbon di oxide at 10 years. So, next time you see a small place in your backyard, plant a tree to help fight global warming.
TRY TO LIVE A LIFE WITH MINIMAL WASTE
If facts are to be believed, every year almost 230 million tons of waste or trash is generated only by United States alone. Making it simpler, almost 4.6 pounds of trash is generated by a person each day in the USA. And this trash ends up finally in landfills, while only a small part of it is recycled and used again. At this rate, very soon our planet will be covered with more landfills and dumps than homes and forests.
TURN OFF ELECTRONIC DEVICES
We live in an age of technologies and appliances. Right from dish washers, washing machines, air conditioners, heating systems, laptops, and etc. we use them all daily. But when not in use, it is best suggested that you keep them off instead of keeping them on a stand by. Keeping your electronic devices on a standby itself uses almost 40% of its energy.
USE ONLY COMPACT FLUORESCENT LIGHT BULB
We need light almost 24 X 7 for all our daily home and workplace activities. But very occasionally do we need to change the light bulbs. However, next time you need to buy a bulb, make sure you choose the new generation Compact Fluorescent Light Bulbs that save 60% of your energy than the regular bulbs, hence saving almost 300 pounds of carbon di oxide annually. Great right!!
Yes, we all love owning our own small car or bike and driving it to our workplace. But, every gallon of fuel used produces 20 pounds of carbon di oxide into the atmosphere. But, you can always save more fuel by simply driving less and driving smart. Walking, biking and using common mass transport systems can help you save a lot of energy. Even carpooling to school and work can help you save a lot of gas and reduce pollution in the atmosphere. Also, make sure you maintain your car regularly, keep your tires in check and also drive at a constant speed to reduce the use of more fuel.
These points are simple and not very difficult to follow. With these small changes, we can surely make a difference in the world we live in and reduce the effect of global warming on our planet. So, let’s make an effort in saving our planet with these 5 tips.