In a world saturated by negative social influences, it is crucial that schools act as extensions of the personal formation instilled by parents at home. integral education
The following are the 4 key benefits resulting from a humanistic education model:
1. FOCUSES ON THE STUDENT
Even though all educational models say they center their efforts on ‘the student’, most of these only focus on the intellectual or cognitive skills of him or her. The humanistic approach to education prioritizes the discovery of each individual’s potential in order to develop the student into his or her own personal identity, before proceeding to educate the individual’s intellect.
2. FOMENTS INDIVIDUALITY
In the context of humanism, individualism focuses on recognizing and accepting the fact that we are all original and unique human beings. We have been made with particular strengths and weaknesses that make us different from others. Understanding what makes them different, helps students find similarities with their peers.
3. ENCOURAGES LEARNING
In this educational model, teachers are not viewed as authoritative figures, but as learning facilitators. The humanistic approach to education places the educator in a very unique role that does not consist of merely transmitting knowledge.Teachers are able to foster a healthy relationship with their students encouraging them to rely on their teachers as educational leaders, who are there to facilitate their learning. This creates a very wholesome environment of inclusion and collaboration.
In the humanistic approach to learning, the student is guided and pushed by his own interests; the motivation to learn is developed very naturally, fomenting a proactive approach to the acquisition of knowledge.
4. CONTRIBUTES TO SOCIAL WELLBEING
The humanistic model of education emphasizes the importance of self-knowledge and personal identity. These traits allow the individual to better understand his qualities and weaknesses. By doing so, he is able to comprehend his place in society and how it is that he can enhance the world. Furthermore, this educational model aims at establishing clearly defined values that find a niche in the individual’s habitat. In contrast to other educational models, the humanistic approach to education responds to the need of a world that is more concerned with and sensitive to the needs of the constantly evolving generations. The humanistic educational model produces individuals capable of adapting to a changing world and modernization.