The International Baccalaureate Organization aims to develop inquiring, knowledgeable, and caring young people who help create a better and more peaceful world through intercultural understanding and respect. The learner profile consists of the learner outcomes for the program. They are a set of ideals to define the type of learner we hope to develop at Quarry Bay School.
They understand the importance of intellectual, physical, and emotional balance to achieve personal well-being for themselves and others.
They show empathy, compassion, and respect towards the needs and feelings of others.They have personal commitment to service, and act to make a positive difference to the lives of others and to the environment.
They understand and express ideas and information confidently and creatively in more than one language and in a variety of modes of communication. They work effectively and in collaboration with others.
They develop their natural curiosity.They acquire the skills necessary to conduct inquiry and research and show independence in learning.They actively enjoy learning and this love of learning can be sustained throughout their lives.
They explore concepts, ideas, and issues that have local and global significance.In so doing, they acquire in-depth knowledge and develop understanding across a broad and balanced range of disciplines.
They understand and appreciate their own cultures and personal histories, and are open to the perspectives, values, and traditions of other individuals and communities. They are accustomed to seeking and evaluating a range of points of view, and are willing to grow from the experience.
They act with integrity and honesty, with a strong sense of fairness, justice, and respect for the dignity of the individual, groups, and communities.They take responsibility for their own actions and the consequences that accompany them.
They give thoughtful consideration to their own learning and experience.
They are able to assess and understand their strengths and limitations in order to support their learning and personal development.
They approach unfamiliar situations and uncertainty with courage and forethought, and have the independence of spirit to explore new roles, ideas, and strategies. They are brave and articulate in defending their beliefs.
They exercise initiative in applying thinking skills critically and creatively to recognize and approach complex problems, and make reasoned, ethical decisions.
Click here for an introductory video on The Learner Profile