Tis' the season... It is about a week before holiday break and with all the preparations for the holidays, I began thinking about the traditions and celebrations that occur this time of year. The past few years my wife and I adopted the Elf on the Shelf tradition that is really fun for the kids, but can be a challenge to think of new ideas each and every night. Apparently Pintrist is the place to get ideas.
I was also working with a social studies teacher who is working on a culture project discussing customs, traditions, holidays. They are working on exploring other cultures and then comparing them to their own family culture.
Tonight we are going to look at culture and how we teach about holidays, traditions and see if we can't create some end of the year lessons to engage and educate our students!
Next week is Christmas so I am going to vote for skipping #sstlap next Thursday or my family will crush me. So we will return January 1st if enough are interested otherwise Jan 8th. Let me know your thoughts- 1st or 8th
Q1 What do you do to celebrate the holiday season? #sstlap
Q2 With diverse Ss populations, how do you incorporate the multitude of cultural beliefs and values of our society? #sstlap
Q3 How can you use the diversity of holiday traditions and customs as a learning experience for all students? Kwanza, Hanukkah, Christmas, etc. #sstlap
Q4 What could you do to incorporate societies that don't have similar customs- Hindu, Native American, etc. #sstlap
Q5 When teaching about holidays and celebrations, and history in general, do you teach status quo, or delve into the myths of history aka Thanksgiving (Native American POV)? Why? #sstlap
Q6 How can you use the concept of Gift giving into your lessons to celebrate holidays and teach about cultural differences?#sstlap
Q7 How can you use the Food Hook to connect the holiday season to class content especially varied cultural practices?#sstlap
Q8 Holidays tend to share the concept of the spirit of the holidays, or good will, how can you teach about the different holidays and demo similarities between cultures?#sstlap
Tonight is about Life Changing Lessons- These are discussed in Dave Burgess's first book Teach Like a Pirate. Notice I put first book because he has co-authored his second book with his amazing wife Shelley Burgess. Teaching is not only about creating exciting, engaging, unique lessons to bring your teaching to the next level. It is also about making connections to your students and their lives. What allows teachers to create those great lessons is the hard work put in to get to know their students and build the bridges of trust and understanding. Our goal as educators is not to create good test takers, but to create WORLD CHANGERS!
Q1 What are life changing lessons (LCL) ? #sstlap
Q2 What is difference between LCL and ticket lessons ?#sstlap
Q3 What experience do you have as T, Ss parent admin w/ LCL? How impact life?#sstlap
Q4 What content concept do/could you use as basis for lcl? #sstlap
Q5 What experience can you provide that can be a lcl for your students ?#sstlap
Q6 Why should our goal be to create lcl for out students? #sstlap
Q7 What do you say to those who say test scores are important and we must prepare ss to take the test in relation to our lcl discussion tonight? #sstlap