Alan Turing broke the enigma code in World War Two, and devised machines that became programmable computers.
Turing's homosexuality resulted in a criminal prosecution in 1952, when homosexual acts were still illegal in the United Kingdom.
He lost his security clearance, and accepted treatment with female hormones (chemical castration) as an alternative to prison. He commited suicide in 1954, just over two weeks before his 42nd birthday, from cyanide poisoning.
Visit Manchester University's official Alan Turing page, and sign up for their newsletter.
June 23, 2012, is the Centenary of Alan Turing's birth in London. During his relatively brief life, Turing made a unique impact on the history of computing, computer science, artificial intelligence, developmental biology, and the mathematical theory of computability.
2012 will be a celebration of Turing's life and scientific impact, with a number of major events taking place throughout the year. Most of these will be linked to places with special significance in Turing's life, such as Cambridge, Manchester and Bletchley Park.
"Memory Of The Future" was heard on 'Radio 2 In Concert', Wed 5 Dec 2012, BBC Philharmonic Studio, Salford, part of a piece Tennant and Lowe have been writing inspired by Alan Turing youtube.com 18 Dec 12
The Universal Machine
A new musical about the life and death of Alan Turing. New Diorama Theatre, London - Tue 16 Apr - Sat 11 May newdiorama.com 18 Dec 12
the British codebreaker, should be pardoned posthumously over his historic conviction for homosexuality, Prof Stephen Hawking and other leading scientists have said telegraph.co.uk 14 Dec 12
The Minister of State, Ministry of Justice (Lord McNally): Dr Turing's conviction, essentially for homosexual activity, was the result of an offence which we would now consider discriminatory and which has now been repealed. This was a shocking and inappropriate fate for someone who had contributed so much to science and to the defence of his country. However, it is long-standing Government policy that pardons under the Royal Prerogative of Mercy should be reserved for cases where it can be established that the convicted person was innocent of the relevant offence, and not to undo the effects of legislation which we now recognise as wrong. Lord Sharkey introduced a Private Member's Bill in the House of Lords on 25 July which would grant a statutory pardon to Dr Turing, and the Government will consider their response to this Bill in due course.
Written Answers in the House of Lords - Asked by Lord Grade of Yarmouth, Tuesday 11 December 2012
To ask Her Majesty's Government whether they will reconsider their decision not to grant a posthumous pardon to Alan Turing.
The son of one of Alan Turing's closest friends has called for the codebreaking hero to be pardoned
Speaking at a signing of the new Alan Turing Monopoly game, William Newman, said: "I don't see why they can't pardon him, it's not a crime anymore. Who does it hurt? miltonkeynes.co.uk 6 Nov 12
Lego portraits of
and other LGBTQ icons from the Little Artists - 10% from every print sold in November to the Terence Higgins Trust littleartist.co.uk
Labour Shadow Justice Minister backs Campaign to pardon Alan Turing miltonkeynes.co.uk 2 Nov 12
Bank of England
adds Alan Turing to a list of suggestions of people who could be featured on banknotes, after he received 21,996 e-votes bankofengland.co.uk 26 Oct 12
UK LGBT History Month
pre-launch at Bletchley Park, focusing on Maths, Science and Engineering, and Alan Turing covered all 3 disciplines - Thu 15 Nov LGBT History Month 23 Oct 12
director of Codebreaker says Alan Turing's story needs to be told. The movie being premiered in the USA washingtonblade.com Oct 12
Graham Moore's screenplay about Alan Turing's story has been bought by Black Bear Pictures, after Warner Bros passes deadline.com 8 Oct 12
GCHQ Chief, Iain Lobban, said the unique people the country needed were often mavericks, and it was his job to set them to work in the world of secret intelligence, "not to tell them how to live their lives"
at treatment of Alan Turing - his death robbed the country of "one of our greatest minds"
National Portrait Gallery Photo mug of Alan Mathison Turing
- £10.21 amazon.co.uk 22 Jun 1
Bletchley Park Shop
"The first computer started here. Alan Turing Bletchley Park 1943"
- £7.99 bletchleypark.org.uk 22 Jun 12
New drama documentary about the heroic life, tragic death, and lasting legacy of Alan Turing. A shorter version of this film broadcast on Channel 4 in 2011, attracted 1.5 million viewers turingfilm.com 22 Jun 12
seeks art works for the Alan Turing Centenary at Bletchley Park, launching mid September facebook.com 28 May 12