There’s no doubt that the food we put into our bodies can have an impact our skin. But when it comes to acne, there are plenty of myths and misinformation. Understanding the relationship between your diet and breakouts is key for keeping skin clear, so read on to separate the facts from the fiction....
Truth or myth: chocolate causes acne.
There is no solid evidence that chocolate has an effect on acne, and dark chocolate is actually packed with good-for-your-skin antioxidants. The caveat: Sugar can trigger breakouts (read on), so it’s best to satisfy your sweet tooth with chocolate that contains high levels of cacao.
Truth or myth: cakes and sweets cause acne.
Recent studies have shown that high glycemic index foods—the ones that cause blood sugar levels to spike—can make acne worse. We know it’s easier said than done, but try to stick to high-fiber foods like whole grains and legumes instead of simple sugars and white flour.
Truth or Myth: water can help flush away acne.
Proper hydration is essential for good overall health and your skin is no exception, but extra trips to the water cooler are not going to clean out your pores.
Truth or myth: fish can help improve acne.
Oily fish are rich in omega-3 fatty acids that help fight inflammation in all of the body´s systems, including our largest organ, the skin. You can up your intake with a few servings of salmon or tuna every week. If fish isn’t for you, walnuts and supplements can give you a good dose of these fatty acids too.
Truth or myth: vitamin and mineral supplements improve most cases of acne.
Hormones are the primary cause of acne, not vitamin or mineral deficiencies. Nonetheless, a balanced diet with plenty of fruits and vegetables helps provide the skin with the essential nutrients it needs to heal pimples. A “rainbow on your plate” is a good rule of thumb, as colored fruit and vegetables are naturally high in antioxidants that help keep skin inflammation in check.
Truth or Myth: greasy foods like pizza and fries feed acne.
A common acne myth is that grease on your plate translates to more oil in your pores, but there is no scientific evidence that there’s a direct link between the two. However, a diet high in saturated fat can fuel micro-inflammation throughout the body, including the skin. In short, pizza and chips won’t cause acne, but moderation is the best policy for overall health.
Truth or Myth: alcohol can bring on breakouts.
There is no convincing evidence that alcohol has any impact on acne. However, it does lead to facial redness by causing blood vessels in the skin to dilate. Alcohol is also dehydrating, so always drink in moderation.
This article is intended as general information only. You should seek advice from a professional before altering your diet, changing your exercise regime or starting any new course of conduct.