Atlanta-based CDC (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention), often regarded as the country’s leading health authority, has offered Halloween health and safety tips for the haunted 2011 season. The safety tips spell out “Safe Halloween” and help parents keep Halloween festivities safe for trick-or-treaters and party guests.
S – Swords, knives, and similar costume accessories should be short, soft, and flexible.
A – Avoid trick-or-treating alone. Walk in groups or with a trusted adult.
F – Fasten reflective tape to costumes and bags to help drivers see you.
E – Examine all treats for chocking hazards and tampering before eating them. Limit the amount of treats you eat.
H – Hold a flashlight while trick-or-treating to help you see and others see you. Always walk and don’t run.
A – Always test make-up in a small area first. Remove it before bedtime to prevent possible skin and eye irritation.
L – Look both ways before crossing the street. Use established crosswalks wherever possible.
L – Lower your risk for serious eye injury by not wearing decorative contact lenses.
O – Only walk on sidewalks whenever possible, or on the far edge of the road facing traffic to stay safe.
W – Wear well-fitting masks, costumes, and shoes to avoid blocked vision, trips, and falls.
E – Eat only factory-wrapped treats. Avoid eating homemade treats made by strangers.
E – Enter homes only if you’re with a trusted adult.
N – Never walk near lit candles or luminaries. Be sure to wear flame-resistant costumes.
Expecting trick-or-treaters or party guests?
- Provide healthier treats for trick-or-treaters such as low-calorie treats and drinks. For party guests, offer a variety of fruits, vegetables, and cheeses.
- Use party games and trick-or-treat time as an opportunity for kids to get their daily dose of 60 minutes of physical activity.
- Be sure walking areas and stairs are well lit and free of obstacles that could result in falls.
- Keep candle-lit jack-o’lanterns and luminaries away from doorsteps, walkways, landings, and curtains. Place them on sturdy tables, keep them out of the reach of pets and small children, and never leave them unattended.
- Remind drivers to watch out for trick-or-treaters and to drive safely.
Follow these tips to help make the Halloween festivities fun and safe for everyone. If you’re weary of trick-or-treating in neighborhoods, many malls in and around Atlanta are sponsoring organized events. For more information, follow this Examiner link. In addition, Trick or Tracker is a popular Halloween cell phone app that lets parents keep track of their older trick-or-treaters.
About the CDC
For over 60 years, Atlanta-based CDC has been dedicated to protecting health and promoting quality of life through the prevention and control of disease, injury, and disability. The CDC is located at 1600 Clifton Rd., Atlanta, GA. 30333. For more information, visit the CDC website.
To receive future articles by Jackie Kass, scroll to the top of this article, and click on SUBSCRIBE. Do you have a story idea? I’d love to hear from you! E-mail your ideas to me at [email protected]