Books Written By Margaret Mead
Coming of Age in Samoa: A Psychological Study of Primitive Youth for Western Civilization.
Growing Up in New Guinea: A Comparative Study of Primitive Education
The Changing Culture of an Indian Tribe
Kinship in the Admiralty Islands
Sex and Temperament in Three Primitive Societies
Cooperation and Competition Among Primitive Peoples
The Mountain Arapesh
And Keep Your Powder Dry: An Anthropologist Looks at America
Balinese Character: A Photographic Analysis. New York Academy of Sciences.
Male and Female: A Study of the Sexes in a Changing World
The School in American Culture
Soviet Attitudes Toward Authority: An Interdisciplinary Approach to Problems of Soviet Character
Growth and Culture: A Photographic Study of Balinese Childhood
The Study of Culture at a Distance
Themes in French Culture
Childhood in Contemporary Cultures
An Anthropologist at Work: Writings of Ruth Benedict.
The Golden Age of American Anthropology
Continuities in Cultural Evolution.
Anthropologists and What They Do.
The Wagon and the Star: A Study of American Community Initiative
The Small Conference: An Innovation in Communication
Science and the Concept of Race
Culture and Commitment: The New Relations Between the Generations in the 1970s.
A Rap on Race
Blackberry Winter: My Earlier Years
Twentieth Century Faith: Hope and Survival
To Love or to Perish: The Technological Crisis and the Churches.
World Enough: Rethinking the Future
Letters From the Field: 1925-1975
An Interview with Santa Claus
With a Daughter's Eye: A Memoir of Margaret Mead and Gregory Bateson, by Catherine Bateson
Margaret Mead: A Voice for the Century, by Robert Cassidy.
Uncommon Lives: My Lifelong Friendship with Margaret Mead, by Patricia Grinager
Margaret Mead: The Complete Bibliography 1925-1976, by Joan Gordon (editor)
Margaret Mead: A Life, by Jane Howard
Margaret Mead and Ruth Benedict: The Kinship of Women, by Hilary Lapsley
For Interested Younger Readers
Margaret Mead (Making Their Mark), by Liza N. Burby
Margaret Mead, by Julie Castiglia
She Never Looked Back: Margaret Mead in Samoa, by Sam Epstein
Margaret Mead: Coming of Age in America, by Joan T. Mark and Owen Gingerich (editor)
Margaret Mead, Anthropologist (Giants of Science), by Michael Pollard
Margaret Mead, Grandma Moses, by E. B. White
To Grandmother, With Love, Andrews McMeel Publishing
Importance of Margaret Mead
Margaret Mead: Anthropologist (American Women of Achievement)