Slovenia's diverse landscapes and climates offer a lot to ornithologists and amateur bird watchers alike. Bird watching combines recreation in the nature and education about birds, their habits and their habitat. So far, 386 bird species have been recorded in Slovenia; 223 among them also breed in Slovenia. 386 bird species represent half of all European bird species (about 850). By recognizing the importance of watching and studying the birds, 7th October has been proclaimed the European Bird Watching Day.
Ferruginous duck, gadwall, garganey, wood sandpiper, ruff, Eurasian wigeon, common teal, water rail, western marsh harrier, white-tailed eagle, bearded reedling
Ormož Lagoons are wetlands with extraordinary international significance. They formed in the refining pools that used to be part of the Ormož Sugar Factory. The vast area of muddy shallows are a welcome haven for the migrating birds. There is an educational trail, including some bird watching hides in adapted shipping containers.
Little tern, common tern, sabre fish, black-winged stilt, Kentish plover, common redshank, common shelduck, yellow-legged gull, black-headed gull, little egret, great egret
In 1993, Salt Pans of Sečovlje became a site under Ramsar Convention which obliges Slovenia to protect wetlands as birds’ habitat. Salt Pans and its unique biotope of sea water channels represent an extraordinary habitat for almost 300 bird species that find here their night or wintering place.
Black-winged stilt, common redshank, common shelduck, yellow-legged gull, black-headed gull, little egret
Strunjan salt pans as the meeting point of the sea and land, together with Stjuža, the only sea lagoon in Slovenia, are an area of salty wetlands, one of the highly endangered ecosystems. Numerous birds rest on the banks and strand; many choose this area also as a nesting place. So far, over 200 bird species have been listed in this area.
little tern, common tern, black-winged stilt, common redshank, little ringed plover, little bittern, great reed warbler, reed warbler, Cetti's warbler, little egret, cattle egret
The 122 hectares of Škocjanski zatok is an area dedicated to birds. The reserve consists of the brackish lagoon with nesting islands, saltmarshes and mudflats with grasslands. Around 250 species of birds add up to the abundance of flora and fauna. The reserve has a walking trail with numerous bird watching hides.
Corn crake, whinchat, Eurasian curlew, common quail, common whitethroat, common nightingale, tree pipit, hen harrier, great grey shrike
This 64 hectare nature reserve is a landscape of marsh grassland and residues of flooded forests. Iški morost as a nature reserve is a part of Ljubljana Marshes Nature Park and is a home to numerous highly endangered species of grassland plants and animals. In addition, it is one of the most important nestings places of the corn crake in Slovenia.
black-headed gull, mediterranean gull, common tern, black tern, common sandpiper, jellow-legged gull, tufted duck, common goldeneye, pygmy cormorant, common merganser
Ptuj Lake is a reservoir lake on the Drava river, representing the most important wintering place in the inland Slovenia. Special nesting islands for common tern, Mediterranean gull and black-headed gull have been arranged for this purpose. There is a 12 km walking trail around the lake, with a bird watching spot that includes the most important information about birds.