The effects of childhood bullying can have significant long-term effects. A study published in Psychological Science revealed that bullied children were six times more likely to have a serious illness or psychiatric disorder as adults. Each of these on its own can lead to violent behavior as a child struggles for control and self-worth. Put together it is no wonder that bullied children can turn into struggling, violent adults.
The study of criminal justice and criminology has experienced tremendous growth over the last years, which is evident, in part, by the widespread popularity and increased enrollment in criminology and criminal justice departments at the undergraduate and graduate levels, both across the United States and internationally.
An evolutionary paradigmatic shift has accompanied this criminological surge in definitional, disciplinary, and pragmatic terms. Though long identified as a leading sociological specialty area, criminology has emerged as a stand-alone discipline in its own right, one that continues to grow and is clearly here to stay.
Today, criminology remains inherently theoretical but is also far more applied in focus and thus more connected to the academic and practitioner concerns of criminal justice and related professional service fields. Contemporary study of criminology and criminal justice My criminal behavior survey also increasingly interdisciplinary and thus features a broad variety of research topics on the causes, effects, and responses to crime.
Because just listing suggestions for criminal justice research topics will be of limited value we have included short topical overviews and suggestions for narrowing those topics and divided them into 6 parts as in the list above.
These research papers were written by several well-known discipline figures and emerging younger scholars who provide authoritative overviews coupled with insightful discussion that will quickly familiarize researchers and students alike with fundamental and detailed information for each criminal justice topic.
This collection begins by defining the discipline of criminology and observing its historical development Part I: The various social e. The sociological origins of theoretical criminology are observed across several research papers that stress classical, environmental, and cultural influences on crime and highlight peer group, social support, and learning processes.
Examination of these criminological theory research papers quickly confirms the aforementioned interdisciplinary nature of the field, with research papers presenting biological, psychological, and biosocial explanations and solutions for crime Part III: Criminology Research provides example research papers on various quantitative and qualitative designs and techniques employed in criminology research.
Comparison of the purposes and application of these research methods across various criminal justice topics illustrates the role of criminologists as social scientists engaged in research enterprises wherein single studies fluctuate in focus along a pure—applied research continuum.
This section also addresses the measurement of crimes with attention to major crime reporting and recording systems. Each research paper in this section thoroughly defines its focal offense and considers the related theories that frame practices and policies used to address various leading violent, property, and morality crimes.
These research papers also present and critically evaluate the varying level of empirical evidence, that is, research confirmation, for competing theoretical explanations and criminal justice system response alternatives that are conventionally identified as best practices.
Ostensibly, an accurate and thorough social science knowledge base stands to render social betterment in terms of reduced crime and victimization through the development of research—based practices.
Here, the central components of criminal justice research paper topics law enforcement, courts, and corrections are presented from a criminology—criminal justice outlook that increasingly purports to leverage theory and research in particular, program evaluation results toward realizing criminal justice and related social policy objectives.
Beyond the main system, several research papers consider the role and effectiveness of several popular justice system and wrap-around component initiatives e.My Criminal Behavior Survey. 11 November Crime; If research were to significantly indicate that the tendency to commit crime is inherited, what should be done about or for the children of violent criminals?
If research were to indicate the tendency to commit crime is inherited it would change our government significantly. Uniform Crime Reporting The program was conceived in by the International Association of Chiefs of Police to meet the need for reliable uniform crime statistics for the nation.
In , the FBI was tasked with collecting, publishing, and archiving those statistics. Crime Records. General Information. Armed Forces Enlistment Form (PDF) Computerized Criminal History (CCH) Specifications; Crime Records Newsletters.
In , questions on involvement in criminal behavior and being arrested and booked for a crime were added to the National Household Survey on Drug Abuse (NHSDA) to ascertain the relationship between drug use and criminal behavior.
Analysis shows that drug use is a strong correlate of being booked. Behavior like gang involvement, drug and alcohol abuse, ineffective parenting, lack of engaged fathers, and poor education are a handful of situations that breed dysfunctional behavior.
Federal Criminal History Background Checks required by Act of , 24 PS as amended (Act 61 of ) Background As of April 1, , Act of has required that ALL prospective employees of public and private schools, including their independent contractors and their employees, but excluding employees who do not have direct.