This section includes resources on standards and outcomes on planning for care, quality of care, complaints and protection, care and control, staffing, and administration.
Displaying 1 - 10 of 11
This document serves as a guide for implementing short-term residential care interventions; grounded in evidence-based practice, the Guide provides "7 essential elements of short-term residential intervention" with case examples from the field in the United States.
This handbook, Moving Forward: Implementation of the ‘Guidelines for the Alternative Care of Children,’ is aimed at legislators, policy-makers and decision-makers, as well as professionals and care providers, to support the implementation of the Guidelines for the Alternative Care of Children, endorsed by the United Nations General Assembly in 2009. It explains the key thrusts of the Guidelines, outlines the kind of policy responses required, and describes ‘promising’ examples of efforts already made to apply them in diverse communities, countries, regions and cultures.
Standards for shelters and care providers responding to children who have been trafficked. It gives guidance and practice examples of intake procedures, interim and longer term care, support services, integration and reunification
A set of standards for residential settings, including the young person’s welcome into care, the quality of care they should receive, contact arrangements, and listening and responding to the views of young people.
A set of standards for boarding and residential schools. It outlines what young people can expect when they receive school care accommodation services from a registered/regulated provider.
Operational standards and guidance for residential care facilities for girls and women survivors of trafficking and abuse. It covers administration and staff, confidentiality, care planning, responding to immediate and longer term support needs, psychosocial care, life skills and reintegration activities.
A comprehensive guide to the rescue, rehabilitation and reintegration of child victims of trafficking and commercial sexual exploitation.
A set of standards for ensuring the welfare protection of children in residential special schools. It includes standards and outcomes relating to children’s rights, protection, and care, as well as staffing, organization and management.
A set of standards for ensuring positive welfare, health and education in children’s homes. It includes standards and outcomes on planning for care, quality of care, complaints and protection, care and control, environment, staffing, management and administration, and specialist provision.
A set of standards for ensuring welfare protection at boarding schools. It includes standards and outcomes that outline a school’s welfare policies and procedures, organization and management, welfare support to boarders, staffing, and premises.