The separation of a limb through surgical practice is known as amputation. According to Johns Hopkins Medicine, amputation is surgery to remove all or part of an arm or leg and may be done to treat injury, disease, or infection. The amputation of a limb can be a highly emotional experience with consequences that range beyond the physical cost of the amputation Once the amputation surgery is complete, there are still many steps that an amputee must take on the road to recovery.
The first action that must be taken once someone is made aware of his or her need for amputation surgery is careful planning. Both the financial and emotional burden must be accounted for ahead of time. The costs associated with the loss of a limb can extend far beyond the basic cost of surgery. According to the Spiros Law Firm, the costs that should be considered include the full range of medical care as well as the cost of any medical or prosthetic devices that will be required post-surgery.
Once the procedure is complete, the amputee will be taken to a recovery room in the hospital. Recovery time varies from patient to patient. Once the patient’s vial signs, including breathing, blood pressure, and pulse are stable then the patient is taken to a hospital room to begin physical therapy. This therapy reflects the patient’s individual needs and can include stretching and exercises designed to promote strength, stability, and coordination. The ultimate goal of this therapy is to ready the patient for prosthesis.
While in the hospital, prosthetic specialists will visit the patient in order to determine the best design and fit for the prosthesis. Then the specialist will make the prosthesis. Once the prosthesis is made and fitted to the patient, then the specialist instructs the patient how to move with the limb. The patient will be allowed to go home from the hospital once doctors are sure that the healing process is going well and the patient can look after his or herself with assistance. Once home, the patient should continue to observe the protocol outlined by the doctors and specialists in the hospital. He or she should also expect to continue attending physical therapy. Additionally, pain medication and other types of medicine might still be required once a patient is sent home and should be accounted for as additional costs.