Good collaboration is Leadership Driven.
Key Questions to be Answered
→What are the skills necessary to lead a collaboration?
→How is leadership addressed in your collaboration?
→How can individuals draw upon their own strengths to lead a collaboration?
The following Toolkit activities relate directly to different aspects of the ELEMENT Leadership Driven. Click on the title to take you directly to the full activity.
This activity is an opportunity for individuals representing particular organizations to articulate and share crucial elements of their organizations. When unclear or unknown, these elements can pose challenges to others in the midst of collaboration. This exercise is a way to get individuals talking about the “ins and outs” of their respective organizations.
The purpose of this activity is to articulate and share how a participant’s organization operates on the four dimensions that characterize each collaboration. For each collaboration, there are four main “relevant dimensions” to successful collaboration: 1) culture (the context of the organization); 2) external resources (the people, funding, and other outside sources that provide support); 3) Communication (the approaches and structures people within an organization use to communicate); and 4) the individual players (the personal characteristics of individuals in the organization). This activity encourages individuals to become familiar with the four dimensions; it is another way for potential collaborators to get to know the organization(s) with which they may be collaborating.
The purpose of this activity is to explore the relevant dimensions of a potential collaboration (culture, external resources, communication, and the individual players). Through discussion of the dimensions, collaborators learn more about how each collaborator views the collaboration, their perspectives on the dimensions as they pertain to the collaboration, and to identify goals for future work.
This activity encourages participants to talk about the tricky issue of competition. Competition between partnering organizations can lead to a loss of focus on the goals or even to the disintegration of collaboration. When opportunities arise that may change the course of a partnership, transparency and open communication must be maintained to prevent animosity and the possible dissolution of the collaboration.
This activity helps participants explore how the four relevant dimensions (culture, external resources, communication, and the individual players) are unfolding in the collaboration. Through discussion of the dimensions, collaborators will reflect on the progress of the collaboration as well as identify goals for future work.