Curated Resources for Classes in the Library Today
Welcome to the Library!
Period 1 – CHV2O1
Ms. Belevski’s class is coming in to work on their debate assignment.
The Canadian Student Debating Federation has a great resource designed for students who are performing in a debate. If only we could find some students who were going to be in a debate…. Make sure you use their Research Aides, which are quite useful.
Here are some other very useful resources you can pick up at the Laurier Virtual Library.
Resources for the CHV2O Included are the Virtual Library Catalogue, the Canadian Points of View, Global Issues in Context and the Advanced Placement Source.
Period 3 – HIF101-11
Ms. McWilliams’ class is coming in to research Healthy Recipes.
The Internet is filled with great resources for how to cook.
If you use the following links, you’ll find great resources to use for your Healthy Snack assignment.
One of the greatest websites that deal with Recipes and cooking methods is Serious Eats. They take a very thorough approach to cooking and look at which method works best.
Serious Eats has a page dedicated specifically to Snacks, so you should definitely use it by clicking HERE.
Chef Oliver has done extensive work to improve nutritional standards in North American schools as well as in his homeland of Great Britain. He has established a great deal of healthy snack recipes as well. You can find those HERE.
Eat Right Ontario
Established by provincial dietitians, Eat Right Ontario focuses upon advice, recipes and techniques for Ontarians to eat healthier food than they currently do. Use the search feature on the website to find the appropriate resources.
Period 3 – HSB4U1-11
Click here to download a copy of your assignment.
Ms. Magson’s HSB class is coming in to work on their assignment. For this assignment, you’ll need quality resources from different areas. The Library’s print collection is fairly well established, covering many different topics that will be helpful.
To access them, use our Catalogue; found on the Virtual Library. The Catalogue also provides you access to streaming video and other electronic resources. When off site, you’ll need to log in with your TDSB information.
Other digital sources can be found in the following slideshow such as Canadian Points of View and Global Viewpoints. Also, Advanced Placement Source is a great resource.
So, Ms. Magson wants you to use STATSCan…. it might be the worst designed website in North America. However, it sure has a lot of stats. We can assure you that if you’re looking for demographic data in Canada, it can probably be found HERE.
Resources for the HSB4U