Media Production Development.
Media productions develop out of that which has come before. Media creators and producers frequently reference ideas and techniques that have been developed by others. Collecting, acknowledging and building upon ideas, structures, aesthetics and techniques informs the direction of media productions and an understanding of how audiences are engaged. Students investigate and research a selected media form to inform the development of their proposed production.
This research contributes to the direction of their production design.
Students conduct an investigation of aspects of the media form in which they will work, developing knowledge of narrative, genre, style, media codes and conventions and aspects of the works of media practitioners relevant to their proposed production. Students develop production skills that inform the production, design and development of a media product. They record their learning in documented research, annotated production activities, experiments, exercises and reflections.
Unit 3: Area of Study 2 - Media production development
This area of study forms the initial part of the Media production process. It documents exploration and investigation, experimentation, reflection and evaluation throughout the process. Media production development enables students to investigate a range of styles, genres and forms to develop their own distinctive style from different influences. Unit 3 Area of study 2 provides students opportunities to explore media technologies and processes related to their investigation and reflect on the development of their media product. Media production design articulates the context of the media product, including the intention, specific audience, the narrative and distribution of the product. It forms the basis of the planning of the creation of the media product, including representations, subject matter, characters, roles, tasks and timelines.
Exploration and investigation
As part of their exploration students should identify an idea, concept, ideology or theme, audience and media form they wish to examine for their Media production process. Students make links between their ideas and themes, and explore codes and conventions of media forms and document influences.
Students identify multiple influences from different media forms and the use of different media technologies. They record the codes and conventions that form the narratives, style and genre of these influences and how they are distributed, engaged, read and consumed by audiences. Students analyse aspects of these influences that may assist in developing their own individual style. They investigate technologies, equipment and materials in a range of media forms relevant to their selected media product and evaluate the capabilities of these resources.
Students use the Media production process and technologies in at least two experiments. Experiments should be short activities or exercises, not complete productions and focus on skill development. Students document
the use of media codes and conventions,
aesthetic and structural qualities,
genre and style identified from the study of different media forms, to their own experiments.
Students should consider in detail different technologies and processes, and how codes and conventions can be manipulated to communicate different meanings.
After each experiment, students should write a detailed evaluation, making note of:
the intentions of these experiments and their relationship to influences,
research and studied media forms
the manipulation of codes and conventions and the relationship to the narrative, structure, style and genre
the opportunities and constraints of all technologies or processes used
how the individual style the student has used in the experiment has developed
how specific audiences would be engaged when reading and consuming the codes and conventions, narrative, style and genre of the experiment.
These experiments may lead to further research to refine production skills or understanding of the narrative, style or genre.
Students have One week to complete each production exercise + written documentation Students will be assessed on the work they complete in class during this time Students can work on an exercise in the same Medium as their SAT production - this has the advantage of students being able to try techniques and applications they can learn and then later use in their Major Production or students can elect to work in a different form
First you need to decide what you would like to complete in your production exercises. If you are working in Print/Magazine for your SAT- you may like to design a Magazine cover / or a magazine advertisement / or a feature article for a magazine- alternatively you may like to try something different- like designing a poster to promote a product or a social issue - or design and package a CD - or design a brochure – or a catalogue – or design the cover for a Calendar – it is your choice Students electing to work in Video or animation can create a sequence of 30 -60 seconds based on a technique or production element you wish to use to create a particular effect- Or you could create a short narrative- Or an opening sequence to a short film typical of a specific genre. – Or a music video- sequence - Or any sequence where you wish to demonstrate the use and effect of camera shots / angles or movement combined with sound. Or an interview sequence- Students electing to work in Photography – can produce 1-2 digital photographs. You may wish to explore a particular genre in Photography- e.g. – Portrait/ Landscape / City scape/ Photojournalism / Realist / Sport / Abstract - or demonstrate a particular compositional element- e.g. rule of thirds- leading lines –shape –form –texture. Or you may wish apply an effect/ process or technique in Photoshop- or you may like to include text with your photo- or you may wish to explore a method of presentation
Or you may wish to explore a theme
Whatever you decide- you should aim for your exercise to demonstrate your skills and knowledge of the medium you have chosen.
You will be assessed on your idea- the quality of your work and the documentation
It is important that you look closely at your Mediums Specifications and select 2 that you wish to highlight in your work
IDEAS IDEAS IDEAS IDEAS
When deciding what you will present for your production skills exercises it is a good idea to think of an application- or a technique – that links to your big Media production you will complete in term 3 Whilst you cannot – complete an exercise that is the same as your main production you can explore an application or technique- or specification that will give you technical and creative experience that you can then benefit from when you work on your own production. Remember each exercise- must have documentation that explains your intention- your intended audience - the use of two specifications plus realisation So if I am doing photography for my main production and my topic is something like – night moods- - I might wish to explore the use of lighting- or different shutter and aperture speeds of the SLR camera – to present an image for one production exercise E.g. For exercise one- I want to take a portrait photo of a person – where I use back lighting to create a silhouette – around the figure –so that my subject appears frightening. I always wish to explore composition where I will use a low camera angle shot- so that my subject appears dominant and powerful For magazine- I wish to create a magazine front page based on Food/ Fashion/Sport/ Home/ Garden/ Teenage Girls/ Romance/Weddings/ Travel etc.
For exercise one- I wish to explore the specification of layout- (the arrangement of all the content on my front page) I always want to explore the specification of Font (Typography) – so that the fonts I use are appropriate and generic to the type of magazine cover I wish to design)
For video- I wish to create a 30 second video sequence – where I will demonstrate how the use of creative camera work and sound can communicate a feeling of mystery / suspense/excitement/drama /sadness/ happiness/ tension
These are just simple ideas and approaches- you are not confined to these- there are literally thousands of ideas- at your choosing
The Best way to start –is to look back over your design plan- perhaps there is something in your research or influences you may like to use.
Make a list of all the possible exercise you could create as a good starting point
These small productions can really test you as you determine the Medium, content, style, specifications and audience your short production is for .