The iris flower is named after the goddess of the rainbow in Greek mythology, Iris being the messenger of the gods that connected the heavens with the earth. The symbolism of this flower is therefore linked to communication, luck and wisdom. Purple irises bears the significance of nobility, this flower being found in the stylized form in the coat of arms of many royal families in the past. Blue irises transmit hope and faith, and the yellow ones show signs of passion. White irises express feelings innocence and purity, virtue and respect. Offer a bouquet of irises to to show your support, sympathy and understanding for someone dear.
The iris flower signifies nobility and hope and a bouquet of such flowers sends your compliments and respect to the person you are offering it to. Bouquets containing irises are electrifying and elegant, and by combining different flowers and colors they can be offered a sign of gratitude and as a way to say thanks, encouragement and support. Strong colored arrangements can give a touch of distinction and depth using purple iris. Using different color combinations we have created bouquets of iris suitable for any situation and for all kinds of relationships. Bouquets of white flowers and purple irises express dignity, truth and respect, are imposing and discreet; bouquets of yellow flowers and irises are more exuberant and joyful, communicating optimism and passion.
The iris grows in normal conditions from rhizomes or, when the climate is dry, from a bulb, and has a long stem, simple or branched. The flowers have three wide, arched petals on the outside and three internal petals, short and straight. The special shape of the petals allow insects to sit on the flowers and pollinate them. The plant's name comes from the Greek goddess Iris, who was traveling on a rainbow to make known the will of the gods to the earthlings. This association with the divine messenger with gilded wings caused the iris to be associated with wisdom and hope. In the Middle Ages in France, stylized iris flowers decorated the numerous coats of arms of noble families, thus becoming a symbol of strength. Iris bouquets bring, along with their delicate scent, happy thoughts, love and respect, and floral arrangements that are accented with their mysterious purple color remind of honest souls and honor.