29 Oct Goal in Life (Satsang)
Following is the transcript of the speech made by Dr. Jayadeva Yogendra and Smt. Hansaji Yogendra on the topic.
|Smt. Hansaji and Dr. Jayadeva Yogendra|
“You see, there is the goal of living the life, making money, being happy; these are the obvious goals and we don’t really search for goals. We are forced into life and we carry it on. Sometimes we see others and feel jealous and start thinking also but we have but done much good work, we just leave it there. So practically the whole life goes in muddling through. Sometime we take up one kind of job, sometime we start with some new business…that always goes on. In the end, we are dissatisfied – our children have not grown up as we want, the family is not that happy, we are not being able to succeed and what not because this kind of thinking does not happen.
See, we are born into this world to fulfill our purpose and the purpose is our duties, and everyone does not understand what our duties are. So we just muddle through and try to feel happy about it. But real understanding does not happen. We see others and sometimes feel jealous but we, on our own, have never done any thinking.
I personally believe in accepting life as it is and not grumbling, not saying I’m rich or I’m poor or this or that. If you are born in a certain family, you can carry out the instructions, study, pass exams and be fit for something, take it up and continue. While doing that, maybe some clarity can happen and you might benefit out of that.
But basically, living our life itself is very important. Spending time in quarreling, complaining, is not right. See, life is there for us to live, so just live it. Be happy in living that life and duties are there before us all the time. When you sit before food, your duty is to eat, when you’re in the office – duty to work. This carries on.
I believe that these very simple things are there – to eat, to drink, to grow, to do our work. Now beyond that, let us not think of the other goals – becoming the President of India, becoming a millionaire and all that. We make mistakes there. In our mind, we dream of things that we are not capable of achieving and we get frustrated and more or less, the life is full of frustrations. Had we taken up the things that have come naturally and done our best, then we would have got our answer. But we don’t get answers because instead of doing the things at hand, we try this and that and are not able to feel satisfaction. So I think we should not spend time trying to dream of what is our goal. The goal is what you are doing. You are here to listen, I am here to talk. Let us carry it out.”
Q & A