The world's ecosystems are being degraded at an unprecedented rate, and by 2050 humans will need at least two planets' worth of natural resources to live as they do now, the conservation group WWF warned today.
If everyone lived as Britons did, three planets would be needed to sustain the world's population, the group said.
The latest edition of WWF's two-yearly Living Planet Report showed the demand people placed on the natural world had tripled since 1961, and that humanity was using the planet's resources far more quickly than they could renew themselves.
WWF said over-consumption of resources had increased every year since the organisation started collating the report, in 1998.
In 2003, the most recent year for which figures were available, demand exceeded supply by about 25%, meaning the Earth took 15 months to produce the resources that had been consumed over 12.
The group warned that the consequences of the accelerating pressure on the Earth's natural systems were "both predictable and dire", and would mean the collapse of ecosystems and the erosion of the Earth's ability to support people.
Biodiversity had already been damaged, it said, with terrestrial species declining by 31% between 1970 and 2003, freshwater species by 28% and marine species by 27%.
Paul King, WWF's director of campaigns, said: "We urgently have to face the fact that we are all running up a serious ecological debt and that we cannot continue to exhaust the Earth's natural reserves without putting something back.
"It is time to make some vital choices to enable people to enjoy a one-planet lifestyle.
"The cities, power plants and homes we build today will either lock society into damaging over-consumption beyond our lifetimes or begin to propel this and future generations towards sustainable, one-planet living."
The Living Planet report is based on two sets of data: the living planet index, measuring biodiversity, and the ecological footprint, measuring mankind's reliance on natural resources.
The country with the largest footprint for each person in 2003 was the United Arab Emirates, followed by the US, then Finland. The UK was 14th on the list, up from 15th in the preceding report.
The living p0lanet index is based on trends in more than 3,600 populations of 1,300 vertebrate species around the world.
Jonathan Loh from the Zoological Society of London, one of the report's editors, said the index provided "a stark indication of the rapid and ongoing loss of biodiversity worldwide".
He said: "Populations of species in terrestrial, marine and freshwater ecosystems have declined by more than 30% since 1970, a rate that is unprecedented in human history.
"In the tropics the declines are even more dramatic as natural resources are being intensively exploited for human use."
The report sets out different approaches to the problem, from doing nothing to rapid reduction of the use of resources.
To achieve a reduction in what we use, it said, the global community would need to negotiate how resources were allocated in future, perhaps by allotting "shares" of the footprint to different countries.
The report also called for innovative approaches to help humanity "move beyond the belief that greater wellbeing necessarily entails more consumption".
Mr King said he was pleased the UK government had adopted some of the language of WWF's campaign, but action was needed as well as words.
"A commitment to one-planet living must include a commitment by the UK government to adopt ecological footprint as a sustainable development indicator and set targets for year-on-year reduction.
"Otherwise, one-planet living is at risk of becoming just another overused soundbite with no teeth."