Article by Brandon Thompson Fox 21 News
COLORADO SPRINGS — Machines flying through the sky was still a rare phenomenon when Franklin Macon came into this world in 1923. Even still, it was hard to keep his feet on the ground.
“I started to learn how to fly when I was in high school,” Macon recalled.
The airstrip he learned on was then known as the Pine Valley Airport. It’s now the Air Force Academy Airfield in Colorado Springs.
“We used to fly around to different airports for the fun of it on the weekends, so doing, we happened to be in the Denver area and we saw this airplane sitting out in a field,” Macon said.
The airplane, a Stinson Vultee V-77, was literally in pieces with an asking price of $1,500. Macon negotiated down to $500 and spent more than that fixing it up.
The plane served in the same era as he, both plane and pilot veterans of World War II.
Out of high school, Macon tried to become a certified commercial pilot but was told he was too young to take the test, though, another opportunity found him.
“Then the draft board started breathing down my neck so I went to take the test again and then signed up in the Army air corps,” said Macon.
The U.S Army Air Corp preceded the U.S Air Force during World War II. It was an era of segregation in the country that extended into the service. All black pilots in training were sent to the Tuskegee Airfield in Alabama.
Read entire article here.
Col. Charles Mcgee first time viewing his 1945 photo from Italy in Hangar 2! We love when we get to host our Airmen in the place where it began! March 30th, 2019.
We are a 501(c)(3) non profit independent organization registered with the Internal Revenue Service.
FTANHS, Inc. is a special organization working with the National Park Service to help preserve the legacy of the Tuskegee Airmen and the National Historic site, at Moton Field, a training ground of the Tuskegee Airmen. More About Us
Copyright © 2019 Friends of Tuskegee Airmen National Historic Site Inc. | All Rights Reserved | Designed by 85 Local Media