If you’re looking for a place where you’ll find like-minded people who are fanatic about short stories, then you’re in the right place.
Our aim is to create a community of readers where they can connect with other fans, authors, and publishers to foster an ongoing relationship with reading short stories that lasts a lifetime.
Believe it or not, short stories are wildly popular. We read short stories all the time when we are young before transitioning to books. As adults, we begin reading long-form content because it’s the form most readily available. Walk into any book store or library and you’ll see what we mean. Yet, there’s no reason why short stories can’t continue to be part of an active reading life.
Short Story Book Club helps facilitate the ongoing enjoyment and appreciation of short stories, whether fiction or nonfiction, for children and adults.
On our website, you’ll find tools for helping you add more short stories to your reading repertoire.
WHAT ARE SHORT STORIES?
There are many definitions of what makes a short story. Short Story Book Club takes a broad view. For us, short stories are creative works of any length shorter than a novel. Most novels average 60,000 words or more. Therefore, we define short stories as anything less than that.
Within that definition, there are a range of options. It includes both “short short stories” with word counts under 5,000 words and “long short stories,” with word counts between 5,000 and 10,000 words. It also includes novellas, which are generally longer than a long short story and shorter than a novel.
In our definition, we include both fiction and literary nonfiction. To be considered a “story” in the true sense of the word, there must be a narrative structure. So publications like how-to guides and dictionaries would not be included in our definition even if they were under 60,000 words. On the other hand, memoirs, biographies, and some nonfiction essays and news articles may fit our definition depending on how the writer retells the story.
Finally, we also give nods to collections, anthologies, journals, and the like. Publications comprising a collection of stories by the same or different authors are not short stories but they do receive our consideration when we think about reviewing selections for Short Story Book Club.
WHAT’S THE BEST WAY TO GET STARTED WITH SHORT STORIES?
There’s no one way to enjoy short stories, just as there’s no one way to enjoy a good book. However, we do think there are few ways to help you transition into adding more short stories to your reading life.
Short Story Book Club
Of course, we first recommend that you join Short Story Book Club. All you have to do is sign up for the annual membership, and you’re in.
Join Short Story Book Club for just $8 a year. Membership includes exclusive access to our quarterly newsletter. In each issue you will receive short story news, recommendations, and author interviews as well as a calendar of cultural events.
Our newsletter will introduce you to new short stories, authors, and short story events. Simply choose a story we’ve highlighted for the quarter that piques interest to get started.
The newsletter also connects you to the Short Story Book Club podcast, where you can hear interviews with short story authors.
Community Book Clubs
Connecting with book clubs in your own community can also be a great way to add short stories to your reading repertoire. While many book clubs focus on books, you can recommend that a short story be added every couple of months. You can also start your own club and focus exclusively on reading short stories.
Numerous journals publish short stories online for free or at nominal cost. If you’re on the fence about joining a club, subscribing to a literary journal might be the next best option. You can read these journals online or have them delivered to your home.
The New Yorker Magazine is a popular periodical that regularly features short stories alongside its coverage and commentary of national and local New York City news.
If you have questions about short stories or how to add more short stories to your reading routine, please contact us. Our mission is to get more people reading and enjoying short stories, so we’re eager to help. Just click the Contact Us link in the footer below.