From Tebah 1 and Berothai, Hadadezer’s cities, King David took a great deal of bronze.
the priest will calculate for him the amount of its conversion value until the jubilee year, and he must pay 1 the conversion value on that jubilee day as something that is holy to the Lord.
for the gold used in the display tables, including the amount to be used in each table, for the silver to be used in the silver tables,
Then Mordecai related to him everything that had happened to him, even the specific amount of money that Haman had offered to pay to the king’s treasuries for the Jews to be destroyed.
If he is too poor to pay the conversion value, he must stand the person before the priest and the priest will establish his conversion value; 1 according to what the man who made the vow can afford, 2 the priest will establish his conversion value.
“‘If a man consecrates to the Lord some of his own landed property, the conversion value must be calculated in accordance with the amount of seed needed to sow it, 1 a homer of barley seed being priced at fifty shekels of silver. 2
Whenever the Levites brought the chest to the royal accountant and they saw there was a lot of silver, the royal scribe and the accountant of the high priest emptied the chest and then took it back to its place. They went through this routine every day and collected a large amount of silver.
He launched a military campaign 1 against the king of the Ammonites and defeated them. That year the Ammonites paid him 100 talents 2 of silver, 10,000 kors 3 of wheat, and 10,000 kors 4 of barley. The Ammonites also paid this same amount of annual tribute the next two years. 5
but if only a few years remain 1 until the jubilee, he must calculate for himself in keeping with the remaining years and refund it for his redemption.
So he took David 1 down, and they found them spread out over the land. They were eating and drinking and enjoying themselves because of all the loot 2 they had taken from the land of the Philistines and from the land of Judah.
Joseph stored up a vast amount of grain, like the sand of the sea, 1 until he stopped measuring it because it was impossible to measure.
David supplied a large amount of iron for the nails of the doors of the gates and for braces, more bronze than could be weighed,
and more cedar logs than could be counted. (The Sidonians and Tyrians had brought a large amount of cedar logs to David.)