What Is CBD?
This is the most frequently asked question; what exactly is cannabidiol (CBD)?
CBD is one of over 85 cannabinoids found in cannabis plants.
CBD is a naturally occurring constituent of the hemp or marijuana plant. It is usually the second-most abundant cannabinoid, behind THC.
A wide range of scientific research has been conducted, and there is an ever-growing consensus that CBD offers real benefits to those with chronic illnesses.
How Does CBD Work?
CBD functions by binding to the cannabinoid receptors in the body’s endocannabinoid system.
CBD acts as a strong antioxidant and is believed to have anti-inflammatory, anti-anxiety, and anti-psychotic properties that act as a neuroprotective agent.
It works specifically with different receptors in our brains, gut and immune system. More specifically, it activates the cannabinoid receptors rather than interacting with them directly.
CBD has been found to be beneficial in treating people who suffer from a variety of ailments. An overview about the potential therapeutic effects of Cannabidiol (CBD) may be found here:
- The Biology and Potential Therapeutic Effects of Cannabidiol by Nora D. Voldow, Direc-tor, National Institute on Drug Abuse www.drugabuse.gov/about-nida/legislative-activities/testimony-to-congress/2016/biology-potential-therapeutic-effects-cannabidiol
What Is The Endocannabinoid System (ECS)?
CBD interacts with the body’s endocannabinoid system. The endocannabinoid system runs throughout your entire body and touches all major systems of the body, it is the largest neurotransmitter system in the brain.
The endocannabinoid system is tasked with regulating a wide variety of bodily function such as mood, appetite, sleep hormone production and nervous system and immune responses.
The endocannabinoid system is comprised mainly of two receptors and a series of compounds produced inside the body. The two main receptors associated with the endocannabinoid system are the CB1 and CB2 receptors.
The CB1 and CB2 receptors are found all throughout the body. CB1 receptors are mainly found within the nervous system and the CB2 receptors are mainly found in the gut and cells of the immune system.
Generally speaking, CB1 receptors have been shown to predominantly interact with THC and other psychoactive compounds in the cannabis plant (because the CB1 receptors are mostly found in the nervous system). Therefore, the interaction between CB1 receptors and THC may cause certain changes in brain chemistry, leading to the “high” effects” produced from recreational cannabis use.
CB2 receptors are mainly known to interact with cannabidiol (CBD) associated with the gut and immune system. Because CBD does not interact to a significant degree with CB1 or CB2 receptors, it does not possess the same psychoactive “high” effects that THC does.
CBD does not directly bind to CB1 or CB2 receptors but can indirectly affect endocannabinoid receptor signalling by interacting with no less than a dozen different types of receptors, including those in the immune system, the pain signalling system and the musculoskeletal system.
Where Does Canadian Blends Defence Grow It's Organic HEMP/CBD?
Canadian Blends Defence sources our CBD through our strategic agricultural division.
Pure CBD Oil: The hemp for our Pure CBD Oil is grown on a Certified Organic farm. From our Organically grown hemp, we use a proprietary super critical C02 process to extract our 99%+ pure CBD with no THC. In the past, Canadian blends Defence has sourced NonGMO EcoCertified Organic CBD from Canadian farms.
Pet CBD: The hemp for our Pure CBD for Pets is grown on a Certified Organic farm.. From our Organically grown NonGMO hemp, we use a proprietary super critical C02 process to extract our 99%+ pure CBD with no THC.
Will CBD Get You "High"? No
CBD is antagonistic to the marijuana high; it actually prevents THC molecules from binding to the brain’s receptors. CBD has not demonstrated toxicity in the body (meaning it cannot make you “intoxicated” or “high”), however it is highly reactive with the body’s endocannabinoid system.
What Are The Side Effects Of CBD?
Use of CBD has shown to be non-toxic and safe for human and animal use and has been shown to be well tolerated even at higher doses.
There are dozens of studies that demonstrate the effectiveness of CBD in treating various conditions.
A review on the safety and side effects of CBD may be found here: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5569602/
Is CBD Legal?
Presently, there is much ambiguity and confusion about the legality of CBD at the federal and state level. In short, the answer is “it depends”.
Generally speaking, CBD products that come from cannabis (or medical marijuana) are only legal in states where marijuana is deemed legal.
CBD products from hemp are legal in all 50 states.
Note the keyword “hemp-derived” since hemp typically contains THC content of less than 0.3% and it is not possible to get “high” on CBD from hemp so it is strictly considered a supplement.
Certain states have different rules about exactly who, and under what conditions, can access CBD products.
Many states have laws progressing through their state legislatures right now to regulate the industry.
It is recommended that you check your state laws on the current status of CBD and its use.
How Should I Use Canadian Blends Defence CBD?
Canadian Blends Defence CBD should be taken sublingually (orally under the tongue) and held for approx-imately 30-60 seconds.
When starting a new regimen of Canadian Blends Defence CBD, it is suggested that you start with a low potency and gradually increase your intake your CBD over the course of a few days while observing the effects and adjust your intake as you see fit.
Canadian Blends Defence CBD may also be applied topically and safely with our lip balms and rubs.