Air -- that vital substance that is so necessary in order to sustain life -- is something that is not often thought about. However, its quality can either add to your health or detract from it. When it comes to your indoor air, its quality is even more important. Nowhere is this more important that inside your home where a supply of fresh air is not generally freely available.
1. Indoor air is dirtier than outside air
According to the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), indoor air can be two to five times dirtier than the air outside.
2. Reasons for poor indoor air quality
Pesticide sprays, cleaning products, poor ventilation, allergens and other substances that can move indoor s are all elements that can reduce the quality of the air inside your home.
3. Conditions that signal that you and your family will benefit from an air filter
If you or someone in your home has asthma or allergies to some type of allergy, making the investment in an air filter can help bring about a decrease in the occurrence in these conditions. Smoke from someone who uses tobacco inside your home or from a fireplace or wood burning stove can also decrease the quality of the air inside your home. Airborne viruses and bacteria can result in your family becoming sicker more often. This is particularly true for those segments of the population whose immune systems might already be compromised including the very young, the elderly and those people with chronic conditions.
While air purifiers are tops for making the indoor air better for your family members who have the above conditions, they are ideal for improving the quality of the indoor air in general as well. Think about how much time you and your family spend in your home and you will begin to realize just how important it is for the air inside it to be pure and free of harmful pollutants.
For more information, or for help deciding which type of air purification system is ideal for your home, contact Steve's Plumbing and Heating. Their highly trained professionals can help you find a system that meets your needs and budget.