Sleep is precious. There’s a disagreeable feeling to getting up groggy because you got less than seven to eight hours sleep that even several cups of coffee can’t change. So you were aghast when your hearing loss started to cause you to lose sleep.
Understandably so. Fortunately, there’s a little something that can be of assistance: a hearing aid. It’s possible that these little devices can help you get a better night sleep, according to recent surveys.
How is Sleep Impacted by Loss of Hearing?
Even though you feel tired all day and are exhausted by bedtime, you still toss and turn and have a hard time falling asleep. All of these problems began about the same time you also began to notice that your mobile phone, radio, and television were becoming hard to hear.
Come to find out, you’re not imagining things. There is a well-documented relationship between hearing loss and insomnia, even if the precise sources aren’t precisely clear. Some theories have been put forward:
- Tinnitus can cause you to hear thumping, humming, and ringing and that noise can cause you to lose sleep. (It can become a vicious cycle because lack of sleep can make your tinnitus symptoms worse).
- Hearing loss is connected to depression, and depression can cause chemical imbalances in the brain that interrupt your sleep cycle. This makes it more difficult to fall asleep and stay asleep.
- Your brain, when you have loss of hearing, strains to get stimulus where there isn’t any. If your brain is in high gear trying to hear while you’re drifting off to sleep, your entire cycle could be disrupted (It’s the common issue of not being able to get your brain to stop).
Can Hearing Aids Improve Your Sleep?
According to one study, 59% of individuals who were hearing aid wearers described feeling fulfilled with their sleep, in comparison to a 44% satisfaction rate in people who don’t use hearing aids. So does that guarantee it’s safe to presume hearing aids are also a type of sleep aid?
Not exactly. If you don’t suffer from hearing loss, a hearing aid can’t cure insomnia.
But if you are suffering from loss of hearing, your hearing aids can address several concerns that could be worsening your insomnia:
- Isolation: If you’re out and about, interacting with the people in your social sphere, you’re less likely to feel depressed and isolated. Hearing aids make retaining relationships smoother (sleep cycle issues that cause “cabin fever” can also be reduced).
- Tinnitus: Hearing aids may be a practical treatment for that ringing or buzzing, depending on the nature of your tinnitus. This can assist you to get to sleep by short circuiting that vicious cycle.
- Strain: The strain on your brain will essentially diminished by wearing hearing aids. And your brain will be less likely to strain while falling asleep if it isn’t struggling all of the rest of the time.
Achieving a Better Quality Sleep Using Hearing Aids
It’s not just how many hours you sleep that’s relevant here. In order for your sleep to be actually refreshing, it’s important that you reach a targeted level to your z’s. Loss of hearing can work against that deep sleep, and hearing aids, as a result, can increase your ability to get restful sleep.
Using your hearing aids on the recommended daytime schedule will improve your sleep but it’s significant to note that hearing aids aren’t ordinarily meant to be used while you sleep. When you’re sleeping they won’t help you hear better (you won’t be capable of hearing your alarm clock more clearly, for example). And, over time, using your hearing aids at night can diminish their effectiveness. You get deeper sleep if you wear them during the day.
Go to Bed!
Getting a restful night’s sleep is a valuable thing. Adequate sleep can keep your immune system in good condition, reduce stress levels, and help you think more clearly. A reduced risk of diabetes and heart disease have also been linked to balanced sleep habits.
When your sleep schedule is disrupted by your hearing loss, the problem becomes more than aggravating, insomnia can frequently become a real health problem. Thankfully, people report having better quality sleep when they use hearing aids.