Amazon Black Howler Monkey
Facts about Amazon Black Howler monkey. "Scientific name for Amazon Black Howler Monkey Alouatta pigra". Amazon Black Howler Monkey is a variety of New World howler monkey that comes from the genus Alouatta of the Atelidae family. The Amazon Black Howler monkey are native to Brazil, and they are largely found in the south-central parts of Amazon forests. The Amazon Black Howler monkey can also be seen in mixed deciduous forests and tropical rainforests in eastern Bolivia, the southern parts of Brazil and Paraguay, and the northern parts of Argentina.
Features of Amazon Black Howler monkey
As the name suggests, the Amazon Black Howler Monkey appears with an entire black color body. The Amazon Black Howler monkey use to move by means of a sluggish, four-footed walk. They have elongated legs and arms when compared to the length of their body. The prehensile tail of the monkey assists it to grab or snatch things and it acts as a fifth limb. When the Amazon Black Howler monkey rests, it coils its tail tightly about a tree branch. The Amazon Black Howler monkey are capable of jumping swiftly between tree branches, but they will make three to four yard jumps after much pause. If necessary, they will turn out to be good swimmers, as well.
Diet of Amazon Black Howler monkey
The Amazon Black Howler monkey spend 70 % of the daytime in lying and sitting calmly in tree branches, consuming and fermenting the tree leaves in their cecums. The Amazon Black Howler monkey are herbivores and they feed on sprouts, flowers and fruit, chiefly wild figs. While they munch, they may suspend by their tails or arms.
Behavior of Amazon Black Howler monkey
The Amazon Black Howler Monkey is a diurnal animal, which is active during the daytime and an arboreal animal that lives in trees, and live on the ground for a shorter time period. The Amazon Black Howler monkey varieties are named for the noisy grunts, howls, bark and roar that they use to protect territory. Howling is done by the whole group and it is accompanied with shaking and breaking of tree branches. Their howling noise can be heard at a far away distance of 1.8 miles (2.9 km) from the forest, and 3 miles (4.8 km) above the surface of water. This noisy volume of the Amazon Black Howler monkey is a consequence of their deep jaw, and distended larynx and hyoid bone. The Amazon Black Howler monkey variety lives in groups that consist of 3 to 19 monkeys. Normally, their group is included with 2 to 7 mature females and 1 to 3 mature male monkeys. The Amazon Black Howler monkey varieties practice allomothering where the female monkeys carry, brush and defend infants except their own infant monkeys.
Reproduction of Amazon Black Howler monkey
Usually, the male Amazon Black Howler Monkey attains the sexual maturity after 5 years of their birth, whereas the females will attain the sexual maturity between 3 and 4 years after their birth. The Amazon Black Howler monkey breed all through the year with the birth interval of 7 to 15 months. Normally, the gestation period ranges from 180 to 194 days, and the female Amazon Black Howler monkey offers birth to only one infant, but occasionally, it will give birth to twins, as well. The infants use to cling with their mother until they attain the age of one year.
The average size of Amazon Black Howler monkey is 22 to 36 in (55.8 to 91.4 cm), the average tail size is 23 to 36 in (58.4 to 91.4 cm), the average weight is 15 to 22 lbs (7 to 10 kg). The average lifespan of the Amazon Black Howler Monkey ranges from 16 years to 20 years in the wild, whereas in the captive, they can live up to 25 years.
Monkey meaning (any mammal of the order Primates), this includes the macaques, capuchins, guenons and langurs, this excludes humans, the anthropoid apes, and, usually, the prosimians and tarsier.