While taking up a project, a first-hand assessment is required to be made. The project can be too big and may require a lot of land, labor, and capital. It is essential for the project assessor to ensure that the project is viable enough. It is a lawful planning process done to make the project valid and to see that it is not causing any harm to the environment.
A project assessment is used to evaluate the project by studying the detailed information about the need of the project and ensures that the environmental, social, cultural and economic status of the people is not harmed in any way. Also, here is a list of 16+ Project Assessment Examples and templates for you to use as per your needs.
If you own an IT company and want to do a full assessment of an ongoing or proposed project, this template can be of great use to you. As the assessor of the project, you can use this sheet to record the findings on the project as to whether it has achieved its goals or has the potential to do so, and comes handy while preparing for the final report on the project to be tabled for the management.
Every year, cities are developing, and a large number of construction and infrastructure projects are undertaken. This template can be used as a sample tool to assess, audit, standardize, and understand the infrastructural project details throughout the execution of the project.
Pay For Success (PFS) is a unique approach to formulating ingenious social financing approaches. This will help evidence-based decision making, and this template is a project Assessment Examples report of the PFS concept. The instructions for using the assessment for decision-making are also included in it.
To strengthen and establish community institutions, eradicate poverty, infrastructure development, etc. IFAD has implemented a project, and this Project Analysis Examples is a full project assessment plan of it and helps in establishing and supporting local development priorities.
While we decide to start on a service project, it is necessary to plan the project and track and check the expected deliverables based on the evaluation of a community services agency. This template is a guide for preparing workshops while getting started, and for judging the essential performance of the project.
The project assessment is a vital tool of project management while executing a project, to keep a check on the project conformity and its progress. This template is an excellent aid for the project managers to accomplish that goal.
This template is a project management assessment of NOKIA. Being a well-known mobile brand, they need to do a frequent assessment of their ongoing projects which have a budget of over 1M pounds or are greater than 90 days in duration, to keep improving their overall services. It will help one to understand how a project assimilation management is done.
Organizations working on huge projects are not able to do a proper assessment of their projects; this template will help Public Authorities to improve on the management and delivery of a project when large-scale machinery and types of equipment and groundwork have been solicited. An external evaluation agency has been appointed, which automatically comes into picture depending on the size and scale of the project in question, to conduct an independent and intensive assessment.
Project management assessment is done in a very intensive manner taking into consideration all the different aspects of the project. This template is a syllabus of the project management assessment course and will help in assessing several aspects of a project in a structured way.
College students need to work on several projects, and this template will help them to analyze and structure their projects in a very detailed and methodical way and give them clarity of thought as to whether they are on the right track to achieve the goal of the project.
This Business Assessment example is a manual on Project Assessment Methodology (PAM) aimed at providing guidance to the project coordinators to use PAM and assess the quality of projects before they are certified and endorsed by this elite rating agency called EUREKA.
This Assessment Plan example is a sample of project assessment policy of the Government of a region to make a seismic survey, analysis, infrastructure development, etc., that may have environmental effects on the territory administered by the government.
This is a very good project impact assessment example where the Project Impact Assessment Division(PIAD) assesses a project on the basis of its reaction both intentionally and unintentionally, positive or negative, significant or insignificant, foreseen or not and contains valuable and helpful recommendations for adjustments to be made.
This is an Internal Audit report done on three projects at different stages to find out whether management of the projects are in alignment with the policies of the institution. This template can be a good guide for someone looking to asses an ongoing project midway for adherence issues.
This template is a sample project on risk management to assess how the project does against potential setbacks and institutional obligations and the risks to achieve outcomes and objectives. This risk assessment service reduces the risks from projects and speedups up a project impact with the help expert review and subsequent guidance.
Creative Project Assessment Rubric is an attempt to broadcast the quality expected out of a project and is evaluated by the public to provide an understanding on the effectiveness of the project.
This is a bulletin on public project assessment and this template provides the procedures and requirements for assessing public projects and will pinpoint on permits, approved processes and look into the environmental issues as well. It helps the City department for a project located on city property.