Published on 26 October 2019
Underground mining of ore deposits, sub-floor caving systems with end ore output are widely used but losses and dilution limit their application area. In the underground mines of Russia, they are the main ones in the extraction of iron and phosphate ores, for example, in the Krivorozhsky basin, Mountain Shoria, mines of the Nizhne-Tagilsky plant, and at a number of large non-ferrous metallurgy enterprises. Systems with massive collapse are used in deposits of powerful and medium power. The treatment space is not supported (with the exception of the formation of chambers or slots to collapse the rest of the block in some systems), the breakdown is predominantly borehole, sometimes using controlled self-collapse. The goal of improving the parameters of caving development systems is to develop recommendations for reducing economic damage from lowering ore quality. The chess layout of the treatment faces of the diamond-shaped form is considered. The proposed technique uses the condition of inscribing the release figure into the contours of the beaten and produced ore layer. The maximum allowable for economic reasons ore dilution is determined taking into account technical, technological and technical and economic factors. The stages of mining the ore section are ranked as: drilled section; broken ore layer before release; release figure corresponding to the output of pure ore; a release figure corresponding to the interim release and a release figure corresponding to the final release. The results of calculating the release indicators for the moments of release are the basis for managing the quality of the ore extracted during the release process. Extraction rates taking into account dilution by rocks may be proposed to be determined graphically. Correct methods for calculating ore dilution, production rate and losses are proposed. Ore caving technologies have priority in the extraction of metal ores. Reducing losses and dilution is a reserve for increasing the efficiency of this high-performance technology. The proposed methodology for calculating the extraction indicators improves the accuracy of designing the parameters of the development system, which optimizes them taking into account the nature of the contact of ore with the host rocks, thereby allowing the use of this technology. The new methodology for calculating the parameters of the sub-floor caving system and the analytical, empirical and graphical possibilities of its implementation are applicable in the design and operation of mining and processing enterprises. The proposed technology is a reserve for obtaining an economic effect during the modernization of mining and related industries.
Tags: руда, подэтажное обрушение, торцевой выпуск, наклонный контакт, ромбовидная форма, подземная разработка.
ISSN 1998-4502 (Print) ISSN 2499-975Х (Online)