Here are four tips on how to ask for a raise at work for someone who's never done that before along with an explanation of what each tip is meant to accomplish. Each tip aims to keep your raise request professional and polite, but also firm and direct:

1. Find any and all positive feedback since your last performance review. Once you've made your meeting request, prepare for it by finding any and all evidence that your recent performance has surpassed expectations. In order to be both firm and direct in your meeting, you will need to be able to present concrete examples of how you've performed at an above-average level. Keep in mind, your boss may not interpret your evidence in exactly the same way as you do, so ensure that you remain calm and stick to the facts no matter what they say.
 
2. Come prepared with data and numbers. In order to present the most persuasive and compelling case for your raise, it's best to be able to clearly point to specific numbers and data that demonstrate your value to the organization. By presenting specific metrics and tangible goals you've accomplished, you will be able to show visually that you have outperformed your current salary. Relying on data also helps keep your meeting objective, removing personal bias or emotion from the equation and allowing you and your boss to focus on the numbers. 

3. Explain what you’ll bring to the team in the coming year. Once you've discussed your past performance, be sure to also focus on your goals for the future. Frame your raise request as an investment, something that will pay off for the organization by demonstrating a clear commitment to one of its top performers. Remember to remain calm and clear as you talk about the future in order to avoid over-selling your commitment and having it come off as insincere.

4. Identify the salary range you’ll ask for and know how to justify it. One of the most awkward parts of a meeting to discuss a raise is inevitably the question of how much exactly to ask for. This is definitely something you will want to think about beforehand and be prepared to justify based on the evidence you will present. It's important that when it comes time to discuss the specific parameters of your raise request, you be able to point to specific, objective reasons why your numbers are fair so that your boss can best understand and hopefully agree with your point of view. 
 
Hopefully, this list assists you as you prepare to request a raise at your workplace. Good luck!
