The way Jim Kartowicz sees it, the new Missouri Black Bear Foundation "is more for people than bears."
Kartowicz, the foundation's outreach coordinator, said it's clear that more black bears are calling Missouri home, based on research by conservation officials. The foundation was created to help educate Missourians and visitors about black bears and know what to do if they see one.
RELATED: Black bears here to stay
"I think people need to realize our black bears are much more docile than grizzlies," Kartowicz said. "Black bears prefer not to interact with humans and will run away if given the chance. I would consider it remarkably fortunate if you were to see a black bear in the wild."
True enough. But still, Missouri black bears are wild critters that can grow to more than 400 pounds. Kartowicz offered these tips if you happen to encounter one up close.
• If you see a black bear on the trail, make noise and make yourself look large, don't hunker down and try to hide, he says. Slowly back away. Your senses should go on high alert if you find a black bear cub, he added.
"Black bear cubs are very cute, but if you encounter one be aware that it's probably not abandoned and its mother is nearby," he said. "Don't approach it. Give a female with cubs a lot of room because a mother is very protective."
• Black bears have an incredibly refined sense of smell. "A lot of human conflict with black bears occurs as they seek food," he said. "Don't pour your camping bacon grease in the fire and don't keep food in your tent. Lock food in your car trunk or hang it between two trees if you're hiking. Bear canisters can be a good idea because they keep bears from getting at your food inside."
Kartowicz said some southern Missouri parks are beginning to add bear-proof dumpsters to thwart bears from dining on garbage and becoming accustomed to them as a food source.
• In the unlikely event a black bear becomes aggressive and attacks, the best strategy is to fight back as hard as possible with anything at hand — sticks, bear pepper spray, rocks, firearms. Unlike a grizzly bear that sometimes will stop its attack if the person holds still, an aggressive black bear might not stop unless it's physically deterred.
"Fighting back also teaches the bear not to mess with humans in the future," Kartowicz said. "However, as far as I know there has never been a black bear attack on a human in Missouri in recent times."
For a more complete list of do's and don'ts, check out the Missouri Department of Conservation's "Camping in Black Bear Country" online at http://mdc.mo.gov/discover-nature/outdoor-recreation/camping/camping-black-bear-country.
Learn more about Missouri's black bears
The Missouri Black Bear Foundation offers a wealth of information at its new website http://moblackbears.org/. Another good source of information about black bears is at the Missouri Department of Conservation's bear page online at http://mdc.mo.gov/discover-nature/field-guide/black-bear.