"The Adoration of the Shepherds" by GiorgionePoems for Christmas Day 2019 The Society December 25, 2019 Beauty, Culture, Holidays, Music, Poetry, Readings 7 Comments Come to Bethlehem / Silent Night https://classicalpoets.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/12/Come-to-Bethlehem-mp3.mp3 Song and Poem by James A. Tweedie Come to Bethlehem, come and see God stripped bare of majesty. Fragile as a flower; Emptied of might and power; Come to set God’s people free. Jesus Christ is born. Born into a family. Died upon a family tree. Raised to reign in glory. Angels proclaim the story; Off’ring life eternally. Jesus Christ is born. As my Lord is, may I be: Born anew in liberty. Free from sin and sadness. Filled with joy and gladness. Peace, good-will from God to me. Jesus Christ is born. A Christmas Haiku by Joe Tessitore The Virgin, the Child. All that was, all that will be, The moment they smiled. Joe Tessitore is a retired New York City resident and poet. The Golden Age by Nathaniel Todd McKee Setting: The Roman Empire, 1st century BC, just before the birth of Jesus. Legions marching, shield to shield, Bearing trophies from the field: Valiant foes bound chain by chain, Swords and silver fill their train. The Golden Age! The Golden Age! Behold our Golden Age! Aquaducts o’er rivers blue, Stone-paved roads link old to new. Emperor declares his will, Præfects each command fulfill. The Golden Age! The Golden Age! Behold our Golden Age! Steaming baths, both hot and cold, Tables set with goblets gold. Silk for weaving garments fair, Frankincense adorns the air. The Golden Age! The Golden Age! Behold our Golden Age! Father, brother, husband, son Don’t return when Rome has won. Boar’s head standard drowned in mud, Lifeless bodies caked with blood. The Golden Age! The Golden Age! Behold our Golden Age! Filling master’s cup with wine, Worked to death inside a mine. Aphrodite’s trembling maid Forced to ply earth’s oldest trade. The Golden Age! The Golden Age! Behold our Golden Age! Leper rots inside his tent, Widow begs in garments rent. Shepherds sleeping on the ground, All seek hope—can it be found? The Golden Age! The Golden Age! Behold our Golden Age! Silent night, holy night, Lonely star shines pure and bright. “Go to Bethlehem and see!” Liberty for slave and free— Abundant life, eternally! The Golden Age! The Golden Age! Behold our Golden Age! Nathaniel McKee’s interest in classical poetry first grew while studying for a master’s in business administration at the University of Oxford, UK. Somehow this whimsical place deepened an already strong appreciation for the humanities, even as he studied business. Nathaniel’s literary interests include Greek and Roman classics, 18th-19th century English literature, 18th-19th century French literature, the Bible, and history in general. He currently purchases agricultural commodities and energy for a mid-sized food manufacturing company in the foothills of southeastern Tennessee, USA, where he lives with his wife, Bethany. Views expressed by individual poets and writers on this website and by commenters do not represent the views of the entire Society. The comments section on regular posts is meant to be a place for civil and fruitful discussion. Pseudonyms are discouraged. The individual poet or writer featured in a post has the ability to remove any or all comments by emailing submissions@ classicalpoets.org with the details and under the subject title “Remove Comment.” Share this:Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) 7 Responses James A. Tweedie December 25, 2019 My poem’s full title is “Come to Bethlehem/Silent Night.” If you listen to the song long enough you will see (or hear ) why! Merry Christmas all. “Jesus Christ is born.” Reply Carole Mertz December 26, 2019 Always a new way to deliver the message. Enjoyed it, James. And enjoyed your haiku, Joe. Will share “The Golden Age” with my history buff friend. Thank you for it. Reply Nathaniel December 29, 2019 Thanks Carole, Merry Christmas. Joseph S. Salemi December 25, 2019 In the second stanza of “The Golden Age,” the first word should be spelled “Aqueducts,” with an e. Reply Nathaniel December 25, 2019 If only I could change it! Reply Mark F. Stone December 25, 2019 James, I read the text of the poem before I read the title. As I was reading the text, I thought, hmm, this poem could work as the lyrics of a song. Then I read the title and saw that we agree on this. Nice work! Mark Joe, A very nice Christmas haiku. Thank you! Mark Nathaniel, I enjoy trochaic meter and the meter in the non-italicized parts of this poem is perfect trochaic meter (with just one substitution). I enjoyed the poem! Mark Reply Nathaniel December 29, 2019 Thank you Mark for the kind words, glad you enjoyed! I added the extra line on the final stanza in a non-trochaic manner to (perhaps) give a sense of completeness there. Reply Leave a Reply Cancel ReplyYour email address will not be published.CommentName* Email* Website Notify me of follow-up comments by email. Notify me of new posts by email. This site uses Akismet to reduce spam. Learn how your comment data is processed.