Viewpoint: Keep the supplemental nutrition program to protect Michigan's most vulnerable
Nobody should have to worry about having enough food on the table. Unfortunately, hunger is a reality that affects 1.4 million people in Michigan — almost 40 percent of whom are children. Although Michigan’s overall economy is strong, many Michigan residents work hard every day in low-wage jobs or multiple jobs, but still can’t adequately feed themselves and their families. That’s why the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) is a critical safeguard for those who otherwise wouldn’t get enough to eat.
Unfortunately, this successful federal program is in danger. The U.S. House and Senate are debating the final version of the farm bill while the lives of Michigan’s most vulnerable residents — including seniors, children, veterans and those with disabilities — hang in the balance.
The version of the farm bill passed by the U.S. House contains harsh work requirements that would leave many people, including those temporarily between jobs, without access to SNAP benefits. The House farm bill does not meet the needs of millions of Americans who deal with hunger on a day-to-day basis, and contains cuts that would reduce or eliminate benefits for some people altogether, taking food off the kitchen tables of more than two million SNAP participants.
The Senate’s bipartisan version of the farm bill passed in early July strengthens SNAP and has no short-sighted work requirements. SNAP is a nutrition program, not a jobs program, and most adults receiving SNAP benefits who can work do so. However, low-paying jobs with unreliable hours are all too common, so people still need food assistance to feed themselves and their families. When food assistance is taken away from parents who don’t meet work requirements, there isn’t enough money to buy food for the whole household, including children.
SNAP has been a success, keeping eight million people out of poverty, including nearly four million children. It has helped many people with disabilities and mental illnesses, as well as veterans and seniors. It also helps the farmers who grow healthy fruits and vegetables, since SNAP recipients can buy fruits, vegetables and other food from local vendors at farmers markets. It’s a great way to help rural, urban and suburban residents work together for the benefit of all, and it’s another way to keep our communities vibrant.
As the House and Senate turn toward negotiating a final version of the farm bill in conference committee, we urge Michigan’s U.S. senators, Debbie Stabenow and Gary Peters, to continue to stand strong and support all residents. We need a final version of the bill that protects those in our communities with the greatest needs and enables our friends and neighbors who experience hardship to feed their families while they get back on their feet.
The best outcome for our state and nation is a strong, bipartisan farm bill that protects SNAP without imposing harsh work requirements. The U.S. Senate farm bill meets these criteria, and it is now up to all lawmakers to ensure that the final farm bill does the same.
Gilda Jacobs is the president and CEO of the Michigan League for Public Policy. Phillip Knight is the executive director of the Food Bank Council of Michigan.