Read a Banned Book
newspaper article for the Dyersville Commercial
Do you believe in the freedom to choose what you read? Then you just might be surprised to discover that some people think your favorite book shouldn’t be available in the public library or at the local school. Since 1990, the American Library Association's (ALA) Office for Intellectual Freedom (OIF) has recorded more than 11,300 book challenges since 1982. A challenge is a formal, written complaint requesting a book be permanently removed from library shelves or school curriculum. About three out of four of all challenges are to material in schools or school libraries, and one in four are to material in public libraries. OIF estimates that less than one-quarter of challenges are reported and recorded.
It is thanks to the commitment of librarians, teachers, parents, and students that most challenges are unsuccessful and reading materials like “I Know Why the Caged Bird Sings”, “The Giver”, the Harry Potter series, and works by Shel Silverstein remain available.
The most challenged and/or restricted reading materials have been books for children. However, challenges are not simply an expression of a point of view; on the contrary, they are an attempt to remove materials from public use, thereby restricting the access of others. Even if the motivation to ban or challenge a book is well intentioned, the outcome is detrimental. Censorship denies our freedom as individuals to choose and think for ourselves. For children, decisions about what books to read should be made by the people who know them best—their parents!
In support of the right to choose books freely for ourselves, the ALA and James Kennedy Public Library are sponsoring Banned Books Week, September 30-October 6, 2012, an annual celebration of our right to access books without censorship. This year's observance commemorates the most basic freedom in a democratic society—the freedom to read freely—and encourages us not to take this freedom for granted.
Since its inception in 1982, Banned Books Week has reminded us that while not every book is intended for every reader, each of us has the right to decide for ourselves what to read, listen to or view. The JKPL and thousands of libraries and bookstores across the country will celebrate the freedom to read by participating in special events, exhibits, and read-outs that showcase books that have been banned or threatened.
The JKPL will be hosting an interactive display of banned and challenged books inside the library. We will also be hosting a First Amendment Film Festival, (October 1-4) where we will show the following four movies that deal with censorship and violation of First Amendment rights: “Storm Center”; “The Front”; “Good Night, and Good Luck”; and “Fahrenheit 451.” Please call the library or check the website for dates and times.
American libraries are the cornerstones of our democracy. Libraries are for everyone, everywhere. Because libraries provide free access to a world of information, they bring opportunity to all people. Now, more than ever, celebrate the freedom to read @ your library! Read an old favorite or a new banned book this week.