This is a video tutorial for adults and students in Grade 9 to Grade 12. The tutorial is a stand alone instructional resource (STAIR) and includes assessments between each topic.
Type of Material:
Video tutorial (presentation and quizzes)
This module could be used for personal education and/or individual homework for a computer literacy course. It could also be used in a traditional classroom as long as a smart board or computer screen is provided: the quizzes could be a focal point for class discussion.
It's a great introductory course (and even a nice refresher), for seasoned users.
Browser, Flash plugin, Internet access
Identify Major Learning Goals:
Understanding that everyone has a digital footprint
Suggested best practices for online and social media users
Target Student Population:
High school, college, adults
Prerequisite Knowledge or Skills:
Clear information, good audio, and good suggested best practices. The quizzes after each topic "cement" the learning. It's an excellent starter resource on protecting your online information.
On a sidenote, this is a really nicely done PowerPoint voiceover tutorial in Camtasia Studio. It can be used as an example for novice users of the program.
Wikipedia is stated as a source of information (1:30), and will bring along with it skeptics. Very minor detail: a very tiny arrow is seen on the screen throughout most of the presentation.
Potential Effectiveness as a Teaching Tool
Clear and succinct objectives
Good short quizzes (please add some feedback on correct/incorrect responses)
It's an excellent resource for assignments in computer literacy/digital literacy classes or awareness workshops
The background and the footprint image are distracting. There could be a bit more contrast and the footprint image is overlaying the text.
Ease of Use for Both Students and Faculty
Navigation is easy. The font size is adequate and there is not too much on any screen. Quizzes are very easy to understand.
The background and the footprint image distract from the text.
Lighter or darker background, with contrasting font would improve this tutorial because it will be easier to read! :)
Please include some screenshots.
Other Issues and Comments:
Clear and relevant tutorial that should be part of any digital literacy course. The quizzes are very helpful and so are the assignments.
Search by ISBN?
It looks like you have entered an ISBN number. Would you like to search using what you have
entered as an ISBN number?
Searching for Members?
You entered an email address. Would you like to search for members? Click Yes to continue. If no, materials will be displayed first. You can refine your search with the options on the left of the results page.