Understanding the types of cells and their function is a vital knowledge to anyone because cells play a huge role in your bodies. Basically, cells are the parts of the body that make sure that it is functioning right. Hence, being able to know the types of cells and their function will be great as you will easily know what to do if you notice that there is something wrong in your body.
The bone cells are the toughest among this list of the types of cells and their function. Bone cells are also known as osteocytes. A phosphate material and calcium are the ones that make sure that they are bound. The bone cells, as the name implies, can be seen in the bones. Therefore, they have the job of making sure that the bones are strong and give them support.
The nerve cells do not multiply. This is the characterizing factor or the nerve cells in this list of the types of cells and their function. These cells are known to be long and branching. They are seen all over the body too. The nerve cells are also considered as brain cells as there are many of them in the brain and the spinal cord.
The muscle cells are the ones that are found in the muscles. In this list of the types of cells and their function, the muscle cells stand out as being the ones that can provide movement to people. This is because of the fact that they can relax and contract. There are also three main kinds of muscle cells, the skeletal muscle cells, smooth muscle cells and the cardiac muscle cells. Obviously, the skeletal muscle cells are the ones seen in the bones to permit them to move. The smooth muscle cells, on the other hand, are those that are found in the stomach to manage food movement and help it transport them to the gut. Lastly, cardiac muscle cells are what permits the heart to beat.
In our list of the types of cells and their function, the blood cells are the ones that move a lot. Blood, flowing all over our body, moves around and hence the blood cells are moving a lot as well. There are three kinds of blood cells, which of course have different kinds of function. The red blood cells are the ones that transport oxygen to the whole body and take out carbon dioxide. The white blood cells are the ones that aid the immune system in killing bacteria, fungi and viruses in the blood. The thrombocytes or the platelets are the ones that make clotting possible.
There are many others cells that can be included in this list of the types of cells and their function. As a matter of fact, there are just too many of them. However, the fact remains that all these cells in our list of the types of cells and their function are the ones that are most important and that you should make sure that you familiarize yourself with them.