Published on: 11:06AM May 03, 2013
Sugarbeet growers in southern Idaho and eastern Oregon don’t like beet leafhoppers. At all. And it’s not because the tiny insects prefer sugarbeet plant stems as their food of choice – it’s because during their sugarbeet foliage feasts, beet leafhoppers can infect plants with curly top virus, a devastating disease transmitted to the plant by this insect.
While leafhoppers and curly top virus are not new to sugarbeet growers in the Pacific Northwest – area reports about the pests date back to the early 1900s – they remain a threat to sugarbeet crop production every year. Advancements in genetic and pesticide technology now allow growers to better protect themselves from the beet leafhopper, and ultimately, curly top virus. By properly identifying, preparing for outbreaks and monitoring fields, sugarbeet growers can keep leafhoppers and curly top at bay to better realize yield potential.
It takes two: Know your enemies
Beet leafhoppers and curly top virus exist in a symbiotic relationship in which the virus depends on the insect to travel and infect crops. While virus-free leafhoppers cause damage to sugarbeets, they shouldn’t be a target pest for growers.
The leafhopper, which is about an eighth of an inch long, wedge-shaped and pale green, gray or brown, serves as the only insect vector by which curly top viruses can travel and infect fields. Once infected with a strain of the curly top virus, sugarbeet plants will have smaller, crinkled leaves that curl upward and inward. Plant veins will also become more apparent, swollen rootlets become shaped irregularly and root and beet growth is stunted. A new rootlet system will then grow, resembling the hairy appearance associated with Rhizomania, although the diseases are unrelated.
Growers should regularly monitor their fields and apply crop protection products appropriately to help prevent curly top and contain plants already affected. Containing the disease can help prevent the virus from infecting other fields and will help salvage what’s left of an infected crop.
When hot and dry, leafhoppers fly
It is difficult to predict annual pressures from leafhopper and curly top until seasonal conditions begin to unfold as winter ends. Warmer temperatures allow farmers to plant sugarbeets early, but can also indicate leafhopper behavior for the upcoming season – when winter desert host plants die in hot, dry weather in the spring, leafhoppers seek new hosts, including sugarbeets.
The Pacific Northwest has seen relatively cool spring weather the past few years – cool enough to keep leafhopper and curly top pressures low. While these recent trends have been favorable for growers, experts warn that there really is no indication for how heavy leafhopper and curly top pressures will be this growing season.
Natural resistance – and beyond
Sugarbeets are naturally prepared for curly top without assistance from genetic engineering or pesticides. However, this naturally occurring resistance becomes stronger as the beet grows, which means young plants are more vulnerable to the disease and insect.
While sugarbeet’s natural tolerance to curly top is beneficial, the plants aren’t able to fend off heavy infestations alone. Ensuring protection from beet leafhopper and curly top can be achieved with resistant seed varieties and application of the proper crop protection products.
To help sugarbeet growers keep their crops pest-free and realize full yield potential, Syngenta offers Hilleshög® brand varieties and CruiserMaxx® Sugarbeets insecticide/fungicide seed treatment, a combination of separately registered products, for systemic protection of leafhopper. Drawn from a genetic portfolio spanning more than 100 years, Hilleshög brand high-quality seeds deliver unmatched curly top resistance to keep sugarbeet plants healthy and strong.
"Hilleshög seed is a leader in genetic tolerance for curly top resistance, and CruiserMaxx Sugarbeets helps further protect crops from curly top," said Doug Ruppal, sugarbeet crop specialist at Syngenta. "CruiserMaxx controls beet leafhopper in the critical early-life stage of the plant. As sugarbeets emerge they begin to systemically take up the insecticide from CruiserMaxx Sugarbeets, which will control beet leafhoppers in young plants."
Prepare to fight from the start
While beet leafhopper and the curly top virus have always been a problem for Pacific Northwest sugarbeet growers, advancements in research and breeding technology have made the crop profitable despite the century-long battle growers have had with the pests.
And given all the modern technology and crop protection, Ruppal recommends preparing for, rather than reacting to, beet leafhopper and curly top infestations from the start each year.
"Once curly top starts infecting the plant, it’s too late for growers," he said. "It is always a good idea to have sugarbeet plants protected from the beginning. You just never know when beet leafhoppers and curly top are going to enter a field."
For more information on Hilleshög brand sugarbeet seed and CruiserMaxx Sugarbeets seed treatment, contact your area Syngenta representative.
Important: Always read and follow label instructions. Some crop protection products may not be registered for sale or use in all states or counties. Please check with your local extension service to ensure registration status. CruiserMaxx Sugarbeets is an on-seed application of Cruiser 5FS insecticide and three fungicides: Apron XL, Maxim 4FS and Dynasty.
Apron XL®, Cruiser®, CruiserMaxx®, Dynasty®, Hilleshög® and Maxim® are trademarks of a Syngenta Group Company. Hilleshög® is a business unit of Syngenta Seeds, Inc.
All time highs in the stock market today, now what?
Will My Planter Set-Up Close The Seed Trench?