The issues of climate changes and the need for an energy transition have been making headlines for several years. The public has recognized the need to shift to a new energy mix, where clean and renewable energies have their place. Air Liquide is aware of these issues and is working actively on providing clean transportation solutions.
-10% and -90%
Compressed Natural Gas (CNG) is a clean energy that helps to reduce particulate, NOx and CO2 emissions, particularly when the CNG is made from biomethane.
With FordonsGas, Air Liquide has a CNG solution for private cars in Sweden. Sweden is one of Europe’s key markets in the development of sustainable mobility based on biogas. In 2009, the Swedish government rolled out an Energy and Climate policy with the aim of reducing greenhouse gas emissions by 40% by 2020 and entirely eliminating the country’s dependence on fossil fuels in the transportation sector by 2030. Today, there are more than 50,000 natural gas vehicles (NGVs) on the road in Sweden that use CNG. This uptake has enabled the rapid development of Compressed Biogas (CBG) as a fuel source.
Air is a common, vital and universal good. Air Liquide is acting responsibly to preserve the environment and public health, with the aim of improving air quality and fighting global warming. Today, there is a wide range of CNG cars available and the infrastructure is constantly developing.
Air Liquide operates across the biomethane value chain, supporting the circular economy, from waste to transportation. Biogas offers a way of reusing organic and farm waste. It can be used in compressed form (in private cars, buses, etc.) or in liquefied form (for long-haul trucks). It is produced using the purification and liquefaction technologies developed by Air Liquide to recover all types of biogas (organic and farm waste, sludge, etc.) and make it possible to either inject them into the gas network, produce fuel for vehicles, or the produce renewable hydrogen. In FordonsGas stations, at least 50% of the CNG is produced from biogas.
Founded in 1998, FordonsGas is a wholly-owned subsidiary of Air Liquide group, that distributes Bio-CNG/LNG for vehicles in Sweden. FordonsGas allows Air Liquide to better understand consumers' new practices in terms of clean transportation, while contributing to the development of the Swedish biogas industry.