Advantages Of Hydroponic Gardening
1. Space Saver
Hydroponics saves an incredible amount of space compared to traditional soil gardening. Usually, a plant’s roots need space to spread out through the soil, not with hydroponics. Instead, nutrients are applied directly to the root zone, so there is no searching for food and all that energy can be focused on above ground production. Because of this, you get to pack your plants closer together, resulting in a huge space savings!
Plants can be grown almost anywhere. Indoors, rooftops, urban areas and anywhere soil gardening is just not possible.
3. Saves Water
The plants eat and drink exactly what they need and the rest gets recycled unless you're on a drain to waste feeding schedule.
4. No Weeding Necessary
No more wasted time and energy weeding your plants.
5. Less Pests and Diseases
Following that same logic, pests and diseases are drastically reduced in hydroponics. Soil is taken out of the picture and replaced with one of the common hydroponic growing media. Eliminating soil also eliminates a lot of the different soil borne diseases and pests that plague traditional gardening.
6. Time Savings
Not only does growing hydroponically save you the time of weeding, pest control, and watering; it also speeds up the growth of the plant. If you’re growing outdoors, that means you get to squeeze in more harvest cycles before your growing season ends. You also get to observe the growth of plants at a quicker pace and learn about all of the different things you could do to improve the growth much quicker. For example, you can take a head of lettuce from seedling to harvest in around a month in hydroponics compared to two months in soil.
7. Gives You absolute Control
You become the master of your plant’s environment. It’s up to you to create the perfect nutrient mixture, temperature, humidity and growing schedule.
8. Become An Amateur Scientist
All of the additional control you have over your growing environment makes for a great way to learn how to grow plants. You can tweak the variables and see how your plants react. You get to customize your environment to whatever plant you’re growing. Each plant is unique. Figuring out what adjustments you should make to your recipe is part of the fun of it.