Downloadable ContentThe method that's helped thousands in the U.S. and Japan learn Japanese successfully.
The Japanese language has two primary writing systems, kanji characters—which are based on Chinese characters and hiragana and katakana—a mnemonic based alphabet. This handy book teaches you a new mnemonics-based method to read and write the 430 highest-frequency kanji characters. Along with its sister book: Japanese Hiragana and Katakana for Beginners it provides a complete introduction to written Japanese.
Japanese Kanji for Beginners contains everything you need to learn the kanji characters required for the Advanced Placement Japanese Language and Culture Exam. It is designed for high school or college students as well as independent learners. The kanji learned in this book carefully adhere to those introduced in every significant Japanese language textbook.
Key features of Japanese Kanji for Beginners include:
The 430 highest-frequency kanji characters
44 simple, easy-to-follow lessons
Concise information on kanji elements, readings and pronunciations
Extensive exercises, drills, and writing practice
Free CD-ROM with printable flash cards, practice quizzes and extra exercises
As a bonus—the free CD-ROM inside the kanji book contains a set of printable kanji flashcards to assist learners in reviewing and memorizing the kanji in the book. It also provides sample vocabulary quizzes in a multiple-choice format similar to those on the AP exam, as well as additional exercises that further reinforce the newly learned kanji.
About the Author: Timothy G. Stout lived in Japan for 20 years and has taught Japanese language for 23 years in public and private schools, and at the university level. While teaching at the American School in Japan, he conducted research on the use of keyword mnemonics in the instruction of Japanese. Stout has a Doctorate in Education (EdD) from Utah State University, an M.A. in Japanese Pedagogy from Columbia University and a B.A. in Japanese Teaching from Brigham Young. He currently teaches Japanese at Utah Valley University and resides in Lehi, Utah with his wife and five children. Stout is the author of Japanese Hiragana and Katakana for Beginners and Let's Learn Japanese, both available from Tuttle.