The popular question is “Where can I pay someone to write my college essay?”. The one and only answer is EssayBasics.
Fast food is viewed in different ways by different consumers. Some are stuck on fast foods, unable to prepare proper foods in their houses. Others dread such foods, citing health consequences linked with the high salt and calorie content of such foods. While proponents and opponents on each side of the debate point to key reasons for their positions, fast foods are generally unhealthy and unfit for humans.
On the positive side, most fast food restaurants serve large quantities of foods, and this guarantees them of return customers. This enables them to offer more employment opportunities, an example being McDonald outlets which have offered employment chances to thousands of employees across the world, thus improving their standards of living. Fast foods come in handy for individuals whose tight work schedule does not allow them adequate time to prepare traditional food in their houses. Such individuals regularly consume fast foods from restaurants.
Fast foods significantly save on time. There is no waiting time as time is served and consumed instantly. Food is prepared within a few minutes and is ready for consumption. Some restaurants have drive-through services which allow customers to place orders quickly, which saves hours on working consumers’ busy schedules. In the current world where consumers are health-conscious, some restaurants have turned to offering healthy alternatives. Such alternatives are, however, more expensive.
The health consequences associated with fast foods, however, render such foods harmful and worthless as they reduce human lifespan. Due to high-calorie content, consumers risk suffering from such diseases as obesity, diabetes, heart disease, and high cholesterol. Obesity is a risk factor for diabetes. Given that a significant number of consumers make poor choices regarding their diet, most of them end up consuming hot dogs, pizza, hamburgers, chips, ice cream, chicken nuggets, fried chicken, sandwiches, among other tasty but high-salt, high-calorie fast foods. Fast foods are made from high saturated fats, increasing the likelihood that such fats end up clogging arteries in consumers’ bodies thus increasing the risk of obesity and heart disease.
At times, the demand for fast foods is so high that hygienic standards are often compromised in some restaurants. In some cases, cows and pigs are hung upsides down, while chicken is cramped in stuffy, enclosed spaces, slaughtered and quickly prepared for consumption. Food-borne illnesses sometimes occur in such cases, resulting in inflated health care costs to individual families and at national levels.
Having evaluated the arguments above, it is clear that the health consequences of fast foods supersede the benefits. A wide range of research literature has proved that fast foods contribute significantly to adverse health conditions as obesity, diabetes, and heart disease. Such conditions cost the healthcare sector millions of dollars annually, and adversely affect the global economy. For instance, obesity is one of the most devastating health conditions that drain the healthcare sector of the United States. It is surprising that the greatest number of obesity cases is not genetic- it is linked to consumption of high-calorie foods.
In conclusion, fast foods present more problems than benefits to users. Consumers need to either avoid such foods or choose healthier alternatives, such as less salted foods although such options may cost more. Traditionally prepared food is relatively expensive and more time-consuming to prepare but it is certainly healthy. In the long run, good health is more important.