We are determined that every pupil will learn to read, regardless of their background, needs or abilities. We value the importance of high-quality texts and use them at every opportunity to enhance our curriculum.
2. Staff fostering a love of reading in the whole-school community
Pupils’ vocabulary, language comprehension and love of reading is developed through access to stories, poems, rhymes and non-fiction. Actions to develop reading across the school are planned and deliberate to ensure that pupil’s understanding of the texts they read deepen as they progress through the school. This love of reading also extends beyond the classroom and to this end, we promote, support and value the contributions that parents/carers can make to their child's reading at home.
3. Ensuring that reading programmes and progress are well thought-out and structured
The phonics programme at Lakeside matches the expectations as set out within the National Curriculum and the Early Learning Goals. We have clear expectations of pupils’ phonics progress term-by-term, from Reception to Year 2 and this is achieved through a consistent and systematic approach to the way in which phonics are taught.
The sequence of books is matched closely to the school’s phonic programme. Teachers give pupils sufficient time to practice in reading and re-reading books that match the sounds they know, both at school and at home.
The teaching and learning of phonics starts from the moment a pupil comes through the door at Lakeside.
Assessment is used frequently to identify any pupil who is falling behind and targeted support is given immediately. We ensure that the lowest 20% of pupils practice reading whole-words and not just initial sounds on a daily basis.
The school is committed to developing expertise in the teaching of phonics and reading. Teachers and Teaching Partners have regular professional development opportunities which are used to enhance and develop their abilities to lead high-quality teaching of phonics.