Nicotine chewing gum
What does nicotine chewing gum do?
Nicotine (Nicorette(R)) helps people stop smoking. By replacing nicotine found in cigarettes, physical withdrawal effects are less severe. Nicotine chewing gum is most effective when used in combination with a supervised stop-smoking program. Nicotine gum is for use over short periods of time (not more than 6 months). Generic nicotine chewing gum is available.
NOTE: In some cases, Zyban(R) ( also known as bupropion), a precription medication, is used together with nicotine to help people stop smoking. You should only use Zyban(R) with nicotine skin patches or nicotine gum if these have been prescribed by your healthcare prescriber. Ask your prescriber for information and advice before purchasing any non-prescription nicotine products if you are currently on Zyban(R). The use of the two medicines together requires special observation by your prescriber.
What should my health care professional know before I use nicotine?
They need to know if you have any of these conditions:
high blood pressure
previous heart attack
stomach problems or ulcers
an unusual or allergic reaction to nicotine, other medicines, foods, dyes, or preservatives
pregnant or trying to get pregnant
How should I use this medicine?
Chew nicotine gum in the mouth. Do not swallow the gum. Follow carefully the directions that come with the chewing gum. Use exactly as directed. When you feel an urgent desire for a cigarette, chew one piece of gum slowly. Slow chewing reduces belching problems. Continue chewing until you taste the gum or feel a slight tingling in your mouth. Then, stop chewing and place the gum between your cheek and gum. Wait until the taste or tingling is almost gone then start chewing again. Continue chewing in this manner for about 30 minutes. Do not use more than 30 pieces of gum a day. Too much gum can increase the risk of an overdose. As the urge to smoke gets less, gradually reduce the number of pieces each day over a period of 2 to 3 months. When you are only using 1 or 2 pieces a day, stop using the nicotine gum.
Contact your pediatrician or health care professional regarding the use of this medicine in children. Special care may be needed.
What if I miss a dose?
This does not apply. Only use the chewing gum when you have a strong desire to smoke. Do not use more than one piece of gum at a time.
What other medicines can interact with nicotine?
bupropion (Zyban(R) or Wellbutrin(R))
Tell your prescriber or health care professional about all other medicines you are taking, including nonprescription medicines, nutritional supplements, or herbal products. Also tell your prescriber or health care professional if you are a frequent user of drinks with caffeine or alcohol, or if you use illegal drugs. These may affect the way your medicine works. Check with your health care professional before stopping or starting any of your medicines.
What side effects may I notice from using nicotine?
Side effects that you should report to your prescriber or health care professional as soon as possible:
damage to teeth or dental work
fainting or lightheadedness
fast or irregular heartbeat (palpitations), chest pain
Side effects that usually do not require medical attention (report to your prescriber or health care professional if they continue or are bothersome):
constipation or diarrhea
irregular menstrual periods
joint or muscle ache
sore throat or mouth