Wordsworth's mother died when he was eight—this experience shapes much of his later work. Wordsworth attended Hawkshead Grammar School, where his love of poetry was firmly established and, it is believed, he made his first attempts at verse. While he was at Hawkshead, Wordsworth's father died leaving him and his four siblings orphans.
We may receive compensation for products we feature on our website. Writing prompts are useful because we know sometimes it can be hard to think of what to write about!
To help you brainstorm, we put together this list of creative writing prompts to give you something to write about daily. Whether you write short stories, poems, or like to keep a journal — these will stretch your imagination and give you some ideas for topics to write about!
Here are Creative Writing Prompts to Inspire: The Unrequited love poem: How do you feel when you love someone who does not love you back? Write about a ship or other vehicle that can take you somewhere different from where you are now. Or maybe you could write a poem about that time you met a friend at a cafe.
Write about two people seeing each other for the first time. Write about the experience! Write something inspired by a recent dream you had.
Write about being friends with someone. Do you battle him? Or is the dragon friendly? Write a poem using words from a famous letter or a letter from your own collection. Read a book and circle some words on a page. Use those words to craft a poem. Alternatively you can cut out words and phrases from magazines.
Open up a dictionary to a random word. Define what that word means to you. Hey, even writers and creative artists have to do housework sometimes. Write about doing laundry, dishes, and other cleaning activities.
Write about someone you admire and you thought to have had a beautiful mind. Write a poem or short story about someone who has lost or is about to lose their home. Smoke, Fog, and Haze: Write about not being able to see ahead of you.
Write something so sweet, it makes your teeth hurt.
Write a poem or journal entry about numbers that have special meaning to you. What scares you a little? What do you feel when scared? How do you react? Why is it closed? What makes you smile? What makes you happy? Write about your shopping wishlist and how you like to spend money.
Write about a teacher that has influenced you. Take any poem or short story you find anywhere. Rewrite it in your own words. Write about a piece of jewelry.
Who does it belong to?This list of rainbow poems is composed of the works of modern international poet members of PoetrySoup.
Read short, long, best, famous, and modern examples of rainbow poetry. This list of works about rainbow is an excellent resource for examples on how to write rainbow poems. To create a Rainbow Poem, use the seven rainbow colors featured on the left side of our Rainbow Poetry printable, or simply have each person write a list of his or her favorite colors.
Your child might like to use a different colored pen or pencil to write each word in the matching color. Write Rainbow Poems These Write Rainbow poems are examples of Rainbow poems about Write. These are the best examples of Rainbow Write poems written by international poets.
Free Verse Poetry: Samples. These free verse poetry samples were all written by sixth grade students. These pieces are excellent examples of free verse, but as with all writing, even the most famous masterpieces, there is room for revision.
Still I Rise - Discover the meaning behind Maya Angelou's inspiring poem, with an audio recording of actress Rosie Perez reading this classic work, which has been celebrated by Serena Williams, Cory Booker, and other public figures.
Rainbow Acrostic Printables. Write a poem about a rainbow with the help of our fun acrostic printables. Perfect for St Patrick's Day, a rainbow theme or a weather theme.
Rainbow acrostic printable - blank - Log in or Become a Member to download.