No problem, here are some names for a wizard that you might like: 

Fire: 
1. Calor: Calor means "heat" in Latin, making it a great name for a wizard who specializes in fire magic. It is a simple two-syllable name that is easy to remember. 
2. Spark: A spark is a small particle thrown from a fire, making it a good name for a fire wizard. It's also one syllable and easy to remember. It would make a good name for a wizard with a bright and "sparky" personality.
3. Blaze: Blaze is a cool, one-syllable name. It is a word used to describe a particularly large fire or one that is hard to extinguish, making it a great name for a fire wizard. 
4. Flame: Flame is the name given to the visible part of a fire. If something catches fire, a common phrase is that it "went up in flames". The name is one syllable long, which makes it easy to say and remember.

Water:
1. Aqua: Aqua is Latin for water and a common word many people associate with water. It's also two syllables and easy to pronounce.
2. Meri: Derived from the Finnish word, the name Meri translates to "sea". It also sounds like the word "merry", so it would be a good choice for a water wizard with a bright and happy demeanor.
3. Unda: Unda is a Latin word, meaning "wave", which is related to the ocean and water, making it a great name for a water wizard.
4. Lake: A lake is a large body of water. The name is only one syllable and is easy to pronounce and remember.

Generic:
1. Wiz: "Wiz" is a shortened version of the word wizard. It is also similar to the word "whiz", which can be used to describe something that moves quickly or a person who is extremely clever and skilled in a particular field. It would be a great name with a double meaning for a wizard who has an outgoing personality and never stays still. 
2. Whitebeard: In popular culture, wizards are often depicted with long white beards. If you decide to go down the route of using a fire or water wizard, then Redbeard or Bluebeard could also be used (though "Bluebeard" is already used as a name in a popularly known work of fiction).
