It is common knowledge that the symptoms of a heart-attack can be detected just before the myocardial infarction (heart-attack) occurs. The attack can be sudden and almost without a warning, which makes it one of the deadliest medical conditions. However, few know that it is possible for us to detect subtle clues to an impending cardiac event even a month before the actual heart-attack.
Heart-attacks occur when a coronary artery has a gradual build-up of plaque. This results with blood supply loss and eventually the attack. When a heart-attack occurs a tissue dies as a result of the lack of a blood flow and the person experiences an excruciating pain and crushing pressure. If there is no medical person to immediately prevent the attack, the death of the tissue can be fatal. Here you can read about the symptoms that can point to a possible heart-attack that could happen in the near future. It is said that these symptoms can indicate an impending attack even up to a month before it even happens.
1. COLD SWEATS AND DIZZINESS
Due to the poor circulation your brain will not get the proper blood flow it needs to operate appropriately. This is a sign that you are in extreme danger, and you should seek medical attention immediately.
2. CHEST PRESSURE
This is one of the most noticeable signs of them all. This pressure is a clear sign that an attack is near. Many people also ignore this pressure, claiming that it’s nothing or that it’s normal, but it’s not. Get checked out immediately if you are experiencing pressure.
Becoming increasingly weak is another dangerous sign that you may have a heart attack. This is because you arteries have continued to narrow. This doesn’t allow the proper blood flow throughout the body.
4. COLD AND FLU SYMPTOMS
Many people have recorded developing cold and flu like symptoms right before an attack happens. These are very scary signs, and once again contact your doctor immediately.
If you are feeling tired and drowsy all the time it could be a result in the loss of blood flow to your heart. This happens when there is a buildup of plaque in your arteries, the same arteries that carry blood to and from the heart.
6. SHORTNESS OF BREATH
Due to the loss of blood flow your lungs are going to suffer as well. When not enough blood gets to your lungs you will not be able to take in enough air, which is related to shortness of breath. If you are having trouble breathing you should contact your doctor immediately, this is a very bad sign.
If you experience any of the above symptoms of a heart attack you must get yourself up and to the doctor. After all, the best way to prevent a heart attack is to catch wind of the symptoms before it happens. Do whatever it is you can to ensure you have good cardiovascular health; it could be the difference between life and death.
What to Do?
If you happen to experience any of these symptoms or a combination of them, you should immediately seek advice from your doctor. These are all signs that may indicate an impending heart-attack, and the best way to prevent it is to react upon the symptoms.
Women tend to have much subtler symptoms, so when they have been discovered it may be too late. This is why women should visit their physician at regular intervals for a complete check-up. Always insist on testing if you feel your body behaves strangely, especially if your family has a history of heart diseases. Many people have been treated for anxiety in such cases, which later turned out to be a heart-attack.