Textile Fragment Mounted on Modern Fabric
Arts of the Americas
Early Intermediate Period
This item is not on view
George C. Brackett Fund
You may download and use Brooklyn Museum images of this three-dimensional work in accordance with a Creative Commons license
. Fair use, as understood under the United States Copyright Act, may also apply.
Please include caption information from this page and credit the Brooklyn Museum. If you need a high resolution file, please fill out our online application form
For further information about copyright, we recommend resources at the United States Library of Congress
, Cornell University
, Copyright and Cultural Institutions: Guidelines for U.S. Libraries, Archives, and Museums
, and Copyright Watch
For more information about the Museum's rights project, including how rights types are assigned, please see our blog posts on copyright
If you have any information regarding this work and rights to it, please contact firstname.lastname@example.org
Paracas Necropolis. Textile Fragment Mounted on Modern Fabric, 0-100 C.E. Camelid fiber, 3 3/4 × 4 1/2 in. (9.5 × 11.4 cm). Brooklyn Museum, George C. Brackett Fund, 34.560.1. Creative Commons-BY (Photo: Brooklyn Museum, 34.560.1_SL1.jpg)
overall, 34.560.1_SL1.jpg. Brooklyn Museum photograph
"CUR" at the beginning of an image file name means that the image was created by a curatorial staff member. These study images may be digital point-and-shoot photographs, when we don\'t yet have high-quality studio photography, or they may be scans of older negatives, slides, or photographic prints, providing historical documentation of the object.
Embroidered bird figure in black, dark blue, green, yellow, red, beige, and light blue from a Paracas textile.
Size: undetermined or adult; probable wearer: undetermined or male. Plain weave with a vertical camelid fiber warp and camelid fiber weft. Camelid fiber embroidery. The iconography represents a bird with an animal-like head. Also see 86.224.96 in the Brooklyn Museum collection; these fragments are obviously from the same original even though acquired at different times (Ann Rowe).
Not every record you will find here is complete. More information is available for some works than for others, and some entries have been updated more recently. Records are frequently reviewed and revised, and we welcome
any additional information you might have.