AdviceAn advice is a hint, suggestion or counsel given to you by someone.
In constitutional law Advice is a frequently binding instruction issued to a constitutional office-holder or institution. For example, Queen Elizabeth II of the United Kingdom formally appoints Ministers of the Crown on the advice of the British Prime Minister.
In some cases, whether the advice is mandatory or advisory depends on the context and authority of the person offering advice. Hence in normal circumstances when the President of Ireland is advised to dissolve Dáil Éireann (the House of Representatives), by the Taoiseach (prime minister) he or she must do so. However, where in the words of the Irish Constitution a taoiseach has "ceased to retain the support of a majority in Dáil Éireann"1 (ie, lost the House's confidence) the President had the option of refusing to follow that advice.
To indicate that what is being received is not merely an informal suggestion but a formal constitutional instruction which potentially may be obligatory to follow, some though not all constitutional writers capitalise the word, writing it as Advice.
In aspect-oriented programming an advice is a piece of code executed when a join point is reached, that is associated with the pointcut of the advice.
In complexity theory, an advice is a string with extra information used by Turing machine or other computing device. See advice (complexity theory).
- Article 13.2.2. of Bunreacht na hÉireann (1937)
Source | Copyright
Webmasters: Add your website here:
Readers: Edit |
Ask Sister Rossetta
Nuns, clergy, and regular sinners like you ask questions of the lavender nun.
Gorm the Wired Viking
Choose your topic and be rewarded with an "ancient" Viking proverb, or help to create new proverbs in Gorm's Olde Proverb Factory.
Dear Aunt Nettie
America's oldest Internet guru tells it like it is.
True Meaning of Life
Advice from videogame and pop culture icons.
Ask Uncle Ralph
Humorous advice for trailer trash.
Advice on life, love, travel and other topics.
Just for the Halibut
Humorous quotes and strange advice for everyday life.
Ask Dodgy Mike
An un-trained, un-qualified idiot who will be of no help whatsoever.
Pose humorous, stupid, technical or profound questions for discussion.
Miss Abigail's Time Warp Advice
Old advice for contemporary dilemmas, covering the age-old topics of dating, love, living together, puberty, marriage, sex, etiquette, housekeeping, and even home repairs.
Includes advice column, letters, information about their book, profile, rhetorical questions and links.
The truth about life's big mysteries and senseless little annoyances.
Guru Jeff's Page of Truth
An illustrated guide to ass-kissing, take on online quiz to see if you are enlightened, or discover the truth about men.
Mr. Joel's Hollywood Beauty Tips
Mr. Joel of Hollywood offers humorous Hollywood gossip, beauty tips, and sexual advice to women.
Warm, fuzzy advice and computer tips.
Advice to laugh at, learn from or scoff at.
Interact with pop culture, fictional characters, and weird stuff.
Chat with the Swami Baktanimbin. Let the Swami relieve you of the heavy burden of your wallet.
How To Become a Successful Super Villain
A step-by-step guide to world domination.
Visitors can ask questions from this possibly fictional redneck.
Featuring somewhat tongue-in-cheek safety advice.
Pickled Pauline's Problems Page
Warped advice from an inebriated agony aunt.
Forum offering humorous advice on life and relationships. Free membership.
Ask Aunt Aggie
Old lady gives offensive advice on relationships, medicine, psychology and knitting.
Ask a Nun in a Pirate Hat
Sister Mary of the Jolly Roger addresses the cares and concerns of visitors with insane advice.
Hundreds of dumb questions and answers.
Questions about women, relationships, and the random weirdness of our world.
Advice from Taco on relationships, sex, or just about anything under the sun.
Offers advice on any subject to anyone for free.
The Naked Dancing Llama
A tangoing, frolicking, peanut spitting llama who is here to help you with your problems.
Inaccurate and doubtful advice offered on almost any topic.
Sometimes serious, and sometimes humorous answers to seemingly trivial questions covering all mannger of topics.
Ask any question for a humorous and sometimes correct answer.
My Magic Baby
Seek answers to difficult questions from a baby in a hat.
Odd advice for strange people.
Get answers directly from the omnipotent King of the Gods, Zeus.
Badly thought out advice. Read an archive of visitor's problems and see the suggested poor solutions.
Stupid Questions Answered
Submit your dumb question here. No question too dumb. Lots of dumb answers, too.
Free advice from romance to jobs. Free greeting cards, and links.
Wise Babe Advice
Social commentary and humorous advice that focuses on fashion. Submit your social questions.
Free analysis on subjects of your choice. Includes forum and message boards.
The Bastards Handbook
Guidance on how to be unpleasant.
Shut Up and Date
Relationship advice for men from a charismatic romance professional.
Duct Tape Guys
Jim and Tim explore implausible uses of the sticky gray stuff in books and appearances on stage and television. Drop-down list with dozens of use categories.
Random answers to troubling questions.
Ask Dr. Eldritch
Uncommon advice for those who find themselves in extraordinary circumstances.
Advice on relationships and moral dilemmas.
Offers advice with straight-forward answers and humor.
The Moral Minority
Irrelevant answers to your most important questions.
Ask Dr. Metropolis
All manner of advice for those who don't need to know.
Utterly useless advice from a completely unqualified guy.
The Macking Manual
A guide for the young macks out there, the players, and the veterans.
The Son of God operates this advice driven search engine.
The Bitter Single Guy's Relationship Advice Site
Real advice with a fun twist from a guy who's been dumped too many times.
Sage advice from the enlightened one.
Humorous relationship advice, consumer information, and celebrity revenge.
Don't Throw a Brick Straight Up
Advice and tips to help the stupid cope with life.
I'm Right You're Wrong
Resolve issues with lovers, friends or family by taking them to court, or join a jury and pry into the affairs of others. Most features require registration.
Ask Mr Wonderful
Humorous relationship advice and guest columnists.
Get personal advice from a very angry person.
Ask Mr. Universe
Answers to questions of cosmic importance.
Agony Aunt to the South London underworld. Contact her first on issues that concern loved ones, or to organise hits on same.
Ask the Big Brain
Funny answers to questions submitted to "The Big Brain".
The truest facts that you never knew until now. Read the thoughts of a flawless genius. Marvel at the truth behind things you have always pondered.
Married to Mommy
The "Professors of Matrimony" explore the marital metamorphosis of women into their mothers.