We are releasing the complete collection of all the biscuits that we have covered over the years. Our idea for these articles was that you could use them as quick reference points for navigating the various articles on our site. We will update these collections accordingly, so that you always have access to up-to-date information for your research.
Biscuits are small, flat, thin pieces of pastry that are baked to a low moisture content. The difference between the terms cookie and biscuit is that a cookie is a sweet, small, chunky biscuit type, baked to a low moisture content and with a long shelf life.
The two terms can also be two name variations of the same types of biscuits. This depends on where you live. Cookies are most commonly baked until crisp or just long enough that they remain soft, but some types of biscuit are not baked at all.
Jammie Dodgers are popular types of biscuits in the UK and are made from short bread and raspberry jam. These types of biscuits have been enjoyed by the British for over fifty years. With short bread on the outside and raspberry flavoured jam on the inside, they are a true delight.
Burton’s Biscuit Company is the only company producing these biscuits. The Jamie Dodgers were listed as the most popular biscuit brand for children in the UK, in 2009.
As their name implies, the gingerbread biscuits are types of biscuits that use ginger as their main ingredient. Other ingredients include molasses and honey, which is very healthy for the human body. What has earned this type of biscuit its global popularity, though, is its characteristic taste.
The term gingerbread is borrowed from the old French term gingimbrat or gingembras, which was in turn borrowed from medieval Latin term gingiber. Gingerbread now translates to pain d’espices, which is French for “spice bread” and lebkuchen – German for “pepper biscuit”.
The pretzel has a very distinct appearance, that of a loose knot. The pretzel is basically a salty cracker, however, by tweaking the original recipe one can create tasty types of biscuit.
The most widespread explanation behind their etymology is that pretzels draw their name from the German word Brezel, which also derives from the Latin word bracellus or bracchium. These biscuit types are shaped as folded arms, just like the name suggests.
Aachener biscuit types are traditional German biscuits, also called Lebkuchen. It originates from Aachen City, Germany. The Aachen biscuits look a lot like traditional English gingerbread types of biscuits. Honey is one of their main ingredients.
The term Aachener Printen is a protected term. Therefore, all Aachener biscuits are distributed from the city of Aachen. The name Aachener was derived from the German city where this type of biscuit was created. Printen, on the other hand, has several different definitions.
Cornish fairings are traditional, spicy ginger types of biscuits from Cornwall, UK. The Cornish Fairings are ginger biscuits given to children. Men also give these as gifts to their better halves.
Originally, Cornish Fairings were sold as souvenirs at English fairs. Fairing types of biscuit vary per region. For instance, in the north, they were simple, decorated Easter Paste eggs. In the Victorian times, the most popular version of the Cornish Fairings were the spiced ginger biscuits.
Custard cream are types of biscuits that are well-known in Britain. They are similar to biscuit sandwiches. They sport a creamy, custard-flavoured filling placed between two biscuits.
The custard cream originates from twentieth century England. The design of the biscuits is quite Victorian, with baroque markings such as Victorian. These biscuits are also very popular in Ireland.
Ginger biscuit types are English goodies and very popular snacks. They are flavoured with powdered ginger, with hints of other spices like cinnamon and nutmeg.
The ginger types of biscuits are not to be mistaken with gingerbread! The former is a hard type of biscuit, while the latter is thicker and softer. Ginger biscuit types are also called ginger nuts. Ginger biscuits are popular in countries like the UK, New Zealand, the Isle of Man and Australia.
Marie Biscuits are types of biscuits which are very sweet and quite similar to English Rich tea biscuits. Marie types of biscuit are popular in almost every country around the globe. Marie Biscuits are round in shape and its name is imprinted in the centre of the biscuit, with intricate designs on the edges. They were, however, originally called Maria.
Shortbread types of biscuits are sweet, crumbly biscuits from Scotland. Today, they are a popular Christmas treat, enjoyed all over the world.
Shortbread biscuit types are sweet, dense and rich in flavour. Bakers like to make them, as they are easy to both bake and distribute. Legend has it that shortbread biscuits originate from eighteenth century Scotland. Shortbread types of biscuits are also considered by some to be the UK's greatest biscuit.
Photo: Martin Rettenberger/Shutterstock.com
Vanillekipferl are small crescent-shaped types of biscuits, which are very popular in Middle-European countries. They are usually made with ground hazelnuts or almonds. Their typical flavour is due to vanilla sugar that is dusted on top.
The Vanillekipferl biscuit types are shaped like half-moons. They are usually served during Christmas season. They are easy to make and ideal as mid-afternoon snacks or for dieters.
Wafer biscuits are crisp, thin, sweet and flat types of biscuits that are used to decorate ice cream. Wafers are also used together with chocolate bars to enhance their taste.
The small round flatbreads that are used by Christian churches for celebrating the Eucharist are also called wafers. The Holy Wafer is the large type of biscuit taken by priests, while the Communion Wafers are the smaller pieces of biscuits given to the people during mass. These Holy Wafers are special and are made with images of the Holy Cross on them.
Speculaas are Dutch types of biscuits that are very popular in other countries as well. Speculaas are served on the eve of St. Nicholas’ Day and during Christmas season.
Some people say that the name Speculaas is taken from the Latin term speculum, which means mirror. There could be a connection because the Speculaas are moulded and decorated using wooden stamps with imprinted images.
Rich tea types of biscuit are a variety of sweet biscuits whose ingredients include wheat flour, vegetable oil, sugar and malt extract. These biscuits are popular in the United Kingdom.
Their plain flavour makes them really good dunking-biscuits. They were originally called Tea Biscuits and were developed in seventeenth-century Yorkshire for the British aristocracy. It has been said that the McVitie’s brand tastes like Britain itself, just like the nation’s past and future.
This traditional type of biscuit has most-likely been made by Jewish immigrants that once settled in Ohio. Russian tea biscuits even look like a bigger version of a traditional Jewish cookie – rugelach.
In the eighteenth century, Russian tea cakes gained popularity during tea ceremonies. By the twentieth century they spread over the world, becoming a traditional part of Christmas festivities around the globe.
Arrowroot has been used for many different applications. For example, it can be used as a healthier alternative to corn-starch. It is most recognizable in its powdered form. It is also prominently used for baking different types of biscuits.
There is a theory that its name is a misspelling of the name given to the root used by the native Americans, the “Aru-root.”
The bourbon biscuit… what is it? It is a type of biscuits sandwich created by combining two chocolate flavoured biscuits with a chocolate butter-cream filling. It goes great with tea and is adored by many.
These types of biscuits derive their name from a contraction of two names: Bourneville and Bonn. The significance of these two names can be discovered in the full article, along with a biography of its creator.
Photo By: Daniele Carotenuto/Shutterstock.com
Probably one of the most popular types of biscuits in the UK, digestive biscuits are a semi-sweet variety, made from coarse whole-wheat flour. The biscuit is firm, soft and crumbly.
The biscuit owns its name to the main leavening agent used in its production - baking soda. In the past, sodium bicarbonate was used to ease indigestion problems. As such, digestive biscuits have the same healthy properties. The name stuck and is used for the biscuits today.
Scones are classics. They never go out of style. They are perfect for any occasion and any time of day.
A scone falls under the bread/cake category. It is heavier than a muffin but thicker than flat bread, however. This biscuit type originates from the UK. It is usually combined with Devonshire tea, light meals, creams or jams.
Types of biscuits that we call fig rolls are proof that not everything is about cream filling (when it comes to biscuit types). Biscuits can be as good when they are combined with fruit; in this case - figs. This delicacy has global fame, but did you know it dates back to ancient Egypt?
The fig (ingredient) has been around for a long time, and it was just a matter of time until people realised they could make a delicious type of biscuit out of it. The fig roll has all the goodness of figs and the convenience of conventional biscuits.
If you love Japanese delicacies, then these types of biscuits are perfect for you! Monaka biscuits are made from azuki bean jam-filling which are sandwiched between two thin wafers. The wafers are made from wochi flour.
Azuki bean (or red mung bean) is an annual vine known for its small beans which can be found in East Asia. Mochi, however, is a Japanese rice-cake made from mochigome, a short-grain rice. Monaka biscuit types can also be made with sesame seeds, chestnuts, or almost any other ingredient in a paste form.
Viennese whirls are sandwich types of biscuits made from two shortbread biscuits glued together by raspberry jam and butter-cream. They go rather well with tea.
Even though Viennese whirls sound like they should originate from Austria, they were actually created in modern day UK. They were inspired by Austrian types of biscuits though. That is where their name comes from. Viennese Whirls were popularised by Mr. Kipling.
Snickerdoodle types of biscuits are types of biscuits made from butter/oil, sugar and flour. They are also rolled in cinnamon sugar. Snickerdoodles are characterized by cracked surfaces and can be crisp or soft (depending on the ingredients).
Snickerdoodles are often called sugar biscuits. However, there is one key ingredient to them – tartar cream. It seems weird but it works perfectly. It makes the biscuits chewy. Another difference between snickerdoodles and sugar types of biscuits is the topping – cinnamon.
The world of pastries is exciting. One of the classics of the industry are certainly wagon wheel types of biscuits, made from two biscuits with marshmallow filling, covered with a jam layer and covered in chocolate coating.
Biscuits and chocolate make for a great combination. Add marshmallows to the mix and you’ve got yourself a winner! They are a global phenomenon. There are so many version of them however, from New Zealand's chocolate fish to Danish cream bun or flødebolle.
Hardtacks are hard, square types of biscuits that are made from flour and water. They are also called pilot biscuits, pilot bread, sea biscuits and ship biscuits.
Since they are very dry, they can be stored for longer periods of time without refrigeration. That, combined with the fact that they are easy to make, is one of the main reasons sailors and soldiers used them as rations. They would dip them in tea of coffee to soften them up. They are also light and can replace bread.
Springerle biscuits are traditional Christmas treats in areas such as Bavaria and Austria. Springerle are white, anise-flavoured types of biscuits, made from simple egg-flour-sugar dough.
They are usually rectangular or circular in shape. They also have different designs stamped on them. The images are imprinted with specially-carved rolling pins or flat moulds. After these types of biscuits are made, the designs are enhanced with edible food-colours.
We are sure that, when we mention a certain food, a specific country instantly comes to your mind. Is there anything that comes to your mind when you hear the word “Brazil”? If not, after reading this article it surely will!
The Toruń gingerbread is a very famous and loved type of biscuit. It has a long and rich history filled with interesting facts, tales and legends.
Tradition is important. It is important to keep it alive, in order to honour those who came before us and preserve some of their values. However, sometimes it is important to keep tradition alive simply because it is so incredibly tasty! The Toruń gingerbread, a gingerbread named after the city of Toruń, the place of its origin, is a traditional Polish types of biscuit with a history stretching back to the Middle Ages.
Photo: Museum of Toruń Gingerbread, department of District Museum in Toruń, photographer: Krzysztof Deczyński
Macaroons, not to be confused with “macarons”, are American types of the famous French biscuit. Besides their name, they don't have a lot of things in common. Coconuts became popular in the nineteenth century, thanks to the Indian imports. Bakers used them to rewrite the macaron recipe.
Indian Nankhatai biscuits are dried types of biscuits with a tradition and history stretching back to the sixteenth century. Nankhatai is also one of the main treats during the Diwali festival where people celebrate the victory of light over darkness. Many bakers prepare and sell their Nankhatai biscuits on the streets during these festivities.
Modern-day people lead very busy lifestyles. This can take its toll on a person’s well-being, so it is important to remember to relax sometimes, put everything aside and enjoy some peace and quiet. One good way to do so is with a cup of tea and some biscuits. This is a favourite pastime for many people across the world. If you are one of them, then you might appreciate the simplicity of the Indian Nankhatai biscuits.
One of the most popular variations of marshmallow treats is the chocolate-coated version. The variation actually depends on the various coatings used, which range from liquorice, chocolate, candy sprinkles et cetera.
There are different names given to these marshmallow treats. This candy confection originates from the land of Egypt. It bears the name “marshmallow treat” because the result is a great treat for everyone.
The name Petit Beurre originates from France and the company that invented them is named ''LU''. The LU stands for: ''little butter'' and their appearance has an interesting story related to time.
You’ve probably eaten these types of biscuits during your childhoods. If you want to relive it, and learn some interesting facts about the biscuits in the process, read the full article.
There is no difference between biscotti and cantuccini. All biscuits are called biscotti in Italian, and the word “biscotti” means “twice-cooked”. They are often made with almonds and are perfect to match with wine.
Many special types of biscuits belong to Italian cuisine, but the focus of this article is on one – cantuccini biscuits, you will have the opportunity to learn their origin, history, makers, and interesting facts.