DISTRICT 6 GIFTED AND TALENTED IDENTIFICATION
Questions and Answers
What is the purpose of the identification process in District Six?
The purpose of the identification process is to find students who match the definition of gifted and talented students and show potential for exceptionally high levels of academic achievement. The definition of gifted children in District Six is:
“Gifted children” means those school-age children and youth “whose abilities, talents, and potential for accomplishments are so outstanding that they require special provisions to meet their educational needs."
Gifted and talented students are capable of high performance, exceptional production, or exceptional learning behavior by virtue of any or a combination of the following:
- general or specific intellectual ability
- specific academic aptitude
- creative or productive thinking
- leadership and human relations abilities
- visual arts, performing arts, spatial or musical abilities
Gifted children represent all cultural, ethnic, linguistic and socioeconomic backgrounds and may demonstrate both gifts and disabilities.
How does the process begin?
Giftedness exists within all sub-groups of the population, and we make continuous attempts to see that students identified as gifted reflect the diversity of the local community in terms of gender, ethnicity, and socioeconomic status. Information regarding the nomination process is sent home with students or included in school newsletters. Student nominations are accepted from parents, teachers, peers, community members, and students. Any stakeholder has an opportunity to nominate students by completing and returning a nomination form that is available in the school office. Students may also be flagged for further consideration by CSAP scores in the top 5% for the district and NWEA scores.
What happens once a student is nominated?
Nominated students are evaluated with multiple sources and tools to allow a child to reveal his/her exceptionalities or potential. A variety of assessment tools are used to collect information on a student whose background or talent area makes him/her unique from others. Information is collected with input from teachers, parents, or the learners themselves, and may include: 1) verbal, non-verbal or written tests such as group and individual tests of achievement (CSAP, NWEA, ), 2) group general ability tests (such as CogAT screener given in 2nd grade, and 3) referrals, observations, and rating scales. This is all called a Body of Evidence.
Who sees and evaluates the information?
Information collected is confidential. A team of teachers trained in the identification of gifted students then meets to determine if the student qualifies for gifted educational services. The gifted identification process works to recognize exceptional strengths and potential in learners so that appropriate instructional accommodations and modifications can be provided. Qualifying students typically score two or more years above grade level in at least one academic area and demonstrate characteristics typical of gifted learners. They may also demonstrate precocious levels of performance in a strength area and/or have cognitive abilities within the superior range.
How are parents notified if their student does or does not qualify?
After a period of observation, testing, and data collection, a trained team of GT teachers will meet to review the data. After the review meeting they will send a letter to parents letting them know the results of the identification process. If parents have questions about this process or steps being taken to evaluate their child, they should contact the building GT teacher.
What happens once a student is identified as gifted/talented?
Each student identified as gifted/talented will have an Advanced Learning Plan (ALP) designed in collaboration between the student, parents and teachers. This plan will outline what programming is needed to assist the student in their continued growth.
DISTRICT 6 GT IDENTIFICATION
A VISUAL OVERVIEW
Greeley-Evans School District 6 follows established procedures for the identification of gifted/talented students that align with state guidelines (CDE, 2003). Identification is an ongoing process that takes into account both formal and informal data, and requires the collection of a body of evidence over time that substantiates students talent in specific areas. Ultimately, the process guides programming for each identified student. A complete ID kit is available at each school. The following is a visual outline of the process: