First Aid for Your Pet
In an emergency, first aid is not a substitute for veterinary
However, before you are able to get your pet to a veterinarian, knowing
some basic first aid can help. Always seek veterinary care following
Give us a call @ (607)336-PETS (7387) 24 hours a day, 7 days a week.
- Bite Wounds
Approach the pet carefully to avoid getting bitten. Muzzle the animal
if necessary. Check the wound for contamination or debris. If significant
debris is present, then clean the wound with large amounts of saline,
hydrogen peroxide or balanced electrolyte solution. If these are not
available, then regular water may be used. Wrap large open wounds to
keep them clean. Apply pressure to profusely bleeding wounds. Do not
use a tourniquet. Wear gloves when possible.
Bite wounds often become infected and need professional care. Call
Apply firm, direct pressure over the bleeding area until the bleeding
stops. Hold the pressure for at least 10 straight minutes (continually
releasing the pressure to check the wound will hamper the clotting).
Avoid bandages that cut off circulation. If you have trimmed a toe
nail too short, direct pressure in the nail bed with a cotton-tipped
applicator will work. Also can pack nail tip with a little flour
or better to keep some clotting powder on hand for this purpose
for purchase here or at many pet supply stores.
- Breathing Stops
Check to see if the animal is choking on a foreign object. If an
animal is not breathing, place it on a firm surface with its left
Check for a heartbeat by listening at the area where the elbow touches
the chest. If you hear a heartbeat but not breathing, close the animal's
mouth and breathe directly into its nose--not the mouth--until the
chest expands. Repeat 12 to 15 times per minute. If there is no pulse,
apply heart massage at the same time. The heart is located in the
lower half of the chest, behind the elbow of the front left leg.
hand below the heart to support the chest. Place other hand over
the heart and compress gently. To massage the hearts of cats and
tiny pets, compress the chest with the thumb and forefingers of one
hand. Apply heart massage 80-120 times per minute for larger animals
and 100-150 per minute for smaller ones. Alternate heart massage
Please note: Even in the hands of well-trained veterinary health
professionals, the success of resuscitation is very low overall.
Success may be slightly
higher in the cases of drowning or electrical shock.
- Burns (chemical,
electrical, or heat, including from a heating pad)
Flush the burn immediately with large amounts of cool, running water.
Apply an ice pack for 15-20 minutes. Do not place an ice pack directly
on the skin. Wrap the pack in a light towel or other cover. If the
animal has large quantities of dry chemicals on its skin, brush them
off. Water may activate some dry chemicals.
Animals may show symptoms such as difficulty breathing, excessive
pawing at the mouth, blue lips and tongue Be sure to protect yourself
as the animal, as the pet will likely be frantic and may be more
likely to bite. If the pet can still partially breathe, it's best
the animal calm and get to a veterinarian as quickly as possible.
Look into the mouth to see if foreign object in throat is visible.
can, clear the airway by removing the object with pliers or tweezers,
being careful not to push it farther down the throat. If it is lodged
too deep or if the pet collapses, then place your hands on both sides
of the animal's rib cage and apply firm, quick pressure. Or place
the animal on its side and strike the side of the rib cage firmly
the palm of your hand three or four times. Repeat this procedure
until the object is dislodged or you arrive at the veterinarian's
- Diarrhea and or straining
Withhold food for 12-24 hours, but not water. Usually pets that appear
to be straining are sore from diarrhea rather than from constipation.
Your veterinarian can help you decide which it is and what will help.
Trying at-home treatments without knowing the real cause can just
make things worse.
Your pet may have symptoms such as pain, inability to use a limb,
or a limb at an odd angle
Muzzle the pet and look for bleeding. If you can control bleeding
without causing more injury, then do so. Watch for signs of shock.
DO NOT TRY
TO SET THE FRACTURE by pulling or tugging on the limb. Contact your
veterinarian immediately. When transporting support the injured part
as best you can.
Your may may show symptoms such as rapid or labored breathing, vomiting,
high body temperature, and collapse. Place the animal in a tub of
cool water (not ice cold water). Or, gently soak the animal with
hose or wrap it in a cool, wet towel. Do not overcool the animal.
Stop cooling when rectal temperature reaches 103 degrees Fahrenheit.
This can cause symptoms such as vomiting, convulsions, diarrhea,
salivation, weakness, depression, and/or pain depending on what
the poison is and
how your pet was exposed.
Record what the pet ingested and how much. Immediately call your
veterinarian or poison control center. Do not induce vomiting. In
case of toxins or
chemicals on the skin from oils, paints, insecticides and other contact
irritants, request directions on if and how to wash the toxin off.
Move the pet away from any objects that could be harmful during the seizure.
Use a blanket for padding and protection. Do not put yourself at risk
by restraining the pet during the seizure. Time the seizure. They usually
last only 2 to 3 minutes. Afterwards, keep the animal calm and quiet.
This causes irregular breathing, dilated pupils, and pale mucous membranes
Shock may occur as a result of a serious injury or fright. Keep the animal
gently restrained, quiet, and warm, with the lower body elevated.
Withhold food for 12-24 hours. Give the pet ice cubes for two hours
after vomiting stops, then slowly increase the amount of water
given over a 24-hour period.
If you need to muzzle your pet: Use a strip of soft cloth, rope, necktie,
or nylon stocking. Wrap around the nose, under the chin and tie behind
the ears. Care must be taken when handling weak or injured pets. Even
normally docile pets will bite when in pain. Allow the pet to pant after
handling by loosening or removing the muzzle. Do not use a muzzle in
a case of vomiting. Cats and small pets may be difficult to muzzle. A
towel placed around the head will help control small pets.
If your pet can't walk: A door, board, blanket, or floor mat can be
used as a stretcher to transport injured or weak animals.
If your pet's emergency is not covered here, please call Pet Street
Station Animal Hospital immediately (607) 336-PETS (7387)