An artistic chain links a school with kindness
GEORGETOWN – Students at Georgetown Middle School dreamed up 600 variations of a theme – how kindness can push back against bullying – during a weeklong art project to create large-scale murals.
"This conversation will stay alive in front of them," said artist John Donato, who spent days at the school helping students make the murals. "These murals are going to be around for a long, long time. The kids who come after them are going to read all these messages from the kids before them."
The murals resemble a library's shelves, showing the spines of dozens of books lined up next to each other. Each book was painted by a different student, but they all share a theme, expressing ways kindness can overcome a bullying impulse.
The books were rich in metaphor. "Kindness cures bullying," said one, over a stylized medicine bottle. Many students incorporated linked chains, symbolizing the importance of everyone in the school committing to being kind, into their book covers.
"They see kindness as like a chain," Donato said. "If you're bullying, or not being kind, you're breaking that chain, and it weakens the whole population."
The art project is a joint effort of the Indian River School District and the Joshua M. Freeman Foundation, which said the initiative will "help bolster confidence and inspiration within the student body." The Foundation has collaborated with schools before on arts initiatives.
For the students finishing up their slices of the mural on Friday, the work during a part of their class day called an "exploratory" was as much about self-expression as it was about kind behavior.
"I'm going to put my name on top, and I'm going to write 'kindness' in words around the pepperoni," said Mauro Sgromo, 13, after painting a slice of yellowish pizza on a blue book spine. Donato showed Sgromo how to mix paints to get a tan hue for the pizza's crust.
On Wednesday, parents got the chance to come to school to work on the murals with their children. Over the weekend, Donato was to work on mounting and framing the murals, and they'll be displayed in different places around the school come Monday morning when students return.
Donato said the project leads kids to think about bullying without making it a chore.
"It's not us telling them what we think is a solution," he said. "There's this ripple conversation going on. If you're mean to somebody, it ends up coming back to you. That ripple goes out, and a wave comes back."