This website is full of practical teaching resources provided in easy-to-use chunks, and is quickly searchable according to age range, theme and subject area. Lots of the resources are free, and are easily downloaded from the website.
RISC’s interactive Resource Bank supports the effective delivery of Global Citizenship across the curriculum. Choose from thousands of photos and artefacts from many different countries, plus teaching packs and books along with schemes of work and
Maths teacher Ed Read reflects on the skills his students need to be learning.
Resources to support Science, Technology, Engineering and Maths.
Maths has roots in a range of cultures. It gives people powerful tools to represent, analyse and change the world. Students need to be able to apply maths beyond the classroom, and recognise its rich and historical roots.
Nicola Richardson teaches Mathematics at The Ridings’ Federation Winterbourne International Academy (TRFWIA), an 11-18 co-educational Academy in rural South Gloucestershire. For World Food Day she gave Key Stage 3 students (age 11-14) the chance to see how different families around the world have very different resources available to buy food.
The British Museum has created a set of PowerPoint resources for KS1 which explore colour, pattern and two-dimensional shapes using museum artefacts. They show how ancient cultures used colour, pattern and shape to make sense of the world around them
Sunny Schools is a UK education project run by SolarAid. They have a number of KS2 teaching resources available to download free from their website. These tackle issues of climate change and energy, and bring to life the science of renewable energy.
Practical Action’s Global CREST challenges are based on real problems faced in developing countries. They are divided into five themes – water, food, energy, shelter and transport, and give secondary students ideas for starting points for projects.
The Catholic aid charity CAFOD has developed a range of primary teaching resources available free online, which highlight the importance of sport in development. They draw on CAFOD’s work in a number of different countries.