Dog teeth care
How to care for a dog’s teeth? And whether it is necessary to look after them in general? These questions arise for each responsible pet owner. In the natural habitat, wolves, jackals and coyotes – wild relatives of dogs – do well without dental toys, treats, special toothbrushes and pastes. And what about pets?
Unlike wolves, coyotes and jackals, domestic dogs do not have to participate in natural selection and fight for survival. There are not only pros, but also cons. A striking example is the health of the dentition.
In nature, the jaws of the wolf will always find application. The beast hunts, butches prey and eats not only meat, but also tendons, cartilage, bones. Hunting trains the muscles of the jaw, and hard food naturally cleans plaque from fangs. With a weak dentition, the wolf would not have survived!
With domestic dogs, everything is different. Unfortunately, about 80% of dogs have oral diseases by the age of two years. In many cases, the problem is not immediately detected, but at a time when complications have already developed. The owners do not give proper attention to plaque and stone and are not in a hurry with treatment. But tartar provokes periodontal disease, gingivitis and other complications. As a result, the pet suffers, and veterinary dentistry is very expensive. How to avoid this?
Regular care is required for the oral cavity of a dog of any breed. Basic care is brushing your teeth with special toothpaste for dogs or special dental diets.
Dental brushing is a very effective method for the prevention of diseases of the oral cavity. Using a special brush and paste, you can remove 80% of the plaque from the teeth of a pet in just 30 seconds. The only difficulty is in accustoming the dog to the procedure. If you start learning from childhood, problems, as a rule, do not arise. The puppy perceives hygiene procedures as a game and another opportunity to chat with the owner. Making an adult dog with a brush is more difficult. Perhaps that is why the nutritional approach in our country is more popular.
Dog teeth care
The dietary approach involves the use of special food, which effectively cleans teeth and prevents diseases of the oral cavity. This is an alternative to the natural diet of wild relatives of dogs in nature. Let’s see how such a diet works, using the example of food for adult and elderly dogs Eukanuba with the 3D DentaDefense system. This system prevents oral diseases as follows:
Special S-shaped granule formula for maximum contact between teeth and feed. In the process of cracking, such a granule comes into contact with almost the entire surface of the tooth and mechanically removes plaque.
The active component is applied to the surface of the granules – sodium tripolyphosphate, which prevents the formation of tartar. Studies have shown that this technique reduces the risk of tartar by almost 70% compared to conventional dry food.
Enrichment with calcium. Optimum calcium levels contribute to healthy teeth and bones.
As a result, the care of the pet’s oral cavity is provided with virtually no involvement of the owner. The owner simply gives the pet a special food – and his health is protected.
The maximum effect is achieved through an integrated approach. By combining toothbrushing, diet, as well as dental toys, goodies, or special nutritional supplements (such as ProDen PlaqueOff), the risk of diseases of the oral cavity is minimized.
However, even arming yourself from all sides, do not forget about the preventive visits to the veterinarian. Your dog will be grateful to you!