Grade 9 Courses
In order to achieve the Ontario Secondary School Diploma, please view the compulsory and elective course requirements and number of electives by grade click the link below Ontario Secondary School Diploma (OSSD) Requirements
- GRADE 9 COURSES
|Subject||Academic or Applied||Enriched||Open|
|GEOGRAPHY OF CANADA||CGC1D|
|HEALTH & PHYSICAL EDU.||PPL10|
This course emphasizes analytic reading, writing, oral communication, and thinking skills that students need for success in secondary school academic programs and their daily lives. Students will study and interpret texts from contemporary and historical periods, including plays, short stories, and short essays, and will investigate and create media works. An important focus will be the correct and effective use of spoken and written language. Prerequisite: None
English, Grade 9, Academic – Compulsory (ENG1DE)
The enriched curriculum enables learners to read, interpret and evaluate texts through the study of literature in English. Learners develop an understanding of literal meaning, relevant contexts and of the deeper themes or attitudes that may be expressed. Through their studies, they learn to recognise and appreciate the ways in which writers use English to achieve a range of effects, and will be able to present an informed, personal response to the material they have studied.
The syllabus also encourages the exploration of wider and universal issues, promoting learners’ better understanding of themselves and of the world around them.
This course enables students to develop an understanding of mathematical concepts related to algebra, analytic geometry, and measurement and geometry through investigation, the effective use of technology, and abstract reasoning. Students will investigate relationships, which they will then generalize as equations of lines, and will determine the connections between different representations of a linear relation. They will also explore relationships that emerge from the measurement of three-dimensional figures and two-dimensional shapes. Students will reason mathematically and communicate their thinking as they solve multi-step problems. Prerequisite: None
Our enriched program is the customized to enrich the Ontario curriculum to enhance our students’ skills, knowledge and critical thinking at an advanced level that supports their ongoing success in the field of Mathematics. It is an extension to the academic mathematics to prepare students to appear in AP courses or International Examinations. Through a combination of Ontario an international curriculum, students will be introduced with the basics of approaching year’s concepts. Concepts of grade 9 Ontario Math will be refined with the depth and proofs. Students will be developing their own formulas rather than solely rely on memory.
This course enables students to develop their understanding of basic concepts in biology, chemistry, earth and space science, and physics, and to relate science to technology, society, and the environment. Throughout the course, students will develop their skills in the processes of scientific investigation. Students will acquire an understanding of scientific theories and conduct investigations related to sustainable ecosystems; atomic and molecular structures and the properties of elements and compounds; the study of the universe and its properties and components; and the principles of electricity. Prerequisite: None
Our enriched program is the customized to enrich the Ontario curriculum to enhance our students’ skills, knowledge and critical thinking at an advanced level that supports their ongoing success in the Post secondary Science programs. It is an extension to the academic mathematics to prepare students to appear in AP courses or International Examinations. Through a combination of Ontario an international curriculum, students will be introduced with the basics of approaching year’s concepts. Concepts of grade 9 Ontario Science will be refined with the depth.
This course emphasizes the further development of oral communication, reading, and writing skills. Students will build on and apply their knowledge of French while exploring a variety of themes, such as relationships, social trends, and careers. Thematic readings, which include a selection of short stories, articles, and poems, will serve as stepping stones to oral and written activities. Prerequisite: Minimum of 600 hours of French instruction, or equivalent
This course explores Canada’s distinct and changing character and the geographic systems and relationships that shape it. Students will investigate the interactions of natural and human systems within Canada, as well as Canada’s economic, cultural, and environmental connections to other countries. Students will use a variety of geotechnologies and inquiry and communication methods to analyse and evaluate geographic issues and present their findings. Prerequisite: None
This course emphasizes regular participation in a variety of enjoyable physical activities that promote lifelong healthy active living. Students will learn movement skills and principles, ways to improve personal fitness and physical competence, and safety and injury prevention. They will investigate issues related to healthy sexuality and the use and abuse of alcohol, tobacco, and other drugs, and will participate in activities designed to develop goal-setting, communication, and social skills. Prerequisite: None
This course emphasizes the active exploration of dramatic forms and techniques, using material from a wide range of authors, genres, and cultures. Students will construct, discuss, perform, and analyse drama, and then reflect on the experiences to develop an understanding of themselves, the art form, and the world around them. Prerequisite: None
This exploratory course introduces students to concepts and skills in communications technology, which encompass television/video and movie production, radio and audio production, print and graphic communications, photography, and interactive new media and animation. Students will develop an awareness of related environmental and societal issues, and will begin to explore secondary and post-secondary pathways leading to careers in the field. Prerequisite: None
This course focuses on learning strategies to help students become better, more independent learners. Students will learn how to develop and apply literacy and numeracy skills, personal management skills, and interpersonal and teamwork skills to improve their learning and achievement in school, the workplace, and the community. The course helps students build confidence and motivation to pursue opportunities for success in secondary school and beyond. Prerequisite: None