This year’s drownings on the Great Lakes are ahead of last year at this time, with Lake Michigan again having the most drownings.
As of July 28, 2019, the Great Lakes have had 51 fatalities from drownings, which is two more fatalities to date than 2018.
Even more alarming is the number of drowning fatalities so far on Lake Michigan alone. Twenty-seven people have died from drowning in Lake Michigan so far this year. At this point last year, 15 people had drowned in Lake Michigan.
On the other Great Lakes, drownings to date are at two on Lake Superior, five on Lake Huron, 11 (plus one missing boater) on Lake Erie, and six on Lake Ontario.
Dave Benjamin, executive director of public relations and project management of the Great Lakes Surf Rescue Project, says it’s not just one factor that is leading to the large amount of drowning fatalities on the Great Lakes.
At first you may think the high water on the Great Lakes this year would lead to an increase of people being swept off piers. Benjamin says the number of people swept off piers this year is actually down.
We have had some windy conditions during otherwise desirable swimming conditions. Last weekend was a good example of a dangerous combination of sun, warmth and strong winds. Last weekend two people drowned on Lake Michigan, one at Holland and another at Indiana Dunes State Park at Chesterton, Ind.
While high water doesn’t contribute in a big way to the number of Lake Michigan drownings, it does contribute, according to Benjamin. Two recent drownings near Ludington State Park were a direct result of high water. In the cases at Ludington, the high water levels on the Big Sable River produced a strong outflow current out into Lake Michigan. Two people near shore were pulled out into the open water in Lake Michigan.
The National Weather Service says the most prevalent wave angle during drowning emergencies is 30 degrees to 60 degrees to the shoreline. In other words, waves crashing in at an angle have caused the most danger. Most of the incidents don’t occur during what would typically be considered stormy weather. The majority of Lake Michigan drownings also occur in the southern half of Lake Michigan where there is more population.
The Red Cross says 60 percent of drownings happen to good swimmers; 80 percent of drowning victims are male.
The National Weather Service says early August historically has had more drowning incidents on the Great Lakes.
Benjamin says we are trained what to do in a fire, but not trained for a water emergency. He also says the flag system on the Great Lakes is too inconsistent. A red flag in Chicago means no lifeguard is on duty. A yellow flag at beaches in Michigan City, Ind. means high bacteria levels. If the flags are hinged to water conditions, they are often put up at 6 a.m. when water conditions are calm. Benjamin feels the flags should be put up by on-duty lifeguards and changed as water conditions change.
Benjamin would also like to see an educational campaign. He points out that Pure Michigan spends an estimated 30 million dollars on advertising. Benjamin would like to see some of the money from tourism go toward an educational program about water safety.
One thing Benjamin really doesn’t understand is why kayakers and stand-up paddleboarders on the Great Lakes don’t have to wear a life jacket. They only need to have one in the kayak. The tucked-away life vest might not be reachable in a water emergency.
Benjamin says we need more water safety education to prevent drownings. He advises us to remember the safety slogan, “Flip, Float and Follow.” The first step in drowning is panic. If you flip on your back and float, you may be able to control your panic. Then follow the easiest path to a safer situation.
Two pieces of common sense: Wear a life jacket, and stay out of the water when winds are strong. Benjamin says 99 percent of all drowning victims weren’t wearing a life jacket.