High cholesterol is a major risk factor for the development of a heart attack or stroke due to plaque formation in your arteries (atherosclerosis). Here are some simple ways to reduce your cholesterol that are non prescription’ to start lowering your risk for heart attack and stroke: Portion control: use your hand as a guide to the size of portions of meat (palm), fruit (fist), and veggies (cupped hand). Serve up mostly heart healthy foods: 5-9 servings of fruits and vegetables per day. Go to the sea twice a week: eat fish twice a week, good for omega-3 fatty acids. Whole grains: oatmeal or whole grain cereal to start your.
The Centers For Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) report 5 million people worldwide die every year from smoking or the complications from smoking. The best way to quit smoking is never to start smoking or prevent yourself from ever starting. But if you are already a smoker, here are some tips and alternative ways to quit: Nicotine replacement therapy in the form of patches, gum, lozenges, nasal spray or the medications bupropion (wellbutrin) or varenicline (Chantix). Oral fixation replacement. Chew on things like gum, toothpicks, mints and lozenges. Look for sugar free ones to avoid excess calories. Hypnosis or hypnotherapy. You must be open to this method. Make sure you.
A habit is a choice we deliberately make at some point and then stop thinking about but continue making every day. A habit is a formula our brain automatically follows: when I see a Cue, I will do a Routine in order to get a Reward. We all have habits….good and bad. How can you begin to identify and modify those habits you want to change and improve your health and happiness? The core of all habits have been found to be three parts of a loop: a cue a routine a reward An Example: I take a break from work every day to go to the break room and.
Vitamin D deficiency in America has become a widespread problem. A recent CDC (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention) report indicated that 1/3 of Americans aren’t getting enough vitamin D. One quarter were at risk for vitamin D inadequacy and 8 percent at risk for deficiency. Individuals with darker skin tones are even more likely to be low in vitamin D than those with lighter skin. Low vitamin D levels can occur when: The recommended intake is low over time A person has limited sunlight exposure The kidneys cannot convert vitamin D 25(OH) to its usable form The absorption of vitamin D in the gut is inadequate Vitamin D deficient.
Millions of Americans suffer from the symptoms of thyroid dysfunction without ever knowing it. In fact, it is estimated that more than 30 million women and 15 million men have an underactive thyroid or hypothyroidism. Our endocrine system is made up of the glands that produce the hormones that circulate in our bodies that are responsible for growth, repair, metabolism, energy and reproduction. The thyroid is one of these glands that when underactive can affect our health systemically in a negative way. What are some of the less conspicuous symptoms of a low thyroid? Feeling blue or unmotivated. Constipation. Difficulty sleeping. Overweight and having trouble shedding pounds. Low body temperature,.