Advantages and Disadvantages of Static and Dynamic Website
Web design-developers are the process of creating content presentations (usually hypertext or multimedia), which are displayed to the end user of the Internet via a browser.
All web pages are an electronic file or a set of electronic files stored in hard drives called servers.
The electronic files can be images (.jpeg, .gif, .png, .bmp) that are placed on our page using the appropriate markup codes to be recognized by our browser, which in turn will shows us on our screen. The “appropriate signposts” I mentioned above are html / xhtml / xml.
However, in general, browsers follow the standards and specifications set by W3C. And browsers today embed plug-ins on them, which users should install separately.
The static website has advantages that do not have dynamics and vice versa. That’s why we can not say that one is better than the other. This mistake is made by many, who say that dynamics are better than static, perhaps because they have more advantages.
The main difference is that static websites do not interact with the visitor, which dynamics do.
Static websites are characterized by the permanence of their content and layout, which can only be changed / modified by a request for upgrade by the developer / administrator of that page.
A simple html page (html document) that includes text, links, and photos, for example, is a simple example of a static page. Data on a static website does not change dynamically. They have fixed, unchanging content.
The static overpage is the low cost of manufacturing and maintenance, because a static page does not require much space to host from a webserver. A static page is developed / designed faster than a dynamic one. Also, static pages load faster than dynamic ones.
Great advantage of static websites versus dynamics is also that more SEO friendly. SEO means Search engine optimization and in Greek “Search Engine Optimization”. Static pages are therefore more search engine friendly.
Read Also : Programming Language Use To Build Static And Dynamic Websites
This is because static websites have the ability to place html code, meta tags that are recognized by search engines, and rank the static page over a dynamic that is not exactly that.
This is a very powerful advantage of static websites, because as you understand it is directly related to their visit. And visit to a website can be translated into profit. And as it is known, search engines are the ones that refer users to the web pages.
So the better the page rank on the search engines in different keywords, the greater the advantage over its competitors. The market is making a tough battle between SEO experts for various keywords.
It is remarkable that only in the Greek market for keywords such as (fashion, gadgets, clothes), to reach the top position in the search engines, is spent up to 20 thousand euros. For these phrases, in the global market the amounts are skyrocketed as perceived.
A static website is that a user must have programming skills to be able to break the page content. This is because it should intervene in the code.
In a static website, the user does not have any kind of interaction with the page and any other drawbacks involved in it.
You’ll choose a static website if you do not want to refresh your pages often, which will not be over 15-20. Static websites are best suited for small businesses who want to make a simple presentation of their products online, without wanting to refresh them often.
The construction of a static website by web designers has a lower cost than the dynamics, and this is logical because it’s simpler to build. Indicatively, prices for a static website start from € 60 to € 400 in general.
Content on dynamic pages often translates to the server that is sent over the server (Apache), through programming languages running on the server (Perl, PHP, ASP, JSP, ColdFusion, .NET etc).
Behind dynamic websites are always hidden databases where data and information on that website are stored.
And with the user’s order, the website communicates with the database, from where it will draw the content that the user requested to see. Because of databases, it’s easy to add content to dynamic websites, even the most irrelevant (on-site programming) user-visitor of the page.
Because on a static page to change or modify the content of the page it should intervene in the code. So he needs to know programming. While on a dynamic page, it just needs to know how to manage the content in the database and everything else becomes automated by the program. As we said static pages are just html documents.
Dynamic webpages are application-programs. To create a dynamic site, multiple-line programming code lines are needed. Although it is relatively difficult to build a dynamic site, it is easy to manage and renew.
Here is the big advantage over the statics. In order for a simple user-visitor to manage (change it, modify or delete it) the content of a dynamic page easily, without programming knowledge, there are CMS! CMS (Content Managment System) are easy-to-use content management mechanisms.
So, in the page management area, they can manage its content, simple members, editors, administrators, etc. Everyone has their own password and what privileges each person has and how much the content of the page can be changed is defined by the superman of the page.
Someone will choose a dynamic website if they want to have a dynamic presence on the internet. If it’s meant to refresh its content and want to have an unlimited number of different pages.
The pros is that its content can be renewed and modified by people who do not know programming, unlike statics, where this is impossible. Also on a dynamic website is very easy to manage users, administrators and members of the site.
You choose a dynamic page if you want to upload a lot of content to it (we talk about over 20 pages) and you also want to refresh its content frequently. If you want your posts and your posts to be categorized and archived.
If you want to have authors publishing new content without knowing programming. If you want to allow your visitors to become active members on your page and have their own password to link to it.
On a dynamic site there is undoubtedly much higher construction and maintenance costs, because due to the larger requirements, it requires a much larger web hosting space.
It usually loads slower than a static page and a long time is required for a dynamic page to be created by a web designer or by a developer, as, as I said before, many or more rows of code are required.
Read Also : How To Get Quickly Index Your New Post On Google
They are suitable for large businesses who want to make an online store (e-shop), where they will sell their products, hotels that the visitor wants to make online reservations of their rooms and, more generally, large news portals that are frequently refreshed their content and they want the visitor to join the page, leave comments, receive a newsletter and more generally interact with the page.
Dynamic websites have higher manufacturing costs than static and this is logical because of the complexity of their content. Indicatively, prices range from € 300, and I’ve seen up to 5000 if it’s a very complicated site, e.g. the site of a very large e-shop.
These values are indicative and constantly changing.
As I explained above, there are very many CMS mechanisms available on the market where everything becomes more automated and so creating a dynamic website becomes easier and cheaper than ever.
The most popular, larger and more popular content management system (CMS) is Joomla, which is an open source application, followed by Drupal, which is admittedly more difficult because it requires developer knowledge.
The fact that, in general, dynamic websites provide greater possibilities than static, it means that they are necessary for everyone. Before choosing a dynamic or static website, it’s important to know what you’re asking for.
The invention of dynamic websites has been a milestone in the course of the internet. With this discovery, the user from a simple reader would now be able to join a page, customize it, add his or her own information to it, and generally with the dynamic websites created the most visited today’s sites.
This discovery has had a major impact on a number of areas. Most clubs, groups have only online presence. In particular, people with disabilities can do things that they could not do otherwise. With dynamic websites, “live” the internet!
Do not forget that all online stores (e-shops) and online booking are only feasible on dynamic pages. With dynamic websites, we can now make financial transactions through the internet, see our emails and generally do things that were previously impossible on the internet.
It is a brilliant future for both dynamic and static websites (and maybe another category), with the new technologies being constantly discovered and others that are in experimental stages.
We hope these tips are useful for you. If you liked or think that they can serve someone else, share them on your social networks and we will be eternally grateful to you =)