When you think of gardening, you probably think of warm afternoons tending to your plants and sunny days appreciating your beautiful outdoor space. After all, isn’t that what gardening is all about? However, gardening isn’t a pastime that finishes when the colder months roll around. If you want your garden to continue to thrive, you will need to prepare it for autumn. Autumn brings with it frost, cooler temperatures and rain. Without a little help and preparation, very few gardens will continue to look their best.
Key Parts of Preparing Your Garden for Autumn
Though preparing your garden for autumn may initially sound as though it’s going to be hard work, it really isn’t. Even by sticking to just the basics, you’ll give your garden what it needs to withstand whatever autumn throws at it. As summer draws to a close and autumn gets nearer, here are some of the key things to do to prepare:
Remove Dead Plants and Debris - Before doing anything else, it’s vital to remove all dead plants and debris from your garden and lawn. This includes dead branches, leaves and dropped fruit. A lot of what you remove can then be used for compost.
Bring Herbs Inside - Compared to other plants, herbs are extremely sensitive. This means that they’re easily damaged by the cold temperatures and frost that autumn brings. They’ll have a much better chance of thriving if they are inside and with a lot of light.
Remove All Weeds - As well as removing dead plants and debris, you should prepare your garden for autumn by removing all weeds. Remember, the roots also need to be removed to reduce the chances of them growing back. The weeds that you remove can be used for compost.
Prune Trees and Perennials - If any of your garden is looking discoloured, it’s best to prune accordingly. This discolouration is usually found on branches, leaves and flowers. You may also want to prune away any areas that appear to be damaged or diseased, as this can spread.
Loosen Soil - Soil tends to compact during the summer, which doesn’t allow a lot of air into it. Before autumn hits fully, loosen the soil with a rake. This will aerate it to ensure the soil remains as its best throughout the colder months.
Cover the Garden in Mulch - With colder temperatures and less gardening being needed, your garden is at risk from diseases and pests. Though it’s not always possible to keep these away entirely, mulching the garden helps a lot. Mulch will seal the soil, protecting the plants.
As you can see, preparing your garden for autumn isn’t the complex and difficult task that a lot of people assume it to be. There’s no lengthy processes and no specialist care. Instead, it’s all about removing the waste and protecting it from what’s to come. By taking the time to prepare your garden for autumn, you’ll set yourself up for an easier transition into spring and summer. And if you need a helping hand along the way, dont forget that the expert gardeners at J.R Evans garden maintenance are able to offer you advice and assistance.