Every winter, residents of Delhi and adjoining areas along with the 'national' media fret and fume over the quality of the national capital region's air. The usual hunt for scapegoats and suspects ensues.
Activists blame SUV owners, the government blames farmers for burning residual stubble from the previous season, and citizens blame everybody except themselves. Then, all of a sudden, the sky clears, the wind picks up again, and normalcy is restored. Year after year, this has been the cycle.
But this year, air pollution in the NCR was particularly bad because the usual October-November post Diwali breeze went missing. The capital was choked, forcing schools to close down. On a couple of days, the air pollution level was recorded at nearly 10 times the normal level.
While spikes in Delhi's pollution levels regularly hit headlines, there is no doubt that urban pollution is a global problem. According to a World Health Organisation (WHO) study , more than 80% of the global urban population breathes poor quality air. The problem is particularly acute in middle and low-income countries, where 95% of residents in cities breathe dirty air.
The reflex response to urban pollution is to restrict or ration travel and economic activity. However, this often fails because business and commerce cannot be curtailed. Overcoming urban eco toxicity requires a combination of technology , public restraint, better implementation of laws and urban restructuring.
Where necessary , case-specific solutions must be tested. For example, the solution to stubble burning is not to pray for higher wind speeds, but to educate farmers about better alternatives like retaining the crop residue and not tilling the land after the harvest. This practice retains soil nutrients, and the challenge of weed, insect and disease control can be overcome with more effective distribution of pesticides and herbicides.
The reflex response to urban pollution is to restrict or ration travel and economic activity. Overcoming urban eco toxicity requires a combination of technology, public restraint, better implementation of laws and urban restructuring.
While cities cannot always prevent the foul air that floats in from elsewhere, they can certainly tackle many locally produced forms of pollution effectively . This is usually a combination of industrial activity , construction, cleaning practices, power generation and travel. None of these activities can be banned effectively. But cities can opt to change the way they do things.
Transportation is the most visible source of urban pollution and the growing car fleet gets most of the public and policy attention. Typically , governments offer political solutions to car crowding by banning some kind of cars and restricting some others.
It does not work because of the sub situation effect. Demands are made to replace cars with public transportation. That, too, does not work because the public transport system is saturated. Increasing the carrying capacity of metro trains is constrained by the track length, while increasing buses on choked roads will make them move even more slowly .
Against this backdrop, here are some suggested solutions.
First, India needs to move faster in adopting more efficient standards of automotive fuels and engines. It must also offer incentives for the production and use of electric micro cars.
Even the existing compressed natural gas technology and infrastructure require a major upgrade. Currently , fuel-carrying capacity is limited, and refuelling is a huge challenge.
Investments in more efficient vehicles would obviously mean larger R&D costs and a shorter investment recovery period -resulting in higher costs for consumers. Yet, over time, such costs can easily be counter-weighed by the resulting health and environmental benefits.
Second, city stakeholders need to make much better use of predictive and guiding technologies. With most FILE PHOTO citizens now carrying smartphones, each city can work with developers to deploy apps that help choose the best routes and the most efficient modes of transport.
Third, electricity supply needs streamlining. Where feasible, urban lighting requirements can be met with solar power. Genset makers can offer more efficient and cleaner engines. Power plants located on the urban periphery also need to switch entirely to gas as a fuel source.
Finally , redesigning cities holds the key. Suburbanisation may have helped cities claim more land for business by pushing out housing.But it has also aggravated and stretched urban pollution.
To reduce urban travel and construction, mixed use of urban spaces can allow people to stay within cycling distances from their workplaces.Cities could have multiple business districts surrounded by residences but with enforceable restrictions on the expansion of commercial activities into the residential areas. Commercial spillover is difficult to prevent. But it can certainly be mitigated by making it expensive.
Intracity highways are also critical to enable fast and clean travel. The bulk of the vehicular pollution is produced by slow-moving traffic. A chunk of Delhi's vehicular traffic problems relating to trucks, for example, would be addressed once the Kundli-Manesar-Palwal (KMP) Expressway is fully operational.
Urban pollution is a reality that all growing cities have to wake up to.Countering this challenge requires foresight, common sense and, most important, pressure from citizenry to create political will.
The writer is president, All India Management Association