Here are the five least visited national parks, excluding those in Alaska:

1. American Samoa: The National Park of American Samoa is located in a remote area 2,600 miles southwest of Hawaii and received only 8,495 visitors in 2021. Despite its low popularity, the park offers stunning views of the sea and coral sand beaches, as well as an abundance of aquatic life and a vast trail system for hiking. Visitors can also learn about the Samoan culture through the park's visitor center and homestay program.
2. Washington: North Cascades National Park is located three hours from Seattle and offers visitors a range of activities year-round. It provides the most glacier views in the U.S. outside of Alaska and has hundreds of miles of hiking trails for both beginner and advanced hikers. The park offers river rafting trips, horseback riding, backpacking, and climbing.
3. Michigan: Isle Royale National Park is an isolated island in Lake Superior and can be reached only by boat or seaplane. The park has forests, rugged shorelines, backcountry trails, and around 400 satellite islands. The park offers scuba diving opportunities to explore sunken shipwrecks in the cold waters of Lake Superior.
4. Florida: Dry Tortugas National Park is a 100-square-mile park located 70 miles out from Key West, Florida, comprising seven small islands, including Garden Key, which houses Fort Jefferson. The park features the Florida Keys reef system, the third largest in the world, and has abundant marine life and shipwrecks to explore. Visitors can camp on Garden Key, explore the fort and enjoy stargazing at night.
5. Nevada: Great Basin National Park is a diverse park with a variety of flora and fauna due to the drastic elevation changes, from 5,000 to 13,000 feet. Visitors can find deserts, mountains, fossils, springs, caves, and glaciers. The park is also known for stargazing and offers opportunities to see 73 mammal species, 200 bird species, 11 species of conifer trees, and 800 plant species, including alpine wildflowers in the spring. Additionally, the park has the oldest trees in the world and ancient caves.
