Yoga is a traditional practice well known for its health and de-stressing benefits. It has become a common exercise for all types of people of every age group. If you have never attempted yoga, or think it is not right for you based on the images or videos you have seen, think again. There are many yoga practices you can take part in, even if you are a beginner or feel that you are not flexible enough to take on this exercise. 

Here are a few benefits of yoga for you to consider if you are thinking about taking on this healthy exercise. 

1. Improved Range of Motion 

If you have issues with stiff joints and moving certain areas of your body can be troublesome, yoga can help. Popular yoga poses, such as the downward-facing dog, will require you to exhibit a good range of motion in your shoulders, hips, and ankles. These are areas where many people tend to experience pain or stiffness. Doing this exercise several times a week can help you to improve your range of motion in these areas. 

2. Improved Balance

There are several yoga poses that are designed to help you create a strong and stable base for your body and enhance your balance. If you are one of the many individuals who struggle with proper balance, you should give yoga a try. Several poses focus on helping you maintain an active core while you stabilize your body to achieve different movements. It can even help you focus more on grounding and stabilization which will further enhance your balance over time. 

3. Enhanced Posture 
One of the primary focuses of yoga is doing every movement with the correct posture. To achieve this goal, you will need to focus your attention on noticing if you are slouching while posing. Most yoga poses emphasize aligning your bones correctly to achieve each pose. Therefore, as you improve your core strength, you will naturally start to improve your posture as well. 

4. Improves Muscle Tone and Strength 

You can enhance your muscle tone and strength by holding weight-bearing poses that will improve your muscle tone and increase your strength as well over time. Doing so will help you move throughout everyday life with greater ease while also preventing potential injuries.
