Today marks a new day in not only American history but world history. We are no longer alone in the universe. Life outside our planet exists and aliens have landed in Nevada.

NASA scientists had been tracking a strange non-terrestrial object for days leading up to today's big event. The object appeared from behind the dark side of the moon and was originally believed to be an untracked asteroid or comet. However, the object's path and speed started changing until today it entered Earth's atmosphere. Instead of burning up like a hunk of space rock, it was able to penetrate the atmosphere and survive.

The military scrambled jets and the first sighting described the flying object as being triangular with a matte black exterior and no visible ports of entry or egress. It was a tense few moments as first contact was made but the craft was allowed to continue unhindered as it showed no hostile intent.

Passing over Washington, D.C., Chicago, and other major metropolitan areas the craft finally touched down in Nevada. Many top officials believed they were heading to the notorious Area 51. But that proved not to be the case as the UFO instead landed directly on the Vegas strip. Roughly the size of a 747 jet, all traffic stopped immediately.

Two figures exited the craft distinctly humanoid in shape. The taller of the two raised its right hand and made a gesture splitting their fingers into a V-shape and spoke in perfect English, "Live long and prosper." It was at this point that the shorter alien slapped the taller alien on the shoulder and let out an audible sigh.

They were Trekkies. The aliens were Star Trek fans.

As people approached the aliens they noticed they were clad in the uniforms of the original Star Trek officers, one in yellow for command and one in blue for science specialty. This was no alien invasion, this was a vacation.

The aliens were allowed to proceed as journalists and military personnel alike shadowed them. They went directly to the casino already possessing American dollars and proceeded to lose it all at the dice table in less than an hour. Following this display, they went to the buffet and ate three plates of crab legs. These visitors to Vegas were not too different from us. We are not alone.
