On the porch, we found a bottle of wine propping up a handwritten welcome note on a side table next to the entrance. "So glad to have you," our host had written, "Make yourselves at home."

"Wow," I sighed as the front door fell closed behind me. "I have to admit, I was expecting something smaller based on what we paid for the reservation." 

"I know!" Garrett agreed, charging through the foyer like an excited child in a grand hotel. "The photos really didn't do the place justice, huh?" 

I chased him through the living room, library, and kitchen before we found ourselves on a patio with a million-dollar view. There were too many rooms to explore straight away, and the great outdoors was calling to us. After being cooped up through a murky New England winter, the warm tickle of a salty spring breeze was positively enticing. We uncorked the bottle our host had left us, poured out two glasses, and headed outside to sit by the fire pit where we could watch the sun setting over rolling green hills. 

Half an hour later, when my glass was drained, I climbed to my feet and reached out to muss Garrett’s hair affectionately. “I'm heading in, you want another gla--oh my God!” 

“What?” he leaped to his feet, following my gaze. “What is it?” 

I clapped a palm to my collarbone, pointing towards the house with the other hand. “I--I saw someone in the house.”

“What?” his tone was incredulous. “Seriously?” 

I nodded. “A face in the window, right there.” 

Garrett clenched his jaw, then turned to the firepit, reaching for the axe that leaned against a stack of fresh firewood. He raised it over his shoulder and I caught his arm just as he started charging towards the house. 

“Don’t!” I hissed, “It might be our host.” 

“Or it might be a criminal!” he snapped back impatiently. 

“I don’t think so. It looked like… like a little old lady.” 

He furrowed his brow. “Are you sure?” 

I shrugged. “I only caught a glimpse, but… I think I saw white hair and big dark eyes and--and maybe a bathrobe collar.” 

“You think? Well, let’s go find out.” Garrett grabbed the cast iron fire poker and thrust it toward me. “Better safe than sorry, right?”
