On a bright sunny day in June, all the neighborhood children gathered at little Sammy's house to celebrate his 7th birthday.  All the children wore funny cone-shaped birthday hats.  They couldn't wait to play pin-the-tail on the donkey.  The birthday cake was shaped like an airplane because Sammy always dreamt of becoming a pilot.  Fifty helium balloons decorated the backyard and danced in the warm breeze. After singing "Happy Birthday" and eating a big slice of chocolate cake, Sammy suddenly got an idea.  

"What if I can grab a hold of all of the balloons at once?" he thought to himself.

He quickly loosed the balloons and began to hold them all together in the little fist he made with his right hand.  When he got to the 50th balloon, something strange started to happen.  His feet started to lift off of the ground!  The children gathered around in amazement.  He laughed as he rose...higher...and higher...and higher!  In a flash, Sammy was above the rooftops and the treetops of his neighborhood, and was drifting away from his own house with the wind.  

"This is the best birthday ever!" thought Sammy as he floated through the air.

The birds squawked in surprise as they flew past him and wondered how a little boy learned to fly! The children below squealed in delight as they saw Sammy rise higher and higher into the air.  

Only the adults seemed worried, as they yelled from below, "Sammy, start letting go of some balloons, right this instant!"

Seeing their concern, Sammy let go of one balloon.  He began to sink a little lower to the ground, but could still see the birds nesting in the trees.  A new idea came to him.  

"What if I float over to my neighbor's pool and make a splash landing?" thought Sammy. 

 He let go of another 5 balloons as he came closer to the large pool in the neighbor's yard.  Before he knew it, he was hovering just above the cool blue waters and decided to release the rest of his balloons.

"SPLASH!" Sammy had fallen directly into the pool!

The children came running over and laughing, dove in after him.  Sammy swam over to them as they cheered him for his aerial adventure.

"I'll never forget the birthday I learned to fly!" exclaimed Sammy with glee.
