Here are some pros for living in Medellin as an ex-pat. 

1. Affordable. 
Medellin is a very affordable place to live compared to other big cities worldwide. An apartment in Medellin will cost you about $600-$700. A meal out in Medellin will likely set you back around $3-$5 for a main, soup, and juice. A trip to the cinema will cost as little as $6 per person. 

2. Great weather. 
The City is called the City of eternal spring. If you like nice weather, not too cold, Medellin is perfect as it's spring-like weather all year round. The city doesn't have high humidity; however, you can expect some rain during the rainy season. It will mostly rain for short showers in the afternoon. 

3. Learning Spanish.
If you want to learn another language, then Medellin is perfect for learning Spanish. Lessons in the city are usually well-priced, and you can expect a knowledgeable teacher to help you along. Spanish is the local language also, so you can get out and about to practice whenever you feel like it. 

4. Friendly local community. 
The local people in Medellin are said to be very friendly and welcoming of tourists and ex-pats. Don't be surprised to hear a Buenos Dias from a passerby as you meander through the streets of Medellin. Be sure to be polite and courteous back using any Spanish you pick up. 

5. Large ex-pat community. 
While the local community is lovely and welcoming, sometimes it can be nice to be surrounded by compatriots and like-minded people. Medellin has a reasonably large ex-pat community with whom you can meet and tour the city together. Making friends in the town should be very easy for ex-pats. 

6. International food options. 
The food in Medellin is delicious, and there are many local options to try. However, if you are searching for some home-country cooking, you can rest easy knowing Medellin has a wide variety of foods from around the globe. This is in large part thanks to the ex-pat community. 

7. Fast and reliable WI-FI.
If you are moving to Medellin and plan on working online or simply streaming movies, you will wonder about the WI-FI. In Medellin, internet connections are primarily reliable and fast. This will allow you to get on with your work before exploring. You can utilize the internet at one of the many cafes in the city and find strong WI-FI.
