In a large field full of dry grass, there were two rats. One rat, named Larry, was exceptionally clumsy. Larry fell out of bed every morning, but that did not stop him from doing what he had to do. Larry lived with his friend, Peter. Peter often had trouble paying attention to one thing for very long, but he was extremely fast. Peter could race around the field and bring food back into his hole in minutes. 

One day while Larry and Peter were out in the field looking for food, Peter got frustrated at Larry for being too slow, and occasionally dropping some food behind him as they moved through the field. Larry was offended and told Peter that he could easily make it across the field faster than him. Peter accepted his challenge and the two rats discussed a starting and endpoint for the race. 

Once ready, they lined up at the starting line and got Mr. Raven to say "3, 2, 1, GO!" Peter left Larry in a cloud of dust as he sprinted forward. Larry tripped and fell, but he got right back up and kept going. After a while, Peter looked behind him and didn't see Larry, so he kept going until he came across a pond. It was exceedingly hot outside and Peter knew he had time for a swim, so he got in and splashed around for a while. 

Meanwhile, Larry was still steadily racing toward the finish line. He had quietly passed Peter and kept moving forward. Larry looked behind him and saw Peter sprinting behind him. This startled him, and he lost his footing once again. Peter surpassed him and made sure that he couldn't see him anymore. Peter then came across his favorite snack, a fresh strawberry. He could not resist as he went off the path and indulged in the fruit. 

Larry had once again caught up to Peter, and the finish line was in sight. He tripped over a rock but bounced straight back up and continued. He finished the race and waited for Peter. Peter came into sight, walking with two strawberries in his hand. With a smile on his face, he handed one over to Larry and said, "You win." They both sat down and ate strawberries for the remainder of the afternoon.
