What is scoliosis? Subtle curves in the spine are normal. When different curves are present, like side-to-side curves which also twist the spine, this is the condition called Scoliosis.

What are the types of adult scoliosis? Adult Idiopathic Scoliosis and Adult Degenerative Scoliosis. The latter develops later in life and the first one usually early in life. These are two different syndromes of scoliosis.

Where are the locations of scoliosis? Scoliosis occurs in several locations. Those include the thoracic, upper spine, lumbar, and lower spine. They appear as shoulder asymmetry, a rib hump, or a prominence where the lower back is located in front of the curvature. 

What causes curves to worsen in older patients? Disc degeneration and/or sagittal imbalance, arthritis which affects joints of the spine. This leads to the formation of bone spurs.

What are the symptoms of adult idiopathic scoliosis? Adults have more symptoms than teens because of the degeneration of discs and joints. Because of this, there is a narrowing of the openings for the spinal sac and nerves which is called spinal stenosis. To alleviate this some patients may lean forward in an attempt to open up space for their nerves. Or they man lean forward because of loss of the natural curve in their lumbar spine which is the lower back. As a result of this imbalance, patients compensate by bending their hips and knees trying to hold an upright position. These symptoms can lead to gradual loss of function. Lower back pain. Lower back stiffness. Numbness, shooting pain in the legs, and or cramping. As a result of fatigue, because of the strain on the muscles of the lower back and legs.

What sort of imaging evaluation is used? A standing X-ray looks at the entire spine from the back and side. This allows the physician to determine the curve magnitude using the Cobb method. Another type of imaging is an MRI (magnetic resonance imaging). This is rarely used unless the patient has more than minimal symptoms of idiopathic scoliosis. If the patient is having leg pain or subtle neurologic abnormalities noticed during physical examination or if the patient is complaining of significant pain or has an atypical curve pattern.

What are the nonoperative treatment options? Periodic observation, over-the-counter pain relievers, exercises to strengthen the core muscles of the back and abdomen as well as stretching for flexibility. Braces are another option but only for short-term pain relief. Long-term usage is not recommended because it weakens the muscles. Epidurals or nerve block injections for temporary relief of leg pain and other symptoms of pinched nerves or arthritis. Narcotics are addicting and should only be used after seeing a scoliosis surgeon to pinpoint the possible causes of the pain.

What are the operative treatments? Operative treatments are only recommended for patients who have not seen improvement using nonoperative treatments or have disabling back or leg pain and spinal imbalance. Another reason would be a greatly reduced overall quality of life. Here are the procedures, Microdecompression, Surgical Stabilization, Fusion, Osteotomy, and Vertebral column resection.
