In Aethoria, the rich and the poor are split up into different hierarchical levels. The rich have the utmost Top which holds all the useful resources to have a pleasant life, while the Bottom consists of garbage scattered around the streets with hardly any light reaching the surface.

A girl named Linda lived at the Bottom, in a place called Zoid which is the lowest rank you could live in. Lynda lived every day without knowing what her next meal was going to be. She lived with her parents who were drug addicts. In a world where instant pleasures had plagued the streets, Linda saw their parents sleeping on the couch with needles in their arms. She thought to herself that she would never end up like them. 

For a few years, Linda has been experimenting with creating dreams, which were only legal to the rich and people with status. So Linda was committing a crime which was punishable by death. However, this did not stop her from wanting to escape the reality of where she lived. After spending several hours a day, skipping meals and sleep, she finally created a dream which was sought after by many wealthy clients. However Linda could not go to the Top and just sell the dream, she had to find a way around and sell it on the black market. This black market had lower prices which were a steal compared to the prices on the Top. So Linda decided to head out to the shop which hosted the black market a level above her.

Once she got to the shop, she was overwhelmed by the smell in the air. It smelt like burnt rubber mixed with mold. But Linda trodded on with the mission in mind. The shopkeeper's name was Dan. A simple name and a popular one at the Bottom that would not alert the elite authorities. Linda whispered that she had created a dream and a legendary one at that. Dan's jaw dropped and he was amazed that a little girl like Linda created a dream. He wondered about how much pain she had to go through to create such a dream. Linda was able to sell the dream to Dan. She was happy that she was able to finally leave the Bottom and venture out to live a peaceful and happy life at the Top.
