Tom loved his job. It combined his two favorite things: plants and space. As the solo astronaut on the space station, he had to keep the station in good repair as well as tend to his plants. It was hard, lonely work, but he loved it.

Today, he needed to go check on his lettuces. They had just started to come up yesterday, and he was hopeful that they would look healthy today. As he made his way down the corridor from his quarters to the lab, he ripped open a nutrition bar and took a bite. It was a bit stale and too chewy, but that was to be expected from a bar that had been packaged and sent up into space with him many months ago. He swallowed his bite without really paying attention to the taste. He’d adjusted to boring repetitive meals a long time ago. 

At the lab, he slid the door open and was greeted with the aroma of loamy soil and the light, earthy scent of things just starting to grow. His eyes lit up as he drew closer to the lettuce. The leaves were delicate and bright green. He grinned in delight and almost looked around to share his excitement with someone. It was a hard habit to break, even after months alone on the space station. He was used to working in a lab with lots of other scientists, so not being able to tell someone else about his success was a letdown each time. He sighed, determinedly pushing away the feelings of loneliness. He grabbed his tablet and began writing his report, measuring and photographing the progress of his lettuce. Even if it was hard being all alone sometimes, it was exciting to be making so much progress growing different plants in space.

As he left the lab, he went slowly through the rest of the space station, checking gauges and wiring. If something broke down, he was the only one to fix it. He had to make sure everything was always in good order. 

By the time he got back to his quarters, he was exhausted. He frowned, looking at his door. He was sure he hadn’t closed it; he always liked to leave it open to let air circulate. As he contemplated his closed door, a solid THUMP sounded on the other side of it.
