GEOLOGISTS’ CORE OBSERVATIONS
After logging MIL-002, the longest and best hole available in 2010, Milena Resources geologist, Steve Johnson, reports core starts in reddish phyllic/chalky breccia material. It penetrates many zones of argillic/propylitic and phyllic alteration and bottoms in sericite propylite alteration. Mineralization consists of pyritic copper-bearing quartz veinlets and pebble filled veins above 100 meters but distinct sulfide filled “A-veins” appear below, one or two to a core box. In the upper 50-75 meters there is a consistent dissemination of covellite-enargite-chalcocite in non-magnetic granite/diorite hydrothermal breccia that extends throughout. Teck logs and reports are reconnaissance in nature and do not mention copper sulfosalts such as covellite or enargite (logs by Teck and Milena Resources are available). Veins show as quartz-pyrite fracture fills with rounded quartz filled pebble dikes at 88m hosting pyrite rimmed silica-pyrite clasts bearing 0.36% Cu (see Fig 4 inset). Wall rock shows alternations of gypsiferous argillite-to-sericite alteration throughout according to PIMA work. Bottom hole assemblages including anydrite-bearing matrix material with small gray apatite like crystals in propylitic greenish calcite/dolomite breccia fill with slightly purplish gray quartz fragments. Sulfides and sulfosalt copper minerals appear in what Teck reports hydrothermal magmatic breccia outcropping over large areas. The coarse diked breccia is cemented by “dirty quartz” according to Milena and mineralization is ubiquitous. Photographs at 20-30x and core exam by Milena shows material with chalcopyrite-covellite clasts in sulfide-cemented quartz and sericitic tonalitic dike rock, with chalcopyrite fragments with dusky euhedral cored crystals (fig 7).
Fragments of such material appears as clasts in outcrops of chalcanthite pyrite chalcopyrite and possibly chalcocite bearing breccia (fig 8). Distinctive cored crystals and or dark quartz-like rimmed aggregates are apparent in both, in core and fragment at tip of pencil).
All indicate deep magmatic reaction products that support Teck’s geologists who felt confident in continued work. Core photos show rounded pebbles of chalcopyrite with possible covellite in quartz-rich, chalcopyrite-bearing, sulfide-cemented vein material Fig 9-11). Milena Resources core review identifed a veined and mineralized felsic dike near the bottom of MIL 002 indicating both significant fractionation in the magmatic system at depth which would have sourced the fluids for any porphyry-style mineralization.
PIMA work on core shows extensive argillic to sericite zones (Fig 12 a,b,c).
Assay work and PIMA results are available and posted on the Milena website.