The Goddess Saraswati is worshiped in many countries the world over. In China she’s Biancaitian, in Thailand she’s Surasawadee, in Japan they call her Thurathadi, and so on. As the Goddess of Knowledge, the ‘Puja’ or worship ceremony has a broad impact on young minds and students. And although her name and appearance may change depending on your location, the reason why she’s worshiped remains unchanged.
Saraswati is depicted as a beautiful woman in a white sari, seated on a white lotus, which depicts absolute truth. She holds a ‘Veena’ – a traditional Indian musical instrument, which symbolizes her affinity to the arts and technology.
Devi Saraswati is mostly worshiped by students across the country. She’s quite popular in eastern India in states like Orissa, Bihar and West Bengal. By using decorative crafts with colourful papers, Rangolis and Alponas (the art of painting chalk paste onto the ground) to decorate the place where the idol is kept, students even participate in cultural programs, drawing exhibitions and charitable work.
The invitation cards to Saraswati Puja festivities are also noteworthy as each of them are most likely a work of art themselves. While some show folk culture, others are a form of fine art. The unique elements give the Puja a different identity in various parts of the country.
Seeing as she is the ‘Goddess of Knowledge’, the practice of keeping an ink pot near the Puja is a compulsory element. Usually, an earthen inkpot is placed before the Goddess, filled with milk instead of ink and a pen or ‘Khager Kalam’ (a reed) is used to write the ‘pronam mantra’ (worship words) with the milk, on wood apple leaves. These are necessary tasks to be conducted in order to please the Goddess.
To celebrate the day, girls are seen in yellow saris, that symbolises the mustard flower and Marigold that blooms in abundance in spring time. With an essence of love, energy for creativity, and an atmosphere of festivity, the Saraswati Puja is a fantastic day to be enjoyed by all young boys and girls.
Like the Goddess Saraswati, Kokuyo Camlin places great emphasis on nurturing the arts and knowledge in young minds and is proud to join in the celebration of the auspicious day.