There are industry standards for the maximum allowable distortion, which is known as tolerance, for each type of alloy used in standard and custom aluminum extrusion. Tolerances are crucial to the mechanical engineering manufacturing process as they will not only determine how well a part will fit in final production, but also as how stable the final product will be. Tolerances can refer to mechanical fit, fit up (i.e. proper alignment of holes for assembly), deviations from straightness or accuracy of assembly. It is the most important consideration for decision makers in their custom metal fabrication. Below, we take a look at the importance of tolerance in custom metal fabrication.
Why Is Tolerance Important in Custom Metal Fabrication?
- Risk Management
Checking the correct tolerances is some of risk management’s most important duties. A well-trained risk management team will not only mitigate the risk associated with poor tolerances but will also dramatically reduce the number of faulty parts in a production cycle. Risk management gives metal fabricators the ability to reflect on their processes and assess the way in which improvements can be made. Risk management can run through parts faster and be more effective if tolerances are optimized.
- Choosing the Right Fit for Optimization
We work with nominal thicknesses in custom fabrication, so it is important to know the thickness tolerance on the material you choose in order to know if the final product will be suitable for your application. It is important when working with sheet metal that you factor in finish tolerances. If you add a finish such as powder-coat, you add more thickness, and this should be factored into your design at the beginning.
The accuracy of the machinery that processes raw materials contributes to what is practical in terms of precision in sheet metal. Manufacturing tolerances are limited by the physics of rolling hot metal to create sheet stock. Tolerances for precision work such as laser cutting, machining and forming will have little room for error. More precision requires greater consistency in the tooling setup for blanking and bending of the sheet metal parts. It is important to use a correct guideline with regard to tolerances to ensure the correct precision is determined.
Rider Tool and Manufacturing Co. for Your Custom Metal Fabrication
We started out in the steel industry, so it should come as no surprise to learn that our expertise and experience enable us to fabricate alloy steel, carbon steel and even aluminum structures based on our clients’ specifications. Furthermore, while we are not interested in providing our services as a metal fabricator when it comes to brass and bronze, we are more than capable of machining said materials into the desired size and shape so as to make the metal fabrication process that much simpler for interested individuals.