About ShahjahanpurLocated in Uttar Pradesh, Shahjahanpur is the birthplace of brave freedom fighters like Ram Prasad Bismil, Shaheed Ashfaqullah Khan and many more and also the home to the world’s third tallest Hanuman statue. Named after Shah Jahan, the city was founded by two brothers Bahadur Khan and Diler Khan, who were both highly respected during Shah Jahan’s regime. The city has a rich culture, heritage and history. Apart from the various temples and mosques around the city, it is also known for its posh cantonment area with its parks and grounds. The city is also famous for its carpet and jewelry industry.
Brief History of Shahjahanpur
The city of Shahjahanpur played a big role in the Indian Rebellion of 1857. It was the place where Nana Saheb Peshwa, Maulvi Ahmed Ullah Shah from Faizabad, Shehzade from Delhi and Bareily’s Khan Bahadur Khan united to plan the freedom struggle. Unfortunately, Ahmed Ullah Shah was killed under the order of the British Government. Almost 70 years later, Ram Prasad Bismil and Ashfaqullah Khan put Shahjahanpur back on the map after their major contribution in India’s Independence struggle. After the Kakori robbery in 1925, freedom fighters like Banwari Lal, Premkishan Khanna, Roshan Singh, Jagdish were arrested; all belonged to Shahjahanpur.
Geography of Shahjahanpur
With a geographical area of 4575 sq. kilometers, Shahjahanpur sits an elevation of 472 feet above sea level. Districts like Bareilly, Lakhimpur-Kheri, Hardoi, Pilbhit and Farukhabad surround it. Gomti, Ramganga and Garrah are the three main rivers and Shahjahanpur is situated at the junction of Khannaut and Garrah rivers. The district is mainly agricultural and the cash crops that grow here are wheat, millet, gram and potatoes.
Climate of Shahjahanpur
Shahjahanpur has a tropical climate with hot summers when the temperature can be anywhere from 22 to 40 degrees Celsius. Monsoon here starts in July and lasts till October when the city gets soaked in monsoon rains. The best time to visit Shahjahanpur, is during the winter season, when the temperatures are between 11 to 23 degrees Celsius and visitors can make the most out of their trips. Winter months start in October and end in March.
Due to the mix of populations, Shahjahanpur has a rich amalgamation of culture. There are many temples and mosques scattered in and around the city, which give an insight into the history and heritage of this city. Along with religious places, there are parks and other monuments that can be visited around the city. The tiger reserve in the neighboring city of Pilibhit also attracts visitors.
Major Tourist Attractions in Shahjahanpur
The 100-feet tall statue of Lord Hanuman on the banks of Khanaut River draws a lot of tourist attention. With a golden mace in hand, and an image of Ram-Sita at heart, it is a heavenly feeling to look at this orange colored statue of Hanuman towering overhead. The statue is located at Visrat Ghat, which is only a 4-5 km drive from Shahjahanpur Railway Station and Bus Stand.
Other tourist places in Shahjahanpur include:
- Shaheed Udyan Park
- Ashfaqullah Khan’s Mausoleum & Ancestral Home
- Ahmadullah Shah’s Mausoleum
- Ram Prasad Bismil Smarak
- Mumuksh Ashram
Shopping in Shahjahanpur
Shahjahanpur is well known for its carpets, especially knotted carpets. The designs are rich in color and each carpet is unique. Other than carpets, Shahjahanpur has a jewelry or Sarrafa market which visitors can take advantage of. There are also many bazars that can be visited for souvenirs etc.
Festivals in Shahjahanpur
There is no match for the way Indian festivals are celebrated in the North. Similarly, in Shahjahanpur, the major festivals like Holi, Eid-ul-Fitr, Diwali, Makar Sankrat, Lodi, Christmas, Eid, Dussehra, and Muharram are all celebrated with pomp and splendor.
Food in Shahjahanpur
Other than the local attractions of a city, the taste of the food in that city is something that lingers on one’s tongue. From mouth-watering street food to vegetarian restaurants, to high-end resto lounges. The city offers a variety of cuisines to match your taste buds.
How to Reach Shahjahanpur
Shahjahanpur is well connected to New Delhi and Lucknow, the capital of Uttar Pradesh on National Highway 24. It is 336 kilometers from Delhi and approximately 175 kilometers from Lucknow. If traveling by train, almost all the trains pass through the city and Shahjahanpur Railway Station is an important station between Bareilly and Lucknow. The nearest airport from Shahjahanpur is the Chaudhary Charan Singh International Airport in Amausi, Lucknow, which is approximately 178 kilometers away.
Quick Facts about Shahjahanpur
Government in Shahjahanpur
Total: 4575 km2 (1766 sq miles)
Elevation: 143 m (472 feet)
Population as per the 2011 Census
Metropolis: 346, 103
Density: 660/km2(1,700/sq mi)
Timezone – IST
Postal Index Number - 242 0xx
Shahjahanpur STD Code - 5842
Official Languages - Hindi & Urdu
- SHARE THIS
- TWEET THIS
- SHARE THIS
- LOVE THIS 1