Language forms a foundation for establishing strong relations with countries and its people. Germany’s strong economy, strategic location in Europe and the strong German industry presence in the Asia Pacific region make German a highly relevant language offering in Australia.
The ability to speak German can enhance your travel and cultural experiences, study opportunities and career development. On a broader perspective languages play an important role in our national security and economic strength. In a globalised world there is an increasing demand for multilingual representatives with strong cross-cultural understanding and advanced communication skills in order to build and maintain beneficial cross-cultural relationships that ensure meaning and intent are not lost in translation.
- For Business
- For Cultural Understanding and Travel
- For Schools
In Australia we live in a part of the world alongside one third of the entire world population; China, India and the remaining Asian countries. German industry and business have a very strong presence in this Asia-pacific region. The ability to speak German provides a competitive advantage both for career development and business partnerships.
For Cultural Understanding and Travel
German is the most widely spoken language in Europe. Spoken not only in Germany but is also the official language of Austria, Switzerland, Luxembourg and Liechtenstein. German is also widely spoken as the native language of a significant proportion of the population in other European countries especially within Eastern Europe. Learning the language means getting to know the culture and its people.
Schools play a vital role in preparing students to become global citizens by providing access to language programs and cultural learning.
There is a growing importance for multilingualism in an increasingly globalised world. Learning a second language broadens our perspective and outlook to other cultures. For a student having knowledge of the German language can lead to opportunities for studies abroad, career and cultural enhancement.
Germany’s strong economy, strategic location in Europe and the strong German industry presence in the Asia Pacific region making German a highly relevant language offering for Australian Schools.
Knowledge of the German language opens doors for students providing opportunities for student exchange, studies abroad, career development and cultural enhancement.
Brochure for download: German for West Australian Schools: An Information Booklet for School Principals
Language Learning Compliments and Strengthens Literacy
Learning another language uniquely develops the student’s cognitive skills resulting in a strong link between improved literacy and second language learning. Through the learning of a second language focus is drawn towards the mechanics of language: grammar, sentence structure and vocabulary. This enhances the student’s awareness of language and how it can be structured and formed. As a result there is evidence that learning a second language can improve a student’s literacy in their first language.
For more detailed information see:
Strong link the German language shares with Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) subject areas
Germany is a world leader in innovation with leading universities, research institutes and strong engineering, IT and manufacturing industries. Germany is Europe’s largest economy and one of the world’s most technologically powerful economies.
The German language is one of the most commonly used scientific languages with Germany being a significant contributor to research and development.
Students who learn the German language gain access to academic knowledge, culture, discourse and ideas in German speaking countries and central Europe.
Germany offers grants and scholarships for STEM related studies through the German Academic Exchange Program (DAAD). The DAAD offers a RISE scholarship for undergraduate German students with academic training in biology, chemistry, physics, earth sciences, engineering, or a closely related field. The scholarship provides the opportunity for students to work with research groups, research institutions and doctoral students in Germany.
Content and Language Integrated Learning or CLIL in German
Germany’s strong record of research, development and innovation in the fields of Science, Technology, Engineering and Maths (STEM) provides a great opportunity for German language and STEM subject content to be learnt together (Content and Language Integrated Learning or CLIL). This educational approach increases the student’s motivation and confidence in both the language and subject.
CLIL has the advantage of addressing the ‘crowded curriculum’ issue as it enables one or more curriculum areas to be taught in and through an additional language, and thereby extends the time on task for language learning..
For more information on CLIL in German see the attached flyer “CLIL STEM In German” by the Goethe Institute Australia:
Goethe-Institut Brochure – CLIL STEM in German
German Language Curriculum developed for Western Australian Schools
The School Curriculum and Standards Authority has developed a P-10 German Languages syllabus as part of the Western Australian Curriculum and Assessment Outline as well as German: Second Language and German: Background Languages courses for Year 11 and 12.
These documents are accessible via the School Curriculum and Standards Authority website
Opportunities for Scholarships to study in Germany on a Student Exchange
Scholarships for Australian-German Student Exchange (SAGSE) awards scholarships to Australian students each year to travel to Germany for 10 weeks during their summer vacation. The exchange program aims to give students an insight into a foreign culture and build friendships between the youth of these two countries. The SAGSE website has further information.
Opportunities for Academic Exchange
The German Academic Exchange Service (DAAD) is an organisation which provides grants and scholarships for study and research in Germany to students, researchers and academics affiliated with Australian universities and other institutions.
For further information about DADD study programmes and scholarships see the following links:
English speakers have an advantage when learning German
There are many similarities in the grammar and vocabulary of English and German, this is because modern English and modern German both evolved from the Germanic language. This means that English speakers have an advantage in learning German. Comparatively it has been demonstrated that students can make greater progress in a shorter timeframe.
For further information and German language promotional material for school leaders, parents and teachers see:
German Language Round Table Brochure: German for West Australian Schools – An Information Booklet for School Principals
Brochure: Languages Open the Door to a Bigger World
Resources and Support
Lead Language School German
The German language is taught on a highly professional level and supported by a network of language advisors, best practice teacher training (both in Australia and Germany), support materials and resources, and state and national conferences. The Department of Education has introduced Lead Languages Schools to assist with the provision of face-to-face and on-line language lessons. The Lead Language School for German is Rossmoyne Senior High School.
For more information see:
German Language Round Table
Teachers Association German Western Australia (TAGWA)
The Central Agency of Schools Abroad
Within the Federal Office of administration the Central Agency of Schools Abroad (ZfA) provides assistance and support to German Schools abroad and other educational institutions.
For more information see:
Information Brochure about the Central Agency of Schools Abroad
Information Brochure: ZfA in Brief
Information Brochure: Deutsches Sprachdiplom (DSD) a globally accessible certificate of German language proficiency
Information Brochure: Pasch network