Workers seeing results from flash welding. (Photo by Al Fenn//Time Life Pictures/Getty Images). Copyright: Time & Life Pictures
Welding is a fabrication or sculptural process that joins materials, usually metals or thermoplastics , by causing coalescence . This is often done by melting the workpieces and adding a filler material to form a pool of molten material (the weld pool ) that cools to become a strong joint, with pressure sometimes used in conjunction with heat , or by itself, to produce the weld. This is in contrast with soldering and brazing , which involve melting a lower-melting-point material between the workpieces to form a bond between them, without melting the workpieces. _x000D_
Many different energy sources can be used for welding, including a gas flame , an electric arc , a laser , an electron beam , friction , and ultrasound . While often an industrial process, welding may be performed in many different environments, including open air, under water and in outer space . Welding is a potentially hazardous undertaking and precautions are required to avoid burns , electric shock , vision damage, inhalation of poisonous gases and fumes, and exposure to intense ultraviolet radiation . _x000D_
Until the end of the 19th century, the only welding process was forge welding , which blacksmiths had used for centuries to join iron and steel by heating and hammering. Arc welding and oxyfuel welding were among the first processes to develop late in the century, and electric resistance welding followed soon after. Welding technology advanced quickly during the early 20th century as World War I and World War II drove the demand for reliable and inexpensive joining methods. Following the wars, several modern welding techniques were developed, including manual methods like shielded metal arc welding , now one of the most popular welding methods, as well as semi-automatic and automatic processes such as gas metal arc welding , submerged arc welding , flux-cored arc welding and electroslag welding . Developments continued with the invention of laser beam welding , electron beam welding, electromagnetic pulse welding and friction stir welding in the latter half of the century. Today, the science continues to advance. Robot welding is commonplace in industrial settings, and researchers continue to develop new welding methods and gain greater understanding of weld quality.
<div id="index_ignore">Description above from the Wikipedia article Welding
, licensed under CC-BY-SA
full list of contributors here
. This page is not affiliated with, or endorsed by, anyone associated with the topic.</div>