Survival tips, survive in the wild
Just in case our Survival Tips. Those who would like to survive in the wilderness should now memorize our vital survival tips. The three main pillars of survival are water, food and protection from the weather. It is very important to know how to properly prepare water and what foods to eat. Also essential is knowledge about making fires and building a shelter. In order to use our tips in case of emergency, we advise you to repeat these survival tips after the 3, 7, 21 and 28 days.
Sterilize and desalinate water
Sterilizing the water and removing salt from the seawater can be vital. Humans can survive without food for several weeks. However, it is very difficult to survive without water for a week. If you’re lost in the wild on a backpacker tour or if you’re stranded in a plane crash, you’ll try to survive. The best way to sterilize water is to boil it down. Although there are tablets, but you have this in the least cases. Therefore, one should learn to make a fire without a lighter.
The desalination of water is achieved by boiling. For both variants you need a refractory vessel by giving the water. In addition, you need another vessel and something to catch the steam and drain it. With a few crossed pieces of wood you can build such a construction. The heat on boiling off kills all bacteria. There is also salt left. This could be used to preserve meat and give it some flavor.
A little tip: Watermelons, coconut, cucumbers, tomatoes, lettuce and other fruits or fruits contain a lot of water.
Make a fire without a lighter
Indispensable to survive is the fire. It not only provides warmth but helps us in difficult situations. For the preparation of food and for the protection against wild animals a fire at the shelter is necessary for survival. One of the oldest and most fortified ways to make fire is to rub two woods together. It uses a hardwood and a softwood (as dry as possible). The hardwood is rubbed into the softwood until fine chips heat up to glow. With this embers ignite dry grass or the wood. (Very exhausting)
Do not forget to take your two woods back with you. In case the weather changes, you could carry a few dry grasses in a waterproof bag. There is also the possibility to keep embers in wet leaves, airtight, store. In the fortunate case, in the evening you still have slightly flammable embers for your fire. Especially those who find little or no food must save resources or energy.
Another way of making a fire without a lighter is the method with the bow. You stretch a wooden bow and clamp a hardwood into the string. This hardwood is then incorporated by drilling in the softwood. In turn, fine wood chips and embers are created by the friction. Here is a short video about it.
Find and prepare food
In order for our body to be supplied with sufficient energy and that it does not degrade our muscles, we must take in food. It all depends on where you are. In the wild there are animals with rabies, so be careful when eating infected meat. Best always roast the meat very well. In rivers and lakes you can often find edible fish. There are crabs by the sea and coconuts and other fruits in the jungle. Those who are not sure and do not know the fruits and fish should not eat them. A coconut contains not only healthy drinking water with vitamins but also good pulp. The problem is the correct opening of a coconut without tools.
More tips to survive in the wild
Who knows more fruits and other vital foods in the wild? Write it in the comments. Your tip can save lives. Best with land and where to find it.