The Princess Elisabeth Antarctica Research Station.
Living sustainably has its challenges, but none greater than in the climate and geography of Antarctica.
Emperor Penguin in Antarctica.
Emperor Penguins thrive in harsh conditions, but a new study shows that their fate depends on human action to slow global warming and associated loss of sea ice.
A polar bear wandering on melting pack ice in Canada, north of the Arctic Circle, during the summer 2017. Scientists say the last interglacial offers lessons for future sea level rise.
Florian Ledoux/The Nature Conservancy
Antarctica is no longer the sleeping giant of sea level rise. New research delved into the past and found when the Earth warms, its ice sheets can melt extremely quickly.
Indonesian residents wade through flood water near the Ciliwung river in Jakarta in February 2018. Our emissions in the near future will lock in sea level rise over centuries.
New research confirms that what the world pumps into the atmosphere today has grave long-term consequences. Governments - especially Australia's - must urgently ramp up efforts to reduce emissions.
Evening light on a Heard Island icescape. The island is part of the Kerguelen Plateau, which is being jointly studied by France and Australia.
Scientists are uncovering the secrets of a giant undersea rock shelf, parts of which lie four kilometres below the ocean's surface.
During the Pliocene, up to one third of Antarctica’s ice sheet melted, causing sea-level rise of 20 metres.
New research shows that warming by more than 2°C could be a tipping point for Antarctica's ice sheets, resulting in widespread meltdown and changes to the world's shorelines for centuries to come.
Meltwater on the ice shelf near the McMurdo research station, Antarctica.
Nicholas Bayou / UNAVCO
These lakes could threaten the future stability of parts of the Antarctic ice sheet.
Aerial imagery revealing the extent of storm damage in Dee Why on Sydney’s Northern Beaches in 2016 following wild weather.
The IPCC report says extreme sea level events that used to hit once a century will occur once a year in many places by 2050. This situation is inevitable, even if emissions are dramatically curbed.
Antarctic winds have a huge effect on weather in other places.
NASA Goddard Space Flight Center/Flickr
Each spring, winds circling the South Pole weaken. If they weaken enough, they can actually reverse – causing rapid warming.
Technology, such as satellite systems, can be used for both military and scientific purposes.
‘Dual use’ technology – technology used for both peaceful and military purposes – is allowed in Antarctica, according to the treaty.
Since the last ice age, the ice sheet retreated over a thousand kilometres in the Ross Sea region, more than any other region on the continent.
New research shows that ocean and air temperatures both contributed to the melting of Antarctica's Ross Ice Shelf in the past, but melting from below by a warming ocean became more important over time.
A wild leopard seal on South Georgia.
Cooperation or theft? New observations show wild leopard seals sharing food when targeting king penguins in Antarctica.
One of two underwater gliders is deployed from a research ship into Antarctic waters.
Sending autonomous vehicles to the Southern Ocean can be fraught with anxiety, especially if one of them doesn't make radio contact when it's supposed to.
Scientists measured the thickness and basal melt of the Ross Ice Shelf.
Parts of Antarctica's largest ice shelf are melting ten times faster than the rest of the shelf, and solar heated waters below the ice are to blame.
Emperor penguins have uniquely adapted to their Antarctic home.
Emperor penguins have a few hidden tricks to stay warm, like blood vessels in the nose arranged so they can regain most of the heat that would be lost by breathing.
A small boat in the Illulissat Icefjord is dwarfed by the icebergs that have calved from the floating tongue of Greenland’s largest glacier, Jacobshavn Isbrae.
Sea levels could rise by two metres by 2100, sparking a refugee crisis unlike anything the world has ever seen.
The research vessel must dodge dangerous icebergs as it drills for sediment core samples.
A paleooceanographer describes her ninth sea expedition, this time retrieving cylindrical 'cores' of the sediment and rock that's as much as two miles down at the ocean floor.
The Casey Station is part of Australia’s permanent outpost in Antarctica.
Buildings and human disturbance in Antartica is clustered in an ice-free zone that is essential to most of the continent's biodiversity.
A new climate model combines data on ice loss from both polar regions for the first time.
Climate scientist predict that the combined effect of ice loss in Greenland and Antarctica will be more extreme weather, with impacts on agriculture, infrastructure and human life itself.
Sea ice responds to changes in winds and ocean currents, sometimes with origins thousands of kilometres away.
Antarctic sea ice cover fell to an all-time low recently and hasn't yet recovered. Why? The initial answers could lie in an unlikely place – the tropics.