Supply chain management as a concept has only been around since the start of the 21st century. While elements of SCM have existed throughout the history of business, the holistic, collaborative system of SCM has not. Essentially, it is a collaborative effort by distribution channel partners that includes logistics, transportation and distribution.
The Supply Chain
To understand the evolution of supply chain management, it helps to understand what exactly the "supply chain" is that's being managed. The supply chain, or distribution channel, is the chain of companies involved in getting products from original manufacture to end consumer. Manufacturers, wholesalers, retailers and consumers are the four typical members in a supply chain. Before supply chain, each of these organizations was only concerned with getting the best deal for itself. In an SCM system, each the three business channel participants view themselves as partners in getting consumers the best value.
Focus on Sales and Distribution
Supply chain management is sometimes viewed as an evolution of distribution, though it really integrates multiple business elements. Historically, manufacturers, distributors and retailers were most concerned with making or acquiring goods at affordable prices, selling them to the next step in the chain and transporting goods. A manufacturer, for instance, simply made goods, sold them to wholesalers and then transported them after sale. Wholesalers held inventory, sold it to retailers and transported as demanded. Retailers acquired goods, held inventory and promoted products to consumers.
The major evolution to supply chain management was based on the development of supply chain software programs. These programs enable partners to sync computer systems through electronic data interchange. By sharing inventory data and replenishment levels, buyers and sellers can automate ordering processes and distribution. A retail store's inventory program can alert a wholesaler to distribute new products when inventory reaches a minimum threshold.
Supply chain management is also known as a company of distribution and logistics. Logistics is the planning and coordination of the flow of information and goods within the distribution channel. In addition to sharing computer information, planning the most effective, efficient transportation and distribution systems is vital. In some cases, companies even collaborate with non-competing businesses to share truck space or to coordinate sharing distribution for cost savings. Environmental responsibility has also become synonymous with efficient transportation, as populations hold companies accountable for the amount of pollutants their trucks put in the air.
- Comstock Images/Stockbyte/Getty Images