Good relationships are important, especially when researchers believe that type of relationship might be crucial to help prevent coral bleaching on the Great Barrier Reef.
Scientists from the University of Queensland, along with international colleagues, have sequenced the genomes of a number of algae that live in a symbiotic relationship with coral.
Dr Cheong Xin Chan from UQ’s Institute for Molecular Bioscience said the exact nature of that relationship was previously not well understood.
“We’re at the point now where we can find out what are the core genes that relate to this relationship, and explain this coral symbiosis,” Dr Chan said.
“We want to know, by looking at the genes, what is making this relationship work.”
The algae that live within the coral, called dinoflagellates, are very diverse, with multiple species interacting with different types of coral at different depths.
Dr Chan said they also had some of the widest genetic diversity he had ever seen, with the team managing to sequence nine of the algal genomes in four years.
“The genomes of this algae are actually very, very complicated, much more complicated than human cells, even though they’re tiny compared to human cells,” he said.
“So we still don’t know much about it. The more we analyse the DNA, the more complex we realise it is."
The next step of the research would be to compare the genomics of the symbiotic algae with related types which live on their own in the open ocean.
By finding the differences between the two, it’s possible researchers could gain insight into how the algae interacts with the coral, and how that relationship is affected by the stress of climate change.
“Ultimately, we hope to develop a sort of chip which you could put in the water and it would show green, amber or red, which tells you how vulnerable a given section of the reef is,” Dr Chan said.
“If we can achieve that, it will help with mitigating the various risks associated with protecting the Great Barrier Reef.”
In particular Dr Chan said such a system could act as an early warning for a reef which physically looked fine but was showing signs of distress, allowing scientists to concentrate their efforts on the parts of the reef which most urgently needed it.
The reef suffered a major bleaching event in 2016, mostly in the northern sections, prompting UNESCO to issue a warning to Australia that the reef’s world heritage status was under threat.
The research was conducted in collaboration with Emeritus Professor Mark Ragan at IMB and Professor Debashish Bhattacharya at Rutgers University, and was published in the journal Trends in Ecology & Evolution.