Back-to-School Resources from NewseumED
Coming Soon: Propaganda Public Education Campaign, Teacher Open House
We’re Here to Lend a Hand
As you settle into a new school year, let us indulge you with the wide array of free NewseumED resources available to assist in your curriculum planning. From lesson plans to videos to infographics, our online materials help foster media literacy skills and First Amendment appreciation in the classroom.
Here are just some ways you can use our resources.
Help your students better understand their First Amendment rights, as well as the latest challenges to them in the news, with our You Can’t Say That in School?! virtual class and our Free Speech Essentials and Freedom in the Balance EDCollections. These multimedia collections contain past and present critical debates addressing issues such as hate speech, cyberbullying and student protest. There is also an interactive quiz that gets students thinking about how they’d balance individual freedom and public good. You can also examine how the civil rights and women’s suffrage movements used the power of the First Amendment to gain key rights.
Whether your students are working on research projects or keeping up on current events, ensure they have the necessary skills to determine the trustworthiness and reliability of the information they uncover with our Fighting Fake News and Believe It or Not? virtual classes and our related lesson materials online.
As the 2020 election heats up, help your students better understand the process by which candidates enter the race, compete in primaries and promote their messages. Our Decoding Elections EDCollection provides historical context, relevant primary sources and discussion questions for 11 different aspects of the electoral process.
And these days, the words election and propaganda go hand-in-hand. We’re readying materials to help people become propaganda-proof. Learn more about Disinformation Nation and our public campaign lower in this newsletter and at our Teacher Open House on Oct. 5.
We believe that a full understanding of the First Amendment and strong media literacy skills — accessing, analyzing and evaluating information from a variety of sources — are essential to civic life. Thank you for your using our resources. Here’s to a great school year!
Our Fall EDstravaganza Is Around the Corner!
We’re busy planning our annual Teacher Open House and hope you’ve made plans to join us on Saturday, Oct. 5. Show off your smarts in two special events this year: a trivia game and a puzzle-based scavenger hunt. You’ll also have a chance to attend special programs and take exhibit tours. And, of course, there’ll be free posters and other swag. Admission to Teacher Open House is FREE for educators, school and public librarians as well as religious and civic leaders. Find more information and a schedule of events here. Don't forget to register in advance for a chance to win door prizes. Come and enjoy the day!
Coming Soon: Disinformation Nation
Later this fall, we’ll launch a public education campaign on the growing menace of manipulative media. Visitors to the Disinformation Nation website will learn what propaganda is, how it impacts their decision-making and what can be done to lessen its influence. The interactive experience will include a “Propaganda Profile” quiz, which will shed insight on how users can be unknowingly targeted by propaganda producers, and tips on how to spot propaganda. Get a sneak preview of Disinformation Nation at our Teacher Open House on Oct. 5.
Website Wins WebAward
NewseumED and our web development partner, Echo&Co, recently won a 2019 WebAward for Outstanding Achievement for NewseumED.org. The award is presented annually by the Web Marketing Association to recognize excellence in the industry.
Book a Virtual Class
Whether you're across the world or right next door, our NewseumED teachers are ready to lead live, virtual classes with your students on media literacy and First Amendment topics. All classes are free of charge. Check out our list of classes and booking information here.