Art is in our lives an important place. Since ancient times, people did all kinds of crafts, worked wonders with his hands, poured his soul into their products.
Different styles of art endured in our day. We use them in our interior designs, we decorate their room, we do arts and crafts to satisfy their inner desires and feelings.
Very popular is the restoration of the stucco. manufacture of cornices, friezes, corbels and other decorative details of plaster. All these decorations make our spaces, our homes are individual, stylish and unique. All thanks to the art that once upon a time originated in our culture.
The legacy of ancient Greek architecture is the basis for all further development of world architecture and related monumental art. The reasons for this sustained impact of Greek architecture lie in its objective qualities: simplicity, truthfulness, clarity of the compositions, the harmoniousness and proportionality of total and forms of all parts, in plasticity organic connection of architecture and sculpture, in close unity of the architectural and aesthetic and structural-tectonic elements sooruzheniy. Ancient Greek architecture featured a full line of forms and their design bases, were a whole. Basic design — stone blocks of which the walls were laid. Continue reading
Sharp wooden spire of the bell tower rises above the stone Church. Only up close you can see that this is not one, but two separate buildings, standing very close is the bell tower built in the XVIII century near the facade of the Gothic Church, which for three hundred years older. Stone temple Dating back to the XIV century, the outside does not seem particularly interesting. Neatly whitewashed small single-nave Church-the Church, built in a defensive style. However, the outward simplicity of the temple is deceptive. Special historical and artistic value is covered with paintings of the XVIII century the ceiling. It is made of wood and divided into 60 squares (tiles), each with painted stylized floral ornaments. The name of a carpenter working on the ceiling, you know – his name was Sandor Ferenc. On one of the wooden squares, the wizard left the image plane, and the other set a date of 1753. But the name of the artist history is silent.
Special glamor attached to the ceiling of the temple Matt black, white and gold colours of the squares on which the unknown painter has caused the amazing beauty of the patterns. Continue reading
The natural conditions of Ancient China. In Southeast Asia, cut off from the world by high mountains, lies the Great plain of China. In ancient times it was covered with dense forests. On the vast expanses of China plain there are two of the greatest rivers of Asia — the Yangtze and the yellow river. The soil along the banks of these rivers are so soft that they can handle even the simplest tools, made of wood or bone. Therefore, agriculture has spread here already in ancient times.
The most fertile land in the yellow river valley. Here there were the most ancient in China human settlements. But this river in the rainy season it often overflows and floods all around. Also it happens that because of the softness of the soil when the spill washes away the banks and changed the channel. The river has washed away human settlements and crops. Not by chance in China the yellow river is called “Wandering river”, “River of a thousand disasters”. Continue reading