In 2018-19 Huntley Community School District 158 expanded its Dual Language (English and Spanish) program by adding kindergarten dual language classroom at each of its three kindergarten buildings: Chesak Elementary, Leggee Elementary, and Mackeben Elementary School, as well as two 1st-grade classrooms at Chesak Elementary.
In the years following one new kindergarten class will be added at each building, until reaching full implementation of a dual language structure through fifth grade. The plan was based on a comprehensive language review completed in 2017.
Students who are identified as English Learners and who qualify for bilingual instruction based on language screening will receive placement into the program. Students who do not qualify for bilingual instruction, including all native English speakers, will be entered into a lottery for remaining spots. Interested families must complete a Dual Language Interest Form at Kindergarten Registration. Registration will be held in early June.
Visit the Enrollment page for full information.
Huntley 158 is actively recruiting excellent teachers qualified to teach in a Spanish-English Dual Language environment!
What is Dual Language?
Dual Language is an educational approach that promotes biliteracy for both native English-speaking students and native Spanish-speaking students. The aim of the program is that by 5th grade, students will be bilingual, bi-literate, and culturally competent. That is, they will be able to read, write, and speak in both languages and knowledgable and comfortable in a multicultural setting.
While Dual Language programs are offered in a variety of different structures, a primary feature is that instruction is offered to all students in both English and Spanish. At Huntley, the program is still being developed, with the exact structure to be announced later in 2018.
Information for Families
Please explore this site for more information on the benefits of Dual Language, structure of our program, and the application and enrollment process. To learn more about the rationale and plans for the program, watch the video below.