We are discussing our writing contest today and formulating questions for our contest. I would like us to brainstorm and come up with at least two questions that writers could answer. They should be opinion questions with some depth to them. Submit your questions for evaluation ( by the class) on paper and blog them hear as well.
Here are some resources you can read over to formulate your question.
- Born: 10 May 1838
- Birthplace: Bel Air, Maryland
- Died: 26 April 1865 (shot to death)
- Best Known As: The man who shot Abraham Lincoln
John Wilkes Booth shot and killed President Abraham Lincoln on 14 April 1865. During a performance of Our American Cousin at Ford’s Theater in Washington, D.C., Booth snuck into the presidential box and shot Lincoln behind the left ear. Booth leapt down to the stage (breaking the fibula bone in his left leg as he landed) and shouted “Sic semper tyrannis!” (In Latin, “Thus ever to tyrants.”) He escaped with an accomplice and eluded pursuers for 12 days before being cornered in a tobacco shed in Virginia. The shed was set on fire, and in the ensuing confusion Booth was shot by a Union soldier, Sgt. Boston Corbett. Booth was dragged from the shed alive, but died a few hours later.
Booth was part of a conspiracy; while he shot Lincoln, others were supposed to attack vice-president Andrew Johnson and Secretary of War William Seward. Seward was stabbed but survived; Johnson was never attacked, and became president upon Lincoln’s death. Four of Booth’s co-conspirators were hung on 7 July 1865… Booth was a well-known actor and had appeared on the Ford’s Theater stage many times; Lincoln had actually seen him there in an 1863 performance of The Marble Heart… Booth’s father, Junius Brutus Booth, Sr., was an even more famous actor… Booth shot Lincoln five days after the Civil War ended with the surrender of Confederate general Robert E. Lee to the Union’s Ulysses Grant at Appomatox on 9 April 1865
1 What did John Wilkes do for a living?
2. What year was he born?
3.Who did John Wilkes Booth Kill and shoot?
4. Why did John Wilkes Booth want to kill Lincoln?
5 Who else was supposed to be killed at the same time as Lincoln?
6. What was the name of the theatre that Booth killed Lincoln in?
7. What was the name of the Play?
8. On what side of his head did Booth shoot Lincoln?
9. What happened to booth right after shooting Lincoln?
10. How many days did Booth elude ( avoid) capture?
11. What does the word conspiracy mean?
12. How did Booth die?
Hit the comment button and answer these 12 questions.
Prizes will be given for those who score 100 and answer in the proper format.