10 Facts about Charles Lindbergh
Find out the interesting facts about the famous American author, military officer, inventor, aviator, social activist and explorer in Facts about Charles Lindbergh. Lindbergh was born in 4 February 1902 as Charles Augustus Lindbergh. He died on 26 August 1974. He was called in various nicknames. People often call him Lucky Lindy, Slim or even the Lone Eagle. If you want to know more about him, check the following Lindbergh facts below:
Facts about Charles Lindbergh 1: the international fame
Lindbergh had an instant fame when he was able to do a solo nonstop flight on 20 to 21 May 1927. Therefore, he earned Orteig Prize.
Facts about Charles Lindbergh 2: the start and finish of his solo flight
Lindbergh had his solo flight from Roosevelt Field, Garden City in Long island New York. It was finished at Le Bourget Field in Paris, France.
Facts about Charles Lindbergh 3: the distance
The distance of his amazing solo flight was around 5,800 kilometer or 3,600 statute miles. He did it using a single engine and single seat.
Facts about Charles Lindbergh 4: the record
Due to this amazing flight, Lindbergh took the record as the first person who was in New York one day and the next day, he was in Paris.
Facts about Charles Lindbergh 5: the time of the flight
Can you guess the time that he used to reach Paris from New York? Lindbergh was on the flight for 33 hours and 30 minutes.
Facts about Charles Lindbergh 6: who was Lindbergh?
Many people are curious about the job of Lindbergh. Actually, he was an officer in United States Army Air Corps Reserve.
Facts about Charles Lindbergh 7: the Medal of Honor
Due to his historic exploit, Lindbergh was awarded with Medal of Honor. It is considered as the highest military decoration in America.
Facts about Charles Lindbergh 8: promotion
Since Lindbergh was very famous, he promoted the Air mail services as well as commercial aviation in Americas and United States in the end of 1920s and beginning of 1930s.
Facts about Charles Lindbergh 9: Crime of the Century
There was a tragedy in the life of Lindbergh. It was dubbed as the Crime of Century when the infant son of Lindbergh named Charles Jr, was kidnapped and murdered in 1932. Find facts about Charles Kingsford Smith here.
Facts about Charles Lindbergh 10: the later years
In his later years, Lindbergh became an environmentalist, international explorer, prize winning author, and inventor.
Do you have any opinion on facts about Charles Lindbergh?