Alpha Lipoic Acid as a Natural Treatment for CRPS
Complex Regional Pain Syndrome (CRPS) is a neurological condition of the Central, Autonomic, Sympathetic & Enteric Nervous Systems. There is no cure but there are many treatments and medications available to help treat the symptoms of CRPS. There are several pharmaceutical treatments available by prescription from your doctor, but not everyone is comfortable putting medications which causes harsh side effects and long-lasting effects into their bodies.
To learn more about the symptoms, click here.
With recent news stories stating that current pharmaceutical medications like gabapentinoids should be illegal due to their powerful ability to "stop" the brain's ability to create brain synapse, which may cause brain death (the brain's ability to grow), there is a growing number of patients that are turning towards towards Naturopathic treatments.
What is Alpha Lipoic Acid?
Several studies have found that Alpha Lipoic Acid (ALA) can help with neuropathy -- nerve damage --related to CRPS, reducing symptoms like pain, tingling, and prickling in the feet and legs and found ALA to have powerful antioxidant properties.
Research studies show that ALA plays an important role in improved nerve function, reduced inflammation, lower blood sugar levels, weight-loss, diabetes, slowed skin aging and other health conditions.
ALA also helps turn glucose into fuel for the body and has been approved in Germany for treating neuropathic pain. It has been used in turning diabetic neuropathy (as well as other polyneuropathies) and while there have not been specific trials related to CRPS - it shows very promising future is being those with CRPS & POTS.
It’s made inside the mitochondria, which many refer to as the "powerhouse of the cell". This is the point where the enzymes turn nutrients into energy.
Water-Soluble and Fat-Soluble Creates A Powerful AntiOxidant
Plus, it's both water and fat-soluble, which allows it to work in every cell or tissue in the body. This is an important piece of information considering that most other antioxidants are only either water- or fat-soluble and this also makes ALA a powerful antioxidant. If we were to look at vitamin C alone, we would see that it is just water-soluble, while vitamin E is just fat-soluble. As ALA is both, this is what makes it so powerful as an antioxidant.
Free Radical & Free Radicals Scavengers
ALA is a powerhouse of a Free Radical Scavenger - meaning that ALA finds them and destroys them. Another reason that makes it a powerful antioxidant. Free radicals cause serious damage to our bodies. Free radicals are unstable molecules that are made during normal metabolism.
Free Radical Scavengers, like ALA, protect cells, fight disease, and help the body process and use vitamins. They help fight the damage caused by free radicals.
How to Increase Alpha Lipoic Acid Intake
Your body produces ALA naturally, but as humans only produce ALA id in small amounts, it's important that we include as much as possible in the foods we eat every day, we need to be careful about the foods that we do eat, or include as a dietary supplement.
Select ALA in the Foods We Consume
Red meat and other animal products like organ meats are great sources of alpha-lipoic acid. Plant-based foods like tomatoes, broccoli, spinach, and Brussels sprouts also contain it.
Add As a Supplement
Most likely, you would never eat enough ALA to get what you need for CRPS, so you will need to supplement. You can also find ALA in supplement form, which is usually found in 600mg capsules. Supplements can pack up to 1,000 times more alpha-lipoic acid than food sources.
Suppllemental Dosage of Alpha Lipoic Acid
According to Dr. Pradee-Chopra, it is very effective when taken as IV (Intravenous) but can also be taken orally, in over-the-counter (OTC) pills or capsules. Doctors recommend that to treat symptoms of CRPS, patients should take the maximum daily allotment of either 1800-2400mg per day;
- Women should take 600mg 3 times daily.
- Men should take 600mg 4 times daily.
For dosing, start low to get your body used to it, and increase slowly, ramping up to your desired daily maximum determined by you and your doctor.
Side Effects and Adverse Effects of Alpha Lipoic Acid
Alpha Lipoic Acid is generally considered safe with little to no side effects. In fact, research shows that adults can take up to 2,400mg without harmful side effects.
In some cases, people may experience mild symptoms like;
- Skin Rash
- Low blood sugar
To eliminate some of the gastrointestinal side effects, take after eating and on a full stomach. Taking on an empty stomach will increase stomach upset and heartburn.
Is Alpha Lipoic Acid a Solution for CRPS?
Alpha Lipoic Acid shows a very promising future for those with CRPS & POTS and Naturopathic Physicians & Neurologists are recommending adding ALA to your daily supplement intake, but to date, nothing has been proven.
Considering that it has such great anti-oxidant properties and that you can get it naturally, through both animal and plant-based diets, and as a supplement, and it helps with inflammation, memory, weight-loss and overall health, we will be following this and are hopeful for this natural organic compound.
Please continue to let us know what you think warriors and as always, battle on!