When a student hears about the punctuation rules, in most cases, his reaction is overwhelmed bewildering. For some, it seems to be very simple, and they assume it can be a subject of intuitive use. For others, on the contrary, the study of punctuation is a too difficult task: there are many nuances and even more exceptions. Both of these cases are united by one thing - the lack of motivation to learn and, as a result, the desire to forget about the existence of punctuation. Lots of international rules exist too.
But, is it the right approach? Is the rule of punctuation just unnecessary thing that will not affect your result? Of course, the answer is no, no, and again no. All those comma laws - it's not dull punctuation rules at all, it is a necessary ingredient for creating the perfect essay. These are powerful tools that will emphasize your opinion and correctly show it in the eyes of the reader.
Punctuation Rules! Let's Learn More About It
However, even such a grand role of these laws does not deny their complexity for studying. Moreover, to master all of these grammar rules is far from the interesting endeavor. The question arises - is it possible to simplify this task? Our answer is yes. Now we will show the simplest approaches to studying the rules of punctuation, which will be a total must-learn for those who can't stand boring studying. Don't hope to do it tomorrow, there is no better time than now.
In fact, writing an essay following all punctuation regulations is simply if you know a reliable resource with tips. Pro-Academic-Writers is one of the best of such services, which not only informs but also offers assistance in writing essays. Want to brush up your skills on writing an essay? Here is a wonderful post about 30 Catchy Problem Solution Essay Topics. Or maybe, youre interested in Social Media Essay? All these tips and even more is available here. Plus, you can find other useful information like What Medical Majors to Choose.
Punctuation Rules Hacks: How to Master It Quickly and Efficiently
There are only a few cardinal punctuation rules, so read, relax and punctuate with confidence.
1. Use Semicolons.
Let's start with a semicolon, which is the symbol ";" to be clear. There is nothing difficult to use this punctuation mark - in general, there are two ways for it:
- To divide two related clauses
The semi-colon separates the sentence into two parts. The key point here is that both parts would be complete sentences on their own. To determine if it is possible to use a semicolon in any complex sentence, you must ask yourself if you can split it into a simple one. From the writer's perspective, a semi-colon is a useful way to indicate that two thoughts are related.
- To separates items in certain types of lists
This case, of course, happens less frequently. What is its main essence? We use Semicolon in the list when there are already commas in the list. In simple words, a Semicolon in such cases helps to better divide all objects. Here's an example of proper use to better explain this:
Join the event that will feature three orators: Robert, the tattoo firm's CEO; David, a marketing leader; and Nick, a logistics expert.
One more note: almost all the time, a list that is separated by semi-colons is preceded by a colon--the ":" symbol.
Not clear enough? Read more about punctuation rules about it here.
2. Be Cautious With Commas.
A comma (,) is used to show a separation of ideas or to separate plural elements with the structure of a sentence. They bring order out of chaos. But, dont even think about using lots of commas. Use them joyfully.
When comma should be used?
- When listing similar adjectives and nouns
- When clarifying the noun. (For example: Paris, the capital of France, is very crowded)
- To place introductory words and references: (For example: By the way, I’ve seen our former classmates)
- To divide the parts of a complicated sentence, if they have different subject: (For example: The days were shiny, and we decided to go hiking)
Best comma advice ever: If you’re unsure where they go, put a comma when you would naturally pause when reading. If you want to be a comma-master, visit this site with lots of punctuation rules explanation.
3. Punctuation Stays Inside Quotations.
Quotation marks ( "" ) are used to mark the beginning and end of a passage that is repeated word for word. They are also used to emphasize the necessary word or indicate the unusual or dubious status of a word.
When using quotation marks, make sure that the punctuation marks stays inside the quotations. When the quote is at the end of a sentence, you may be tempted to leave the period on the outside. It may look right, especially when you are issuing another sentence, but don’t do it.
4. Keep sentences short
The biggest trick in writing a paper is the use of short sentences. A simple and fluent language will make it easier for you to form your opinion and avoid mistakes. Therefore, try to write as short as possible sentences.
Mastering this advice you will certainly get good results! If you do not have time to write an essay yourself, we stand ready to assist you. Our professional writers will assignments of any complexity and you will be guaranteed to receive high grades!