New Orleans, Louisiana
June 26, 2016
June 26, 2016
August 28, 2016
Pre-College Engineering Education Division
In recent years, science, technology, engineering, and math (STEM) educators have sought innovative ways to integrate technology in teaching and learning to engage and build the interest of secondary school students in STEM disciplines as well as to capture their imagination about STEM careers. Recent technological advancements have allowed design, development, and commercialization of low-cost mini unmanned aerial vehicles (MUAV) that offer a novel and ideal platform to support STEM disciplines in high school classrooms. This paper focuses on one illustrative example wherein four sections of a 9th grade quantitative research course, consisting of 25 to 30 students each, were engaged by a graduate student through an AR Parrot 2.0 MUAV-based lab activity, which considered the research question “How fast does the AR Drone fly?” Within the framework of a hands-on lab, the students designed a MUAV-based controlled experiment, collected their own data, used the collected data to formulate an understanding of the physics, and applied relevant mathematics to reach conclusions. The graduate student integrated and examined an array of motivational factors in the lesson, including the embodiment of quantitative research principles, critical thinking about real-world scenarios, ownership of experimental procedure and outcome, and gamification wherein students used a video game controller to pilot the MUAV in the experiment. Finally, the MUAV lab targeted the special learning needs of students with autism spectrum disorders (ASD) who composed of 12% of the student body in the school.
This paper will provide a series of learning elements unique to the structure of the lesson, e.g., a situated cognition model to frame the experimental activity, a project-based learning (PBL) structure in a lab environment, and a social constructivist approach to bridge the gap between the scientist and the classroom. Specifically, the situated cognition model was incorporated by the graduate researcher posing as a member of a university lab that conducts Department of Defense (DOD) sponsored research. Students were informed that the university lab was preparing to bid on a high-dollar classified MUAV project with a DOD agency and the lab needed students’ support in performing preliminary research to generate experimentally validated data for the proposal. This approach produced a contagious excitement and ownership because many students in sections following earlier introductory sections knew what to expect; their peers from earlier sections had shared the idea outside of class. Furthermore, hands-on interactions embedded in PBL allowed students to “do something” to “learn about something,” instead of the usual classroom teaching with singular focus on “learn about something.” At the start of the MUAV lesson, students drew names out of a hat to choose between four possible roles: piloting the MUAV, timing MUAV flight to measure its velocity over a set number of parking spaces located behind the school, recording data, and making experimental observations to explore sources of error. In a class meeting prior to the day of the experiment, students convened in their respective groups to discuss how they might perform their roles to achieve the best possible results. During post-experiment reporting, students provided answers to the question “How fast does the AR Drone fly?,” culminating in a research presentation and a formal lab report to model activities used in post-secondary level labs. Within the experiment, a social constructivist approach allowed students to connect past and present experiences in their lives with the phenomena they observed in the scientific experiment. Research questions were posed in a self-deprecating way with a supposed hesitation of particular answers to provide a fuller understanding of the physical world as the students confirmed or rejected their own prior assumptions.
Following the lesson, a post assessment was conducted wherein students were given a survey to indicate other types of experiments they might want to conduct using a MUAV. While some of the ideas conveyed in the survey are not deemed feasible, others provide an insight into how future teachers might design a MUAV lesson plan differently to better capture the interests of the students. The full paper will provide details of the lesson motivation, activities, and assessment.
Clever, H. M., & Brown, A. G., & Kapila, V. (2016, June), Using an AR Drone Lab in a Secondary Education Classroom to Promote Quantitative Research Paper presented at 2016 ASEE Annual Conference & Exposition, New Orleans, Louisiana. 10.18260/p.27129
ASEE holds the copyright on this document. It may be read by the public free of charge. Authors may archive their work on personal websites or in institutional repositories with the following citation: © 2016 American Society for Engineering Education. Other scholars may excerpt or quote from these materials with the same citation. When excerpting or quoting from Conference Proceedings, authors should, in addition to noting the ASEE copyright, list all the original authors and their institutions and name the host city of the conference. - Last updated April 1, 2015