Here are some of the best Ocean Learning Activities for Kids that you’ll ever find! They truly are amazing! There are so many creative ideas to do every day all Summer long!
Ocean Learning Activities for Kids
Here is a great and beautiful sensory bin that focuses on ocean animals and the beauty of the ocean floor.
Take a look at this printable! It is a great way to have fun and include ocean animals in the mix!
These ocean animal count clip cards will help kids learn to count in no time! You can even make them self correcting and let kids play without needing much help!
Use this exciting science experiment to teach your kids both about ocean zones and liquid density!
Teach your kids about ocean currents with this low-cost experiment! Little supplies needed.
This unique game helps young kids learn colors and letters in a fun way! You start telling them the colors and letters but, before you know it, they’ll be saying them back!
The sensory bin is the perfect way to help teach kids their upper and lower case letters as well as helping their coordination in matching!
Use this fun activity to teach your kids about the seriousness of oil spills in the ocean and to show them the impact they can have!
This is the perfect activity for kindergartners learning about the water cycle. Don’t have an ocean or body of water near you? Use these instructions to make your own waves!
These ocean themed printables are a great way for kids to learn while having fun!
Use this salt water experiment to teach your kids about the density differences of fresh and salt water!
Sight word Go Fish cards are perfect for helping your child learn their sight words and improve their reading!
This activity is not only a fun craft to make, but it also helps teach kids words of any kind (nouns, verbs, adjectives, etc.)! It also goes along with The Rainbow Fish book by Marcus Pfister which teaches a great lesson on friendship!
How cool is an octopus?! With this cute craft, you can teach your kids more about counting and numbers, and of course, the amazing octopus! Perfect for ages 3 and up.
Ever want to see how big a blue whale really is? Make your own life size whale outside this summer using just a measuring tape and sidewalk chalk!
Use these pattern block mats to help teach your kids both shapes and colors while making fun pictures!
These printable practice mats will help kids learn to count, not just with words, but physical objects! Have them try this fun hands-on activity!
Thank you so much for taking a look at this awesome Ocean Learning Activities for Kids post!
You’ll also like: