There is a good chance that you have heard of Botox as a means of dealing with wrinkles and lines in the skin. However, you may not be aware of exactly what Botox is and how it works.
Having a better understanding of Botox is important, if you are thinking of having this treatment carried out.
What is Botox?
Botox is a trade name for a substance that is injected into the skin, to help reduce the movement of muscles. It's made from the neurotoxin botulinum toxin. This is the same toxin that can lead to botulism. However, Botox is used in carefully monitored doses. This greatly reduces the risk of any problems resulting from the treatment.
Botox is one of the most popular cosmetic treatments in the world. When Botox is injected, it restricts the movement of muscles. It does this by blocking the nerve signals to the muscles, causing them to relax. This reduces the visibility of lines and wrinkles.
If you are thinking of having this treatment carried out, make sure that you find a qualified professional to help you.
Why seeking professional help is important
Choosing the right person to complete Botox treatment is vital. This is because a qualified person will complete the work safely and effectively. When you are choosing someone to inject you, there are some questions you should ask:
- What training, qualifications and experience do they have?
- What product is being used and is it fully licensed?
- What are the risks and potential side effects of the treatment in your case?
- What insurance is in place?
It's important to do this research before you undergo treatment. Do not be tempted to simply choose cheap option. Doing so means that you could be putting yourself at risk.
How long do the effects of Botox last?
Having Botox treatment carried out involves a significant investment. Therefore, you need to understand how long the effects of the treatment will last and how many times the treatment will need to be repeated.
The effects of Botox treatment normally start to be seen within a few hours. However, it's not until after a week that the full effects appear. This means that you need to be patient once you have been injected.
Once the effects are in place, they normally last for 4-6 months. This means that you need to be prepared to have the treatment completed two or three times each year, in order to maintain the results. The professional who carries out the treatment can provide you with further advice about this.
Botox can be a safe and effective way to reduce the appearance of lines and wrinkles. If you are wondering whether the treatment is right for you, take time to find a qualified professional to help. Doing so means that you limit the chances of any problems occurring and get the best possible results.