Below is a short-list of ten countries and their traditional medicinal uses of papaya leaves taken from a fantastic overview of current research on papaya leaves:
Carica Papaya Leaf Extracts – An Ethnomedicinal Boon
*Tatyasaheb Patil1, Snehal Patil2, Anuprita Patil3, Shreedevi Patil4
International Journal of Pharmacognosy and Phytochemical Research 2014; 6(2); 260-265
Table 2: Use of papaya leaves by various indigenous populations –Indigenous populations usually cure their sick using various plant products. So it would pave way for future research to understand the various uses of papaya leaves by different populations. *1-5
Ghana Ivory coast
Uses of carica papaya leaves:
Young leaves are cooked and eaten like spinach.
Crushed leaves may be used to tenderize meat. Also functions as a Vermifuge and a primitive soap substitute in laundering.
Dried leaves have been smoked to relieve asthma or as a tobacco substitute.
Purgative for stomach troubles
Purgative for horses
Treatment of genitor urinary ailments
Relief in nausea(during pregnancy)
Leaf are prepared in combination with Quassia amara, Euterpe oleracea and Citrus sp for the treatment of malarial fever
Heart tonic, febrifuge, vermifuge, colic fever, beri beri, abortion and asthma
Stomach troubles and cancer
To treat high blood pressure
Rheumatoid arthritis, constipation, jaundice, diabetes, dermatitis, hurt
Packages of dried, pulverized leaves are sold by “health food” stores for making tea (used as tumour destroying agent )
The fresh green tea acts as antiseptic and dried leaves are best as a tonic and blood purifier
Also used as digestive system promoter, chronic indigestion, weight loss, obesity, arteriosclerosis, high blood pressure and weakening of heart
Diuretic and Antihelminthic
1.Okoli RI, Aigbe O, Ohaju-Obodo JO, Mensah JK. Medicinal Herbs Used for Managing Some Common Ailments among Esan People of Edo State, Nigeria. Pakistan Journal of Nutrition 2007; 6 (5): 490-496.
2. Halberstein RA. Medicinal Plants: Historical and Cross-Cultural Usage Patterns. Ann Epidemiol 2005; 15: 686–699.
3. Ogbe FMD, Eruogun OL, Uwagboe M. Plants used for female reproductive health care in Oredo local government area. Nigeria Scientific Research and Essay 2009; 4: 120-130.
4. Rahmatullah M, Ferdausi D, Mollik MAH, Jahan R, Chowdhury MH, Haque WM. A survey of medicinal plants used by kavirajes of chalna area, khulna district, bangladesh. Afr. J. Trad. CAM 2010; 7: 91 – 97.
5. Teklehaymanot T, Giday M. Ethnobotanical study of medicinal plants used by people in Zegie Peninsula, Northwestern Ethiopia. Journal of Ethnobiology and Ethnomedicine 2007; 3: 12.
This blog is sponsored by the Julia Ruffin Project. The Project promotes, researches, and grows papaya leaf tea.