eBooks & eAudiobooks
The Overdrive for Kids collection has downloadable ebooks and eAudiobooks suitable for elementary grades.
Early World of Learning, World Book Online’s early childhood digital resource, is a child’s first encyclopedia, eBook, and introduction to core early concepts. With read-aloud across all functions, the 60 stories in “World of Reading” and “Trek’s Travels” tie learning together through videos, games, and printable activities. Twelve stories are available in both Spanish and English, and the worksheets also offer written instructions in Spanish. Classic songs, nursery rhymes, and fairy tales complete the program, and are often included in the lesson plan for each story.
The eBook K-8 Collection contains more than 13,000 titles chosen to support a quality learning experience for K-8 students across all subject areas taught in elementary and middle schools, and content aligns with Common Core Curriculum Standards (for participating U.S. states). The collection also features a selection of teacher resources to support educators and administrators.
The eBook Cricket Media Collection includes more than 400 titles in e-book format and is suitable for Children grades Pre-K through 8th. Cricket is an internationally recognized education company with award winning print content for children, families and educators. Cricket is focused on engage children in a wide variety of subjects and disciplines helping them explore and expand their worlds.Highlighted titles include:From Sloppy Copy to Polished Prose
Happy, The Hearing Ear Dog
Dinosaurs Among Us
Whose Legs Are Whose? A Tale From Mexico
Research while practicing reading skills with Read It by Ebsco. helps students with a basic foundation in English grammar and reading who need adapted reading material for many subjects.
Read It is also a great tool for English Language Learners.
Ebsco Explora for Primary grades Explora provides easy-to-use features and reliable content from the world’s leading magazines and reference books
Novelist K-8 Plus is a comprehensive reading resource for fiction and nonfiction. With a fun and intuitive interface, and extensive proprietary content, NoveList K-8 Plus integrates reading across the curriculum and supports young readers.
Have interactive fun with your favorite Disney characters. Cool craft ideas, coloring sheets, stories and more!
Interactive games and activities for young children (some educational).
A Nickelodeon TV site for younger kids; play games, read and do crafts.
Games, stories, songs, and more from popular PBS shows including: Between the Lions, Sagwa, Caillou, Clifford, and George Shrinks.
Always a great place to visit and play games with your favorite Sesame Street characters.