|Grade Standard||Medicine Grade|
Epilepsy, it is a condition in which the sufferer gets unprovoked and recurrent seizures. Millions of people around the globe suffer from it. The seizure can either be extended or brief, from vigorous shaking to minor loss of consciousness. It can at times even lead to physical damage. Seizures can either make a person fall or lose consciousness of their surroundings.
Let’s find out how yoga cures epilepsy.Yoga For Epilepsy Treatment
Yoga helps gain control over the body, thus letting a person manage seizure without getting much extreme. Yoga asanas help oxygenate the brain and stretch the nerves. They calm down the brain cells and prevent from getting excited.
Forward bends, standing asanas, inverted poses and backbends are perfect for calming down the nervous system. Yoga lets you gain an internal balance that slows down the excitation level. It gives deep rest, hence allowing the body to cure itself.Yoga Poses For EpilepsyBalasana (Child's Pose)
If you're feeling anxious or a bit unsteady, it is perfect stress reliever. Besides, it can prevent if a person thinks, they might have a seizure. It is a gentle stretch for the neck, back and hips. It might be helpful if one experiences pain after seizures.Nadi Sodhana (Alternate Nostril Breathing)
It lets you balance right and left side of the brain and calms down the nervous system that may play a crucial role in seizure control.Kapotanasana (Pigeon Pose)
This asana lengthens the hip flexors while giving space for breathing into the body and check how the body is feeling.Sirsasana (Headstand)
Headstands or Sirsasana bring strength and independence that help encounter anxiety adjoining seizures.
Along with the above asanas, herbal remedies provided by Abhimantrit Guruprasadam Epilepsy Yog are also quite effective in the treatment of Arthritis and shows excellent recovery results in the patients. These herbal medicines are:
|Grade Standard||Medicine Grade|
It is not too much amazement fact that yoga improves body organs functioning, improves flexibility and quite helpful in maintaining good health. Yoga could also be favorable for eye health! Performing eye yoga exercises may help improve overall eye functioning.
Below stated eye yoga exercises must be practiced daily without expecting any immediate cure. We've compiled few yoga exercises that’ll help ease out worn-out muscles and help your eyes focus.
Along with the above asanas, herbal remedies provided by Abhimantrit Guruprasadam Eye Care Yog are also quite effective in the treatment of Arthritis and shows excellent recovery results in the patients. These herbal medicines are:
|Grade Standard||Medicine Grade|
Liver, being one of the most important human body organ, it plays a key role in digestion and overall health maintenance. Major function of liver is to receive goes along the intestines and keep harmful toxins away from the bloodstream. If the liver is malfunctioning, the body may become accumulated with toxins which could be re-circulated in the blood.
Since liver plays an integral role in the human body, it makes it more susceptible to disease. Thus, healthy diet and yoga may help clear and detoxify the liver that helps in proper functioning. Here is few yoga poses that may help keep liver healthy.Kapalbhati Pranayama
This asana is breathing exercise that boosts the liver health and helps in spleen function. To practice this yoga, sit cross-legged on a flat surface. Inhale deeply and exhale through the nostrils. For better results, practice every day for at least 15 minutes.Ardha Matsyendrasana
This yoga asana is known for its liver benefits. The asana stimulates and strengthens the liver by applying pressure on it. It is quite beneficial for liver which gets damaged by apotheosis, fibrosis, stress and inflammation.Dhanurasana
This yoga asana is quite effective for people suffering from fatty liver. This yoga help stimulate the liver. As an energy source of the body, it makes use of fat deposited in the liver. For best results, repeat the asana as many times as possible.
Along with the above asanas, herbal remedies provided by Abhimantrit Guruprasadam Fatty Liver Yog are also quite effective in the treatment of Arthritis and shows excellent recovery results in the patients. These herbal medicines are:
The aggravation of Vata and Kapha are heralding features of febrile illness. The symptoms of febrile illness are marked by a running nose, common cold and flu. The common cold, also known medically as ‘acute coryza’, is a swelling of the upper respiratory tract which is caused by a virus infection. It is quite an annoying condition, as a person in neither proper well or pooper sick. Despite modern advances in science, no vaccine or drug has been discovered that can effectively cure common cold and flu.
Through Yoga Sadhana, it is possible to build resistance, strength and adequate energy needed to overcome cold and its ill effects. All Yogic asanas are designed for strengthening the body and mind, and help us make less prone to emotional upsets, mental depression, neuro-endocrine imbalance and loss of energy.Downward Facing Dog
In this asana, you have to make your hands reach down to the floor, bending knees if required. Walk the hands out for 3-4 feet in front of the toes. Pushing into the palms, lift the hips up toward the sky and press back into the heels, try to get them flat to the ground. Keep the gaze toward the legs and continue pressing the chest toward thighs to make nice flat back.Seated Forward Bend
Sit on the mat with feet stretched in front, reach the hands up toward the sky and start hinging forward at hips. Allow the arms to drop towards the ground, reach forward to the toes. If the person can't reach any further, place the palms and lower the forehead down toward legs with nose toward the knees.Legs Up The Wall
Sit to one side next to the wall and place the bones as near to the wall as possible. Now lie down onto the back and straighten the legs up the wall, thus reaching the feet toward the ceiling for 5 minutes. Keep the legs together and straight, or separate them into V shape for more 5 minutes.
Along with the above asanas, herbal remedies provided by Abhimantrit Guruprasadam Febrile Illness Yog are also quite effective in the treatment of Arthritis and shows excellent recovery results in the patients. These herbal medicines are:
Fever is body’s immune system reaction to viral infection. Though fever is usually caused by a viral and bacterial infection, other medical condition and environmental factors may also lead to fever. It is described by sore throat, elevated body temperature, headache, body ache and at times even runny nose.Yoga Therapy For Fever
Yoga asanas and deep breathing techniques may help lower the body temperature and cause discomfort. It lets you breathe easier, clears congestion and boosts up the immune system. Regular practice of yoga asanas greatly improves the immunity against infections and helps the person stay healthy. Here are few yoga asanas that prove quite relief in fever:Nadi Shodhan Pranayama
Nadi shodhan pranayama has a very soothing and comforting effect on the nervous system that can turn the body temperature to normal. It is a simple breathing yoga that cleanses the circulatory and respiratory systems. This yoga asana is highly beneficial in headache.Shitali Pranayama
Sanskrit term, ‘shitali’ means cooling down and this asana is meant to cool down the entire body. In this breathing asana, air is breathed in through mouth and breathed out through the nostrils. This act of mouth inhalation lets the body cool down and relaxes the central nervous system, thus, healing fever.Anulom Vilom Pranayama
Anulom Vilom Pranayama has been described as an energy channel which purifies and cleanses the entire body. It helps relieve cold which is a fever symptom, by arousing the inner mucosal lining.
Along with the above asanas, herbal remedies provided by Abhimantrit Guruprasadam Fever Yog are also quite effective in the treatment of Arthritis and shows excellent recovery results in the patients. These herbal medicines are:
While consequence of dysphagia diagnosis is mainly focused on nutritional factors, swallowing ailment may cause respiratory issues. Most dysphagia sufferers experience breathing disorder in combination with the digestion and eating process.
Several dysphagic cases are related to esophageal muscular injury that results in the esophagus stiffening, with complete loss of functionality. As esophagus becomes weak for producing the necessary swallowing contractions, breathing and eating can affect destructively.Introduction To Dysphagia Therapy
Dysphagia therapy involves several exercises that range from jaw, lip, tongue to actual swallowing exercises. Jaw being the most important element during chewing since it breaks food into smaller pieces that are combined into single food bolus.
Here are few simple exercises that help regain jaw strength and give high amount of swallowing ability.Sideway Jaw Stretch
This exercise helps in recreating actual movements that are performed during chewing. Pain must not be felt in this exercise; however you should feel stretching of muscle. Just stop as you begin to feel pain, or as you develop jaw cramp. Repeat this 5-10 times in every session.Open Jaw Stretch
This exercise helps in stretching the jaw muscles. Open your mouth as wide as you can and bite on a gigantic apple. Don't open it that cramp is developed, although ensure that as you open your mouth, you feel jaw muscles being stretched. Repeat this 5-10 times.Jaw Circles
With the jaw, draw circle in the air. Move the jaw in circular motion by making largest circle possible. Yet again, stretch the muscles and perform this exercise 5-10 times.
Along with the above asanas, herbal remedies provided by Abhimantrit Guruprasadam Dysphagia Yog are also quite effective in the treatment of Arthritis and shows excellent recovery results in the patients. These herbal medicines are:
|Concern||Anti Hair Fall, Multi Concern, Damage Repair, Anti Dandruff, Hair Growth|
What do you see when looking in the mirror? If lifeless and dull hair is what you see, it’s high time you need to take action. Scientific studies have proven that hair is a reflection of overall health which makes it more important to keep it in good shape.
To help you with it, here are few yoga asanas that definitely play huge role in enhancing hair health.How Does Yoga Protect Hair?
Yoga works wonders on the body, it’s not much amazement. It can change the hair from dull to gorgeous that not even classy salons cannot do. Yoga aids digestion and reduce anxiety level that are major factors contributing to hair health.Yoga Poses For Hair ProtectionAdho Mukha Svanasana (Downward-Facing Dog Pose)
Adho Mukha Svanasana helps in improving blood circulation and lets fresh blood stream flow into the head. It condenses the abdominal muscles and aids digestion. It stretches the spine and neck, hence releasing stress. This yoga asana relaxes the mind and calms it.Uttanasana (Standing Forward Bend Pose)
Uttanasana gives instant energy to the cells in the head. It helps calm the frustrating mind and keeps sleepless nights and splitting headaches away. Digestive organs are properly massaged that solves constipation problems.Ustrasana (Camel Pose)
Ustrasana enhances digestion ability and thus excretion. It opens up the chest, thus providing relief to trapped stress. It cures and balances the chakras, improves the posture, and strengthens the body. It maintains the menstrual cycle and help release tension of the ovaries.
Along with the above asanas, herbal remedies provided by Abhimantrit Guruprasadam Hair loss Yog are also quite effective in the treatment of hair loss and shows excellent recovery results in the patients. These herbal medicines are:
Nowadays, the daunting truth is that age is no bar when it comes to ailments. People in their mid 20s as well are getting heart attacks. The reason being is, we skip our meals and replace it with junk food carrying zero nutrition? The issue is that it is taking toil on our health few years earlier than expected.
So, what’s the solution? One solution is to incorporate yoga in our daily lives. This solution is a natural and healthy alternative for cardio vascular patients. Yoga asanas are a a preventive measure and can be quite beneficial as well.Yoga Exercises For Healthy Heart
There are specific yoga asanas for heart problems that makes the body more rejuvenated and relaxed as you reach the final position.Tadasana (Mountain Pose)
The mountain pose or Tadasana help strengthen the heart and the vertebral column. Deep breathing involved help in expanding the lungs.Vrikshasana (Tree Pose)
The tree yoga pose or Vrikshasana is an exercise that helps in developing strong and balanced position. It expands the shoulders and opens the heart making the body feel more happy and confident. Utthita Hastapadasana (Extended hands and feet pose)
This yoga posture, that is, Utthita Hastapadasana requires concentration and strength for balancing. It helps in controlling weight, hence boosting the heart health.
Along with the above asanas, herbal remedies provided by Abhimantrit Guruprasadam Heart Disease Yog are also quite effective in the treatment of Cardio Vascular disease and shows excellent recovery results in the patients. These herbal medicines are:
Hernia refers to body tissue projecting through the cavity wall. Hernia can be painful, unsightly, and uncomfortable; and may even become the cause of severe complications. Hernia generally requires surgery and even after the operation, one needs to take extra measures to prevent the ailment from rising again.
Proper practice of asanas can help cure hernia. Yoga asnas help drive away symptoms and cure some forms of hernia such as, inguinal hernia. Let’s have a look at some asanas:Single-Leg Raising
Lie down, with arms by the sides. While inhaling, slowly raise the left leg up, without bending the knee, without feeling pain in the hamstrings, now exhale as you lower the leg. Keep lower back close to the floor. Start with 5 leg raises for every leg and count up to 20.Head Lifting
Lie down, with legs straight out and arms by the side. Exhale and raise arms, shoulders and head. Hold it for a while, now come down for inhalation and calm down. Repeat it up to 20 times.Embryo
Lie with the heels together, arms stretched behind. Bend knees as legs are raised, inhale slowly. As you exhale, tuck the knees in to the chest, hold them with interlocked fingers and bring chin up to the knees. lastly, bring both legs to the chest and move forward and backward few times.
Along with the above asanas, herbal remedies provided by Abhimantrit Guruprasadam Hernia Yog are also quite effective in the treatment of hernia and shows excellent recovery results in the patients. These herbal medicines are:
Artery, made up of semi-flexible muscle and tissues stretches like elastic as blood is pumped through it. The higher the blood force, the more arteries stretch and allow more flow of the blood. When the blood flow force is continually high, tissues that make arteries wall stretch beyond their set limit, and thus, get damaged. The only method to check if you have high blood pressure is by getting it tested.How Can Yoga Reduces Blood Pressure?
Any sort of physical activity lowers the blood pressure, hence yoga wins the race. It not a mere physical activity, it also has meditative effect. It not only reduces stress but also arouses every single organ in the body. Yoga relaxes mind, body and soul and balances the nervous system which controls autonomic functions. All of this affects high blood pressure and help in reducing it.Yoga Asanas For Controlling High Blood Pressure
The following yoga asanas help lower high blood pressure.Shishuasana (Child Pose)
Shishuasana help relieve fatigue and stress. It also normalizes the blood circulation.Vajrasana (Diamond Pose)
Vajrasana can be done even after dinner or lunch. It helps in controlling obesity and increase blood flow to lower abdomen.Paschimottanasana (Forward Bend Pose)
Paschimottanasana helps in reducing fatty deposits present in the abdominal region, consequently enabling in weight loss. It also acts as a stress reliever that normalizes high blood pressure.Shavasana (Corpse Pose)
Shavasana helps in relieving fatigue, depression and stress. It helps body relax and make it ready for sound sleep. It also stimulates circulation of the blood.
Along with the above asanas, herbal remedies provided by Abhimantrit Guruprasadam High Blood Pressure Yog are also quite effective in the treatment of high blood pressure and shows excellent recovery results in the patients. These herbal medicines are:
|Grade Standard||Medicine Grade|
Depending upon the doctor’s advice, yoga asanas for HIV/AIDs are a feasible solution. Yoga has been successfully used for curing numerous issues. HIV and AIDS are comparative newcomers in the realm of ailments that has made it more difficult to cure. However, yoga has proven to be quite useful for patients suffering from HIV and AIDS. It leads high level of improved immunity, physical fitness, greater sense of inner peace and lower levels of stress. Though almost all yoga poses prove helpful, there are asanas that yield a greater advantage for this particular ailment.
Meditation, pranayama and simple yoga asanas with deep relaxation have shown merits in the field. It helps increase CD4 count and decrease viral load after 2 months of regular practice in comparison to those who continue with yoga therapy.
AIDS affects different ways in different people. Their emotional and medical issues vary tremendously. Some highly common limitations are:
Along with the above asanas, herbal remedies provided by Abhimantrit Guruprasadam HIV Yog are also quite effective in the treatment of HIV/Aids and shows excellent recovery results in the patients. These herbal medicines are:
|Grade Standard||Medicine Grade|
|Packaging Size||0.60 Kg|
Fistula is a medical name given to an abnormal channel which links two cavities of the body, such as, rectum and vagina. One major reason behind the formation of fistula is abscess. It is a pouch of pus in any part of the body that constantly gets filled up with one’s own body fluids like urine or excreta. Constant wetting and dampening hinders the curing process. Generally fistulas occur around the anus and genitals region. Thus an anal fistula would be an unusual tunnel between anus and genitals.Yoga For Fistula
Yoga has been known to effectively treat fistulas. If the cause is identified, treatment is not much difficult. Another reason behind the formation of fistulas is stress, as per medical science and Yoga experts. This is the reason why Yoga focuses heavily on relaxation. The following plan of Pranayama (Breathing exercises), Asanas (Yoga poses), Sattvic (Pure and Simple) Yoga Diet and Kriyas (cleansing techniques) produce excellent results.Asanas (Yoga Poses)
Do all Yoga asanas (poses) with more stress on
These are breathing exercises that are designed for coolness and calmness of the mind. It supplies the body with all the required bio-energy. The following breathing exercises are recommended
Lastly, don’t put more stress on the digestive system by taking heavy foods. Say hello to Sattvic Yogic diet, which is predominantly vegetarian, high in fiber, low in spices and salt, fruit and salads.
Along with the above asanas, herbal remedies provided by Abhimantrit Guru Prasadam and Anal Fistula Yog for Inflammation Bowel Disease are also quite effective in the treatment of IBD and shows excellent recovery results in the patients. These herbal medicines are: