Curious about if sex selection is really possible? Is picking the sex of your baby a true thing?
Valid medical processes do exist that permit a baby gender selection. Yet these methods are extremely expensive and not easily available to most people.
There are Only 2 Proven Scientific Options:
- Premplantation Genetic Diagnosis (PGD) also known as IVF
- Sperm-sorting through Microsort.
How IVF Sex Selection Works
Eggs are retreived from the female, and semen is collected from the male. Embryos are made through vitro fertilization, then clinically tested to determine which embryos are boys (XY) or women (XX). Then, embryos of the desired sex are implanted back into the female’s uterus for pregnancy.
This process was created to stop specific X-linked genetic diseases, such as hemophilia. However the exact same scientific principles can be used for genetic screening.
Since just embryos of the chosen sex are implanted into the female, sex selection by PGD/IVF is 100% accurate, the only legitimate scientific method that guarantees a desirable gender.
The Way Sperm Sorting Works
Sperm is collected in the man and separated based on if the sperm genetically conveys a female (X) or male (Y) chromosome
The Microsort sex selection method utilizes a machine which could detect if it’s the semen has more DNA using a fluorescent stain that glows. Sperm carrying an X chromosome have 2.8 percent more DNA and so glow brighter in the system.
Considering that the sperm is just ‘chosen’ to get a particular sort of sperm, there’s not any guarantee that a baby will be the selected gender with sperm sorting. But, sperm sorting through Microsort has been clinically demonstrated to boost the probability of conceiving a boy or girl.
Microsort shows 93% efficacy for women, and 82% efficacy for boys; better than 50:50 natural chances. Nevertheless this still implies, 7 percent of mothers wanting a girl might actually receive a boy, and 12 percent of mothers looking for a boy might actually get a girl. Contrary to PGD/IVF, there isn’t any 100% assurance of the desired sex with sperm sorting independently.
PGD, or PGS, using IVF, is the sole sex selection method that will 100% guarantee you’ll have a male, or female. Microsort chances vary in the 80-90% assurance you’ll have a particular sex infant.
On the other hand, the likelihood of getting pregnant using a legitimate sex selection procedure, either PGD/IVF or sperm sorting, is quite low, and the two approaches are extremely costly.
Standard IUI is just <10-15% successful for becoming pregnant in each effort, even WITHOUT sperm sorting. This percentage is much lower when coupled with sperm sorting methods, since less <50 percent of semen is used.
IVF is just 20-40% successful for pregnancy every cycle for a female under 40, WITHOUT PGD. Success rates for IVF/PGD pregnancy are a considerably lower when coupled with sex choice, roughly approximate 10-20 percent, as merely the embryos of their desired sex are moved back into the female.
To be able to avert a zero percent cycle, Microsort could be inserted to IVF/PGD as then >80-90percent of embryos generated are the chosen sex.