Junior High Mathematics is a required academic course for all students in the 7th and 8th grades at AIS-Salzburg and meets daily for a total of five hours per week throughout the school year.
Junior High Mathematics I at AIS-Salzburg is a general mathematics course with the purpose of providing students with a broad range of fundamental skills necessary for further study of mathematics at the high school level. The goal of the course is to strengthen students’ understanding of arithmetic while providing a strong foundation for a wide range of mathematical topics. The main topics covered by the course are: expressions and equations, inequalities, ratios and proportions, percents, circles, area and volume, exponents, and probability and statistics.
Junior High Mathematics II at AIS-Salzburg is a general mathematics course with the purpose of further developing students’ skills in the fields of Algebra and Geometry. The goal of the course is to provide students with a variety of mathematical tools which can be used to solve problems, while maintaining an appropriate level of academic rigor which is often lacking from application based math courses. The main topics covered by the course are: linear equations and inequalities, exponential functions and sequences, perimeter and area, angles, triangles, and transformations. The course also teaches students how to display and analyse data, and the foundations of mathematical reasoning and proofs.
Geometry is a required, credit-bearing academic course for all students in grade 9 at AIS-Salzburg and meets daily for a total of five hours per week throughout the school year.
Geometry is the study of points, lines, shapes, and solids. The students will be engaged with fascinating theories concerning these which have been proven by mathematicians over thousands of years and learn to prove them themselves. The study of geometry develops the student’s spatial awareness and ability to think and imagine in 2 and 3 dimensions. Students will learn to draw diagrams accurately and construct shapes precisely using a compass. Course content includes the study of lines, points, and planes, angles, transformations, perimeter, area and volume, congruency and similarity, the Pythagorean Theorem. Finally students will be introduced to trigonometry.
Algebra II is a required, credit-bearing academic course for all students in grade 10 at AIS-Salzburg and meets daily for a total of five hours per week throughout the school year.
The Algebra II course focuses primarily on the intermediate algebra level with the goal to evolve to circular and trigonometric functions and some advanced algebra. The ultimate unity of algebra and trigonometry will provide the foundation necessary for continuing on to precalculus and AP calculus in the following years. Major objectives for the course include the study of linear, quadratic, exponential, rational, and irrational functions and the ability to graph them by hand and on an automatic grapher; the ability to select a function and derive an equation that suits the information given within the problem; use of a variety of mathematical concepts to solve the same problem; and the ability to create mathematical models of phenomena in the real world.