The rise of Wi-Fi’s role in home automation has primarily come about due to
the networked nature of deployed electronics where electronic devices (TVs
and AV receivers, mobile devices, etc.) have started becoming part of the
home IP network and due the increasing rate of adoption of mobile computing
devices (smartphones, tablets, etc.).
Several organizations are working to equip homes with technology that
enables the occupants to use a single device to control all electronic devices
and appliances. The solutions focus primarily on environmental monitoring,
energy management, assisted living, comfort, and convenience. The solutions
are based on open platforms that employ a network of intelligent sensors
to provide information about the state of the home. These sensors monitor
systems such as energy generation and metering; heating, ventilation, and air
conditioning (HVAC); lighting; security; and environmental key performance
indicators. The information is processed and made available through a number
of access methods such as touch screens, mobile phones, and 3–D browsers
. The networking aspects are bringing online streaming services or net-
work playback, while becoming a mean to control of the device functionality
over the network. At the same time mobile devices ensure that consumers
have access to a portable ’controller’ for the electronics connected to the
network. Both types of devices can be used as gateways for IoT applications.
In this context many companies are considering building platforms that integrate the building automation with entertainment, healthcare monitoring,
energy monitoring and wireless sensor monitoring in the home and building
IoT applications using sensors to collect information about operating con-
ditions combined with cloud hosted analytics software that analyse disparate
data points will help facility managers become far more proactive about
managing buildings at peak efficiency.
Using the IoT to create a smart building must add value to a business in order to be worthwhile. The application of smart building and IoT technology should accomplish three important things:
Improve the occupant experience
Meeting all of these objectives ultimately adds value to a property through cost savings and enhanced revenue. When contractors can provide these to customers then the IoT technology they offer is delivering a measurable ROI.