Those who specialize in graphology, the practice of handwriting analysis, believe your penmanship harbors more than the power of self-expression; they believe it bears the unique imprint of your personality.
Check new design of our homepage! This article aims at giving you basic insights on handwriting analysis and to develop awareness about what your and other people's handwriting signify.
Let's see what your handwriting has to say about you. Mysticurious Staff Last Updated: Mar 12, Spoken words are the symbols of mental experience, and written words are the symbols of spoken words. Just as all men have not the same speech sounds, so all men have not the same writing - Aristotle What is graphology?
It is defined as a scientific study and analysis of handwriting, or the art of interpreting character and personality through handwriting. This can be taken up as a professional practice or as a hobby or even for self assessment and improvement. It is said that a person's past makes an impact on his handwriting.
Hence, handwriting can describe the past. Ruth Gardner said, an individual can be successful in disguising his thoughts, feelings to an extent but he can never do it totally. And, it shows up in handwriting. Obtaining a Right Sample You may or may not believe it but even if you try to manipulate your handwriting, a graphologist scholar will tell you who you are, by merely analyzing your handwriting.
However, there are a few prerequisites that one needs to follow. You need to make sure that the writing sample is at least words.
Sample that has been copied from already written matter and poetry should not be used. Size In the sections below, different handwriting types and their associated behavioral traits have been listed along with specimens.
A person with tall writing, is ambitious, observant, farsighted. Here the writer looks at life with a microscope. Very analytical, modest, reserved, resourceful, thrift, obedient and meticulous. They are often misers and lack self-confidence. They desire to travel, are boastful, tolerant, frank, friendly, imaginative, artistic, spontaneous, broadminded and social.
They often display pride, ego and lack of concentration. They can be obtrusive, impudent and intrusive. A person with large handwriting likes being noticed and standing out in the crowd.
This indicates that the writer possesses inhibition, has self-control, self-discipline, is economical, distrustful, socially passive, inartistic, introvert, timid, seclusive and suspicious.
Upright writing indicates reliance, a slant towards the left indicates introversion and towards the right indicates extroversion. They lack self control, are impulsive, intense, expressive, radical, dependent, and cannot handle frustrations.
They express their opinions, are confident, affectionate, kind, extrovert, and think about the future. They can also be impulsive Straight: This indicates that the writers head controls his heart.
People with straight hand are independent and are able to control their emotions in time of crisis. They can work well alone, but they lack spontaneity.
They are independent, objective, non-sympathetic, cannot express themselves easily, self contained, and are choosy about things and friends. Indicates that the person may have had a repressed childhood, fears the future, evades from reality, and is very defensive.
This indicates extreme sensitivity, moodiness, unpredictability, versatility, and ambivalence. Right Slant Baseline Normally Straight: Ascending to the Right: Optimistic, has faith in the future, feels loved, excited, joyous and invigorated.
Pessimism, fatigue, discouraged, depressed, and ill. An arc shaped baseline indicates that the writer starts a project enthusiastically at first but later gives up and leaves things unfinished. The writer is a slow starter and lacks confidence or purpose.
However, as the project begins, the writer will overcome the negativity.Handwriting Analysis as an Assessment Aid, Keith Laycock. The analysis of handwriting is an art, not a science, and the quality of the result is dependent upon the caliber and capacity of the artist.
The left and right margins retreat. The slant is vertical and, in some instances, backwards. Lower loops are close-set and one is sealed.
(a) (c) (b) Figure 1(a) Rightward slant (b) Upright (Vertical) (c) Leftward slant) In slant assessment, measurement is taken by the angle of the stroke in relation to the baseline of the.
Handwriting Analysis - Free download as PDF File .pdf), Text File .txt) or read online for free.
|Handwriting Insights Portable Personality Test Handwriting Analysis Terms||The Analysis of Handwriting Graphology What does your writing reveal about you? Handwriting analysis is used to detect the character of a person and is used by some companies as part of an interview and hiring process, in fact I read of one lady who became a graphologist after being turned down at a job interview, because of her handwriting.|
|The Lowdown on Handwriting Analysis | Psychology Today||You are detail-oriented, organized, and emphatic in what you say or do. Pointy lowercase cursive "s" You enjoy learning new things.|
|Account Options||Most people write with a right slant. They range from slightly right to far right.|
Acquisitive Shown by tiny hooks at the beginning of words. If hook is in the middle zone, this is a need to acquire material things. If in upper zone, it is a need to acquire knowledge, ideas, or education.
Aggressiveness Shown by hard right upstrokes that replace a lower loop. Slant: Left or right direction of writing as it separates from the baseline.
Degree can be measured on a protractor scale. Degree can be measured on a protractor scale. Upstroke and downstroke slant are measured differently; consistency is the key factor for both.
Handwriting that used to slant toward the right that now slants leftward shows a person who is withdrawing emotionally from the world. President Richard Nixon's deteriorating signature During the course of Nixon's presidency, we can see how stressful events while in .
Apr 08, · My intricate analyzation of the slant, letters, circles, spacing, size, shapes, margins, and loops in each individual’s particular handwriting gives me an edge. I quickly place them in categories such as: emotional, practical, or logical.