November 08, 2019
Vitamin D is commonly known as the sunshine vitamin. When your body is exposed to sunlight, it produces vitamin D; however, it is also contained in some foods and supplements. Vitamin D is very important for your body. It maintains healthy teeth and bones and also helps fight diseases like cancer, multiple sclerosis, and type 1 diabetes. It supports the immune system, nervous system, and the brain. The vitamin also helps in the improvement of lungs and cardiovascular health. Vitamin D is not actually a vitamin but a pro-hormone. Since vitamins cannot be produced by the body itself, vitamin...
December 21, 2017
In today’s world, people are more considerate about physical fitness and well-being than ever before, and for this reason, they perform various exercises and partake in sports to keep their bodies fit and healthy. Our bodies get various vitamins and nutrients from the food we eat on a daily basis; however, the body doesn’t receive all the required nutrients in the adequate amount. One example of this is a nutrient known as choline. The possible symptoms of choline deficiency include; fatigue, muscle aches, memory loss, and mood swings. To fulfill the additional requirements of nutrients, minerals, and vitamins...
July 10, 2017
Wondering about what to eat to stay healthy? Well, there’s a whole lot to choose from. You just need to know where to look. Fruits and berries: These are incredibly tasty and easy to add into any diet as they need little preparation and are best for health. Apples are highly rich in vitamin C, fiber, and various antioxidants. Bananas are known to be the best potassium source. They are also rich in fiber and vitamin B6. Oranges are known for a high content of vitamin C. They also contain antioxidants, fiber, and are incredibly tasty. Blueberries are a...
workout plans -
April 04, 2017
A lot of students are in search of various ways that can help them learn better. You might have heard about students using DMAE supplement to help increase their learning capabilities. However, in order for you to know how it works let's go over what is meant by DMAE. DMAE basically stands for DiMethyl Amino Ethanol. It is a supplement in the form of a tablet that's used by students to improve their brain power as its effects are said to be a bit similar to choline and caffeine, allowing us to become active. Students usually take 1 capsule...
January 05, 2017
Amino acids are composed of a carboxyl group (-COO) and an amine group (NH2) and a functional group is attached to them. These functional groups are specific for every amino acid, and they impart different properties to them. Amino acids combine together to make peptide chains and proteins. They are organic compounds, and there exist 20 amino acids overall. These 20 amino acids are divided into two categories which are essential and non-essential amino acids. Among the 20 amino acids, nine of them are essential amino acids and eleven of them are non-essential amino acids. Figure.1. Structure of Amino...