People read left to right on a page in almost all circumstances. When it comes to reading most forms of text, few people will read it differently. Thus, when people view a webpage, they will read the same way. However, people do not read everything on a webpage and may skim the page, making it crucial to highlight specific details in easy to read places.
What people want to see
Reading is becoming less of a social norm than what it used to be. The Pew Research Center finds that in 2015, around 27 percent of U.S. adults did not read a single book within 12 months. The problem is that this lack of reading does not stop at just books, but it continues to any form of reading, including online content.
Most people may skim or click “Accept” without reading the Terms and Conditions of an IOS update, but people may also skim content on a web page. If someone needs information on dental implants, they may only have one question out of hundreds of possible questions. If the individual finds the answer, then he or she is less likely to stay on the specific page and may “bounce,” or move, to another website.
By placing crucial content in specific spots on a page, we can help ensure that the individual sees the most important information about a practice. This is where the “Z-Pattern” can be effective.
Brandon Jones states in a blog on envato tuts+, that “The Z-Layout is a great way to start just about any web design project because it addresses the core requirements for any effective site: branding, hierarchy, structure, and call to action.”
The Z-Pattern is a design that follows the projected route of the eyes when an individual reads, left to right and top to bottom. The pattern starts with the top left of the page to the top right, diagonally down the middle to the bottom left and then to the bottom right. Imagine that the reader makes an imaginary line from the top left to the top right and this line is where a practice needs to include the main components the viewer needs to focus on.
The diagonal line will include the body of content, including bits of information that relate to the main focus. The bottom line will contain the call to action at some point. It is important to note that the Z-Pattern is only useful for pages with less content. For the pages with a large amount of content, we will choose to follow the F-Layout instead.
At Doctor Genius, we know when and how to use these layouts properly and help sell the specifics of the page for you. We can help you customize the website for your practice and maximize the level of access for the information that shows off your practice. Call us for more information today.
At Doctor Genius, we work with clients to expand their private practice by helping them reach, engage and convert consumers into new patients. By offering high-end web marketing services to medical and health professionals throughout the United States, we help clients gain more profit and build trustworthy relationships with patients to initiate sustainable practice growth.
We construct a website for your practice, establish an active online presence, build and constantly update social media profiles, help you build stronger connections with patients, streamline the appointment scheduling process, funnel traffic from search engines directly to your practice website and much more. To begin the process of increasing the success and presence of your practice, give us a call at 877-477-2311.