PerfectRouter.com DD-WRT Router Tutorial|
Configuring as a Repeater Bridge
By default, DD-WRT is configured as an open / unsecured AP with the wireless
name 'dd-wrt'. If you want to use the router as a repeater bridge, you will
need to change a few settings. This is a relatively straightforward process,
which will be shown in this tutorial.
You should start by setting up the setup page password as shown in the
tutorial, so you can get to
the various tabs of the setup page.
After that, configure the router to function as a normal repeater by following
tutorial. Once everything is functioning
as a normal repeater, follow this tutorial to alter the configuration to be a
A repeater bridge is essentially the same as a repeater, however a repeater
bridge uses the DHCP server of the existing network so that all computers are on
the same subnet. In most cases a normal repeater is fine and a more desirable
setup, but some networks may have resources such as network storage or print
servers that will not function correctly with devices on different IP networks.
Make sure you are connected to the DD-WRT router by either an ethernet cable to
one of the four switch ports, or to the DD-WRT router's wireless network before
You will want to initially configure the repeater in close proximity to the AP
you are trying to repeat. This is to assure that range is not an issue, and to
make sure everything is functional before putting the repeater in its final
Changing Repeater to Repeater Bridge
Bring up the DD-WRT setup page.
Look at the upper right corner at the numbers
next to WAN IP:. These should not be 0.0.0.0, if they are then you will
need to go back to the normal repeater tutorial and assure that you are connected to
the host AP.
In our example it is 192.168.1.130. Of these, the first three numbers are
important. You will need these in a moment, so write them down.
Go to the Status>WAN tab. The WAN IP should
match the number next to IP Address in the WAN>Configuration Type
You will also need the numbers next to Subnet Mask and Gateway. For reference,
here is what we are working with on our example for the tutorial. Your numbers
may be different.
Once you have all of these, go to the Wireless>Basic
Setup tab and change the Wireless Mode to Client Bridge for the
Click Save. Do not click Apply yet, we will get to that later.
Go to the Setup>Basic Setup tab. Assure that STP under WAN
Connection Type is Disabled.
Under Network Setup change the first three numbers of the Router IP to be the WAN IP address you
wrote down earlier, but change the last digit so it is one digit up from the
last digit of the Gateway address you wrote down. For example, for our numbers we got a WAN IP
address of 192.168.1.130 and a
Gateway address of 192.168.1.1, so
our new Router IP will be 192.168.1.2. If your last digit comes out to be 255,
change it to be 2 numbers down, to be 253.
Enter the Subnet Mask that you wrote down earlier, and put the Gateway address
you found in both the Gateway and Local DNS fields.
If you check Assign WAN Port to Switch under WAN Port then you can use
the internet port on the router just like one of the four switch ports.
Click the Save button. For
reference, here is what our Setup>Basic Setup tab looks like.
Go to the Setup>Advanced Routing
tab. Change the Operating Mode
to Router. Save.
Go to the Services>Services
tab. Set DNSmasq>DNSMasq
Go to the Security>Firewall
tab. Uncheck all of the boxes, but leave
checked. Set Firewall Protection>SPI Firewall
to Disable. This configuration will rely on the firewall running on the Gateway
or host AP device, just like if you were directly connected to it. Click the Save button. Then wait a moment and click the Apply
You will need to disconnect from the DD-WRT repeater, then reconnect. You may
need to wait 30 seconds or so for the repeater to reboot. If everything is
working, when you reconnect you should have an IP address issued to you by the
remote / host AP. Be sure to make a backup as mentioned in the following section
of the tutorial.
Also, after applying the settings the DD-WRT setup page URL will change to the router IP address you determined earlier.
If things are not working, you can reset the unit to defaults as mentioned in
the next section of the tutorial, then reconnect and bring up the setup page at
the default address http://192.168.1.1. From here you can reconfigure or restore
your normal repeater backup. Make sure you did not skip over anything when
following this tutorial. If you continue to have issues, contact us.
A few more tips..
Feel free to explore the DD-WRT setup page on your own, but be sure to make a
backup when you get a working configuration for your implementation. This is
done under Administration>Backup
and will allow you to restore your configuration in
the event something goes awry.
If you really mess up the configuration or forget a password, you can always
reset the unit back to the default configuration. This is done by powering up
the unit, then holding the reset button on the back of the router with a pen for
about 20 seconds or until the power light flashes at a regular interval. About a
minute later the unit will have rebooted and be accessible again.