Frequently Asked Questions
1. How old is the park?
The park started in 1954. For more information on this subject, visit our history page.
2. Where do the animals come from?
Most of the animals at the park come to us from other zoological facilities in North America where they are born in captivity. Some of the animals originated in the wild but are injured or orphaned and rehabilitated but cannot be returned the wild. Read more information on this subject.
3. What happens to the animals in the winter?
Most of the animals at the park are indigenous to the province and are therefore well adapted for winter weather. The birds who would typically migrate or are not native to our area i.e. peafowl and swans are moved to barns for the cold season.
4. Can I bring you an injured animal?
If you find an injured or orphaned animal please contact your local district office of the Department of Natural Resources. View a list of regional DNR offices.
5. Do the animals have names?
We do not give the animals names. We want to reinforce no the message that these are not domesticated or pets.
6. What do you feed the animals? When is feeding time?
Each animal has a specialized meal plan based on a one week rotation. Their food is carefully measured and their intake is recorded daily. Feeding happens throughout the day and for most of the animals is a very low key event.
7. Can we feed the animals ?
People cannot bring anything to feed the animals, there are coin operated feeders for the waterfowl and the white tailed deer which enables us to regulate the calorie intake yet provide nutritionally balanced food. Feeding of any other animal is strictly prohibited. Please read What Every Vistor Needs to Know.
8. How many species of animals are there in the park?
There are 29 species of mammals and 45 species of birds.
9. How long does it take to walk through the park? How long is the park trail?
The path through the park is about 2kms in length. How long it takes will depend on how much time you spend at each enclosure! The walk around the Wetland trail is 1km in length and the St. Andrew’s Marsh trail is about 3.5kms.
10. How do I apply for jobs/volunteer?
Information about volunteering or working at the park can be found on our our opportunities page.