NASA has squashed "wild" speculation among conspiracy theorists who fear a huge asteroid will smash into Earth next month.
They claim a massive space rock will hit Puerto Rico some time between September 15 and 28 causing mass devastation.
This "enormous dinosaur-killer" of an asteroid will send a 300 ft tsunami rushing across the Atlantic, devastating much of the UK as well as Spain, Holland and most of the eastern seaboard of America.
Some 30 million people will die more or less immediately, whilst a further 40 million will perish as civil disorder sweeps the globe and society descends into anarchy.
Luckily, the scary speculation has been halted by NASA, who claim it is based on "unsubstantiated" rumours.
"There is no scientific basis - not one shred of evidence - that an asteroid or any other celestial object will impact Earth on those dates," said Paul Chodas, manager of NASA's Near-Earth Object office, which keeps an eye on potentially dangerous space rocks.
"If there were any object large enough to do that type of destruction in September, we would have seen something of it by now."
He claimed there was a 0.01% chance of a big-hitting asteroid smashing into earth in the next 100 years.
At least we are now able to rest in the knowledge that we can enjoy stargazing without this major threat - and there's no better place to do that than in Scotland.
Thanks to the high quality Scottish skies, you can view the stars and beautiful sights like the Northern Lights all year round.
The Galloway Forest Park is the first Dark Sky Park in the UK and is only one of three in Europe.
The site was named one of the best places in the world to see the stars at night, only missing out on the top spot to Flagstaff in Arizona, USA, in a poll conducted by top American travel firm Shermans.
More than 7,000 stars and planets are visible with the naked eye from the park.
Remote parts of Scotland have low light pollution, which means you will certainly be able to find a few places that are perfect for viewing the night sky.
So if you don't own a telescope, there's no problem. Experts say it’s best to start with a full view of the night sky.
Scotland’s national parks offer stunning views, though darkest in winter, are still spectacular on warmer nights.
The nation is also the perfect location to take in the stunning aurora borealis, also known as the Northern Lights.
The spectacular light show can often be seen in Caithness in the north of Scotland and has topped a bucket list of things Scots would like to see or do before they die.
So hopefully, our galleries will inspire you to pick up a camera and capture Scotland's night sky at its finest.