Summer ends with an explosion of colour in the forests. This is the season known as ‘ruska’, when the autumnal reds, browns and yellows are especially beautiful on the fells of Lapland. September is also a popular time for trekking in northern Finland.
autumn in figures
+2°C – +15°C
80 – 90 days
September – November
it’s time for ‘ruska’
While Finns are going back to work, recalling the summer and planning for the next one, others are still finding their way here, to spend a different kind of holiday. Autumn is a time of silence. A time to step back and calm down. It is a time for hiking in clean, crisp air and colorful surroundings. Waiting for the winter to arrive.
Autumn leaf colour, or “ruska” to locals, is a spectacular natural phenomenon that paints northern landscapes in deep and soft tones. Covered in forests and wildernesses, Finland is a prime destination for some serious leaf peeping.
berries and mushrooms from forest
The woods are dotted with wild edible mushrooms, such as yellow chanterelles and brown porcini. Autumn is a heavenly time for people who like to gather their own food.
The pièce de résistance regarding Finnish food products is the surprising fact that they are often completely free of charge and have grown in the wild. Everyman’s right in the country’s forests guarantees that you are allowed to pick almost anything your heart and mouth desires.
season of change
Autumn is the time when Finns are taking their boats out of the water, putting their bicycles in the garage, and preparing to get out their skates and skis. It is the time between the two main seasons – summer and winter – but no less important.
Autumn leaf colour acts as a messenger of sorts; it bids a melancholic but sweet farewell to long summer days and serves as a reminder of the dark and cold winter days looming around the corner.
northern lights season begins
Even though many people associate the Northern Lights with cold and snowy winter scenery, the most active seasons are actually autumn and spring when the earth’s orientation towards the sun maximises the probability of solar flares interacting with the planet’s magnetic field to generate this phenomenon.