In this lab we'll explore the syntax of Supercollider and learn to make some sounds.
Work through the following short tutorials. These are .sc documents; download to your workspace and open them from Supercollider.
1. Getting Started
2. Easy Synthesis
3. Signal Generators
5. Control Signals
Due: Monday, Oct. 10, 9 pm
Review the examples in the documents 3SignalGenerators and 4Envelopes. Create a SC file that is titled with your last name and first initial followed by #1.sc. For example, "HemingwayB#1.sc".
In this file you should create an example of SuperCollider code that does the following:
1a. Create a SuperCollider example:
• Using Buffer create a waveform that has only odd harmonics 1 (fundamental), 3, 5, and 7 such that the third harmonic has the highest gain.
• Using this waveform, Env, EnvGen and Osc play a note with a linen envelope.
1b. Create a SuperCollider example:
• Using Buffer create a waveform that has only even harmonics 1 (fundamental), 2, 4, 6, and 8 such that the 2nd harmonic has the highest gain.
• Using this waveform, Env, EnvGen and Osc play a note with a reverse percussion envelope.
1c. Combine 1a and 1b such that waveform #1 starts loud and fades out, while waveform #2 starts soft and gets loud. The two waveform should specify the same fundamental frequency. In effect, there should be a crossfade between the two tones.
Be sure to play and to plot the results from all three with the scope!
Email your SC file to email@example.com. KEEP A COPY!!
Assessment. Each programming assignment will be assessed as either complete, incomplete or not received (C, I, or N).
C: To be complete, all components of the assigned need to be completed in the submitted work. Omitting elements will lead to an incomplete.
N: If the assignment is not received by the due date, it is assigned an N and there is no opportunity to redo the assignment.
I: If you receive an incomplete, you will have an additional week to redo the assignment and to turn in a revised version. If the revised version fulfills all elements of the assignment, it will considered complete and receive a C. Revised work files should have the letter ‘Rev’ appended to the original file name.