IELTS TEST PREPARATION
IELTS EXAM OVERVIEW
The International English Language Testing System, or IELTS for short, is a mandatory international level test for Non-Native English language speakers who are aiming to study or work in native English speaking countries. The concept behind this test is to assess the feasibility of the potential students or workers in all aspects of English language usage. Thus, it assesses them on how well they can communicate in oral and written forms along with comprehending what they have heard and read. This is predominantly used in the European based education systems where as its counterpart, the TOEFL, is the option of choice in most American based institutions.
Proper Choice Training Institute offers affordable and comprehensive IELTS preparatory classes that facilitate your effort to earn the highest possible band score. With our specially designed study plan, students are evaluated at the start of the preparation by conducting diagnostic and accordingly sessions are planned. We take pride in our students’ achievements and love to make them be the best possible version of themselves they can be by acing their exam.
The scores of the IELTS Exam are valid for TWO years
IELTS COURSE PLAN
IELTS Test preparation at Proper Choice begins with a DIAGNOSTIC TEST which evaluate student’s strength and weaknesses; thus, it will allow us to know for a better score.
32 hours of IELTS Test Preparation, this includes
- Assessment Test
- In Class Training which focuses on Listening, Reading , Writing and Speaking in details
- 5 MOCK tests and their review sessions
- Unlimited doubt clearing and review sessions until upcoming test date
- Personal attention to individual students to enhance their score
- Weekdays and Weekend batches
- Flexible timings which suits working professionals and students
- We guarantee score enhancement as our trainers are specialized in test preparations.
- 1-2 week intensive classes with series of practice test and their reviews
- Focus on particular module according to students need
- Flexible Timing
- Personalized attention
IELTS TEST STRUCTURE
IELTS is a mandatory international level based test for Non-Native English language speakers aiming to study or work in native English speaking countries. IELTS is jointly managed by Cambridge English Language Assessment, The British Council and IDP Education Pvt. Ltd.
There are two forms of IELTS Testing:
IELTS General Training Exam–
This is for those who are planning to undertake non-academic training or to gain work experience for immigration purposes.
IELTS Academic Exam–
This is intended for those who want to enroll in universities and other institutes for higher education purposes in English speaking countries.
The difference between the General and Academic training version is the content and purpose of the tasks. All other features such as timing allocation, length of written response and reporting of score are same.
As this is an English Language Exam, they focus on assessing the students in all areas of communication: Reading, Writing, Listening and Speaking.All students are given the same Listening and Speaking tests; Reading and Writing vary as per the need of the student who opt for Academic or General Training exams.
Each section is scored separately in the range of 0 to 9, and the overall score is an average score of all four sections. The results are available usually in 13 days from the test date.
RECENT OCTOBER 2019 SCORE
|VLADLENA SAIDOVA||AASHINA AGARWAL|
|Listening – 7||Listening – 9|
|Reading – 7||Reading – 8.5|
|Writing – 7||Writing – 7|
|Speaking – 7||Speaking – 7|
|Band Score – 7||Band Score – 8|
WHY CHOOSE US
- Personal attention to individual student
- Customized programs
- Exhaustive study materials
- Expert guidance from highly experienced faculty
- Complete and in-depth coverage of test syllabi
RECENT IELTS SCORE
How are IELTS Score Calculated?
IELTS scores are between 0-9 in which you will be scored individually for each module. Also, you will get an overall band score that is the average of all the modules.
What are the best resources for IELTS preparation?
There are plenty of materials that you can available in online as well as in shops. In that, the best study guide is The Official Cambridge Guide to IELTS and the website is ieltsbuddy.com
What is the best way to prepare for IELTS?
Before starting preparation, know the format of the test. Schedule your test at least 2 months away and start doing practice for each module. And the best way is, to undergo a coaching for IELTS.
How do I write essay for IELTS Task 2?
It depends on the countries that you are opting. The TOEFL is more commonly accepted by American institutions, while the IELTS is more commonly accepted overseas.
How can I get 8 band in each module of IELTS?
Starting with Listening, listen to English every day and listen actively. For reading, read the task and instructions carefully. Finally, for writing and speaking, you need to have a good range of grammar.
Why do many IELTS students are fail to get above 6.5 in the writing exam?
It is relatively easy to get 6.5 in writing, but in order to score 7 in writing is challenging. Also lots of people think they write/speak well but are actually pretty poor at them both. To get 7 in writing, you need an IELTS teacher to show you what you are doing wrong.
How much does the IELTS exam cost in Dubai?
The IELTS test fee for IDP Paper Based is AED 1100 and the Computer-delivered is AED 1260. For BC Paper Based is AED 1092 and the Computer-delivered is AED 1155.
How can I prepare for IELTS in 20 days?
First and foremost, know how to manage all four sections of IELTS exam and get familiar with the structure of all modules. Then, start practicing each section using the strategies and tips, in order to tackle the questions in a correct way.