LAUREL, Maryland — Pluto's largest moon, Charon, is a surprisingly strange world at the outer edges of the solar system.
A new image of the moon taken by the New Horizons probe just before the spacecraft flew past Pluto, reveals that Charon has a relatively young surface with surprisingly few craters, but many noticeable formations.
This indicates that the surface of Charon may have been reformed by geological processes, though scientists aren't yet sure exactly what those forces would be.
The moon has a few distinctive features immediately visible in the new photo — which was taken on July 13, a day before the closest Pluto flyby, when New Horizons was 289,000 miles from the moon.
“It’s a small world with deep canyons, troughs, cliffs and dark regions that are still mysterious to us," New Horizons deputy project scientist Cathy Olkin said during a news conference revealing the image of Charon at the Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Lab.
One of the canyons is visible as a dark indentation on the left side of the world. The canyon is about 4 to 6 miles deep, according to Olkin.
Charon also has a distinctive and mysterious dark north polar region — unofficially called "Mordor" — that has left scientists puzzled. Some researchers have suggested that the dark, reddish color may actually be caused by Pluto's atmosphere sloughing off the dwarf planet, and gravitating into Charon's polar regions.
Other hypotheses posit that the reddish material was actually dug out from below when an impactor slammed into the moon, spraying its material over the surface.
Scientists can pick out quite a lot of detail from this image of Charon. Sunlight illuminates the area south of the equator, casting shadows that make it easier to map the nooks and crannies of the moon's surface, NASA said.
There are some craters visible — just not as many as scientists initially expected to find.
Another one of Pluto's moons is also getting some New Horizons love. Mission managers have pinned down the size of Hydra, a small, oblong piece of ice orbiting Pluto. The moon, which is mostly made of ice, is about 27 miles by 20 miles across.
"New Horizons has finally nailed the basic physical properties of Hydra," says Hal Weaver, New Horizons project scientist said in a statement. "We're going to see Hydra even better in the images yet to come."
New Horizons has also revealed some amazing findings about Pluto itself from its flyby Tuesday. The dwarf planet seems to have huge 11,000 foot tall mountains made of ice — and a very alien landscape that scientists haven't seen in the solar system before.
This is only the beginning of the data dump from New Horizons. The craft captured more amazing measurements and images during its Pluto flyby that will take about a year to be beamed back to Earth.
— NASA (@NASA) July 15, 2015