Treating Periodontal Disease Using Guided Bone and Tissue Regeneration
Guided bone and tissue regeneration has helped to revolutionize periodontal treatments over the last thirty years.
Prior to the introduction of bone and tissue regeneration, treatment for periodontal disease was painful and could cause alterations in the patient
Surgeries were done to treat periodontal disease, which exposed the roots of teeth. This caused sensitivity and sometimes lengthened the amount of tooth revealed above the gum line, giving the patient an abnormal appearance. Guided bone and tissue regeneration helps to avoid these issues while making it possible for patients to receive further treatments such as dental implants and bridges.
Results of Periodontal Disease
Periodontal disease causes pockets to form between the gums and the teeth. These pockets often accumulate bacteria and become infected. As the body fights the infection, the immune response and the toxins released from the bacteria can begin to destroy the gums and connective tissue. Eventually the bone will also begin to deteriorate if not treated quickly enough. If the disease is allowed to progress, the teeth can fall out and the gums and bone can continue to deteriorate.
Bone and Tissue Regeneration Preparation
Before beginning bone and tissue regeneration, the pockets between the teeth and gums must be cleaned. This is done using a process called scaling and root planing. Using scaling, the tartar is scraped from above and below the gum line. Root planning is done to shape the roots so that bacteria cannot be harbored in abnormally shaped areas. Lasers may also be used to remove tartar and bacteria. If infection is present, antibiotics may be prescribed to rid the body of the infection before bone and tissue regeneration procedures are performed.
Bone and Tissue Regeneration Procedure
Depending on the severity of the case, bone grafts may need to be placed below the gums to stabilize the area. A barrier membrane is inserted blow the gums to encourage the growth of certain tissue or bone while blocking the growth of other tissue. There are several different types of biocompatible materials that may be used for this process, some are resorbable and others need to be removed after the regeneration process has been completed.
How is Bone and Tissue Regenerated?
A membrane made of a material such as emdogain promotes regeneration of the tissues of the mouth. The properties present in emdogain are the same properties that are naturally present in the body when teeth and gums are developing. The presence of these substances triggers a reaction in the body and new bone and tissue is generated. Care must be taken to maintain this new bone and tissue to avoid further complications.