What is palm wax?
Palm wax, like soy wax, is an ecologically renewable product. Palm wax is made the leaves of palm trees. Paraffin, on the other hand, is distilled from petroleum and is then purified by sweating or solvent refining. They include harmful substances such as toluene and benzene, which are known to cause cancer.
What are the benefits of palm wax?
Palm oil, like soy, benefits the farmers who grow and harvest the palm leaves used in the production of the wax. Palm wax candles are very smooth and have a “soft” feeling. The wax can withstand summer heat and does not have an "oily" feel. They burn with little or no soot that can transfer to the walls, furniture, or draperies in your homes. Palm and soy waxes are biodegradable and will clean up with soap and water. Palm and soy wax candles can hold more fragrance oil, for a stronger smelling candle.
Researchers say the emissions from paraffin candles can also irritate the lungs and trigger asthma attacks. Palm wax does not add the toxic carcinogens into the air as paraffin candles do, and are better for your entire family and pets.
How long do palm wax candles burn?
Palm was has a higher melting point (131° - 136°) than paraffin (95° - 100°). They burn more slowly and cleanly than paraffin wax candles. Palm wax candles are made from all natural ingredients and give a better burn. They will not leave soot marks on your walls or ceilings provided you follow the burning instructions. Palm wax candles burn at least 50% longer than paraffin candles.
For optimal burn: Reduce soot by trimming the wick to 1/4" and centering the wick each time the candle is lit. Do not burn in drafty areas. Candle should remain lit for a minimum of 3-4 hours each time it is burned. To prevent damage, discontinue candle when 1/2" of wax remains. Burn in a tight fitting glass containers.
Why do the candles look less smooth?
Palm wax, unlike any other waxes, forms crystals on the surface of the candle as it cools. Palm Wax creates candles with a feathering design. The feathering wax will actually appear to change shades as you rotate it in the light. Different molds also contribute to the creation of different crystal patterns. Dye and fragrance combinations used in a candle can influence the crystallizing patterns. As with all handcrafted items, minor defects may occur.
How soon will I receive my candle order?
Many items are handcrafted specialty items and are created when the order is placed. Please allow up to three to four weeks for these items to ship so that we can prepare with the care they deserve. This does not necessarily mean it will take the entire three to four weeks. Recycle your melted candle: Send in any excess wax over 2" and we will reform for free!
GENERAL WARNING: Warning! Failure to follow instructions could result in fire, injury or smoke damage. Natural waxes are attractive to animals. Keep away from pets. Never leave a burning candle unattended. Keep out of reach of children & pets. Keep wax free of matches, wick trimmings & flammable materials. Do not move while candle is burning or wax is hot. Always use a candle holder!