May 8, 2018
People are often referred to the orthodontist because of an improper bite. While this is one of the main oral health conditions that orthodontics is designed to fix, you may be surprised to know that an imperfect bite can be used to describe several different types of conditions. For instance, you may have heard of overbites, which give people prominent front teeth. Alternatively, you may have noticed that your teeth seem all over the place, and certain teeth may even hit the others too hard when you chew. When you wonder what should a perfect teeth look like, you can learn the answers to your questions in this guide.
What Is a Perfect Bite?
People often come to the orthodontist asking how should I know if I have the proper bite alignment. Yet, the subtle differences in your mouth can sometimes make it hard to tell on your own. However, there are general guidelines that orthodontists follow that help them know if your bite is properly aligned. For example, your teeth should fit together a certain way when your mouth is closed and when you smile. To check your teeth alignment, look in the mirror to see if your teeth on the top are relatively parallel with the ones on the bottom when you smile. You should also find that the teeth are not showing too much gum when you smile, nor should one row of teeth completely cover the other.
What Should Perfect Teeth Look Like?
In addition to learning the answer to your question of what is a perfect bite, you should also know what should a perfect teeth look like. While most people associate perfect teeth with being white and cavity-free, there are other factors that play into whether or not your smile is correct.
A perfect bite will have certain characteristics that are visible from the front, side and arch views. While you have already been able to look at the front, you may be unaware of imperfections that show up in your profile. For example, your top teeth should sit slightly on the bottom teeth when your mouth is in a relaxed position. If you notice that your bottom teeth sit in front of your top teeth, then you may have an underbite.
Your teeth should also rest equal distances from each other in your mouth. Teeth that are too close or too far apart create problems with how your teeth fit together when you bite down.
How Should I Know If I Have the Proper Bite Alignment?
When you want to know how the perfect teeth look like, you may also have concerns about the alignment of your bite. While you may be able to point out imperfections in your smile, you can also watch for signs of an improper bite such as experiencing jaw pain or headaches from the pressure that is placed on the ligaments of your mouth as you eat and speak.
If you have a severe bite alignment problem, then you may also find it hard to chew your food properly. Teeth that are crooked or that have large gaps may make it impossible for you to brush and floss properly. You may have also had other people point out problems with your bite. When you suspect that you have a teeth alignment problem, then the only way to find out for sure is to visit your orthodontist for a full exam.
During your exam, you can get a professional opinion regarding how your teeth fit together. You may also discover that correcting something such as the crookedness also relieves other issues with your bite. Correcting bite alignment issues requires a personalized plan for each person so remember that your treatment may differ from other people that you know.
Can Poorly Aligned Teeth Cause Problems?
You may have heard people talk about getting braces so that they can have a prettier smile. While it is true that orthodontic treatment improves your appearance, you should also remember that it is necessary to prevent future problems with your oral health. Left untreated, an improper bite can lead to other health conditions such as TMJ. People with teeth that hit together the wrong way may also experience frequent chips and fractures, or you may even sustain nerve damage when constant pressure is applied to certain teeth.
What Can I Do to Get Perfectly Aligned Teeth?
Now that you are worried about how your teeth fit together, your next question is naturally how to get yours perfectly aligned. The good news is that there are many different techniques that orthodontists use to straighten people’s teeth. Most likely, you are familiar with traditional metal braces, Invisalign, and retainers. All of these are methods that your orthodontist can use to help you achieve a perfect bite.
The first step you need to take to begin caring for your tooth alignment problem is to schedule a consultation with your orthodontist. During this appointment, they will check your teeth using a visual inspection along with x-rays to find out how your bite fits together. While no one wants to hear their flaws be pointed out, this is a critical first step toward correcting each issue. For instance, your teeth may be crowded in the front, and braces will help to pull them apart to fill in the gaps in your smile.
How Long Does It Take to Get a Perfect Bite?
There is no easy answer to this question. While some people need weeks of orthodontic treatment, others need years. However, you can get a fairly accurate estimate of how long it takes for you to get a perfect bite from your orthodontist during your consultation. Keep in mind that your compliance with the program increases how fast it works so make sure to choose a treatment plan that you know you can stick to.
While it would be nice to be born with a perfect bite, most people require some correction to fix common problems such as an underbite or crossbite. Give us a call today to find out how to get your smile in perfect alignment.
Team Demas Orthodontics
27 Meriden Ave #2a, Southington, CT 06489, USA