Conservation and Population Biology
The Huntington's Botanical Gardens support many areas of research related to its living collections. Conservation and population biology studies the origins of different species of of cycads (Dioon sp) by analyzing the genetic makeup of populations. This knowledge helps biologists understand diversity within plant groups and provides clues as to how that diversity can be preserved. Conservation biologists are developing techniques aimed at long-term cryopreservation of plants. Developing new techniques and working with training specialists at other institutions, we hope to protect rare and important plants from extinction due to habitat loss and disease.
Ethnobotanical and Ancient Medicinal History
Studies of the ethnobotanical histories of ancient medicinal and useful plants bring ancient knowledge concerning plants into contemporary context and provides the intellectual basis for interpreting the Huntington's Herb Garden and Wellness Walk.
The Huntington Herbarium (HNT) is a depository of mostly exotic plant specimens used in research and teaching. The specimens serve as documentation for research projects, and as resources for plant identification. With over 10,000 specimens, it's an archive of vascular plants from around the world, with particular emphasis on plants from Mexico, Central America and South America. More
Systematics Research Lab
In The Huntington's molecular systematics research lab, the botanical staff investigates fundamental processes of plant evolution using cutting edge methods combined with traditional field work. Systematics research is the understanding and documentaton of biological diversity and the processes that produce it. The lab's current focus is on speciation, phylogeography, phylogenetics, and biogeography in the cycad genus Dioon. More
International Succulent Introductions
International Succulent Introductions (ISI) is the plant distribution program of The Huntington, furthering the institution’s dedication to aesthetics, education, conservation and the scientific study of cacti and succulents. It's purpose is to propagate and distribute new or rare succulents to collectors, nurseries and institutions. In keeping with sound conservation practices, field-collected plants are not sold; only propagated seedlings, grafts and rooted cuttings produced under nursery conditions without detriment to wild populations are offered. More
Schick Hybrids Catalog
The Schick Hybrids Catalog lists Schick hybrids that were introduced between 1996 and 2015, with the bulk of introductions between 1996 and 2004. Check availability