Most experts point out that when you eat a food rather than drink it, you feel fuller, as previously noted. However, juicing is actually considered healthy in many circles. Here Mary Jane Brown, PhD, RD, HealthLine.com, reviews juicing, good and bad aspects:
“Fruits and vegetables are good for your health.
Some of them even reduce your risk of chronic diseases, such as heart disease and cancer (1Trusted Source).
Juicing, a process that involves extracting the nutritious juices from fresh fruits and vegetables, has become increasingly popular in recent years.
Many people use it to detox or add more nutrients to their diet.
Supporters claim that juicing can improve nutrient absorption from fruits and vegetables, while others say it strips away their important nutrients like fiber.
This is a detailed review of juicing and its health effects — both good and bad.
What is juicing?
Juicing is a process that extracts the juices from fresh fruits and vegetables.
It usually strips away most of the solid matter, including the seeds and pulp, from whole fruits and vegetables.
The resulting liquid contains most of the vitamins, minerals, and antioxidants naturally present in the whole fruit or vegetable.
Juicing methods vary, from squeezing fruit by hand to motor-driven juicers.
Two common types of juicers include:
- Centrifugal. These juicers grind fruits and vegetables into pulp through a high-speed spinning action with a cutting blade. The spinning also separates the juice from the solids.
- Cold-press. Also called masticating juicers, these crush and press fruits and vegetables much more slowly to obtain as much juice as possible.
The nutritional quality of juice obtained from centrifugal and cold-press juicers is similar (2Trusted Source).
Purpose of juicing
Juicing is generally used for two purposes:
- Cleansing or detoxification: Solid food is eliminated and only juice is consumed for 3 days to several weeks. Some people believe drinking juice cleanses their bodies of toxins. However, no evidence supports its effectiveness.
- Supplementing a normal diet: Fresh juice can be used as a handy supplement to your daily diet, increasing nutrient intake from fruits and vegetables that you wouldn't otherwise consume.
Juice is an easy way to obtain a lot of nutrients
Many people don't obtain enough nutrients from their diet alone (3Trusted Source).
Nutrient levels in the foods you eat are also much lower than they used to be.
Polluted environments and high stress levels can also increase your requirements for certain nutrients.
If you find it difficult to get the recommended amount of fruits and vegetables into your diet each day, juicing can be a convenient way to increase your intake.
One study found that supplementing with mixed fruit and vegetable juice over 14 weeks improved participants' nutrient levels of beta carotene, vitamin C, vitamin E, selenium, and folate (8Trusted Source).
Furthermore, a review of 22 studies found that drinking juice made from fresh fruits and vegetables or blended powder concentrate improved folate and antioxidant levels, including beta carotene, vitamin C, and vitamin E (9Trusted Source).
It's best to consume whole fruits and veggies
Juicing advocates often claim that drinking juice is better than eating whole fruits and vegetables.
They assert that removing the fiber makes nutrients easier to absorb.
However, there isn't any scientific research to support this.
In fact, you may need the fiber content of the fruit or vegetable to experience the plant's full health benefits (14Trusted Source).
For example, the antioxidants that are naturally bound to plant fibers are lost during the juicing process. They may play an important role in the health benefits of whole fruits and vegetables (15, 16Trusted Source).
Notably, up to 90% of fiber is removed during the juicing process, depending on the juicer. Some soluble fiber will remain, but the majority of insoluble fiber is removed.
Juicing for weight loss may be a bad idea
Many people use juicing as a weight loss strategy.
Most juice diets involve consuming 600–1,000 calories per day from juices only, resulting in a severe calorie deficit and fast weight loss.
However, this is very difficult to sustain for more than a few days.
While juice diets may help you lose weight in the short term, such a severe calorie restriction can slow your metabolism in the long term (27Trusted Source).
Juice diets are also likely to lead to nutrient deficiencies in the long term, as juices lack many important nutrients.”
If you would like to learn other solutions to help control your health … click here?
Read More … Article Source: https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/juicing-good-or-bad#weight-loss
Every day, millions of Americans experience the nagging, shooting, pinching aches and pains that come with everyday life. Until now, the only way to treat these annoying symptoms were with drugs or other medicines that often caused unpleasant side effects! With Eazol, you'll get an FDA-Registered Pain Reliever that's 100% Natural with no side effects.
Finally, a solution has been found and I’m here to tell that you can finally turn the tables on arthritis and break free for GOOD!
Did you know that you can learn the real cause of Arthritis and naturally get rid of it within 21 days?