Name: Course: EC- 212 Issue-Area: Food
Town Hall Meeting Assignment #3: Talking Points Assignment
Complete this form, print it and bring it to the Town Hall Meeting.
Provide a summary of your issue (you may have refined this since the beginning of the semester):
Population growth and food production are directly correlated when it comes to the issues of food shortages. As the population changes, it sets up criteria whereby the needs that were previously available in the society drastically change. Asians and Africans have totally different approaches to food security. Therefore, there is the need to take good care of our environment by minimizing the global warming so as to reduce the rate of changes in the climate. Moreover, deforestation should be an issue of the past and should be avoided at all cost. The community should set up a structure which allows for awareness creation on the importance of taking care of our environment.
Identify your proposed solution or awareness campaign (you may have refined this since the beginning of the semester). This should be either a solution that an actual lawmaker, court of other governmental organization could enact/implement OR the details of a campaign that would result in widespread understanding and awareness of your issue:
The proposed solution or awareness campaign is based on forest and water conservation about crop and livestock production diversity. Similarly, the campaign ensures that the environment is protected by avoiding deforestation together with emitting a large amount of dangerous gasses.
Provide at least two arguments in support of your policy solution or awareness campaign. Include facts, evidence, quotations, etc. from your sources, interest groups, readings or other research you have completed. Please cite your sources:
Global warming is as a result of human activities which lead to general disruption of food supplies globally. Controlling global warming requires individual and international attentions. “The population factor and crisis management ensure a better address to the problems facing the society such as the global warming” (Hngn, 2016). The interest groups address food shortages by focusing on various institutions and structures.
Reinstating productivity and reliability is also crucial in addressing economic and agricultural systems based on food security because it is one way of ensuring that no society is left behind in food security programs.
Provide at least two arguments in opposition to your policy solution or awareness campaign. Include facts, evidence, quotations, etc. from your sources, interest groups, readings or other research you have completed. Please cite your sources:
A solution to food security and environmental conservation can only be found with the aid of the issues that created the problem (World Food Program, 2017). The alternative forms of monopolistic approaches in production can offer a high level of quality fair and sustainable development in all sectors of the economy.
The current world population strains the existing food reserves, and therefore, there is the need to set structures that will give room for reforms. The reforms should be effectively addressed by the interest groups.
Action Plan: What can you do to influence your policy issue?
Give at least two interest groups or organizations with which you could work to pursue your proposed policy solution or complete your awareness campaign. Explain what each does to affect your issue-area and state what you could do to assist that group:
The United Nations under World Food Program which is tasked with matters of food security and all decision-making processes based on food security. I can ensure that the group reaches the most vulnerable in the society by acting as a link between the group and the society.
Environmental Conservation and Management Committee tasked with matters of environmental protection. When it comes to the matters of assisting the group, I can ensure that the programs they launch in various areas come to reality by enhancing a good relationship between the group and the community.
Provide at least two questions pertaining to your issue-area for your consultant that may assist you in understanding how to make a difference in that issue.
What is the role of the community in environmental conservation?
Why is it necessary to take care of our environment?
Take-Away Points (Complete this section during the Town Hall event)
What suggestions were made to improve your research? List at least two
Addressing food shortages by mainly focusing on various institutions and structures.
Focusing on the population which strains the existing world food reserves.
What problems or solutions are other students working on? List at least two
The organic food have to be in all the stores.
Effects of climate change and its consequences on environmental conservation.
What perspectives, related to my topic, did I not consider? List at least one
How the food is expensive to the population if they want healthy food and organic, also the food security for our global.
Our Service Charter
Excellent Quality / 100% Plagiarism-FreeWe employ a number of measures to ensure top quality essays. The papers go through a system of quality control prior to delivery. We run plagiarism checks on each paper to ensure that they will be 100% plagiarism-free. So, only clean copies hit customers’ emails. We also never resell the papers completed by our writers. So, once it is checked using a plagiarism checker, the paper will be unique. Speaking of the academic writing standards, we will stick to the assignment brief given by the customer and assign the perfect writer. By saying “the perfect writer” we mean the one having an academic degree in the customer’s study field and positive feedback from other customers.
Free RevisionsWe keep the quality bar of all papers high. But in case you need some extra brilliance to the paper, here’s what to do. First of all, you can choose a top writer. It means that we will assign an expert with a degree in your subject. And secondly, you can rely on our editing services. Our editors will revise your papers, checking whether or not they comply with high standards of academic writing. In addition, editing entails adjusting content if it’s off the topic, adding more sources, refining the language style, and making sure the referencing style is followed.
Confidentiality / 100% No DisclosureWe make sure that clients’ personal data remains confidential and is not exploited for any purposes beyond those related to our services. We only ask you to provide us with the information that is required to produce the paper according to your writing needs. Please note that the payment info is protected as well. Feel free to refer to the support team for more information about our payment methods. The fact that you used our service is kept secret due to the advanced security standards. So, you can be sure that no one will find out that you got a paper from our writing service.
Money Back GuaranteeIf the writer doesn’t address all the questions on your assignment brief or the delivered paper appears to be off the topic, you can ask for a refund. Or, if it is applicable, you can opt in for free revision within 14-30 days, depending on your paper’s length. The revision or refund request should be sent within 14 days after delivery. The customer gets 100% money-back in case they haven't downloaded the paper. All approved refunds will be returned to the customer’s credit card or Bonus Balance in a form of store credit. Take a note that we will send an extra compensation if the customers goes with a store credit.
24/7 Customer SupportWe have a support team working 24/7 ready to give your issue concerning the order their immediate attention. If you have any questions about the ordering process, communication with the writer, payment options, feel free to join live chat. Be sure to get a fast response. They can also give you the exact price quote, taking into account the timing, desired academic level of the paper, and the number of pages.