Fashion is an industry that is putting increasing pressures on both our planet and people who make our clothes. Keep reading to find out more about the impacts of fast fashion and what you can do to make a difference this summer!
Did you know…?
The average lifespan for an item of clothing in the UK is 2.2 years! Even more shocking is that consumers send a whopping 300,000 tonnes of used clothing goes to landfill every year in the UK – that’s almost the same weight as the Empire State Building.
What’s more, the textile industry accounts for 8% of the world’s greenhouse gas emissions – that’s more than international aviation and shipping combined.
So what can you do to help?
REDUCE: Let’s be clear – while donating unwanted clothes is good, reducing how many new clothes we buy is best.
REUSE: Instead of buying a whole new wardrobe for the festival season why not buy second hand from an Oxfam shop on the high street or Oxfam online. This way you can reuse something that has been loved and donated. Better to reuse, than buy new.
RECYCLE: When clothes have finished their life in your wardrobe – give them a new lease of life via an Oxfam shop. Every garment sold raises money to fight poverty around the world. One dress could raise enough money to buy drought-resistant seeds for a family to keep growing food despite a changing climate. Oxfam also works with fashion companies to improve the treatment of workers within the clothing industry.
Also if the clothes you give to Oxfam don’t sell in our shops, they go to our pioneering sorting centre, “Wastesaver”. Our team at Wastesaver works hard to resell, reuse or recycle your items – ensuring your clothes continue their journey. Over 14,000 tonnes of clothing each year are diverted from landfill through being donated to Oxfam.
SPEAK OUT: We don’t want to put retailers out of business. Instead, we want them, their workers, and our planet to thrive. So, why not ask your favourite shop to improve their carbon footprint, and how they treat their workers?
Photo: Kitabe stands amongst the onion seed flowers that have helped her earn a decent income. Everything you buy from Oxfam festival shops helps people like Kitabe to build better lives. Abbie Trayler-Smith/Oxfam
Oxfam offers you a way to help reduce the harmful effect of ‘fast fashion’ on our planet and its people. By buying and donating your clothes through Oxfam shops you can give clothes a second chance – increase their lifespan, while protecting the planet, and raising money to help the poorest people around the world.
Let us know how you are going to be more sustainable at festivals this summer by commenting below.
Find your local Oxfam Shop: https://www.oxfam.org.uk/shop/shop-finder
Shop online: https://www.oxfam.org.uk/shop
ASOS Marketplace: Shop an exclusive collection of pieces usually only found at major UK festival https://marketplace.asos.com/boutique/oxfam-festival-shop
Oxfam Festival Shops: This summer you can find our pop up shops at Bearded Theory, Download, Glastonbury, Latitude, WOMAD, Kendal Calling, Boardmasters, Boomtown and Leeds.