But now comes a tantalizing study in tomorrow’s issue of Nature hinting at the possibility that what we do to live longer may change the lifespan of our grandchildren. It’s only a hint—the research reported here involves the faithful nematode, Caenorhabditis elegans. By exposing one generation of these tiny worms to just three proteins, researchers in Anne Brunet’s lab at Stanford produced worms that live up to 30% longer. The surprising thing is that the enhanced lifespan was passed to the next 2-3 generations. The really surprising thing is that the lifespan of the C. elegans great-grandchildren was enhanced even though no DNA sequences were modified. In other words: germline enhancement without genetic modification.
How is that possible? Epigenetics. The three proteins changed the way the DNA is structured or packed without changing the DNA code itself. Such epigenetic changes can change the way genes are expressed. The effect can be dramatic—in this case, a 30% longer lifespan. What’s more, the epigenetic change can be passed to future generations. Most often, epigenetic changes are reset during reproduction. But in some cases, epigenetic modifications are passed to the next 2-3 generations. When that happens, the structure and the expression of DNA are changed even though the DNA sequence remains unchanged. Over time, however, the effect washes out so that the great-great-grandchildren are back to the starting point.
Will this epigenetics-to-lifespan relationship be found in human beings? Who knows. Again, it must be repeated: this research involves flatworms. Humans are just a bit more complicated. Already, however, Brunet’s lab is looking for something similar in mice and in African killfish.
Whether anything similar will be found in human beings, this research already suggests a truly interesting thought experiment. Suppose this leads someday to a human-application technology. Would it be opposed by those who object to human germline modification? Sure, future human beings would be changed without their consent. But no genes are changed, and the changes are not permanent.
Perhaps the more sobering thought is this. Maybe this research will lead to a startling discovery. Never mind some new technology. Might it turn out that what health-minded human beings normally do—eat their green vegetables, get their exercise—has the effect of enhancing their offspring by modifying the expression of their genes by means of generating inheritable epigenetic changes? Could be. If just three proteins make C. elegans progeny live 30% longer, just imagine how your dinner might change your grandchildren (assuming, of course, that you’re in your reproductive years or younger).
The article, “Transgenerational epigenetic inheritance of longevity in Caenorhabditis elegans,” appears in the October 20 issue of Nature.