A teaching assistant helps a child with glue at Redwood Early Learning Center in North Little Rock, Arkansas.
Even though child care costs more than college tuition in many states, college affordability seems to get more attention. Here's why that needs to change.
Boris Cheval/University of Geneva
Childhood adversity doesn't just affect our choices – according to new research, it also weakens the body's fundamental ability to stay healthy in old age.
New research shows that both younger and older siblings uniquely contribute to each others’ empathy development.
New research shows that children who are kind, supportive and understanding influence their siblings to act and behave in similar ways.
Parents can teach empathy by connecting behaviours to feelings when they talk to their kids, to help them understand cause and effect.
Empathy in children can be fostered. Researchers offer three strategies for parents and other caregivers to promote a climate of empathy in the home or classroom.
Clips of Peppa Pig on YouTube aren’t always what you expect them to be.
More than 300 hours of content are uploaded to YouTube every minute - and many children's clips are unauthorised, sneaky or even disturbing. Being aware is the first step.
Learning a language in a classroom is best for early teenagers.
The classroom setting is better for early teenagers, while self-guided language learning is better for adults.
Across the world many countries issue pregnancy grants to support mothers-to-be. South Africa has a progressive social security grant system, but it does not support this vulnerable group.
Healthy, supported children can be a boon to their countries’ economies.
Poor childhood conditions, such as exposure to poverty and stunting, are associated with long-term disadvantages to health, education, social adjustment and earnings.
Children with at least two years of preschool achieve much higher scores than those who attend no preschool or only one year.
Two years of high-quality preschool is one of the most effective strategies we have to change the trajectories of children from disadvantaged backgrounds.
Childhood obesity can be tackled from birth – so why aren’t we doing anything about it?
To combat childhood obesity, we need to start from day one.
Children who attend preschool are more likely to be ready to learn when they start school.
Government funding of childcare is seen as something that helps get mums back into work, instead of setting children up for learning before they start school.
Trying on new roles.
Boston Public Library/Flickr
Research has found a relationship between pretend play and a child's developing creativity, understanding of others and social competence with peers.
Soha, seven, is now taller than her 10-year-old sister Suhala whose growth has been stunted.
Jo Currie/World Vision
Adults who had a low birthweight or were undernourished as young children are more likely to experience high blood pressure and obesity.
Why aren’t enough black students identified for gifted programs?
Howard County Library System
Two students -- one black and one white -- with the same math and reading achievement could have very different likelihoods of being identified as gifted.
Why should schools need to moderate testing?
President Obama's message has put issues around standardized testing back in the news. Here's what scholars have been saying.
If you want to fast-track your child’s development, forget CDs, books that beep, and toys that whirr. Play music with them, with the emphasis being on “play”.
New research shows shared music-making with toddlers may have benefits above and beyond those of reading.
What children learn in their first 2000 days of life is the most vital, so early learning shouldn’t be dismissed as babysitting.
The reorganisation of federal ministerial portfolios this week moved early childhood education and care from social services to education. This is a good thing.
It may be costed, but that doesn’t mean it will work.
Labour’s 2015 manifesto aims to improve life for children and it suggests that one effective means of achieving that aim is to invest in early years’ provision. The claim is that a child’s language development…
The Productivity Commission’s report on childcare will help inform the Abbott government’s soon-to-be-unveiled ‘families package’.
Many of the Productivity Commission's proposals derive from assumptions that the funding of these services should ensure minimal interference, with a classic, market-based model for meeting "demand".
Sharing stories around the dinner table fosters greater self-esteem and resilience in young people.
Families and friends share memories all the time; “You’ll never guess…”, “How was your day?”, and “Do you remember when…” are rich daily fodder. Sharing memories is not only a good way to debrief and reminisce…