Meridians and clock systems Biopulsar : Our body is a system of organs that in harmonious interaction perform all the functions necessary to sustain life.
Through the circulatory system the organs are provided with nutrients, electrolytes, hormones and oxygen releasing the products of metabolism.
Another life-supporting system of our body are the so called meridians invisible to a human eye and providing vital force or energy. This force affects not only the physical function, but also on the mental, emotional qualities that are also have an impact on human organs.
For example, depressions affect a certain organ that resonates with them. Melancholy blocks the flowing of life force (energy), the organ feels energy hunger and cannot satisfactorily perform its core functions any more. Most often, the measurement of energy fields is reflected in the form of low energy levels.
Meridians and clock systems Biopulsar:
In our body we not only have blood and lymph vessels, but also a network of vessels that lie in the invisible spectrum. These are the so-called meridians, which play a big part in Chinese and Indian medicine.
In the blood vessels the blood flows and the organs are supplied with nutrients.
Similarly, the so-called Chi-energy flows vitality into the fine matter vessels. This Chienergy can be influenced through the power of thoughts and feelings. Negative thoughts can weaken the Chi’s flow into the meridians and therefore cannot supply the organs sufficiently with life energy. A shortage of life energy leads finally to sickness.
The meridian energy is reflected in the various reflex-zones on the skin surface.
If the energy of an organ has been low for a long time it can cause physical diseases.
Best known are 12 meridians of organs and 8 special meridians. 12 meridians of organs are activated alternately, which means that the energy flows from one meridian to another. Within 24 hours each meridian has time to go to different states of the energy charge. Every day one meridian is for two hours in a state of activity with maximum energy and after 12 hours it is in a state of minimum energy. Activity time is represented in the measurement of the energy fields as a clock.
Meridians and the Influence on the Aura
The meridians contain the five cosmic elements of which the physical and psychical body of the person is built.
Liver and Gallbladder Meridians are responsible for the building of sinew and muscles in the body. They open over the eyes. The emotions rage, anger and annoyance reduce the Chi-flow in this meridian system. Chi disturbances in the liver and gallbladder meridian produce sinew, muscle and eye problems.
Heart and Small Intestine Meridians are responsible for the building of vessels and blood vessels. They open over the sense organ of the tongue and steer the taste.
Desire and pleasure activate the Chi-flow in this meridian system. Chi disturbances in the heart and small intestines meridian produce heart, blood, small intestine and also taste disturbances.
Spleen and Stomach Meridian are responsible for the building of the flesh and they steer the elements that determine the body form. They open over the mouth’s sense organ. Too much thinking and anxiety reduce the Chi-energy in this meridian system.
Lung and Colon Meridian are responsible for the building of the skin and body hair. They open over the sense organ of the nose. Sorrow and sadness reduce the Chienergy in this meridian system. Lung, colon, skin, hair and nose problems, and also depression, sorrow and sadness, point to disturbances in the area of lung and colon.
Kidney and Bladder Meridian steer the water element, which is also responsible for the emotional body. They are responsible for the building of bones, bone marrow and open over the ears. Fear and anxiety weakens this meridian system.
Meridians and clock systems Biopulsar, example:
Meridian of the liver and the gallbladder is responsible for the structure of tendons and muscles of the body. Violations of this meridian can lead to diseases of tendons, muscles and eyes.
Meridian of the heart and small intestine is responsible for the structure of blood vessels. Violation of can lead to diseases of the heart, the cardiovascular system, the small intestine, as well as to violations of taste.
Meridians and clock systems Biopulsar of the lungs and the large intestine is responsible for the structure of the skin and hair. Violations can lead to diseases of the lung, large intestine, skin problems, hair and nasopharynx. Precondition of violations in meridian of the lungs and the large intestine may be depressions.
These simple knowledge directly affect the interpretation of measurements of the energy.