Landmine Survivors Network Training
Project at a glance
Dates and Place01 - 30 November 2004, Nairobi, Kenya
Landmine Survivors Network (LSN).
Summary and Objectives
For several years, the personal stories presented by landmine survivors have had a significant impact in reminding experts, diplomats and decision-makers of the human faces behind issues being discussed.
However, after the successful realization of a convention banning anti-personnel mines and two years of work to implement it, there is a need to deepen the practice of inclusion to ensure that landmine survivors are effectively involved in the expression of their needs and means developed to meet these needs.
ICVolunteers assisted representatives from the Landmine Survivors Network during their Raising the Voices training seminars for landmine survivors, which took place on a parallel with the standing committee meetings of the International Campaign to Ban Landmines (ICBL). Raising the Voices provides survivors with training in human rights and helps them to develop the necessary capacities to represent, organize and advocate on behalf of landmine survivors and other persons with disability in their home countries and within meetings and processes related to the Ottawa Convention.
Volunteering OpportunitiesSince 2002, volunteer interpreters have provided language support for the various training sessions organized by LSN. Languages included French, English, Portuguese, Vietnamese, Thai, Khmer, Russian, Arabic, Hindi, Serbo-Croatian, Albanian. Volunteers also provided logistical help, transport for the survivors to and from the airport and their hotels as well as general support to the organizers from LSN. For the Nairobi Conference, volunteer translators translated training manuals from English into French, Thai, Hindi and Russian.
This project brings volunteers into contact with people directly affected by landmines, which they all find is a rich and moving experience. Volunteers work closely with the landmine survivors and their motivation and involvement grow with each day spent on the program. Without exception they go home with the knowledge and satisfaction that what they have to offer is making a difference to the lives of each participant, and in turn, the lives of others living with disabilities.
Posted: 2005-11-17 Updated: 2006-8-19