Bio- Magnetic Therapy
Biomagnetic therapy is an alternative holistic practice that uses the application of magnets to specific parts of the body to aid the body in self-healing. It is known to be a non-invasive application that implies no side effects and helps regulate pH levels. Magnets are used in combination with the reduction of stressful electromagnetic fields. The basic underlying theory of biomagnetic therapy is that the blood in the human body is 4% iron, and magnets attract the iron in the blood. This is said to increase blood flow to certain areas of the body which brings balance to the body's systems and jump-starts its natural ability to heal itself.
Biomagnetic therapy was discovered and developed in 1988 by a Mexican Scientist, Dr. Isaac Goiz Duran. Duran, discovered that amongst pathogens (bacteria, viruses, fungi, or parasites) there exists a symbiotic relationship. That, when this relationship is broken using magnetic fields, it is possible to recover health from virtually any disease known to man today.
Many health benefits are claimed by proponents of biomagnetic therapy. Some of these include increased oxygen and nutrients carried to the cells, relaxation of muscles, and the reduction of pain due to swelling of muscles and inflammation of joints. It is also said to increase bone density, prevent and reversal of chronic disease, help overcome sleep disorders, and provide an overall increase to the body's natural immune system.
Magnets in the form of lodestones were used for healing by ancient cultures in China, Egypt, India, North America, and elsewhere. Ancient records show that they were used in 200 BC by a Greek doctor named Galan to treat pain. Queen Cleopatra, during her reign from 69-30 BC, is said to have worn one on her third eye in an attempt to maintain her beauty. Paracelsus (193-1541), considered to be one of the founders of modern medicine, believed that magnets could influence the body's life force.
Iridology is the study of the structure of the iris or colored part of the eye and the pupil border and how they correspond to the systems of the body. The iris contains over 28,000 nerve endings that all go to different parts of the body. Through analysis of the pigmentation and structure, it can be seen which illnesses, strengths and deficiencies may be present in a persons health. The iris acts as a roadmap to your body and all of the organs and systems. By studying the iris you understand the nature of your body and target issues more effectively at their root source.
The Iris can also reveal potential future health risks, that you can identify and prevent before becoming affected by them. Once issues are identified, corrective measure can be taken. The Patterns, colors and characteristics of the iris hold information about a patient's systematic health and study can distinguish between healthy systems and organs in the body, and those that are overactive, or distressed. The features of the iris are one of the most stable features of the human body, the stability of iris structures is the foundation of the biometric technology which uses iris recognition for identification purposes.
Guided Mediation with Biomagnetic Therapy
Guided Meditation with Avishai Maimon is an empowering journey of self discovery through which a person is transported to a place of peace and tranquility. Given in combination with Bio-Magnetic Therapy, this unique mediation draws from the energy within the body to transform a person from the inside out.
Avishai Maimon's unique mediations are healing for mind, body and soul. Based on the teachings of Dr. Isaac Goiz Duran, who discovered that exposing pathogens, bacteria, fungi and parasites to a magnetic field that it was possible to eliminate disease in the body.
Tapping into the subconscious mind, and polarizing the flow of energy with magnets, the person can experience a complete shift in their inner being.
Tension and stress are housed in the body and can cause pain and discomfort that interferes with the enjoyment of everyday life activities. Application of proper stretching techniques are a simple and effective way to rid the body of tension and pain eliminating the need for costly therapies.
Avishai Maimon is skilled at the art of stretching the human body and has developed techniques to make stretching enjoyable and effective. Feel the benefits as early as your first session when you feel the relief from tension that is easily released with proper stretching.
Avishai Maimon is the author of "Stretch It" a full color illustrated guide to stretching the human body. For more information, and to practice stretching with Avishai Maimon's technique, order your copy of "Stretch It" here.