Prohibition 100 years later: Goodwood, Democrat archives take Leon County back to dry days
The 18th Amendment to the U.S. Constitution ushered in the Prohibition era 100 years ago this Jan. 17, when the sale, manufacture and distribution of alcohol became illegal.
The stringent restrictions imposed by the Volstead Act changed business practices and drinking habits and provided a nascent women’s suffrage movement grassroots organizing experience.
The Goodwood Museum & Gardens raises a toast to Prohibition with an extensive exhibit called “A Dry Spell: A Brief History of Prohibition in Leon County as reported by the Daily Democrat,” a forerunner of today’s Tallahassee Democrat.
“We tell a little bit of the Florida story and a little bit of the national story,” said Nancy Morgan, Goodwood's co-executive director.
The display covers the growth of Prohibition at the turn of the 20th century, the restrictions imposed by the Volstead Act which enforced the booze ban, and finally Prohibition's repeal.
There are life-size posters of famed lawman Eliot Ness, gangster Al Capone and “The Brain” — Arnold Rothstein — who many believed also masterminded the "Black Sox" scandal of the 1919 World Series.
Local figures include the nation’s first Prohibition Party governor, Sidney J. Catts. Also, Luella Knott (think Knott House), who led the local temperance movement. And Pistol Pete Boudan, a Prohibition agent who died in a Holmes County shootout and is buried in Tallahassee’s Oakland Cemetery.
The exhibit includes a display of a genuine pair of “cow shoes” bootleggers used to fool lawmen tracking them, and vintage alcohol-infused products from Walgreens — for medicinal purposes only, of course.
According to Wallace H. Beall, lead researcher for the project, the temperance movement began as a protest of 19th-century saloons, where much public and private business was conducted, fueled by the "demon rum."
“It started with women who would go and pray in front of saloons and then it morphed into people ... going in and praying. And then it morphed into people marching in front of them with signs,” Beall said.
Leon County went dry — meaning the sale of fermented beverages was banned — long before Jan. 17, 1920.
In a 1904 referendum, by a vote of 494-372, voters closed the county's five saloons, including one on the corner of College Avenue and Monroe Street, now the home of the Florida Association of Realtors.
Luella Knott, wife of State Treasurer W.V. Knott, although denied the right to vote, led the local temperance movement in a highly effective campaign to turn Leon County dry.
“We had four long squares of marching women and children singing temperance songs headed by a brass band,” Knott would later tell a Women's Christian Temperance Union convention about the campaign to turn Leon dry.
“I found myself marching up and down that line singing and telling them not to falter but to sing louder, clapping my hands, the most conspicuous woman in the city at the time,” said Knott, as reported by the Democrat, of the 1912 referendum.
The city’s two precincts had voted to stay "wet," however, and that city-county divide over alcohol would remain until the local prohibition ended in the 1960s.
“A Dry Spell” sheds light on why Florida started to crack down on alcohol sales. One detail from the exhibit: Average individual consumption of alcohol in the U.S. was 7.1 gallons in 1830. Today, it's 2.3 gallons.
“Everything must have been like an enormous fraternity party," Morgan said. "The amount of consumption back then just sounds terrible."
In 1901 the Legislature passed a series of laws to enforce city and county ordinances to prohibit liquor. Newspaper accounts paint a movement fueled by business concerns over a drunken workforce, and the white establishment’s concern over alcohol consumption by minorities.
In 1905 the Legislature approved a law prohibiting the sale of “any article whatever which produces intoxication to any Indians of half or quarter breed, etc.” When a local alcohol referendum was on the 1912 ballot, the Daily Democrat advised African-American voters to stay away from the polls.
In a community where three years before a black man was lynched, the Democrat’s editorial page declared, “Let it be a white man’s battle, and white men will alone be responsible for the issue.”
A fatal flaw
The rest of the nation joined Leon County in going dry eight years later when Nebraska ratified the 18th Amendment. By that time, men had taken over the temperance movement while the women concentrated on gaining the right to vote.
There was a fatal flaw in the process that the pro-prohibition forces followed, however.
The Volstead Act, meant to enforce the details of Prohibition, was drafted after ratification of the Eighteenth Amendment. Pharmacists saw a loophole and concocted prescription medicine that included whiskey. Wineries began selling bricks of condensed grapes.
The exhibit includes directions on how to liquefy the bricks, including a "warning" not to leave the liquid "in a cool cupboard for 21 days or it would turn into wine.”
And local speakeasies, called “blind tigers,” thrived. Men sold whiskey from their coat pockets on downtown streets. Moonshiners thrived in the woods and forests that surround the county.
Despite accounts in the local paper, in 1928 Treasury agents responsible for enforcing Prohibition in the Panhandle reported to supervisors that Tallahassee was a “drowsy rural center many miles removed from the temptations of gay coastal resorts."
They added that it "reflects the stern law enforcement tendencies of persons native (to) that part of Florida.”
Agent Frank Buckley wrote the sheriff of Leon County was “wholly reliable” when it came to Prohibition and had arrested 118 people on Prohibition violations in 1928, compared to 103 for gambling, 81 for assault and 33 for unlawful riding of a train.
Raids by telephone
It is unclear with whom Buckley spoke, because the Sheriff was Frank Stoutamire. Local legend is Stoutamire’s tolerance for alcohol led him to conduct “raids” by telephone.
He would notify bootleggers of their annual arrest, and speakeasy operators of their annual fines without having to visit the establishments and observe who their customers were.
Stoutamire remained sheriff until 1953, when he became chief of the Tallahassee Police Department.
Leon remained dry until 1966. In a detailed article about the capital county’s relationship with alcohol, Patrick Riordan speculated that the sheer will and “force of personality of Luella Knott” may have kept the local ban in place when most of Florida and the nation went wet.
From 1912 on, the anti-saloon league she organized carried the day every time alcohol appeared on the ballot. Knott passed away in 1965 – and the very next election, Leon went wet. Ken’s Tavern became the first modern-age bar to open, on the Tennessee Street strip.
“Prohibition was an interesting time in our country,” Beall said. "It started a lot of things that remain with us today.”
“A Dry Spell” highlights some of the changes Prohibition brought, including women's involvement in the political process, cocktails (invented to cover the taste of cheap alcohol) and even NASCAR.
“The Prohibition Party is the third oldest political party in the United States,” Morgan said. “It drew 5,600 votes in 2016. Some of the things of Prohibition are still with us."
If you go
What: “A Dry Spell”
When: Regular Goodwood tours available Tuesday-Saturday, 10 and 11:30 a.m., 1 and 2:30 p.m. through March. This special exhibit is part of the regular ticketed tour. For the "Dry Spell" exhibit only, call ahead to confirm availability of guides.
Where: Goodwood Museum and Gardens, 1600 Miccosukee Road
Cost: $8-$12 for regular tour. There is no charge for the special exhibit, but a small donation to support programming is appreciated.
Contact: Call 850-877-4202 or visit GoodwoodMuseum.org
The exhibit is presented in partnership with Leon County/Visit Tallahassee, the city of Tallahassee through the Council on Culture and Arts, the Florida Department of State through the Division of Cultural Affairs and artifacts from the Bureau of Archaeological Research.
Writer James Call can be contacted at firstname.lastname@example.org. Follow him on Twitter @CallTallahassee.
Never miss a story: Subscribe to the Tallahassee Democrat.
Browse the Democrat's archives yourself
The Tallahassee Democrat has become one of more than 100 newspapers nationwide whose entire archives are now online and word-searchable. In our case, that means archives that go back to this newspaper’s founding in 1905 and includes more than 1.4 million pages of news stories.
Subscribers to the Tallahassee Democrat automatically receive free access to the last two years' worth of content. For older content, you'll need to a Newspaper.com subscription for $7.95 a month. (But you can stop and start whenever you want, so you can search to your heart's content for a month and then turn it off.)
Visit the archives the the Floridian (1840), the Weekly Tallahasseean (1900-1902), Weekly True Democrat (1905-1913), The Morning Sun (1907-1909) and the Tallahassee Democrat (1913-now) at tallahassee.newspapers.com.