Posted in: Iron Removal
Removing Micro-plastics From Your Tap WaterA few Months ago, Time Magazine reported that "Plastic Fibers Are Found in 83% of the World's Tap Water". It has even been repoted in some bottled water. Everyone is worried about what it might do to humans and animals with prolonged exposure, but no one knows the consequences yet. So, if you believe what you can't see can't hurt you, then you can skip the rest of this blog. However, if you would rather be safe-than-sorry, then there are things you can do about it right now. There are at least three (3) technologies that can be utilized to remove micro-plastics from the water supply, but before I address that, what about water treatment devices that are made of plastic? Can't they also leach plastic? Good question... and the facts are that extremely cheap plastic products can leach plastic, but the plastic utilized in the manafacture of high quality water treatment equipment typically contains high-density plastics made of products which pose no threat of leaching. So, if you are dealing with a reputable company, the odds are the plastic used is non-leaching. Laboratories have been using plastics for years with no leaching in analytical process which require there be absolutely no leaching.
Three Technologies to Remove Micro-plasticsCarbon Block Filtration - Typically, the smallest plastic particles are approximately 2.5 microns, but most are substantially bigger. Therefore, a carbon block filter enginerred for lead reduction (approximately 0.5 microns) will do a credible job. Undersink Carbon Block Filtration Systems are extremely common. Electro-Adhesion - The US Water Pulsar Disrupter Filter uses Electro-Adhesion to filter out particles to sub-micron levels. Not only can it remove plastics, but it also removes bacteria, cysts, virus, arsenic, chromium 6, lead and other heavy metals. Reverse Osmosis - This technology seperates the water from the contaminants and filters down to below .0001 microns so it obviously is a very viable method. Reverse Osmosis can be utilized as a whole-house system or undersink option. These technologies can be utilized as "stand-alone technologies" or in tandem with others. In many cases, a point-of-use system (just for drinking water) or a whole house solution, may consist of all three technologies. Do you want to just treat your drinking water, or all the water in your home? There is no right answer - the choice is yours, but you can rest assured that the technology exists to remove micro-plastics from the water, even if the current technology does not tell us what the long-term effects of exposure to micro-plastics in the water might be.