- Author: Mary L Blackburn
- Author: Katherine Uhde
230 seniors at seven low-income senior housing sites, became active gardeners after participating in UCCE Alameda wellness interventions and UC Master Gardener trainings.
The Center for Disease Control reported in 2017, older adults accounted for 22% of the U.S. population, surpassing children and adolescents aged 0–14 years (19%). Therefore, California is turning gray. UC ANR research emphasizes the need for senior-friendly prevention strategies to promote health and well-being among this fast growing segment of the population group. The human connection to plants and nature as a source of self-expression, sensory stimulation, wellbeing, physical function, quality of life, and socialization, is encouraged for this group.
How UC Delivers
UC ANR research found senior housing elders had higher rates of nutrition and lifestyle related diseases (Blackburn 2010). As staff planned on-site nutrition and wellness interventions, they considered gardening as an activity to stimulate interest and encourage participation of tenants regardless of physical abilities, literacy, language, and energy levels. The goal was to address inactivity, social isolation, access, participation, and healthy nutrition and lifestyles. Low-maintenance container gardening accommodated frail and disabled seniors, providing opportunities for all residents to participate in the gardening experiences despite physical, environmental, or other barriers.
After 25 UC Master Gardner trainings and gardening maintenance activities, 110 seniors planted garden plots, and 120 for the first time planted container herb gardens. To launch the gardening activities in May of 2018, 199 of 624 seniors completed garden pre-assessments. Seniors completing the assessment showed 97 had never attended a nutrition, physical activity, or gardening workshop; 92 had not used container gardens; and 119 did not have a plot in the on-site community gardens. Over a one-year period, 230 seniors participated in fall and spring planting seasons, and are now planning for a third season. As a result of their participation and effort, the number of garden plots has tripled. Additionally, thirty percent of participants trained by UC Master Gardeners went on to volunteer as peer-educators and gardening ambassadors.
Studies have shown that gardening provides multiple ways to improve health and wellness such as lessening a sense of loss; providing opportunities for creativity, self-expression, social interaction and sensory stimulation; increasing self-esteem, practicing fine and gross motor skills, and improving eye-hand coordination. (D'Andrea, Batavia, & Sasson, 2007); (DL Armstrong, 2000), (Park, Shoemaker, & Haub, 2009). All tenants had an opportunity to participate in the gardening activities which also increased cross-cultural interaction, and peer-to-peer English language learning. In these ways UC ANR is promoting healthy people and communities.