Aging is a normal process when it comes at the right time. It’s a time that most people do not look forward to since people like remaining young forever but it has to happen anyway. Here are signs of aging and how to go about them when one reaches the aging point.
Aging causes the skin to lose its elasticity hence more lines, and wrinkles appear on the surface. The oil glands that help keep the supple skin produce less oil at one age which makes the skin to be dry. The growth of fingernails is also slowed down. The remedy for dry skin is one should always ensure that they use a moisturizer and always wear sunscreen when they are in the sun.
Hair begins to thin out on the scalp, armpits, and even the pubic area. The hair also turns grey since the pigments that give the hair its color also decline with age. This can be dealt with by dyeing the hair though this is short term since one may need several applications every month.
As people start to age, they have a problem seeing things. Some may need reading glasses to help in magnifying the words in the reading material. Night vision and visual sharpness also decline with age. In addition to that, glare also affects the vision which may make it difficult for one to drive safely at night when they are old.
Mineral content in bones is lost as one age. This makes the bones weak and less dense. This can be dealt with when one is still in their younger years. One should maintain a healthy weight even in old age, do weight-bearing exercises like walking and ensure that their diet has sources of calcium and vitamin D. One should also do away with unhealthy practices like smoking which are known to weaken the bones.
Aging brings about change in sleep and circadian rhythm. This means that one is more likely to sleep less hence wake up early. They are also more likely to wake up in the night. The sleep may also not be deep as it used to be in the earlier years.
As one comes of age, their body will need less energy, and the metabolism will slow down as well. Changes in the hormone levels will cause the body to store more fat and have fewer muscles. To help in managing this, one will need to watch what they eat by taking in few calories and doing more exercises. One can also do strength training to build their muscles.
Brain and the Nervous System
The brain begins to change in the early years of aging. The changes include the size of the brain and its nerves. The brain grows new nerve endings. It is also common for one not to recall things and also remembering names may prove difficult. To keep the brain sharp, one may need to engage in regular social activities and also challenging their brain to learn and do new things every day.