To create a message that appears to come from another user While it's easy to choose whatever value you like for certain displayed values, such as the From field in a posting, creating a forgery that will fool an expert who's looking for one isn't nearly as simple
If someone forges an object out of metal, they heat the metal and then hammer and bend it into the required shape. To forge a blade takes great skill. Open furnace for heating metal ore and metal for working and forming, or a workshop containing forge hearths and related equipment. From earliest times, smiths (see smithing) heated iron in forges and formed it by hammering on an anvil. A bellows operated by an assistant or by a foot treadle provided the forced draft for raising the temperature of the fire. Later, a waterwheel or animal power was often used to operate the bellows; modern forges have mechanically powered bellows or rotary blowers
a workplace where metal is worked by heating and hammering furnace consisting of a special hearth where metal is heated before shaping make a copy of with the intent to deceive; "he faked the signature"; "they counterfeited dollar bills"; "She forged a Green Card"
If one person or institution forges an agreement or relationship with another, they create it with a lot of hard work, hoping that it will be strong or lasting. The Prime Minister is determined to forge a good relationship with America's new leader They agreed to forge closer economic ties The programme aims to forge links between higher education and small businesses The Community was trying to forge a common foreign and security policy
noun, 1 A device or place to hold an intensified fire for the purpose of metalworking 2 A place, building or shop where a forge is used verb, to forge, forging, the act or process of shaping heated metal by hammering Forging, noun, an item made by the process of forging A typical forge has a forced air source such as a bellows or blower to intensify the fire, a refractory lining or enclosure to hold the fire and a chimney or vent Fuels include charcoal, mineral coal, heating oil or diesel fuel, propane (LPG), butane or natural gas (NG)
If someone forges something such as a banknote, a document, or a painting, they copy it or make it so that it looks genuine, in order to deceive people. She alleged that Taylor had forged her signature on the form They used forged documents to leave the country. + forger forgers forg·er the most prolific art forger in the country
20 dilde online sözlük. 20 milyondan fazla sözcük ve anlamı üç farklı aksanda dinleme seçeneği. Cümle ve Videolar ile zenginleştirilmiş içerik. Etimoloji, Eş ve Zıt anlamlar, kelime okunuşları ve günün kelimesi. Yazım Türkçeleştirici ile hatalı Türkçe metinleri düzeltme. iOS, Android ve Windows mobil platformlarda online ve offline sözlük programları. Sesli Sözlük garantisinde Profesyonel çeviri hizmetleri. İngilizce kelime haznenizi arttıracak kelime oyunları. Ayarlar bölümünü kullarak çevirisini görmek istediğiniz sözlükleri seçme ve aynı zamanda sözlüklerin gösterim sırasını ayarlama imkanı. Kelimelerin seslendirilişini otomatik dinlemek için ayarlardan isteğiniz aksanı seçebilirsiniz.