What exactly is ‘safeguarding’?
Safeguarding is the phrase used to describe the protection of the vulnerable. It can be equally applied to children or adults of any age, and is relevant to anyone who may be at risk – either to themselves or vulnerable to exploitation by others.
Safeguarding means protecting a persons right to live in safety, free from abuse and neglect.
The Care Act 2015 outlines various functions that a Local Authority has to meet in relation to adults. Section 3 details how a Local Authority has to provide information specifically about independent financial advisers who are qualified to give advice about care planning. Interestingly each local authority has its own safeguarding adults procedures tailored to meet the needs of their locality.
What might make an adult vulnerable?
There are a wide range of factors to be aware of and below are some of the key areas you need to understand which may affect a person from a safeguarding perspective:
• Age related frailty
• Lack of capacity to make decisions
• Difficulty communicating
• Issues relating to low self esteem
• Physical dependency on others
Is safeguarding just for people who access an individual organisation?
No, if you are vulnerable you should be helped so that you are not abused or exploited. A range of organisations work with the public such as police, local authority, health and social care plus members of the Faith Communities, representatives from carer and voluntary organisations. These all work together to ensure that services are available to anyone who may be vulnerable.
Why is it relevant to me, a Paralegal and you?
Everyone who comes into contact with vulnerable people in a professional or personal capacity has a duty to understand what they should do if they believe someone is at risk. Do you fully understand how and when to take action when you have contact with someone you may think is at risk and vulnerable? If not then you can access one of our training courses.
The Office of the Public Guardian are being asked to be more vigilant during the registration process for Lasting Powers and to be proactive in checking how Attorney's have acted to prevent financial abuse. Will Writers meet many people from all backgrounds and need to fully understand their role within the Care Act.
Safeguarding - It’s everyone’s business but do you understand what it means for you?
If you require further information then contact Steve on 07854 585 585 or by email email@example.com