They're gone. All of them. My family. My friends. All of them washed away in a torrent of water and a collapse of Earth. This was not the cruel mistress of weather bearing down on my home with rain. We had defenses and contingencies for that. No, this was the act of one man. A man with malicious intent. With purpose and hate, he walked the hose coupled to the side of his dwelling ut to my home. He held it aloft, pointing the doomsday downward. He let loose the flood of a thousand lives. All are gone. All are lost. All except me. 

My vengeance will not be swift. It is slow. It is methodical. I first must find ingress to the house. It is large and well-protected by barriers of metal, rock, glass, and clay. But I am patient. I know the places to look. Time ruins all structures. Eventually, I found it. It was a crack in the mortar between two rows of packed and fired clay. It was my way in. I took it. 

The inside is enormous and labyrinthine. Though the halls of this structure pale in complication to the once great passageways of my lost home. I take my time again. I scout the building, mapping every corner. I keep to the corners where the ceiling meets the wall to avoid the human's notice. There is danger here, as well. The human's feline companion patrols nightly. Her senses are not only better than the human's but they have also been adapted over thousands of years specifically to find prey. To her, I am prey. Avoiding her, I map the house.

I learn about the man -- my enemy. I learn his patterns and his habits. Every morning is the same. Every evening is mostly the same. I know with reliable certainty when he leaves and when he comes back. I know which television he likes to watch. I know he likes his water filtered. I know where he keeps the filters. I know where he keeps the rat poison. 

The rat poison looks like small granules of green . . . once I break it apart. Ants are good at that. It fits right in with the rest of the filter elements. It will take time. I know that. I can wait.
