Ok, here are some useful recruiting tips that will help your company find the best new talent for the job. 

1. Make Use of Employee Referrals - One of the most highly effective hiring strategies for today's growing companies is using employment referrals. This is a process that uses a person's professional network to find the best possible talent. Think about improving your employee referral program by switching to a stipend system for successful hires. When you choose to create a culture of respect toward these referrals, you can give your own networking connections a boost as well. 

2. Create a Positive Experience for Candidates - The way your prospective new talent feels about the hiring process will be based on the interactions they have with your hiring manager and anyone else they talk to at your company. Their experience may also include other interactions that take place without another person involved such as the online job application process or automated responses to their application submission. 

3. Consider Your Internal Recruits - Sometimes recruiting new talent internally for different positions can be more rewarding than hiring new employees. Hiring internally will reduce the amount of time it takes to hire, onboard, or train a new worker. It also cuts down on additional costs for advertising on job boards or paying for background checks. Plus, when you hire someone internally, you are typically dealing with a smaller amount of candidates, which will save you time during the screening and interviewing process. 

4. Make Diversity Your Priority - Having a team with diverse ideas, experiences, and backgrounds can increase your company's effectiveness and drive more innovation for your brand. Ensuring diversity is prioritized during the hiring process is a great way to guarantee a broad representation of staffing, which will help you work toward the best possible outcomes for workplace equity. 

5. Use a Rubric - One cornerstone of the hiring process is clear expectations. Using an interview rubric, or a checklist to analyze candidates may communicate transparency within your hiring process and make sure that the most qualified candidates will apply for the job. An interview rubric is a scoring tool that defines expectations and assists in determining who to interview, who you should call to interview again, and who to offer the new job to. This form of the rubric can be used to objectively measure both tangible and intangible details like relevant experience and demeanor.
