Chains of command represent the delegation of authority to various levels of an organization. Different levels of the hierarchy have the authority to make specific decisions, and the expectations are that everyone will move up and down the chain with precision. When it works right, this frees up the business owner to concentrate on higher-level aspects of the business. But without proper policies and procedures, it can lead instead to problems up and down the chain.
In a strict chain of command, authority is delineated at each hierarchical level. Questions and concerns move up and down the organizational chart step by step. In a small retail business, for example, a shift supervisor has authority during his time at work but may have to refer to the manager to fulfill specific functions, such as returns over a certain amount. The manager, in turn, expects the supervisor to settle most disputes among that shift’s workers. Managers have greater authority but have to turn to the owner for bigger decisions. The expectation is that issues will be handled at the lower possible level – for example, a dispute over shift hours would be handled by the supervisor, rather than immediately taken to the business owner.
Create a Clear Structure
One benefit of a chain of command is that it establishes a firm structure and accountability. Policies should clearly document the level at which each decision is made and prohibit anyone from jumping the chain except in very specific cases. Limiting financial decisions to the top links in the chain, for example, reduces the risk that lower-level employees will make ill-advised business commitments that detract from the bottom line. The separation of authorities across the chain also reduces the risk that employees will cherry-pick who they bring questions to based on the likelihood of a decision being made in their favor.
Stay Within Boundaries
The chain of command places responsibility on everyone to know his place in the chain – and to stay within those limits. If a business owner steps in and micromanages the shift hours and duties, for example, that curtails the authority of the shift supervisor and leaves employees uncertain whom to turn to.All members of the chain need to be clear what their authorities are, who they report to and who they supervise.
Breaking the Chain
A downside of the chain of command is that it can keep the higher-level decision-makers from finding out about critical problems on the line. If a cashier feels sexually harassed by a co-worker, and the shift supervisor fails to take her complaints seriously, she may feel unable to take further action because of the chain of command. This can leave your business liable if the inappropriate actions continue. Chain-of-command procedures, therefore, should also include provisions that allow links to be bypassed in specific situations if events warrant. If an employee feels her supervisor is ignoring security measures that place the store at risk, or if a supervisor determines that her manager is acting unethically, policies should allow a link in the chain to be bypassed so these concerns are addressed.
- Ryan McVay/Photodisc/Getty Images