How to install and configure storage devices and use appropriate media
While building a computer, the storage devices are given much important since they are the ones responsible for holding up the data in them. Sometimes for using the storage instruments like DVD, there has to be some device which can write them up. So these optical drives also play some vital role here. In the storage devices, hard drive is among those most common storage devices which are found in the computers. Among all the storage devices, this device stands out as different since it has the very large capacity to store the data. One can find many types of the hard disks out there. The three most common types are the SATA, SCSI and PATA. Some of the other media storage devices options are as follows;
CD-ROM: The data can be stored in the CD. CD's stand for the Compact Disk and one can find them having the storage capacity of more than 700MB. The CD ROM helps the user read the CD. One should first turn off the computer so that the risk of electronic current can be avoided. Then the case should be removed and then the person should look up for the CD ROM spot. In desktops, there is always a spot reserved for it since it has a huge size. Then one should put the CD ROM there and screw it with the backside of the CPU. Then the bus should be connected and computer should be restarted. Upon turning on, the computer would show the drives and would install them automatically.
DVD-ROM: DVD-ROM is basically used for using the DVDs. The DVDs typically hold more storage than the CD and hence they are in more use. These days one can find the DVD with the spacing capacity of even 1 TB. The installation process for the DVD ROM is sane as the CD ROM. One has to remove the case, unplug the buses and then install it manually and then should restart computer which on getting on, show the drivers which would help use the DVD ROM.
Blue-Ray: Blu-Ray is actually a DVD player which helps the user play some DVDs in the computer. It can be sued as the substitute of the DVD ROM as well since it also performs almost the same functions as the DVD ROM. The installation and configuration of this device is same as the two mentioned above. The power has to be plugged off and the case has to be removed. Then the drive should be inserted into computer. Here one would have to locate for some small width cable that comes with the drive. Both ends of the cable would be of the L shape, depending on what drive one uses. Then one of its parts has to be plugged into the back of Blu-Ray drive and other should be connected on the motherboard. The configuration can be done one the windows update the drivers itself or it can also be downloaded from the CD which comes with it.
Combo Drives and Burners:
There are some drivers which can be used for written the data into some data storage devices. These drivers can vary in nature and are mentioned as below;
CD-RW: CD writer is a drive which is used for writing the data into a CD. These CD can be among those which can be written only once in their life or can be those which can be written and erased several times. The CD writer can only write a CD and no DVD can be written on it. The drive can be installed quite easily. The way of installation is the quite same. One should just power off computer, remove case and install it there with the help of screws. After everything is done and the computer is turned on, one should insert a black CD and should use the software's like Windows Media Player or Nero Burner to write down the data on the CD.
DVD-RW: Like CD Writer, DVD writer is another important tool used for writing the data into a DVD. The lenses of the DVD writer are pretty thin, hence it can write down the data on the CD as well. So, one should buy the DVD writer instead of CD writer since it serves the double purpose. The installation of this driver is the same and hence it can be installed easily. After the Installation, the drivers should be looked for and one should install them up or update the old ones in order to get started with this device.
Dual Layer DVD-RW: This amazing DVD writer can burn the Dual payer DVDs. These DVDs are also known as the double layered DVDs as well. There is simple drill that has to be done. One can buy the Dual layer DVD-Rw from the market and can get it installed. If one doesn't have to install it, he can also connect it to the computer externally using a USB cable. Hence burning the DVDs become really easy. The dual layer DVDs can have the storage up to 8.5 GB which is a great deal for a DVD. Hence, these DVDs writers are mainly used by the people who like to hold up lots of data with them.
BD-R: BD-R is actually the Blue-Ray writing device. This amazing device can write down the data on a Blu-ray disk with the sped of up to 12x. With the increase in demand of the writable storage, this device also has the demand but it is not as common as the DVD writers. They are mostly used internally means one would have to install the drive into the CPU like a CD ROM or a DVD ROM. But it is quite easy to do so and the drivers are also easily installed by the windows.
BD-RE: This device helps writing the re-writable Blu-Rays disc. So, one should surely own this one. This device can be used the same way and the drivers and some software's are required for the operation.
The devices can be connected to the computer in two ways. First one is, by connecting them directly to the motherboard and for this purpose, one doesn't have to open up the PC. Second method is to do so by opening up the PC and then connecting it to the system. Following are the devices and the buses which can be connected externally;
USB: The USB is known by everyone. One must know that it is connected to the PC externally since the PC doesn't have to be opened up to accept the connection and there are sometimes the buses as well which don't even require connecting it to the CPU.
Firewire: It is the high speed bus used for connecting some digital devices together. As the characteristics indicate, it also is connected externally.
SATA: The SATA is the bus which connects the PC to some storage devices like HD. It is also connected externally and doesn't require the computer to be opened up.
Ethernet: When the wireless connection can't be used, Ethernet cable can provide the connection to the LAN card. It is also connected to LC externally.
IDE Configuration of Setup (Cable Selectm Slave, Master): Normally, there are two IDE slots on the mother board which is primary and secondary. Primary is for HD and secondary is for the CD ROM. They can't get connected to each other's connectors so they must be connected accordingly. This is done since the computer has ability to address only one device at the time so the priority is set and that's why the words Master and Slave are generated. Also, there are words used primary and secondary. Their configurations also have to be done in the BIOS and hence they are categorized as the internal connections since they are installed internally and configured internally as well.
SCSI IDs (0-15): It is actually how the devices make a decision that which device gets to control which bus. The SCSI is actually given some ranks, or numbers which are called the ID's. From 0-7 the IDs means that the priority level increases and these SCSI are so narrow. But from onwards, the priority level falls down. Since these buses operate inside the PC, they are also the internal buses.
Hot swappable drives: The meaning of hot swappable devices is that those devices can be removed without having the PC shut down. So, one can save one's self from the hustle of shutting down and powering ups the devices again and again. There are some HDDs which are swappable as well.
The HD are the most important part of the system since without it, one cannot even install an Operating System. The Hard disk is available in many types and some of them are as follows;
Magnetic: These HD were once used when people didn't even know about the floppy disk. They were 54cm thick and could store only 5MB. The latest magnetic HD can now store a big amount of data. These HD are coated with the magnetic material like Iron Oxide.
5400 rpm: One should know about these HD with the rpms. The rpms is the rate at which the HD can save the data faster and the storage can be done quickly and hence the time can be saved.
7200 rpm: The HDD with more Rpm is the ones which can safe ever larger amount of data than 5400 rpm with less amount of time. Although, there are some flaws since in laboratory, some drives with high rpm can get beaten easily by the ones with low rpm.
10,000 rpm: These HDDs are costly but they result in the more performance. They can store the data at really amazing speed since it has higher rpm.
15,000 rpm: These HDD drives are the most expensive ones and are said to be having more storage speed than other HDDs.
Solid State Drives:<
Here are the drives that one should know exist and can be connected to the computer externally;
Compact Flash: One should know that this card has the ability to store the data on a very small card and it can store some large data as well like there are some 16 GB cards avaliable in the market.
SD: The SD cards stand for secure digital and they are mostly used in laptops for installing data. They laptops usually contain a slot for it.
Micro SD: Micro SD can also be known as memory card and it is mostly used in the laptops and the mobiles.
Mini-SD: Just like Micro SD, it can be used in mobile phones but it stores less data than the Micro SD card.
xD: xD cards have now been obsoleted and modern digital cameras do not use them anymore.
SSD: The solid state disk can store a huge amount of data like HDD. Also, if the SDD is modern, it can beat up some HDD having the more rpm.
RAID actually is the way of making the group of the all devices together to create a bigger drive which is called RAID set. So, the small disks can be appeared as big ones. The RAID types are categorized from 0-5 and hence they tell about the Level of RAID being used. There are some special benefits which are associated with the RAIDS level.
Floppy drive was used one back in 90's when the USB and the CD weren't in fashion. One should understand that they were compromised of a plastic body which has a small ability to store the data.
Tape drive is the drive which has the ability to read and write data on some magnetic tapes. They are used to secure the data for the small scale and the medium level businesses.
CD: CD has the less media capacity and the capacity is only around 700MB in a CD. So, people prefer to have the DVDs. But if the data is small or is divided in some small portions, then it might be a very good idea to store it in some CDs which can be identified easily and one can search for the specific data.
CD-RW: This type of CD can have the data erased and written on it several times. Rewritable CD is actually a great tool since one can write down his data into the CD and can get it stored in a safe manner. These CDs are pretty common now but not all CDs are writable. These are the special ones. . There might be some software's which are required for burning the data into a CD. Example of such software's is Nero Burner or even the windows media player. One can insert the writable CD and then the message will appear asking about burning the CD. One can put the data into the CD and click at Burn to write the data on the CD.
DVD-RW: These DVDs have the ability to store the data several times. One can simple store the data and then can remove and store again. Hence it also works some somehow, a USB. As it has been mentioned, the CDs do not have enough space. So, people prefer to have the re writable DVD so that they can store the maximum data in it. Just like CD writing, this action also requires some software which can be used for writing.
DVD: DVD has the storage of up to 4.7 GB and the double layered DVDs have the capacity of 8.5GB. Blu-Ray: These disks can hold up some good amount of data. Some Blu-ray devices hold 25 GB and they can be as big as 100GB. Tape: The tape can hold lots of data. The latest tape developed by Sony can hold 185TB of data.
Floppy Disk: Floppy Disk cannot hold that much of the data and its maximum storage capacity is 1.44 MB.
DVD DL: It is the dual layered DVD which has two layers holding up 4.7 GB into each. So total it can have around 8.5 GB storage capacities.
The storage devices are the main source where one can gather all the data he has. Also, if that storage device is the RAM, then it becomes more necessary to know about the characteristics since it can affect the computer's speed as well. One should know about all the optical drives and the burners which can be used and how to get them installed to get the most benefit out of them. Also, knowing the media devices and the capacity can help the one choosing the right type of media for their work.