Approximately 23.5 million people in sub-Saharan Africa are living with HIV — more than two-thirds of the global HIV burden. Ninety percent of children worldwide living with HIV are born in this region. Through our partners, we are helping to bridge the gap in HIV treatment and support disparities in Africa.
HIV in sub-Saharan Africa
Since 1999, the Bristol-Myers Squibb Foundation’s SECURE THE FUTURE® initiative has been working with partners in Africa to provide care and support for communities affected by HIV. Over the past 15 years, SECURE THE FUTURE has invested more than $180 million to support more than 240 programs in 22 African countries, with special emphasis on community treatment support programs, care for children and building healthcare infrastructure.
Working with the Baylor International Pediatrics AIDS Initiative at the Baylor College of Medicine and with governments in sub-Saharan Africa, the Foundation helped establish five Children’s Clinical Centers of Excellence in Botswana, Lesotho, Swaziland, Uganda and Tanzania, a network of eight satellite clinics and a Pediatric AIDS Corps of pediatricians and specialists. More than 275,000 children are receiving care through this network.
Now operating as a technical assistance and skills transfer program, SECURE THE FUTURE focuses on harnessing and strengthening community-based resources and building capacity to improve the effectiveness and sustainability of community outreach programs.
The Foundation also is collaborating with prestigious partners such as the World Health Organization, UNAIDS, the President's Emergency Program on AIDS Relief and the Pink Ribbon Red Ribbon initiative of the George W. Bush Institute among others to leverage the legacy and infrastructure of SECURE THE FUTURE in Africa to help HIV patients who are co-infected with tuberculosis or who may be at risk of developing cervical or breast cancers.
HIV in the U.S.
The Centers for Disease Control estimates that 1,201,100 persons ages 13 years and older are living with HIV in the U.S. The impact of HIV infection and AIDS is disproportionately higher for racial and ethnic minorities and people of lower income and education levels. Among the diagnoses of new infections in 2010, African Americans represented 44% even though they constitute only 14% of the population, and Hispanics represented 21% even though they constitute only 17% of the population. In addition, prevalence of HIV is less than 1% in the general population, but 2.1% in urban poverty areas.
AIDS-related deaths occur when people who are infected do not receive the testing, treatment and care they need. Treatment can help people with HIV live longer, healthier lives and also greatly reduces the chances of passing HIV on to others. Although access to care has improved, African Americans, Hispanics, women and uninsured people with HIV remain less likely to have access to care and less likely to have optimal patterns of care. Of the total population living with HIV, only 66% are linked to care upon diagnosis, 37% are retained in care, 33% are prescribed antiretrovirals and 25% are virally suppressed, which is a key to preventing HIV transmission and living longer with the infection.
HIV Programs in Sub-Saharan Africa
HIV Programs in the U.S.