It is true there are more developing countries and underdeveloped countries than developed countries and it is also true that education is the only way to go turn a country developing or underdeveloped to developed. But, for everything, money is required, capital is needed, that is what a poor country lacks. Yet, such a country needs to apply different economical methods to educate its all children from poor to rich from street children to children who live in palaces and nice homes.
Economical means of spreading the roots of education to slum areas are:
Admit in schools:
It is the duty of government to admit every labor child or street child in schools. The authorities of provincial level should find out a total number of street children in their respective provinces and then put them in schools. Other than this, they should ask a common citizen who either falls in middle class or upper class to donate a few coins or rupees of his own choice in order to keep children motivated to study by giving them that money if they would do appreciate-able performance or score the highest marks in test or in any co-curricular activity.
Wall of Kindness:
Every wall can be painted colorfully that would give a very thoughtful and humane lesson and shelves should be hung or attached on. In those shelves, books and copies can be kept. Those books can either be donated by common citizens. Government and nongovernmental organization can do it together. This means not only spread education but also provide means to artists and carpenters to earn money. Regarding books, I would say that only those books should be kept which are easy to read or which can be read by children to gather. Magazines and newspapers should be kept. And it is the responsibility of going by citizens to clean the shelf whenever they stop to read the newspaper or any book.
Establishment of Night Schools:
It is true that most of the families of every poor country do not even earn a complete one dollar every day; therefore, such parents are forced to send their children to sell tissues or beg for money. It is good if a government, with the help of common citizens, provides them wages on daily basis according to the people each family and if the government is unable to do that then it should set up night schools so that the children can study at night. Yet, the government should provide them books, but those books should be easy to read and teachers should be passionate about teaching them like passionate and best assignment writers who are ready to provide assignment help or assistance in writing any kind of write up because energy is transferred from one person to another.
Education is the gateway to prosperity. It is a gateway that leads toward peace, harmony, and verdure. Therefore, learning is the only way to eradicate poverty and darkness. And that’s why a government of every poor country should work on its education system to make their country stable and prosperous in future because learning and reading decide the future.