Effort is part of a campaign to reintroduce the endangered sea creatures to the California Coast
In La Jolla Wednesday, hundreds of young white abalone were getting ready for a venture into the wild as part of a campaign to reintroduce the endangered sea creatures to the California Coast.
Marine scientists are transporting 3,200 white abalone from labs where they were born, to the waters off San Diego and Los Angeles. Half of those were set out in cages weeks ago, where they have been acclimating to the new habitat. The rest will be released next week, in tubes set to automatically open the same night.
Each is marked with a tiny tag to enable researchers to track their progress, and determine which release method works best. After decades of overfishing, white abalone have nearly vanished in the wild, and scientists are racing to beat extinction.
“We can’t wait any longer; the species needs help,” said Melissa Neuman, abalone recovery coordinator for the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration’s protected resources division.
Abalone, a kind of marine snail, is prized for its tasty meat and shiny, pearlescent shells. There are seven species in California, but white abalone, found only in Southern California and known for the tastiest meat, is now the rarest among them.
Its population collapsed in the 1970s after decades of over-fishing, combined with a bacterial disease that caused the animals to wither and die. Marine heat waves and rising ocean acidity due to climate change are also stressing the species, researchers said. That’s bad for fisheries and for the kelp forest, where abalone are prey for animals from octopuses to otters, and help regulate algal growth.
In 1992, a group of marine researchers compared notes and realized that none of them had seen any recently, said Ian Taniguchi, an environmental scientist with the California Department of Fish and Wildlife, who has devoted 27 years to studying the creatures.
They began diving and doing surveys with submersibles in some of the best habitat around the Channel Islands and other parts of Southern California, but found that white abalone had gone missing. In 2001, white abalone became the first marine invertebrate listed under the Endangered Species Act.
“So it has that dubious distinction,” Taniguchi said.
Scientists collected as many mature adults as they could find, and began coaxing them to reproduce in captivity. The animals are sensitive to water temperature and chemistry, and are slow to grow. It took two to four years for the animals slated for reintroduction to reach their current size of about one to two inches.
Tanks of white abalone are cultivated at NOAA’s Southwest Fisheries Science Center in La Jolla, where the animals were prepped for release. But the ones being sent out to sea were grown at Bodega Marine Laboratory on Bodega Bay, and driven nearly 400 miles down to Southern California.
On Wednesday, dozens of researchers made sure each of the animals was tagged, sorted and ready for release. With red or greenish shells colored by pigments in the algae they eat, white abalone are named for their cream-colored tentacles. Pick them up and you can see their flat, muscular foot and little face with its eyestalks and cephalic tentacles, sensory organs that pick up chemical cues from the water.
The animals were stored in flat trays while “Team White Abalone” members marked each with tiny numbered tags using a specialized glue developed for coral restoration. They had to periodically break up clumps of the creatures, which climbed atop each other.
“You have to be a concerned parent saying ‘get away from your sister,’ because they will dogpile,” said John Hyde, program leader for fisheries genetics at NOAA’s Southwest Fisheries Science Center in La Jolla..
The animals were placed into one of eight cylinders, each holding about 100 abalone. On Monday, divers will place the vessels in kelp beds off the San Diego Coast. After 12 hours, dissolvable tethers will release the lids of each tube, allowing the animals to make their way to nearby nooks and crannies. Abalone tend to hide in sheltered spaces when they’re young in order to avoid their many predators.
“When little, they’re easy prey for predators,” Hyde said. “Everything likes them: fishes, crabs, lobster and octopus.”
As they get older, they grow large and strong enough to cling to the surface of rocks, waiting to eat algae that floats past them. Until then, researchers will check on them regularly, several times within the first month, and quarterly after that, said Jenny Hofmeister, an environmental scientist on the abalone program at California Department of Fish and Wildlife.
They’ll look for the introduced animals as well as wild ones, and hope that the new blood can jump-start their populations. It’s helpful for that purpose that white abalone are fairly sedentary, remaining in nearly the same spot for most of their lives.
“They’re lazy,” Hofmeister said. “They don’t move.”
Although white abalone were less abundant than other species, and live in deeper water -- down to 350 feet -- they were some of the most coveted because of their tender, tasty meat.
Diving for abalone, and then dining on the catch, was one of the signature pleasures of coastal California, until over-fishing put wild populations in jeopardy. Still, those memories form a strong motivation to bring them back; researchers say the ultimate goal is populations that are self-sustaining and open to fishing.
Hofmeister remembers her father free-diving for abalone near their home in Northern California, and bringing them home for family feasts. She helped prepare the shellfish, and later began diving for them with her dad.
“I think that one of the reasons why abalone is so significant to people is because there’s such a big cultural event around it,” she said. “Whoever can make it goes out early in the morning and gathers abalone, and everyone else pounds and cooks them.”
Taniguchi had similar recollections of outings to Morro Bay, where his family would gather black abalone among the tidal rocks.
“That was one of my cherished memories from childhood,” he said. “That also spurred my love for the ocean. This event, this first out-planting of white abalone, is huge for us.... My entire career has been working toward this single goal.”
He feels we owe the species that effort.
“If we can recover white abalone, that says we have the ability to save that species that we put in peril,” Taniguchi said.