Our editors will review what you’ve submitted and determine whether to revise the article.Join Britannica's Publishing Partner Program and our community of experts to gain a global audience for your work!
John Mauchly, in full John William Mauchly, also called John W. Mauchly, (born August 30, 1907, Cincinnati, Ohio, U.S.—died January 8, 1980, Ambler, Pennsylvania), American physicist and engineer, coinventor in 1946, with John P. Eckert, of the Electronic Numerical Integrator and Computer (ENIAC), the first general-purpose electronic computer.
After completing his education, Mauchly entered the teaching profession, eventually becoming an associate professor of electrical engineering at the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia. During World War II Mauchly and Eckert, a graduate engineer, were asked to devise ways to accelerate the recomputation of artillery firing tables for the U.S. Army. They accordingly proposed the construction of a general-purpose digital computer that would handle data in coded form, and by 1946 they completed the ENIAC, a huge machine (containing more than 18,000 vacuum tubes) that incorporated features developed by John V. Atanasoff. The ENIAC was first used by the U.S. Army at its Aberdeen Proving Ground in Maryland in 1947 for ballistics tests.
The following year Mauchly and Eckert formed a computer-manufacturing firm, and in 1949 they announced the Binary Automatic Computer (BINAC), which used magnetic tape instead of punched cards. In 1950 the Eckert–Mauchly Computer Corporation was acquired by Remington Rand, Inc. (later Sperry Rand Corporation), Mauchly becoming director of special projects. The third computer after BINAC was UNIVAC I, specially designed to handle business data. Mauchly continued his work in the computer field, winning many honours. He served as president (1959–65) and chairman of the board (1965–69) of Mauchly Associates, Inc., and as president of Dynatrend Inc. (1968–80) and of Marketrend Inc. (1970–80).
Learn More in these related Britannica articles:
computer: The Atanasoff-Berry Computer…invitation, another early computer pioneer, John Mauchly, stayed at his home and was freely shown his work for several days in June 1941. For more on the ramifications of this visit,
seeBTW: Computer patent wars.)…
computer: ENIAC…to a project led by John Mauchly, J. Presper Eckert, Jr., and their colleagues at the Moore School of Electrical Engineering at the University of Pennsylvania; their objective was an all-electronic computer. Under contract to the army and under the direction of Herman Goldstine, work began in early 1943 on…
computer: UNIVAC…the Moore School, Eckert and Mauchly struggled to obtain capital to build their latest design, a computer they called the Universal Automatic Computer, or UNIVAC. (In the meantime, they contracted with the Northrop Corporation to build the Binary Automatic Computer, or BINAC, which, when completed in 1949, became the first…