Let’s shed some light on some common myths of mental illness.
Myth: Mental illness is not that common.
Fact: 43.8 million adult Americans have a mental illness in any given year.
9.8 million adult Americans experience a severe mental illness that significantly affects at least one activity in their life in any given year.
Myth: People with a mental illness are faking it.
Fact: Mental illness has been widely researched and it is a real medical condition. Those who don’t struggle can find it hard to relate to someone with a mental illness. Please remember, for those who are struggling it is genuinely painful emotionally, mentally, physically, and spiritually. No individual by no means wants to feel this way.
Myth: Mental illness is a personal weakness. They just need to have stronger willpower and self-discipline.
Fact: Research shows there are biologic and environmental components to mental illness. Genetics, trauma, and family history all play a part in an individual’s mental health.
Myth: A person can pray or think it away.
Fact: Prayer (spirituality) and positive, healthy thought patterns (CBT and DBT are great therapeutic modalities to help with this) are an important part of any treatment plan. However, ketamine treatments, medications, support systems, healthy eating and sleeping habits and exercise are all equally important parts of any wellness plan.
Myth: If you have a mental illness, you will never get better.
Fact: Some forms of depression and anxiety are short lived, requiring medication and talk therapy through a difficult time. Other mental illnesses such as chronic depression and anxiety, bipolar disorder, borderline personality disorder, etc. may require ongoing medical and therapeutic care. Individuals may experience many ups and downs in dealing with their illness. However, with an excellent treatment plan and support system, many people lead productive, meaningful lives.
Myth: People with a mental illness are “crazy.”
Fact: Having a mental illness does not make you less of a person. People with mental health issues experience life in a unique way. This can be difficult for others to comprehend. As a society, it is important for us to try and understand and have compassion for those with mental health issues.
Have a topic you would like our clinical team to address on our Fact or Fiction podcast?
Submit your topic to our Fact or Fiction podcast series HERE. Any topic regarding Ketamine, Depression or Chronic Pain is fair game.
Terri Kutchera is a Patient Consultant for Ketamine Wellness Centers