95 learners taking this course
This course helped me think about how to get change moving at my school – Anthony I learnt some new strategies and also confirmed what I felt to be true – Megan
I’m going to use these tools in different large and small change situations – Jade
There are things that you can do in your classroom, service, school or organisation to increase people’s willingness to participate in change. In this course, you will learn:
- The basics of behavioural science, shared by international experts.
- Different techniques that can increase people’s adaptability in times of change.
- How to create a culture where people are more willing to participate in change.
This course will take you 1 hour to complete. Enjoy it in one session or spread it out over a few weeks. You will have ongoing access.
This course is on-demand and for private study. Learn at your own pace and at times that suit you. Get a certificate when you finish.
- Foundation to Year 6: Civics and Citizenship, goal setting, creating change
- Year 7 to Year 10: Civics and Citizenship, goal setting, creating change
- General capabilities: Critical and Creative Thinking, Personal and Social Capability, Ethical Understanding
- Cross curriculum priorities: Sustainability
This course is mapped to the Professional Standards for Teachers. It is accredited for teacher professional development hours in the following states and territories:
Graduate Teacher – all states and territories except for ACT
3.7.1 Describe a broad range of strategies for involving parents/carers in the educative process.
4.1.1 Identify strategies to support inclusive student participation and engagement in classroom activities.
Proficient Teacher – all states and territories except for ACT
3.7.2. Plan for appropriate and contextually relevant opportunities for parents/carers to be involved in their children’s learning.
4.2.2 Establish and implement inclusive and positive interactions to engage and support all students in classroom activities.
Highly Accomplished Teacher – all states and territories except for ACT and NSW
3.7.3 Initiate contextually relevant processes to establish programs that involve parents/carers in the education of their children and broader school priorities and activities.
4.2.3 Demonstrate and lead by example the development of productive and inclusive learning environments across the school by reviewing inclusive strategies and exploring new approaches to engage and support all students.
Cool Australia is endorsed to provide the NSW Education Standards Authority (NESA) Registered Professional Development for teachers accredited at Proficient Teacher.
Chris Vella from Cool Australia is your course teacher. He has worked in the education sector for over 10 years as a classroom teacher and educational consultant. He has also worked at Western Sydney University. Chris loves getting creative with education and supporting others to do the same.
As a not-for-profit organisation all revenue from our Professional Development courses is reinvested into providing teachers with the resources to become the designers of exceptional learning.