When fatigue and lack of energy are not due to a health problem such as hypothyroidism and anemia, then the usual suspect is the poor nutrition. However, it’s not only about the food we choose, but also the time we eat and the way it is cooked. Let’s find out more about the secrets of diet that will give us energy.
How important is breakfast to the stimulation of the body?
Breakfast provides essential nutrients that allows us to start our day full of energy. If we skip it, it is very likely to feel weakness 2-3 hours after we wake up. Ideally breakfast should contain milk or yogurt, whole grain bread or breakfast cereals and fruit. (See also: Which nutrients provide energy)
Are Cereals an energy source?
Cereals are a source of carbohydrates, which are the main “fuel” for the body and brain, so it should be eaten at every meal. Whole grains (dark rice, oats, oatmeal, brown bread) are more preferable because they contain plenty of fiber, which helps in bowel movement. (See also: Should I count carbs to lose weight?)
After the noon siesta, I want to eat something sweet. Are the sweets a good energy source?
Sweets, when they only contain sugars which belong to simple carbohydrates do offer a direct stimulation. However, if they include saturated fats too, (e.g. cakes), they may have the opposite effect and load us with several unnecessary calories.
However, the best source of sugars is the fruits, which provides us with valuable antioxidants. (See also: 20 ways to replace sugar in your diet)
Which is the most energizing snack?
Fruit, sesame bun, wholegrain cookies, unsalted nuts and sesame. However, we need to be careful with their consumption as they do have a lot of calories (e.g. 50 g. of sesame bun contains 250 calories).
I eat a meal in the evening. If it includes some energy foods, will I have a constant supply of energy?
Regardless of the energy foods you eat for dinner, these are not enough to give you energy for the rest of the day. If you do not want your energy levels to be decreased during the day, you should eat at least one snack and one light meal at the office.
I do not drink much water. Will this affect my energy?
According to studies, even a mild dehydration of 2-3% can reduce the physical and spiritual performance. We need about 2 liters of fluid every day, 20% of which comes from the food and the remaining 80% (6.7 cups) of water, fruit juices and soft drinks. (See also: Why is drinking water good for you)
Which ingredients are more involved in the process of energy production in the body?
Among the most important are Ferrum (red meat, poultry, liver), the B vitamins (whole grains, potatoes, beans, dairy products, green leafy vegetables) and Magnesium (nuts, potatoes, breakfast cereals).
Does Coffee provide energy?
The caffeine contained in coffee is a mild stimulant and gives some translucency and better reflexes. However, in order to take advantage of these properties of coffee, you need to consume it in moderation (1-3 cups a day).
Is the method of cooking food important?
Fat and particularly the saturated animal fat, is associated with bad mood and decreased mental performance. This is why it is better to eat foods that are steamed, boiled or grilled.
Does Chocolate offer stimulation?
The dark chocolate is a good choice for immediate powering of our body with energy, sugars and magnesium, which, as several studies have shown, are related to the stimulation. However, it is necessary to consume it in small quantities, since a piece of 20g contains about 120 calories.