People typically do not get vaccines very often, perhaps excluding the annual flu vaccine because it is not necessary to do so. When we get a vaccine we have prolonged protection and can be certain that the antibodies will not simply disappear this exact time next year. So why would it be any different with our dogs? The answer is simple; It is not any different!
In reality, vaccinating your dog with every available vaccine every single year can do more harm than good. Dogs simply do not need to get re-vaccinated every year, immunity from vaccines often lasts much longer than one year.
A Minimal Vaccine Schedule for Healthier Dogs!
It is important to do your research and consult your veterinarian, and don't be afraid to find a veterinarian that respects the way you wish you care for your dog and will work with you instead of trying to do what they think it best without your input.
Over vaccination can be detrimental to your dog's health
It is strongly recommended that you do your research on vaccines; What diseases are present or problematic in your area? From there you can determine exactly which protocol will be most beneficial for your dog. Take your desired protocol to your veterinarian and get them on board with your plan. Many dog owners are now choosing to follow Dr. Dodds minimal vaccine protocol; This protocol states that puppies will be vaccinated for DISTEMPER and PARVO only. Your dog must also be vaccinated against the rabies virus - not only is the rabies vaccine required by law but this disease is fatal and painful and can be very easily transferred between human and animal. That means that over the course of your pet's life, they should only be vaccinated for 3 things: Distemper, Parvovirus and Rabies. These are the three most deadly diseases that can kill your pet should he or she contract either one. Additional vaccines should be given in special circumstances.
Vaccines for diseases such as kennel cough, parainfluenza, and adenovirus are typically unnecessary. These viruses are the equivalent of a cough or the flu in humans and healthy dogs can easily overcome them. It is unheard of for a dog to die of kennel cough unless they have an immune system problem. Kennel cough is a repeat visitor at humane societies and animal shelters across North America, very few animals actually die from this condition, and those that do usually have a suppressed immune system.
If you enjoy K9 instinct's articles, you will love getting our weekly Newsletter! It's totally free, and you will get lots of great exclusive content delivered directly to your inbox! You won't want to miss out on all the free advice and recipes!