Eggs are high in cholesterol, so you should limit your intake. Egg yolks are high in cholesterol so ditch the yolk and consume the white.
Do all these sound familiar?
Consumption of high cholesterol foods such as eggs have long been associated with increased blood cholesterol and risks of heart diseases. Previously, the Dietary Guidelines for Americans, issued by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS), along with the U.S.
Department of Agriculture (USDA) also recommended cholesterol intake to be limited to no more than 300 mg/day. Eating 2 eggs would have exceeded this 300 mg limit. So we are not surprised if eggs, and especially their yolks, which contain all the cholesterol are shunned by many.
However, this guideline was changed recently.
We chose to write this article not just because eggs are one of our favourite foods, but because we feel that these little wonders have been much maligned, with plenty of their benefits downplayed!
Here are 5 reasons why you should drop those fears of egg consumption and start embracing them again:
1. There is no significant evidence that consumption of DIETARY cholesterol increases BLOODcholesterol.
The recommended cholesterol consumption limit of 300 mg/day is nowremoved from the latest Scientific Report of the 2015 Dietary Guidelines Advisory Committee by the USDA. Lots of research has proven that consuming foods high in cholesterol such as seafood and eggs, are not associated with increased blood cholesterol and the risk of coronary heart diseases for the general population. The main culprits of high blood cholesterol are mainly due to obesity and consumption of foods high in saturated and trans fats. This is a significant change as warnings against dietary cholesterol have been long-standing and even food brands are influenced to market using the “No Cholesterol” sign on their labels!
2. Eggs are actually good for your heart.
Contrary to what most of us think, studies have found that eggs can help to raise concentrations of good cholesterols such as high-density lipoprotein (HDL) and decrease the bad small low-density lipoprotein (LDL) . It doesn’t make sense to discard the yolk or limit your eggs intake and still continue to indulge in your fried food and processed junk food!
3. The egg yolk is chock-full of nutrients.
More than 90% of an egg’s nutrients (such as calcium, iron, zinc, thiamin, B6, folate, B12, fatty acids and fat soluble vitamins A, D, E and K) is found in the egg yolk. The egg is also a high quality protein source and approximately 40% of the protein comes from the yolk. Now, can you see what you are missing out on if you just consume the egg white?
Just think about it, the egg white is what protects the egg yolk, because that’s where all the goodness is!
4. Eggs keep you feeling full longer
Good news for those who are looking to shed some weight. The protein in eggs has high satiety effects which can act as a natural appetite suppressant. Incorporate eggs into your breakfast menu to reduce those food cravings and snacking during the later part of the day!
5. Eggs are delicious and are one of the most versatile ingredients for cooking!
Have it scrambled, hard-boiled, fried, poached… the possibilities are endless. Eggs are easy to cook and hard to go wrong with. At Thoughtworthy, we strongly support and encourage a revival of a home-cooking culture — and since eggs are usually what most of us start our cooking journeys with, they will always have a special place in our hearts.
It also helps that they are so delicious!
Eggs are one of the most nutritious food out there. Unless you have medical conditions such as diabetes, there are numerous benefits to the inclusion of eggs in your regular diet. Just remember to eat all foods in moderation, and combine that with plenty of exercise and adequate rest in order to achieve optimum health!