It was 60 years ago today that the United States Navy entered the nuclear age with the commissioning of the USS Nautilus, the first nuclear-powered submarine to join the naval fleet.
It was a remarkable engineering feat. The nuclear propulsion plant was a revolutionary design and technological breakthrough that assured the ship of stealth capability, endurance and speed. In fact, the only limitation of how long the ship could spend underwater was dictated by the amount of food and other provisions on board.
Over the span of its 25 years of active service, the Nautilus clocked more than 500,000 miles, and today more than 200 nuclear-powered Navy ships, surface as well submarine, make up the fleet.
The Nautilus, and the nuclear-powered submarine fleet that followed, is a tribute to the dedication and skilled workers at Electric Boat shipyard, the premiere shipbuilding company in the country, if not the world. It is the reason why Groton is known internationally as the Submarine Capital of the World.
After completing its active duty service, the Nautilus was named a National Historic Landmark in 1982, and in 1985, was named Connecticut’s State Ship before permanently being assigned as the main exhibit of the Submarine Force Library and Museum in 1986, located just outside the main gates of the Groton Submarine Base. More than 150,000 visitors a year take a tour of the historic naval sub.
We join with others in the region, state and nation this morning in congratulating the Navy on this momentous occasion and in particular the invited special guests to today’s ceremony that were involved in the initial design and construction of the Nautilus as well as those who served proudly on the ship.
Because of limited space on the museum’s pier, the ceremony marking today’s anniversary is by invitation only and not open to the public. The Naval History and Heritage Command (NHHC) will live-stream the event starting at noon. It can be viewed at bit.ly/1wR3FiQ.
That’s our opinion. We’d like to hear yours. Email us your thoughts at firstname.lastname@example.org.