Florida Weather June Averages, USA
What's the Weather like in Florida in June
June is the official start of summer and the high season in Florida, a state in the United States that bears the appropriate nickname "The Sunshine State." It must be noted, though, that pretty much every month in Florida is a vacation month. Due to the state's (sub)tropical climate, temperatures are always high and sunshine is abundant.
In June, too, the temperatures are exceptional. With an average temperature of 27°C, this is the third warmest month of the whole year, together with September and after the two peak summer months of July and August. Afternoons are scorching hot and humid in June, the mercury reaching an average high of 32°C. At night, the low temperature averages no less than 21°C. These temperatures are very high, so you might want to consider booking a room with air-conditioning this time of year.
Also, to avoid sunburn it is crucial to bring sunscreen with a high SPF level. It would be best to pack light clothing such as shorts and cotton shirts. Wearing a hat is advised as well, particularly in mid-afternoon.
Average Sea Temperature
The sea temperature is 28°C high in June, which is almost the annual maximum and quite a warm temperature for swimming. Needless to say; water sports are extremely popular this time of year.
June features the longest days of the entire year. June 21 is the actual longest day with 13.55 hours of daylight. The other days this month are a tiny bit shorter. Cloud cover increases greatly throughout June, which kind of limits the amount of sunshine that reaches Florida's beaches. Cloud cover increases from 38% to 49% in the course of the month. This is still a very sunny month by all accounts, though. Each day in June has 9 sunshine hours on average.
June falls within the wetter half of the year, a period of short but heavy thunderstorms and rain showers that is typical for a (sub)tropical climate. It is the third wettest month of them all, receiving 178mm of rainfall in total in Miami, one of the state's top tourist destinations. The probability that rainfall occurs increases dramatically in the course of the month, from 40% in the beginning to 63% toward the end. Thunderstorms are virtually the only type of rainfall that you may expect when visiting Florida in June. They occur on no less than 80% of the days with rainfall, but tend to be short and sometimes even refreshing.
If you're thinking about vacationing in Florida soon, you can check out the weather forecast to determine the best period to visit this sunny state.
Florida Hotels in June
The Amelia Hotel
If you are looking for year round sunshine, head to Jacksonville, Florida, which happens to be at its hottest in June. The Amelia Hotel at the Beach is, in fact, located right at the beach of Amelia Island. This family-friendly hotel lies near historic Fernandina and is a charming place to stay popular wedding venue and place to really get away from it all.
The Courtyard Jacksonville Beach Oceanfront
The Courtyard Jacksonville Beach Oceanfront is a well-rated and popular beachside hotel with plenty of amenities and facilities, from free Wi-Fi and a bistro to a seaside pool and even a fire pit and tropical huts. This is one of the very best hotels on Jacksonville Beach.
DoubleTree by Hilton Jacksonville Riverfront
If you'd rather stay in downtown Jacksonville, check out the DoubleTree by Hilton Jacksonville Riverfront. This luxury hotel is located smack-bang in the heart of the city, set on the banks of the St. Johns River. Facilities include a gym, 24-hours business centre, outdoor pool, two lounges and a gift shop.
Florida Beach for June
As the sea temperature now averages 28°C and the afternoons become quite hot, there's hardly better beach weather to be found anywhere. Jacksonville is home to about 35 kilometres of gorgeous beaches, a stretch that is split up into three beaches areastlantic, Neptune and Jacksonville Beachesnd the old fishing town of Mayport that is located just north of those beaches. These wide sandy beaches offers everything from water sports and nightlife to boat trips and family activities.
Bars and Restaurants
North Beach Fish Camp
If you would like to indulge in some delicious seafood in the Beaches and Mayport area of Jacksonville, head to North Beach Fish Camp. This amazing restaurant is located just a few steps from the Atlantic Ocean on Neptune Beach and serves fantastic seafood and southern food in a hospitable and welcoming atmosphere, created by the salty sea breeze and cozy interior.
The Mossfire Grill is located in the historic Riverside & Avondale area of Jacksonville, an area filled with restaurants and bars. This eclectic restaurant is a place you can go for refreshing drinks, such as cocktails and beers, and homemade food with a typical southern flair and taste. Happy hour is not just one-hour long, but four! It runs from 3 pm until 7 pm.
Things to do in Florida in June
The Jacksonville Landing Friday Market happens every Friday of the month from 10am to 2pm, a place where you can purchase fresh produce and shop for souvenirs such as unique works of art and jewelry. In addition to this great market, there are several other farmers markets in Jacksonville.
Hands on Children's Museum
As for the children, they will enjoy the Hands on Children's Museum located at Beach Boulevard where they can experience participatory learning such as acting out a story in the Puppet Theater. There's also a Sheriff's Office, Veterinarian's Clinic and Post Office in which they get to pretend that they are the sheriff, veterinarian or postman respectively.
An attraction for both kids and adults is the Jacksonville Zoo and Gardens. This is a walking zoo allowing interactive activities, such as feeding the giraffes. There are more than 2,000 exotic animals and 1,000 varieties of plants.
Catty Shack Ranch Wildlife Sanctuary
If you like cats, and big ones, visit the Catty Shack Ranch Wildlife Sanctuary that provides a safe and caring environment for tigers, lions, cougars, leopards, bobcats and the "honorary cats" coatimundis, which is actually a mammal from the raccoon family.