The Docks market, in computing and video gaming, is a docking station or dock provides a simplified way of "plugging-in" an electronic device such as the tablet-like hybrid video game console, the Nintendo Switch and laptop computer to common peripherals. Because a wide range of dockable devices—from mobile telephones to wireless mice—have different connectors, power signaling, and uses, docks are not standardized and are therefore often designed with a specific make and model of a device in mind.
A dock can allow some laptop computers to become a substitute for a desktop computer, without sacrificing the mobile computing functionality of the machine. Portable computers can dock and undock hot, cold or standby, depending on the capabilities of the system. In a cold dock or undock, one completely shuts the computer down before docking/undocking. In a hot dock or undock, the computer remains running when docked/undocked. Standby docking or undocking, an intermediate style used in some designs, allows the computer to be docked/undocked while powered on, but requires that it be placed into a sleep mode prior to docking/undocking.
Currently, The industry is highly concentrated, technical barriers and financial barriers are relatively high. The companies in the world that produce Docks mainly concentrate in North America and China, Raw materials are also concentrated in these regions. In particular, as the market leader in Docks, Acer and Apple take the global market share of more than 35%, other key manufacturers include Dell, HP, Lenovo, etc. The production of Docks increased from 27424.6 K Units in 2012 to 36829.7 K Units in 2016, with an average growth rate of 8.57%.
Docks can be classified as three types, such as USB-C Docks, Wireless Docks, others. It can be widely used in many industries. Survey results showed that 13.21% of the Docks market is USB-C Docks, 16.52% is Wireless Docks, 70.27% divided among others in 2016. With the development of economy, Countries increasingly stringent environmental requirements, these industries will need more Docks. So, Docks has a huge market potential in the future.
With the awareness of electronics and development of Docks, we tend to believe this industry is an emerging industry, and the consumption increasing degree will show a smooth growth curve. For product prices, the slow downward trend in recent years will maintain in the future as competition intensifies. Besides, prices gap between different brands will go narrowing gradually. Also, there will be fluctuation in gross margin.
The global Docks market is valued at 6010 million US$ in 2017 and will reach 6190 million US$ by the end of 2025, growing at a CAGR of 0.4% during 2018-2025.
The major manufacturers covered in this report
Geographically, this report studies the top producers and consumers, focuses on product capacity, production, value, consumption, market share and growth opportunity in these key regions, covering
Other regions (Central & South America, Middle East & Africa)
We can also provide the customized separate regional or country-level reports, for the following regions:
Rest of Asia-Pacific
Rest of Europe
Central & South America
Rest of South America
Middle East & Africa
Rest of Middle East & Africa
On the basis of product, this report displays the production, revenue, price, market share and growth rate of each type, primarily split into
By Application, the market can be split into
The study objectives of this report are:
To analyze and study the global Docks capacity, production, value, consumption, status (2013-2017) and forecast (2018-2025);
Focuses on the key Docks manufacturers, to study the capacity, production, value, market share and development plans in future.
Focuses on the global key manufacturers, to define, describe and analyze the market competition landscape, SWOT analysis.
To define, describe and forecast the market by type, application and region.
To analyze the global and key regions market potential and advantage, opportunity and challenge, restraints and risks.
To identify significant trends and factors driving or inhibiting the market growth.
To analyze the opportunities in the market for stakeholders by identifying the high growth segments.
To strategically analyze each submarket with respect to individual growth trend and their contribution to the market.
To analyze competitive developments such as expansions, agreements, new product launches, and acquisitions in the market.
To strategically profile the key players and comprehensively analyze their growth strategies.
In this study, the years considered to estimate the market size of Docks are as follows:
History Year: 2013-2017
Base Year: 2017
Estimated Year: 2018
Forecast Year 2018 to 2025
For the data information by region, company, type and application, 2017 is considered as the base year. Whenever data information was unavailable for the base year, the prior year has been considered.
Docks Subcomponent Manufacturers
With the given market data, QYResearch offers customizations according to the company's specific needs. The following customization options are available for the report:
Regional and country-level analysis of the Docks market, by end-use.
Detailed analysis and profiles of additional market players.