Amanda Bergman’s 3.5-year-old son had already been kicked out of one day care when he arrived for his first day at a new preschool. As soon as he entered the classroom, Bergman said, he looked around, walked over to the teacher’s desk and swiped everything from its surface onto the floor.
While friends offered reassurance to Bergman about her son’s behavior, it was clear to her that something else was going on. Unaware of people’s personal space, he couldn’t keep his hands off of other kids or their stuff. Even in occupational therapy sessions, he couldn’t focus enough to complete certain tasks. When asked to draw a circle, he would get halfway through before his mind drifted elsewhere.
Bergman, now 40 and a web content manager in central New Jersey, finally took her son to a pediatrician who specializes in behavioral, social and other developmental concerns. The doctor’s diagnosis: attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (A.D.H.D.) and autism.
A.D.H.D. — a condition often marked by persistent impulsivity, hyperactivity and an inability to pay attention — can affect both children and adults, but it has increasingly become a common condition of childhood. As of 2016, about 9 percent of American children and adolescents between 2 and 17 had received a diagnosis — and evidence suggests that such statistics are progressively skewing younger.
While the American Academy of Pediatrics doesn’t recommend giving children a diagnosis of A.D.H.D until after age 4, one study found that nearly half of the 237,000 2-to-5-year-olds who had an A.D.H.D. diagnosis in 2011 and 2012 were diagnosed before age 4. From 2008 to 2016, the percentage of A.D.H.D. diagnoses in kids between 2 and 5 doubled from 1 to 2 percent — and about 18 percent of kids in that age group took medication for it.
Adderall and other short-acting amphetamines, which improve focus and reduce impulsivity by increasing dopamine and norepinephrine levels in the brain, have been approved for children as young as 3. And liquid, dissolvable and chewable formulations of methylphenidate (the active ingredient in Ritalin and other drugs) are available for little kids who can’t yet swallow pills.
But with concerns over — and a lack of data about — how such medications might affect young brains in the long term, some researchers are trying to spread the word about other, nonmedication options, such as behavior therapies and training programs for parents of preschoolers with the condition.
Getting that message out has been slow going, said Katie Hart, Ph.D., a psychologist at Florida International University, in part because doctors don’t always recommend alternate treatments, and partly because access to them can be spotty. Another big reason that medication is tempting for doctors and patients alike, said William Pelham, Ph.D., director of the Center for Children and Families at Florida International University, is because it works quickly, often reducing symptoms within an hour.
As an avid reader of online message boards, comment threads and Facebook conversations about parenting, Bergman worried about the overwhelming judgment she would face if she decided to medicate her young child for A.D.H.D. “I did not want to medicate him,” she said, “but mostly for the fact that I felt like I shouldn’t want to medicate.”
A growing concern among the young
There is no blood test or brain scan for A.D.H.D. Instead, diagnosis tends to involve a combination of clinical evaluations, consultations and observations about how inattention or impulsivity might be affecting a child’s ability to function. This ambiguity, paired with the fact that preschoolers are hyperactive by nature, has led some parents and researchers to question whether, for some children, their environment — rather than their biology — might be to blame for the rising tide of diagnoses among the very young.
Critics of diagnosis in preschoolers, for instance, argue that the disorder is an artifact of the unrealistic demands of schools on active and energetic young children. And some data support the idea that societal expectations at increasingly younger ages are responsible for rising rates of A.D.H.D.: According to one 2018 study of more than 407,000 children in the United States who were born just before or just after the kindergarten cutoff date, the youngest kindergartners were 34 percent more likely to be given an A.D.H.D. diagnosis than their oldest classmates.
“We’re living in a culture where the norms of behavior are becoming much more circumscribed,” said Michael Manos, Ph.D., who leads the Cleveland Clinic’s Center for Pediatric Behavioral Health. “And tolerance for children’s different behavior is lower.”
Those kinds of criticisms can be tough on already stressed and exhausted parents who are told their preschool-age children have A.D.H.D. Like in Bergman’s son, A.D.H.D. commonly co-occurs with other conditions such as anxiety, learning disabilities or autism, exacerbating behavioral challenges. And compared with school-age kids with A.D.H.D., preschoolers are three times more likely to get expelled from school settings, leaving parents to scramble for child care.
The medication conundrum
Given the challenges, medication can be a tempting approach. Overall, 80 percent of kids with A.D.H.D. in the United States are prescribed medication within a year of their diagnosis. Those are often stimulants, such as Ritalin, Concerta and Adderall.
But parents often find that the idea of medication is as fraught with stigma and doubt as an A.D.H.D. diagnosis in preschoolers. In a 2018 survey of 151 families, for instance, Dr. Hart and her colleagues found that fewer than half of the parents who answered questionnaires said that they were open to medicating their preschoolers (though the parents of particularly aggressive children were less reluctant). Despite their reservations, many parents told Dr. Hart that they felt pressured by health care providers to medicate.
A major reason for such hesitation is that clear, long-term data is lacking on the long-term effects of these medications on very young and developing bodies and brains.
The longest running study on the safety and efficacy of stimulants in little kids — called PATS — began in 2001 with about 300 3-to-5-year-olds with severe A.D.H.D. Over the course of about three years, the placebo-controlled portion of the trial, which involved 165 children, found that A.D.H.D. symptoms improved in those who took a low dose of generic Ritalin (an average of about 15 grams) each day. But compared with older children who took the medication, the drug also caused more significant side effects, like trouble sleeping and weight loss.
The medicine also did nothing to address the underlying causes of A.D.H.D. At least half of people who are told they have A.D.H.D. in childhood retain the diagnosis into adulthood, regardless of whether they took medication or not. So it was not surprising that nearly 80 percent of the children who originally learned they had A.D.H.D. at the start of the study still had the diagnosis six years later when assessed during a follow-up, said Dr. Mark Riddle, M.D., a pediatric psychiatrist at the Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine in Baltimore, and co-author of the PATS study.
Can behavior training be the antidote for meds?
One insightful, if underreported, finding of the PATS study was that behavior training — which all families participating in the study were required to do before beginning the medication protocol — was potentially so helpful at providing tools for dealing with the symptoms of A.D.H.D. that a third of the families dropped out of the study before even trying the drugs.
Behavior therapy programs teach parents to use timeouts, consistency with discipline and positive rewards for desired behavior, along with techniques for describing emotions and listening actively. They often meet weekly for several months and have been linked with better performance in school, fewer problem behaviors and better relationships between parents and children. And research suggests that they also may greatly reduce the need for medication. In studies with kids between 5 and 12, for instance, Dr. Pelham and his colleagues have found that behavioral training can reduce the dose of medication kids need to take and, for some kids, can eliminate the need for meds altogether.
In the PATS study, those strategies probably worked well enough that families felt they didn’t need medication, Dr. Riddle said.
“It didn’t ease the core symptoms. The kids were still inattentive; the kids were still impulsive; the kids were still hyperactive,” he said. “But the parents were able to manage it, and home life got better.”
For young children in particular, the success of behavior training programs has led the A.A.P. to recommend them as a first-line treatment for preschoolers with A.D.H.D. Trying such programs might be especially important, said Dr. Pelham, since going straight to medication might not give kids and parents a chance to practice new behavior-management skills.
But medications work quickly; and in some cases, time is of the essence. Medication may also help in cases where behavior training alone isn’t enough. Kids with A.D.H.D. often face challenges at school and home that can make it hard for them to learn, said Dr. Jay Giedd, M.D., chief of child psychiatry at the University of California, San Diego. “Every day that a child is anxious or that they’re depressed or that his or her self-esteem is low because she can’t focus in school — all of that also matters for brain development,” he said. “That’s where it gets really difficult.”
Parent-training wasn’t something Bergman knew about when she was told her son, now 12, had A.D.H.D. She couldn’t quit her job to care for him full time, and she wanted to help him function like everyone else. He was getting in trouble at school and feeling bad about himself. Despite the judgment she knew she’d get from other parents, he began taking medication at 4 1/2.
It took a while to find the right drug. After trying Adderall, which didn’t suit him, he started taking a low dose of Ritalin. His first day on the drug, he sat down and drew a flower. Eight years later, she still has it framed. “He was able to get all the crayons where he needed them without just picking them up and throwing them on the floor,” Bergman said. “He was able to sit down in the chair. He was able to ask for the paper and wait for the paper. It was this whole chain of events and behaviors that so many people take so for granted when their kids can just do them.”
Bergman’s son, who still takes medication, recently started attending a new middle school, one that has small classes and is designed for kids with learning differences. She hopes that the new environment will help narrow the gap she has started to see between his potential and his performance. “That gap is getting wider as he’s getting older,” she said. “And I don’t think that is something that medication can fix.”
Emily Sohn is a freelance journalist in Minneapolis, who has written for The Washington Post, Nature, NPR, Spectrum, bioGraphic and other publications.