Teach me to be myself
We have prepared the environment (the classroom) meticulously to create the best conditions for your child to build and develop harmoniously, physically, intellectually, psychologically, emotionally and socially. Your child is cared for individually, in a privileged way and at his or her own pace.
Your child is welcomed by one member of the teaching staff who remains the preferred contact person for the time of adaptation.
The child builds himself through his experiences and the relationships he establishes with his surroundings. Your child goes through several sensitive periods: order, movement, sensory, language and social behaviour.
The educator, with a loving and respectful attitude, is a mediator, and support for the child.
She presents the Montessori material in the class to the child. Maria Montessori has scientifically created materials adapted to the sensitive periods and development of the child, encouraging autonomy, independence and free choice, advancing his or her cognitive, physical, psychological and emotional capacities.
VIDEO: A DAY IN THE CHILDREN’S COMMUNITY
The rest period
Sleep preserves the child’s physical and psychological health. Your child has the opportunity to rest in a quiet, comfortable space provided for this purpose. Sleeping habits (transitional object such as cuddly toys) are respected. The beds are personalized. The waking up of the children is staggered.
At Les Colibris we respect your child’s rhythm. He/she may or may not be toilet trained. The educators will accompany her towards this goal (which depends on your child’s physical, psychological and emotional development). The toilets are adapted to the size of your child.
MOTRICITY and CONTACT WITH NATURE
We are fortunate to be part of the Parc National de la Brague. We would like the children to enjoy the abundant nature around us.
Your child goes out to play in the garden in the morning or afternoon or in the morning and afternoon, depending on his or her needs. Other outdoor activities include working in the vegetable garden, visiting the forest, walking, observing nature, studying plants and animals, and feeding and caring for them.
Activities throughout the year.
Depending on the time of year, various recreational and educational workshops are offered to children. For example: yoga, fine motor skills, gardening, cooking, storytelling, painting, music, olfactory workshops
Meal times are a time of sharing, pleasure, discovery and exchange that takes place in a calm atmosphere. The child serves himself independently and participates in the care of himself (brushing his teeth is offered after lunch) and the environment.
Children participate to set the table, clear the table and take care of the compost, which allows them to develop their responsibility and service to the community.
We have chosen a caterer with organic products, the dishes are heated in our kitchen.
Children have 2 options:
- Lunch box, meal prepared and brought in the morning by the parents (no refrigeration or reheating).
- Various organic menus delivered every day by a caterer and served hot by the school
A snack (organic seasonal fruit) is offered to the children every morning.
Full-time children are welcome on Monday, Tuesday, Thursday and Friday. Children part-time on Monday and Thursday or Tuesday and Friday. On Wednesdays we offer Montessori workshops.
- PERSONALIZED WELCOME from 8:30 am to 9 am
- EXIT from 4pm to 4.30pm
- AFTER SCHOOL CARE from 4:15 p.m. to 5:50 p.m.
Paid after school care is available from 4:15 pm to 5:50 pm on Mondays, Tuesdays, Thursdays and Fridays of the school year at Les Colibris. A snack is served during the after school care. The child must be picked up by 17:50 at the latest. There is a possible tax credit of 50% for out-of-home childcare expenses.
Colette and Cassandra will take care of your children at the daycare.
3735, route des Dolines
06410 BIOT / Sophia Antipolis
Alpes-Maritimes, Côte d’Azur, France