What are the Moringa benefits ?
Whilst many of us will have heard a lot about the benefits of Moringa and its magic healing powers in recent years, we’re often at a loss when it comes to actually explaining what Moringa is in itself.
Known across the world under names such as ‘Behan’ and ‘Indian Horseradish’, Moringa is a tree that grows most commonly in India, Pakistan and Bangladesh. The trees are tall with hundreds of leaves to be harvested each year. Due to high demand for its produce, the Moringa tree is also now native in the Congo and throughout the Tropics.
The trees grow several feet within a few years and produce hundreds of small leaves for harvesting. The crops are grown and harvested all year round; which means it is extremely beneficial for farmers trying to make an income in the impoverished areas of the world.
Uses for the Plant
Each part of the Moringa plant offers something a little different when treating illness, cooking or mixing cosmetic products. There is very little waste when using the plant as the fruit, leaves, bark and even roots are useable.
Moringa’s flowers and fruits make luscious creams and lotions for the body, face and hair. Once grounded, the leaves work for medicinal purposes and is measured by the gram. Other parts of the plant such as the seeds and oils are found in hair products, machine lubricants and cooking oil.
The plant is commonly sold under the name of the ‘Drumstick Tree’ across Great Britain and the United States. Its popularity in these countries derives from the plant’s incredible health impacts, thanks to its combination of amino acids, minerals and vitamins. This is also the reason Moringa is a major food source in some countries: It is cheap, easy to grow, and tastes similar to spinach but stocks all the body’s required nutrients.
The seed cake of the plant refers to the left overs once the Moringa plant has had its oils extracted and all the flowers and fruits are used. Seed cake purifies water and removes salt from seawater to make it drinkable. This gives third world countries a much safer environment with cleaner water solutions.
With all of this to offer and more, it’s obvious to see why the Moringa plant has grown to become a popular ingredient in foods, care products and medicines.
How to Use Moringa
Using Moringa is simple, and the plant takes many forms:
- It is prescribed in grams of powder by doctors for illnesses and ailments.
- The leaves are used for food and drink; often tossed in salad or brewed like tea
- Parts of the plant is used for skin and hair treatments and worked into a paste which is applied directly onto the skin or massaged into the scalp.
- Moringa oils are made into cooking oils, perfumes and cosmetics.
What are the real benefits of Moringa?
Image by Yemiagbula
Even with all this information, it’s still difficult to grasp just what the health-enhancing power plant can do, and how it can benefit each of us differently. Moringa maintains health, prevents illness and treats the body to the nutrients it deserves. By reading on you can found out how the power plant will benefit you.
A Modern Medicinal Alternative
The plant owes most of its fame to the industry of Ayurveda medicines – a practice dating back to ancient Indian traditions. According to these ancient Ayurveda medicines, the Moringa plant has hundreds of compounds found in each part of the plant that make it an empowering resource that prevents, treats and eases the symptoms of over 300 diseases.
Besides giving energy levels a kick like many other natural products that work to boost the immune system, the medicinal benefits of Moringa are more specific and plentiful. Unlike modern medicines, Moringa has the potential to cover all the bases when you’re feeling a little under the weather and need a quick treatment.
Aches, Pains and Blood Infections
In order to mend itself, the human body needs plenty of proteins to help heal broken and dysfunctional cells. Containing tonnes of proteins and vitamins, Moringa is a natural antioxidant, so is used to help anemic patients, or those with high blood pressure and diabetes.
It overall strengthens the body’s immune system so that it can fight against joint aches from arthritis, along with pain in the lungs and organs from breathing disorders such as asthma. This is all thanks to its anti-inflammatory qualities – making it an all-natural alternative to ibuprofen.
Powdered Moringa is a must for your first aid kit and helps with so many other common illnesses and ailments like stomach pains, ulcers and fungal infections. It even aids the body in fighting more difficult health problems like thyroid disorder and kidney stones.
Moringa Cures Skin Infections
Apply Moringa directly onto the skin to kill germs and infections that lead to athlete’s foot, warts and abscesses. Its rich compounds of amino acids help and encourage the healing of cells in the body – making it ideal for healing wounds and cuts, too, and soothing bites from insects or snakes.
Moringa is a versatile medicinal product that helps internal infections and illnesses as well as external skin defects.
Cancer is caused by oxidation and damage to the body’s cells: It is not an external disease that enters the body. According to the Asian Pacific Journal of Cancer Prevention, the Moringa plant is bursting with antioxidants which fight within our bodies against free radicals and damage to major bio-molecules – meaning Moringa has potential as a cancer preventative medicine.
More research is being done to find out more about Moringa’s cancer curing capabilities. If successful, the plant could gain a reputation in the world of chemotherapy at some point: Dramatically changing the way we treat cancer patients for the better.
Side Effect Free
Image by One Planet Nutrition
All parts of the tree are used in various products from food, lotions and medicines. You should never eat the roots and extracts of the Moringa plant directly, as this can be toxic for the body. But, other than this warning, there have been no side effects of using Moringa reported.
Doctors prescribe up to 6 grams a day for up to 3 weeks as medicine to treat illness and infection without any side effects. The plant is available as supplements, food and tea too which are entirely safe products too.
Moringa is The Best Vitamin Supplement
Moringa is available in capsules to be taken like any other multi-vitamin. The supplement offers all the health-boosting qualities that the raw leaves would provide naturally.
Bursting with minerals, vitamins and everything you need to live a strong and healthy life, Moringa contains more vitamin C and A, calcium, protein and potassium than your typical sources like bananas, oranges and carrots.
Image by Dadazanzibar
Increases Milk Flow for Cows and Nursing Mothers
For new mothers, Moringa works to increase the production of milk flow to help feed new born babies. Increased milk flow has also been seen in dairy cows fed on Moringa. The increased production allows us to feed our children with the right proteins and nutrients they need to maintain a healthy, early life, grow strong and develop at the right pace.
It Helps With Weight Loss
Of course, one of the major consumers for the plant in Europe and the U.S are those of us wanting to lose a little weight quicker than a balanced diet with exercise can offer. Moringa tree leaves are rich in the nutrients our bodies need to balance out water weight – one of those more annoying weight gains that often seems unavoidable.
The plant also offers a glucose-modifying compound which will help to fight the battle against high cholesterol and obesity that is seemingly becoming a bigger and bigger problem in the Western world.
Drank as tea or taken in capsules, it’ll be no time before Moringa is the next big weight loss supplement hitting the stores. And with its all-natural ingredients, there’s no harm in trying it!
Moringa Hair Benefits
Rich in calcium and vitamins, Moringa improves the health and physical appearance of hair.
Choosing to take it as a supplement could potentially rid you of a frustrating life of dandruff, split ends and breakages – which can give us all low self-esteem from time to time.
There is more vitamin A in this health-enhancing miracle plant that usual sources like carrots. Vitamin A helps maintain clear vision as well as promoting health hair follicles and encouraging hair growth. This is done by regulating the flow of nutrients to the cells.
With Vitamin E making an appearance too, the drumstick tree can help circulate blood through the body and the scalp – which goes a long way when preventing dandruff, hair loss and maintaining a healthy quality of hair.
To really feel the effects of the product and how it can promote healthy hair, gently massage the oils into your scalp as part of your regular hair routine. Similar to the techniques used for leave-in conditioners.
Drumstick leaves are rich in calcium, vitamins and minerals that the body needs to keep skin hydrated and moisturized. Similar to Moringa’s effect on our hair, the plant is gaining popularity as an ingredient in skin care products.
Free radicals are what cause our skin to age with wrinkles and look a little tired. Moringa products latch onto these free radicals and help to remove them and cleanse the skin cells instead. Overall, the plant can help in anti-ageing products for a more youthful and revitalized complexion.
Moringa contains Sulphurs that also appear in our body’s cells. Sulphur helps to make skin stronger whilst promoting the elasticity. With a firmer and more toned complexion, you’ll have a youthful look to last a lifetime.
The plant is an all-natural product to balance skin tone, rid of toxins and rejuvenate your skin’s complexion. Which is why it’s the perfect detoxing face mask to try with friends!
Healthier Mind-set with Moringa
There are tonnes of cosmetic benefits to the Moringa tree, but it also helps keep the mind at bay. Researchers found neuro-enhancer activity in the cells of the plant, which means it could be the start of a new experimental treatment for ageing diseases like Alzheimer’s and Dementia.
And due to its long list of vitamins and minerals, it helps to balance serotonin, dopamine and noradrenaline in the brain – all of which can affect stress, enjoyment and even mental health issues such as Anxiety and Depression.
Could This Be The Next Step to Fighting Poverty?
Moringa removes salt and toxins from seawater when used in particular ways, and purifies other water sources. This ultimately gives third world countries a gateway to safer drinking water.
Moringa is possible to grow and harvest all year round and provides local communities with a sustainable food source. Flowers are cooked like green beans, leaves are steamed like spinach or tossed through salad. The plant is even grounded up as a condiment.
The plant is rich in the nutrients the body needs to survive, which is great for third world countries who may not have access to such luxuries easily.
And with its gaining popularity, Moringa is going a long way to help the economies in third world areas; providing jobs to farmers, income and overall safer living conditions for the world’s poorest areas. So could this be the beginning of a cure to poverty?
A Leaving Comment
Image by 4 Health Innovation
As one of Asia’s best kept secrets to date, and it’s crazy to think how many more discoveries are yet to come when researching into the uses of this versatile plant. From medicinal therapies and cosmetics, to foods and purification, is there anything the Moringa trees can’t do?
If you’re looking to give your body a health boost, Moringa is certainly something to add to the shopping list. Have a pamper with face masks, drink Moringa tea or take it as a supplement to give your body the healthy and beautiful feel we all deserve.
Credit to Sources: