Yoga consists of life-long learning. This ancient method of physical, mental, and spiritual development is dynamically interacting with many cultures in these modern times. This interaction can lead to many results across a wide spectrum. At one end we might see new and creative approaches to yoga emerge, and at the other end we see some people turn yoga into something almost unrecognizable. We can take some time to ponder how to be open to the new and yet not lose the essence of yoga’s teachings. Every culture, including our own here in the U.S. , colors and shapes yoga with its own specific background.
New yoga students often don’t realize that yoga came from the indigenous people of India as a combination of a particular holistic health system, a spiritual development guide, and a moral code that could attract people from different faith traditions. After all, India had about 80,000 tribes with many distinct belief systems.
We can thank the ancient to modern Hindus for keeping yoga alive through all these centuries because, sadly, many of the health systems and spiritual ways of indigenous people on this planet have been wiped out over the last few thousand years as lands were plundered and peoples subjugated. We had a rich variety of very deep teachings in our human history. Now, many biologists, anthropologists, and spiritual leaders are trying to find ways to make sure we don’t lose any more of these precious teachings from our human heritage.
There are many different kinds of yoga. Bhakti yoga is the yoga of love and devotion, where the accent is put on devotion to God or Goddess (or whatever higher power one chooses) through prayer, song, chants, and devotional rituals. Karma yoga is the way of service to humanity and puts emphasis on actions of peace and justice to help others awaken to their true nature. Jnana yoga concentrates on knowledge through study of all human knowledge and the creation of new learning. Tantra yoga combines breathwork, repeated postures, and sensual enhancement ( Kundalini yoga is considered one of the ways Tantra yoga has come into the West). Raja yoga is associated with the eight limbs of yoga as articulated in the Yoga Sutras of Patanjali . Hatha yoga has more of a focus on postures and breathing. and many consider it a subset of Raja yoga. But even within Hatha yoga, which is the most popular yoga in America , we find a cornucopia of styles with varying approaches and techniques: Iyengar, Forrest, Power, Bikram, Vinyasa Flow, Kriya, Anusara, Viniyoga, and many others.
One of the most interesting trends we can see in American yoga is how it attracts many different kinds of people with diverse needs. We can also see how yoga is showing up in diverse locations across our country: in workplaces, park districts, schools, hospitals, and prisons. Yoga is not just in the ashrams, yoga studios, or health clubs anymore.
As yoga grows more popular as a way to keep healthy in body, mind, and spirit, it is not surprising that we see real differences in yoga styles and teachers. Difference is really wonderful because we learn best from seeing difference. Difference is how we distinguish one thing from another. Difference asks us to be aware of ourselves and others in new ways. Through difference, we can discern where our needs can best be met. When everything is the same, we are less likely to pay attention. I say hurrah for difference! May we always have diversity of opinions, variation in animal and plant species, and variety in yoga styles that can appeal to people who are different from each other. Let us embrace the assortments we have to choose from. Choice gives us a renewed sense of freedom.
One of the things I really enjoy about teaching yoga is that each beginner brings his or her own needs, desires, aspirations, strengths, and challenges to the class. Every person is unique and complex, each on his or her own journey, changing and stabilizing, evolving and becoming balanced.
When we think of any process that is evolving, we are mindful that there is not just one direction of evolution. Evolution brings diversity across a wide spectrum. So it is all-encompassing in this respect. Evolution goes broad by changing into many diverse forms. Evolution also promotes distinct levels of development and can lead to deeper, more profound consciousness as it progresses. Evolution is transcendent as well as deep.
Currently we are still in the baby steps of yoga development in this culture. Our country has had yoga for only a little more than 100 years. We have seen wonderful progress over this time. But only about six percent of present-day Americans have practiced yoga. Most are familiar only with Hatha yoga and not the other types of yoga mentioned above. The integration of body, mind, and spirit transforms individuals one by one but also has the capacity to shift an entire culture from unhealthy to healthy, from violent to nonviolent, from unaware to mindful.
Yoga is both personal and social, truly a way of life. And yoga is complex. It grows in complexity with every culture it touches. As we grow more diversified and broad in our own yoga development, it is just as important to go deep into the teachings and become more reflective on our own contributions to the evolution of human culture.