Imagine spending a weekend away from home. Make a list of ten items that you would take on this trip. Not sure where to go? You could go to a cabin in snowy mountains in the winter, an fruit farm in the spring, a Museum of African Art in the fall, or a rafting trip on a river in the summer.
Choose a food specialty from a different region of the United States or from a country you would like to visit. Find a recipe for this dish in a cookbook, magazine or online. Prepare this food and have a tasting party.
Choose a spot not too far away from where you live that you would like to visit for a weekend. Decide how you will get there, the people and places you will want to visit, what you will wear, and what you will take with you. Figure out how much this trip will cost. Then, choose a date to go to the place you have chosen, put it on your calendar and go there. After the trip, evaluate what you did. Discuss what went well and what you would do differently on the next trip.
Check out travel careers. Visit a travel agent or tour guide. Find out how a travel agent plans trips and tours, what an itinerary looks like, how trips and tours are packaged to be more affordable, and what training is needed for this type of career.
Think about cultural travel itineraries. What kinds of special places and features might be particularly interesting to people who practice Orisa Lifestyle? Are there any travel agencies that package special tours for Orisa devotees?
Pick a country where Orisa Lifestyle is practiced, then make or learn about two of the following: • A traditional article of clothing • A puppet or toy related to a folk tale • A traditional craft or folk art • A musical instrument • A typical song or dance Share what you've made or learned with a group of children. Tell them about the country or culture, and show them how to make or do something similar.
Create an itinerary for a week-long trip to a country you would like to visit. What is the country most well-known for? How will you get there? What famous sights will you want to see? How will you travel from place to place? What type of money is used in the country? Did finding out about the country make you want to visit it more? Share your dream vacation with a friend. Does he or she want to come, too?
Pretend you are a travel agent or a tour director. Help one of the groups listed below plan a trip to your town or state. Include the transportation they'll need to use, the places they will stay and visit, activities they can do once they get there, and how much you think the trip will cost. • A sixth-grade class, with four accompanying adults, who want to visit Santiago de Cuba • Two people who enjoy the out-of-doors and do not want to damage the environment or waste fuel • A group of African American college students, including two girls of Caribbean descent, who want to visit an ethnic dance festival
Say a representative from an orisa community in Brazil is visiting your city for the first time. You have been chosen to be her host, and you will decide what she will see during her two-week visit. If you could take her anywhere in your area, what would you take her to see? What are your reasons for the sights and activities on your itinerary?