At least once, you’ll hear your dentist talking about your wisdom teeth. You might hear them say that they’re teeth that you don’t really need, and that you should have them taken out. But you might also think that they won’t cause too much harm if you leave them be. In fact, you might not even see them growing out at all, which might lead you to think that you don’t have them.
But for cases like these, you can’t afford to jump into conclusions. So before you decide that you don’t need to have those teeth extracted, you need to consider what might happen to your teeth if you don’t have your wisdom teeth taken out.
A tooth that damages teeth
While it is true that some people don’t have wisdom teeth, and others’ wisdom teeth grow normally, the most common case is that wisdom teeth grow at a certain angle. This is what is commonly known as impacted wisdom teeth. This is what usually happens to people’s wisdom teeth, and this is also the kind of wisdom tooth growth that causes the most problems. Impacted teeth don’t seem to do much, especially if they’re growing underneath your gum. But if you leave them be, they could start pushing the roots of the teeth next to them, which could cause problems such as crowding, tooth damage, and even gum infection.
Prevention is better than cure
Even if your wisdom teeth appear to grow upright, your dentist might still recommend an extraction. Wisdom teeth grow in the backmost part of your mouth, and it’s sometimes hard to reach the area when you brush your teeth. This could cause food particles and bacteria growth to accumulate, which could cause problems with your teeth and gums.
In either case, it’s important that you get the opinion of an orthodontist such as Caring Smiles Dental Clinic with regards to your wisdom teeth. Your case might not be the same as others, so you’ll need to have your teeth checked so that you’ll know exactly what you need to do. Set an appointment with one of Boise’s dental specialists, so that they can give the appropriate treatment for your wisdom teeth.