Enologists, sometimes spelled oenologists, are winemakers who specialize in blending. Most enologists working in the United States are employed in the wine-growing regions of California. A degree in food and science technology with a concentration in viticulture and enology is becoming the primary path to a job in enology and winemaking.
Duties of an Enologist
According to the California Occupational Guide, the duties of enologists differ from vineyard to vineyard. In some vineyards, the term enologist refers to specific workers who are responsible for blending wine. They might also be responsible for overseeing the fermentation and bottling process. In other vineyards, the term enologist is synonymous with winemaker. These workers, who earn far more, are responsible not only for blending but for overseeing the winemaking process as a whole.
The Bureau of Labor Statistics classifies enologists within the broader group of food scientists and technologists. As of May 2011, the bureau reports that food scientists earned an average of just more than $64,000 per year. Food scientists working in California, where most of the U.S. wine industry is concentrated, reported an average salary of $67,610 per year.
As of 2011, wine industry magazine Wine Business Monthly reports that workers with the specific title of enologist earned average salaries of $51,000 to $55,000 per year. Median salaries for enologists working at most wineries were around $50,000 per year. However, enologists employed by medium-size wineries that produce between 50,000 and 99,999 cases of wine per year reported somewhat lower earnings, a median salary of just under $46,000 per year.
Enologists with additional oversight responsibilities tended to report higher wages than those simply responsible for blending. According to Wine Business Monthly, enologists who held the title of winemaker reported average earnings of between $92,000 and $123,000 per year in 2011, depending on the size of the winery and the level of responsibility. Enologists who assumed the duties of an assistant winemaker reported average salaries of between $63,000 and $68,000 per year.
- Stockbyte/Stockbyte/Getty Images