Artificial Intelligence is a new tool that’s enabling the world to be a safer place. Through the use of these techniques, security and counter-terrorism efforts can be expanded. Here are just some of the features of AI that are promoting worldwide security efforts.
Cybersecurity may be a huge point of concern for you. This is because you don’t want your information hacked or stolen in an effort to defraud you and others. The point of AI cybersecurity is to identify risk factors and preventing hackers from entering secure systems. Using AI programs to aid in these efforts is much less labor-intensive than having real people attempt to keep up with attacks and more likely to stop an intrusion during off-hours. Another use of this type of system is identifying weak points and performing patches before they can be exploited.
Certain parameters can be extrapolated in terms of known human behaviors. An AI system can analyze these patterns through their learning algorithms and determine if these events may occur. For example, a terrorist may try to take advantage of a set of circumstances in order to conduct an attack in your city. The job of the AI is to analyze past events to prevent future occurrences. It sounds almost like something from a classic sci-fi movie! Keeping track of all of this information would take several teams of people or organizations. A computer isn’t inhibited by a communication barrier thay could delay or prevent police actions.
One of the more commonly discussed counterterrorism measures is tracking and identifying threats through a name matching tool. You may be familiar with such software being used for terrorism watch lists across the world. A name is run through the AI software to see if a match or even partial match exists against a maintained database. Having this type of tool available gives organizations a chance of identifying a threat before it can present itself. Suspicious people can be flagged for further inspection or be detained for questioning.
Using AI in combat operations is helping to ensure that legitimate targets are selected. AI can also help to organize targets and operations. For example, drone technology that uses an AI program to identity targets can eliminate the possibilities of human error. Further information can be pulled from a variety of sources in seconds instead of a person having to make the determination on the information that’s right in front of them.
AI is improving counterterrorism efforts because it’s more objective in nature. These methods may be new, but are aiding in the worldwide efforts of improving security and preventing terrorist attacks.
Brooke Chaplan is a freelance writer and blogger. She lives and works out of her home in Los Lunas, New Mexico. She loves the outdoors and spends most of her time hiking, biking, and gardening. For more information, contact Brooke via Facebook at facebook.com/brooke.chaplan or Twitter @BrookeChaplan
Latest posts by Brooke Chaplan (see all)
- The Most Amazing Advancements in Airplanes Over the Last Decade - January 10, 2020
- How Astronauts Repair Broken Systems in Space - December 16, 2019
- How AI is Promoting World Security and Counter-Terrorism - November 24, 2019