Oral language development activities that incorporate narrative structure learning.
Knowing narrative structure is a functional skill that will improve oral language and receptive language abilities for your toddler.
You can and should teach narrative structure early, even before 2 years of age!
This crucial language skill will make a huge impact on academic success and personal development. The ability to tell stories, participate in conversation, and understand written text, depends on the understanding of narrative structure/story grammar.
For a quick review of story grammar, please review narrative structure basics.
These games are appropriate for children under 2-4 years of age! For older children, check out oral language development activities for ages 4+.
Lean how to play and work on narrative structure at the same time.
Little ones benefit from visuals when listening to or telling stories since they are just developing vocabulary.
That is why “house or farm” are great oral language development activities.
How to Play:
“Set The Setting” by asking your child these questions:
Create an Uh-Oh moment! Make a problem (plot) and ask these questions:
Attempts to solve the problem (plot):
First, ask your child these questions.
Then model a story while you play.
Check out the example script below for some ideas. Think out loud so your child learns how to “think”!
If you need a house, check out these options! They are cool!!
The “green” in me LOVES this house! It is made of eco-friendly materials. This house isn’t only super cool, but a great inspiration for imagination
If you don't have a dollhouse already, this one is great at an even better cost. It comes with furniture but you need to buy people or animals. The open and close feature is nice to stay organized!
Example Script (caregiver plays house and provides story):
Attempts to Solve Problem:
Want More Details on Reading or Playing?
1. Reading: Check out our free ebook on how to best read to your toddler for more language development tips.
2. Talking/Playing: Check out our ebook, Toddler Talk 2.0, to learn how to best talk to your child to help develop oral language skills.
3. Child Talking But Not Talking Enough? We got you covered! These games are not to be missed.