Is your child old enough to swipe right? Do you have an iPad, tablet, or Smartphone in your home? Then this movie is for YOU! Every parent, no matter the age of your child, is encouraged to attend. It is never too early for parents to learn how digital devices and gaming are impacting our children’s development, social skills, and mental health.
Two years ago, Jesse Weinberger, internet safety expert, presented to the IC community and revealed startling statistics. Data collected nationwide reveals that across the country (regardless of socio economics, geography, or school type) cell phone ownership begins as young as 2nd grade. Our community is no exception. Even our youngest students are struggling with the impact screen time is having on their lives.
Mark your calendars for January 23, 2020. That evening, at 7pm, the Home and School Association (HASA) will present a FREE viewing of:
SCREENAGERS: GROWING UP IN THE DIGITAL AGE.
Physician and filmmaker Delaney Ruston learned that the average kid spends 6.5 hours a day looking at screens. She wondered about the impact of all this time and about the friction occurring in homes and schools around negotiating screen time—friction she knew all too well.
In SCREENAGERS, Delaney explores struggles over social media, video games, academics and internet addiction. Through poignant, and unexpectedly funny stories, along with surprising insights from authors, psychologists, and brain scientists, SCREENAGERS reveals how tech time impacts kids’ development and offers solutions on how adults can empower kids to best navigate the digital world and find balance.
Every IC parent & caregiver, regardless of your child’s age, is encouraged to attend. The content is informative and enlightening for every parent with screens in their home.
Please note that students in grades 4 through 8 will be viewing this film on January 22 during the school day.
Please RSVP to this link: https://screenagersIC.eventcombo.com
Watch the trailer here: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LQx2X0BXgZg