Marco Island Florida Panther Facts Wildlife Photography Preservers Information
The scientific name for the Florida Panther is Puma concolor coryi. Florida’s big cats are an endangered species and are a subspecies of the cougar. The Florida Panther is one of the rarest mammals on the planet and is sometimes called a mountain lion, puma or catamount. There are only about 100 left in the entire state.
Florida’s panther population in now located primarily in the southern Big Cypress National Preserve. The prime habitat consists of; hardwood mannock, pine flatwoods, saw palmetto and cabbage palm thickets, cypress forests, mangrove forests and freshwater marshes. Male panthers range up to 200 miles or more, while female panthers home range is typically less than half that.
Panthers diet consists of White-tail deer, rodents, feral hos, raccoons, armadillos and even small alligators.
Panther Life, Living & Loving
Panthers life span is 8 – 15 years in the wild and 10 to 20 years in captivity. Male panthers reach maturity at 3 years. Females mature at 16 months and breed throughout the year – though spring is peak breeding season. Gestation is three months and a typical litter size is two kittens. Cougar kittens leave the dean at 2 months old and are fully independent at 1.5 years.
Habitat loss is the primary threat to the species. Panthers are powerful, beautiful but violent creatures. Panthers often kill other panthers. Other causes of death include; collisions with vehicles and disease. Ask us about your Everglades FL wildlife tours or share reviews. To feature your FL business, contact us.
Everglades Wildlife: Florida Panthers
Sunshine Tours and Charters, Rose Marina, 951 Bald Eagle Dr., Marco Island FL | 239-642-5415
Sunshine Tours offers the best in Offshore, Back Country and Near Coastal Sightseeing Tours, Manatee Tours, Fishing, and Island Shelling aboard one of our four boats. Since 1984, Sunshine Tours has provide unsurpassed on-the-water experiences for locals and visitors alike. Shared and private fishing and sightseeing charters available.
Visit Sunshine Charters Marco Island
Double R's Fishing & Tours Co. - 25000 Tamiami Trail East - Port of the Islands, Naples, FL 34114-9602 | 239-642-9779
View manatee and you explore the natural habitat and wildlife eco-system of the south Florida Everglades. Our two and a half hour eco-nature tour starts in the heart of the Everglades where you will see manatee, then takes us out into the middle of the estuaries of the 10,000 Island to observe the Everglades wildlife.
Visit Double R's Fishing & Tours
Island Hopper Boat Rentals and Tours, 525 Newport Dr., Naples, FL 34114 | 239-961-2473
Guided boat tours leaving Port of the Islands Marina, Naples, Florida Touring the Everglades and the Ten Thousand Islands area. Rent a pontoon for a full day of fun. Whitehorse Key is a great place to beach your boat and find amazing shells. Walk the island, explore the 10,000 islands, and enjoy a great view of the Gulf of Mexico. Look for manatee, dolphin, alligators and everything the Everglades has to offer. See the 10,000 islands up close.
Visit Island Hopper Boat Rental & Tours - Naples, FL