The following information is for educational purposes only and is meant to complement any medical treatment, not to prescribe or diagnose any condition. Please consult with your doctor before starting any medical or nutritional program.
With the invention of all our modern and refined processing for foods we have seen an increase in diabetes in our world. Some of the races that have diabetes in large numbers are the Hawaiians and the Native American Indians. Their bodies have a hard time adapting to the modern foods. More than any other disease, diabetes can be managed quite well with nutrition.
There are two types of diabetes: the first, diabetes insipidus, is more rare and has to do with a deficiency in the pituitary hormone called vasopressin. The other possibility is that the kidneys have an inability to respond properly to that hormone. People with this form of diabetes have several symptoms that make it stand out: they have tremendous thirst and they urinate large amounts regardless of how much they drink, and this shows us the weakness in the kidneys.
Diabetes Mellitus Type I is often called insulin-dependent diabetes It occurs at a young age and is sometimes called "Juvenile Diabetes." It is often caused by a viral attack on the system, but most experts are of the opinion that the body's immune system is weak when this occurs. With the destruction of the beta cells in the pancreas which manufactures the insulin, the body is unable to utilize glucose, the main food for the body. Consequently, the level of glucose is high in the blood since the body can't absorb it. This is often called "insulin resistance." The diabetic's blood becomes "too thick" or "sticky" and this causes blood clots or thromboses that damage blood vessels.
This can lead to the creation of excessive levels of free radicals (oxidants which break down the body faster) and makes the person more susceptible to the following problems: Diabetics have a larger risk of kidney disease, arteriosclerosis, blindness, heart disease or nerve diseases, as well as being more prone to infections. This is because of their body's resistance to insulin, which is the hormone that actually drives the glucose into the tissue and cells as a nutrient. When this does not happen the body becomes metabolically weak. The glucose molecules engage in an abnormal coupling with body proteins, a step called "glycosylation." Consequently, this disrupts the protein's ability to function biochemically and further weakens the immune system.
Some of the more common symptoms are abnormal thirst, again; irritability; weakness; fatigue; excessive urination; extreme loss of appetite or excessive hunger, and in the worst cases, vomiting and nausea. Some of these diabetics can have hyperglycemia type symptoms, which is too much glucose in their blood or at other times hypoglycemia when there is too low blood sugar. Both conditions can be serious. The worst of all these conditions is hypoglycemia, which can come from just missing a meal, or too much exertion or an insulin overdose. The symptoms could be dizziness, confusion, excessive sweating, and if not treated may lead to a coma. With hyperglycemia it could look the same as far as the symptoms, with not being able to keep down fluids as one of the danger signs. This means there is too much blood sugar in the system. It is more common during an illness and could also result in a coma. These two can be serious medical emergencies with life and death consequences.
A poor diet may be one of the biggest factors leading to diabetes. It often occurs with people who are overweight or who eat a diet high in refined sugar, highly processed foods, low in fiber, with too many complex carbohydrates and with too much meat, and who don't exercise.
The second category is Type II or non-insulin dependent diabetes, and more often occurs when people are older, and usually with people whose family may have a history of diabetes. This disorder is a little different in that the pancreas does produce insulin, but for some reason the insulin is not effective. Some of the common symptoms are poor vision; fatigue; frequent urination; skin infections, and slow healing of wounds as well as unusual thirst, drowsiness, and tingling or numbness in the feet. This disease is also linked to a poor diet. The National Institute of Health says that there are twenty to twenty-five million people with diabetes type problems, many have undetected Type II (some five million). Diabetes is the third leading cause of death in America. It can be detected with a simple urine test.
There is lots of controversy about nutrition but most experts agree that if there is excessive weight, a weight loss program is essential. Consult with a doctor who specializes in nutrition. As with other health challenges, each individual is different and I believe we need to treat the whole person. Many will recommend a high complex carbohydrate, low fat and high-fiber diet with lots of fresh vegetables, moderate fruits and green vegetable juices.
Excess fat cells create chemical messengers that block the body's ability to actually respond to the insulin. As the fat comes off the diabetic's own insulin works better and the blood sugar level can improve. Garlic and onion are always great for healing the body. Add some capsaicin, a natural derivative of hot peppers to spice it up and it is also very healthy.
Eat more steamed and raw vegetables, complex carbohydrates moderately, low fat foods (cut down on animal fats), and increase grains and whole foods. Avoid white flour, salt and white sugar as they elevate blood sugar levels. Eat more legumes, root vegetables, brown rice, and nut butters. Vegetable sources from protein are much better because high fiber helps reduce blood sugar urges. Eat proteins such as beans and tofu, salmon, and tuna two or three times a week. These fish have the Omega 3, great for the immune system. Eat lots of raw olive oil for your dressings or spread it on breads instead of butter; never use margarine.
Treat Cholesterol: High cholesterol increases the diabetic's risk for heart disease and stroke. Treat High Blood Pressure: Even modest blood pressure elevations greatly increase the risk of diabetes complications. Most diabetics should be compulsive about maintaining blood pressure control.
Plant fiber concentrates like psyllium (Metamucil, etc.) do more than just help with constipation problems. They can also help with absorption of sugar and starches. Some of these more common fibers have modest blood sugar lowering effects: glucomannan, guar gum, legume fiber, oat gum, pea fiber, apple pectin, and psyllium. Of course, the best way to get fiber is from increasing the fresh fruit and vegetables and legumes you eat so you get the fiber directly.
Avoid tobacco since it constricts your blood vessels and can be much more harmful to your condition. Eat more carbohydrates or reduce your insulin before exercise as it produces more insulin-like effect on the body. Exercise can cause low blood sugar (hypoglycemia) requiring a reduction in dose of insulin or diabetes pills. Diabetics with unrecognized heart disease are less likely than non-diabetics to feel chest pain (angina) as a warning sign that they are exercising too vigorously. (Consult with your doctor).
Most diabetics could cut down and eventually cut out their insulin or diabetes pills through a holistic program centered on nutrition. They could probably all benefit, reducing their risk of long term complications; however, you need to work with a medical doctor that uses nutrition in his or her practice.
Many carbohydrates that people think of as being good for a diabetic can actually raise the glucose level of blood dramatically, e.g., whole wheat bread, many breakfast cereals, a baked potato, raisins, prunes or most dried fruit and carrot juice. Carrot juice is far too sweet. Better to juice a few little carrots and put in more greens such as kale, spinach, celery or wheat grass. Find a good green drink with many of the greens, which is also a great source of chlorophyll. Think: alkaline balance. Other carbohydrates such as pasta, pita bread, unleavened bread or bible bread, boiled potatoes, grapes, oranges, lemons or honeydew raise blood sugar only modestly.
Reduce the use of honey, molasses, etc. They do raise blood sugar, but most diabetics can tolerate them in small amounts, e.g., 1-2 tsp. a day if they are careful; however, it is better to try and do without. Replace those with fructose (fruit sugar) and lactose (milk sugar) as they do not raise blood sugar much and can be used in moderate amounts. A small percent of diabetics do not do well on a high carbohydrate diet, even one that is low in simple sugars and high in complex carbohydrates. Their blood sugar rises as do their triglycerides and cholesterol, so just increase the greens and legumes along with proteins.
Avoid fish oil capsules containing large amounts of para-amiobenzoic acid (PABA) as well as salt and white flour as they tend to raise blood sugar levels. Also, avoid taking large amounts of the amino acid cysteine because it can break down the bonds of the insulin hormone.
Mental calmness is critical for all health. Stress increases the adrenal glands' output of adrenaline and cortisone, two hormones which act to increase blood sugar. Relaxation training and stress management techniques help improve blood sugar control. Sometimes bio-feedback training could be very valuable -- see a professional.
Vitamins and Minerals
I recommend close medical supervision, for any treatment using vitamins or nutrition.
Chromium Picolinate, 400-600 mcg daily (Combination of chromium picolinate, vanadyl sulfate, and other vitamins and minerals that work together to regulate blood sugar levels), or
Diabetic Nutrition RX from Progressive Research Labs
Brewers yeast with added chromium can work too.
Biotin, 3-16 mg doses, but over 3 mg requires close medical supervision
Vitamin B-6, 50 mg. Take the B's together
Vitamin B1, 50-100 mg, Inositol, 50 mg daily
B-12 injection or lozenges- or sublingual for best results
Vitamin C, 1000-6000 mg
Calcium, 1000-1500 mg daily
Coenzyme Q10, 60-120 mg
L-Carnitine, L-Glutamine and Taurine, 500 mg of each (twice daily on empty stomach). Take with some Vitamin C for absorption, which mobilizes fat, reduces
the craving for sugar, and aids in the release of insulin.
Manganese, 5-10 mg daily, do not take with calcium.
Magnesium, 600-700 mg
Quercetin, 100 mg 3 times per day
Vitamin E, 400-900 units
Zinc, 50-80 mg
In conclusion, regarding the emotions or how diabetics are living their lives from The Wisdom of the Body:
Diabetes people are living their life in an attitude of UNACCEPTABILITY of life at the most basic level (Sugars). They are never SATISFIED, never FULFILLED, and never CONTENT, they are always a work in progress.
Sources: Dr. James F. Balch, M.D., Phyllis A. Balch, C.N.C., and Dr. Richard Podell, M.D.
The last sentence taken from Wisdom of the Body by Roger Cotting, Dr. Diane Mistler (Misty), and Connie Smith, RN, about their work and teachings.
see http://www.molinamassage.com for more information and other articles.
Othon Molina Ph.d. c LMT has been involved in the health field as a manual therapist and personal trainer for over thirty five years. He has studied with some of the top doctors and healers of our times. His specialty is treating sports injuries, back problems, and teaching others about how to improve their health using nutrition and training. He has just published his first book "Your beautiful body"
Some of his clients include: Bob Hope, Jane Seymor, Essam Kashoggy, Jim Nabors, Tony Robbins, Mark Victor Hansen, Carol Burnett, San Francisco Ballet, Allvin Alley Dance troup, some of the top olympic and international elite athletes, team doc and trainer for the German professional triathletes. He also trains massage therapy teams all over the world. He has worked in the medical tent for the Kona Ironman for over 9 years and continues to this day. see http://www.molinamassage.com for more information and other articles.
Cell research offers diabetes treatment hope Medical Xpress
Baraboo hospital: Diabetes support works at time when it's needed most Baraboo News Republic
How Penn State's Jarod Verkleeren manages his battle with Type 1 diabetes while being a college wrestler - The Daily Collegian Online
How Penn State's Jarod Verkleeren manages his battle with Type 1 diabetes while being a college wrestler The Daily Collegian Online
Test Should be Given to Type 2 Diabetes Patients Hypoparathyroidism News
The global diabetes care devices market is expected to reach US$ 39,382.3 Mn in 2027 from US$ 23,354.3 Mn in 2018 - Yahoo Finance
The global diabetes care devices market is expected to reach US$ 39,382.3 Mn in 2027 from US$ 23,354.3 Mn in 2018 Yahoo Finance
Top 5 Diabetes Highlights From 2019 Medscape
Kids born to moms with gestational diabetes and preeclampsia at greater risk for obesity - EurekAlert
An SGLT2 windfall? Heart failure gold rush likely to benefit diabetes players: analyst - FiercePharma
Diabetes Is an Independent Risk Factor for Heart Failure Endocrinology Advisor
Get the facts on Type 2 Diabetes Raleigh News & Observer
Type 2 Diabetes Drugs SGLT2 Inhibitors May Prevent Gout: Study Everyday Health
Lower-extremity arterial disease risk high among women with type 2 diabetes, metabolic syndrome - Healio
Lower-extremity arterial disease risk high among women with type 2 diabetes, metabolic syndrome Healio
Five myths about diabetes The Washington Post
Dates for Diabetes: Yes or No? Healthline
Verily highlights diabetes care, Project Baseline even as related partnerships are restructured - BioWorld Online
Verily highlights diabetes care, Project Baseline even as related partnerships are restructured BioWorld Online
Class forming for adults with diabetes risk | Living Hampshire Review
Study reveals what causes type 2 diabetes and how to reverse it Medical News Today
Researchers discover unmet needs in Thai diabetes care Healthcare IT News
Natural Ways to Beat Diabetes Newsmax
MANAGE YOUR DIABETES WITH A DIABETES LOG BOOK Industry Global News 24
How to curb the high cost of diabetic eye disease MedCity News
Infertility, gravidity, and risk of diabetes among high-risk women in the Diabetes Prevention Program Outcomes Study - MD Linx
Infertility, gravidity, and risk of diabetes among high-risk women in the Diabetes Prevention Program Outcomes Study MD Linx
Are Mushrooms Good for Diabetes? Healthline
Big Advances Made Against Diabetes in 2019 | Health News | US News U.S. News & World Report
New algorithm predicts gestational diabetes Science Daily
Is Ragi Good for People with Diabetes? Healthline
New free diabetes prevention program groups starting soon Wiscasset Newspaper
Diabetic retinopathy: Understanding diabetes-related eye disease and vision loss - Harvard Health Blog - Harvard Health
Diabetic retinopathy: Understanding diabetes-related eye disease and vision loss - Harvard Health Blog Harvard Health
Does Liraglutide Affect Bone Turnover in Type 2 Diabetes? Endocrinology Advisor
How to improve diabetes care Medical Economics
Eli Lilly returns to RTP with $470M plant for diabetes drugs WRAL Tech Wire
Israeli researchers create algorithm to predict gestational diabetes The Times of Israel
Diabetes risk of underprivileged Australians - Diabetes Diabetes.co.uk
Associations of Handgrip Strength with Prevalence of Rheumatoid Arthritis and Diabetes Mellitus in Older Adults - DocWire News
Associations of Handgrip Strength with Prevalence of Rheumatoid Arthritis and Diabetes Mellitus in Older Adults DocWire News
Tandem Diabetes Launches a New Version of Its Insulin Pump The Motley Fool
Part II: Native Americans fight historical discrimination to lower diabetes Navajo-Hopi Observer
Local pilot won't let diabetes keep him from conquering his dream The Bakersfield Californian
Can You Reverse Type 2 Diabetes with Diet and Weight Loss? Discover Magazine
3 Top Diabetes Stocks to Watch in January The Motley Fool
Invigorating education for diabetes care professionals Open Access Government
Simvastatin Alleviated Diabetes Mellitus-Induced Erectile Dysfunction in Rats by Enhancing AMPK Pathway-Induced Autophagy - DocWire News
Simvastatin Alleviated Diabetes Mellitus-Induced Erectile Dysfunction in Rats by Enhancing AMPK Pathway-Induced Autophagy DocWire News
Diabetes brings constant worries — especially when deductibles reset The Washington Post
SGLT2 inhibitors may reduce gout risk in patients with diabetes - Pharmacy Today, American Pharmacists Association, pharmacist.com
SGLT2 inhibitors may reduce gout risk in patients with diabetes Pharmacy Today, American Pharmacists Association, pharmacist.com
Lifestyle Medicine Center offers diabetes reversal program Midland Reporter-Telegram
Steuben Diabetes prevention programs slated to begin soon Hornell Evening Tribune
An out-of-the-box attack on diabetes: Researchers use proteomics to pinpoint new prevention strategy for type 1 diabetes - Science Daily
An out-of-the-box attack on diabetes: Researchers use proteomics to pinpoint new prevention strategy for type 1 diabetes Science Daily
Angiopoietin 2 and Neuropeptide Y are Associated with Diabetic Kidney Disease in Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus - DocWire News
Angiopoietin 2 and Neuropeptide Y are Associated with Diabetic Kidney Disease in Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus DocWire News
Dexcom Stock Breaks Out On Bullish Views For 2020 Diabetes Treatment Investor's Business Daily
Buffalo clinical trial contributed to FDA approval for fast-acting insulin for children - UB Now: News and views for UB faculty and staff - University at Buffalo Reporter
Buffalo clinical trial contributed to FDA approval for fast-acting insulin for children - UB Now: News and views for UB faculty and staff University at Buffalo Reporter
Obesity, heart disease, and diabetes may be communicable Medical Xpress
Australian CrossFit Championship Launches New Diabetes Initiative Morning Chalk Up
Scaling the National Diabetes Prevention Program in Underserved Areas Through Pharmacies - Yahoo Finance
Scaling the National Diabetes Prevention Program in Underserved Areas Through Pharmacies Yahoo Finance
Diabetes care platform Virta scores $93M MobiHealthNews
Cognitive behavioral program benefits patients with diabetes Medical Xpress
OCHD Offering Free Diabetes Program At WalMart Jersey Shore Online
American Diabetes Association release updated Standards of Care The Diabetes Times
Fractional Flow Reserve Helps CAD Management in Diabetes MedPage Today
This old Kmart was to be replaced. A California diabetes firm just leased it for 7 years - Idaho Statesman
This old Kmart was to be replaced. A California diabetes firm just leased it for 7 years Idaho Statesman
Preparing Your Child and Family for Life With Diabetes
After the initial shock of diagnosis wears off and we become more comfortable with administering insulin shots, scheduling blood tests and mealtimes, and carbohydrate counting we have a chance to look to the future. At that point it really begins to sink in what a long-term commitment parenting a diabetic child really is.
Ascensia Breeze Glucometer Rated
Simple Testing Over and Over* simple and easy testing. Simple single-function buttons are easy-to-use and easy to understand* No more having to use individual test strips.
Can We Do More for Diabetics? New Research Suggests that We Can
Diabetes can briefly be defined as a state when the body's blood glucose is too high. The body does require a certain amount of sugar in the blood; however, those suffering from diabetes have levels much higher than what is needed.
Diabetic Frozen Shoulder. An Explanation of The Frozen Shoulder - Diabetes Connection?
Diabetic frozen shoulder is a major problem. The pain and limited function that it causes can seriously limit the normal activities of day-to-day life.
Diabetes and Fitness
There are two main types of diabetes, type I and type II. Type I diabetes is characterized by the pancreas making too little or no insulin.
Diabetes, A Bad Omen Or A Fresh Start?
So you've learned that you've got diabetes. Well after the initial shock, you're stuck with dealing with the lifestyle changes that come with your diagnosis.
Normal Blood Sugar Levels ARE Possible for a Diabetic!
What are normal blood sugar levels? Fasting (blood sugar level after not eating for 8 hours) blood sugar should be between 70 milligrams per deciliter to 100 mg/dL. Your blood sugar should not be above 100 at any given time; If it is, this suggests a pre-diabetes condition.
Diabetes and Exercise - Just Move it!
While exercise and eating guidelines are based on goodscientific principles, they do not necessarily agree withhuman nature or common sense. Recent history tells us thatwe are better off encouraging the mediocre people who arewilling to include exercise in their daily lives, ratherthan cramming guidelines down the majority of those who wantto fight the inevitable.
Fibromyalgia and Insulin Resistance
Do you have symptoms that relate to an insulin imbalance? If you have fibromyalgia, look and see if you also have hypoglycemia, insulin resistance, or diabetes symptoms. These types of blood sugar imbalances can cause fibromyalgia pain to get worse.
Tools to Manage Your Diabetes
It's estimated that in the US, over 18 million people over the age of 20 have diabetes. If you happen to have been diagnosed with diabetes, make sure you're getting all the right diabetes treatment supplies.
Insulin has two critical roles in the body that we cannot live without, yet it can be the root of many health problems, including diabetes. Insulin carries sugar (glucose), fat and protein into your cells where they are used for energy and the repair of your cells.
Diabetes Awareness: Wake Up Call
When traveling on out-of-town business, its common to have the hotel front desk give you a wake-up call in the morning. You want to avoid the embarrassment and repercussions of being late for your business appointments.
Diabetes Awareness: The Downside... a New Wardrobe?
Here is some commonsense thinking:I can't understand why anyone who has diabetes wouldn't exerciseand watch what they eat.The down side is that you may have to get an entire new wardrobe since exercise and healthy eating causes weight and size reduction.
Get Rid of Your Diabetes
People at risk of getting the disease drop by a staggering 60 percent if they manage to lose just 10 pounds by following a healthy diet and engage in regular exercise such as walking, according to a report published in the New England Journal of Medicine. (May 3, 2001).
Fanning the Flames of the Diabetes Epidemic
INTRODUCTIONIt is my pleasure to introduce to you, a new Diabetes Prevention Education, Public Relations Campaign established under the name Fannie Estelle Hill Grant, started by me, Lyndia Grant-Briggs, after the loss of my mother who succumbed to Type 2 Diabetes on Christmas Day, December 25, 2000. I noticed a fire burning in the Diabetes health arena, and it is still burning out of control.
Type II Diabetes: Insulin-Dependent Diabetes
The term diabetes refers to higher than normal levels of sugar, or glucose, in the blood. Type II diabetes, also known as insulin-dependent diabetes, was commonly referred to as adult onset diabetes until recently when the name no longer accurately describes the population with this disease.
Low-Carb: The Role of Insulin
There are three basic units the body uses for energy:1. Fats2.
Favorite Desserts For A Diabetic Husband
It's easier than you think to create delicious desserts for your diabetic husband. When I had to get right down to it the ideas came flying at me out of my kitchen cupboard!Here's a few of his favorites:Easy Orange/Banana Parfait1 pkge Lite Orange Jello (no sugar)2 cups vanilla yogurt (fat free, no sugar but artificially sweetened)1/2 tsp vanilla2 tsp Splenda1 banana1/8 cup Lite cream cheeseMakes 4 servingsPrepare the jello per the package directions.
Exercising for Diabetes Sufferers
Exercise is often recommended in treating type 1 (insulin-dependent) and type 2 (noninsulin- dependent) diabetes ~ both as a stand-alone activity and in combination with diet and drug therapy. For people who are heavily dependent on medicines, exercise cannot replace drugs but it does contribute to normalizing the glucose metabolism.
Humulin or Lantus, Which Insulin For Your Child?
Humulin or Lantus? When my daughter, who was 8, was first diagnosed the Children's Hospital that was treating her put her on an insulin program of short acting Humalog NPH and long acting Humalin N. You should have seen me that first day of training after a long night in the emergency room where she was diagnosed.
|home | site map|