Our GCSE Chemistry course is no longer available because of the neceissity for controlled assessment, which is not practical for distance learners. Alternatively, however, we also offer a brand new International GCSE Chemistry course which does not include coursework.
The Old Course (no longer avaulable)
What basic substances make up the world we live in and how do they interact? These are just two of the fundamental questions that the GCSE Chemistry Course explores. The GCSE Chemistry course is split into three modules which mimics the assessment specified in the AQA Chemistry GCSE syllabus. In total there are 27 lessons on the following topics:
Old Chemistry GCSE Course – Module 1
How do rocks provide building materials?
How do rocks provide metals and how are metals used?
How do we get fuels from crude oil?
How are polymers and ethanol made from oil?
How can plant oils be used?
What are the changes in the Earth and its atmosphere?
Why have some species of plants and animals died out?
How do new species of plants and animals develop?
How do humans affect the environment?
Old Chemistry GCSE Course – Module 2
How do sub-atomic particles help us to understand the structure of
How do structures influence the properties and uses of substances?
How much can we make and how much do we need to use?
How can we control the rates of chemical reactions?
Do chemical reactions always release energy?
How can we use ions in solutions?
Old Chemistry GCSE Course – Module 3
How was the periodic table developed and how can it help us understand
the reactions of elements?
What are strong and weak acids and alkalis?
How can we find the amounts of acids and alkalis in solutions?
What is in the water we drink?
How much energy is involved in chemical reactions?
How do we identify and analyse substances?
The Syllabus (no longer available)
This course prepared students for AQA GCSE Science: Chemistry syllabus 4421. Assessment was by three written papers (75%) and coursework (25%). We chose this syllabus as it was then the most suited for distance learning.
Practical Skills/ Coursework
The Chemistry GCSE coursework had two elements:
The practical skills assessment (PSA) assessed the student’s ability to work in an organised and safe manner whilst working practically. It could be carried out at any time during the course.
The investigative skills assignment (ISA) assessed the student’s ability to undertake a task and collect, process and evaluate data. The ISA could be carried out at any time during the course. Students carried out the ISA set by AQA, they then took a written test under controlled conditions. The test asked questions concerning the data collected during the practical task as well as that provided as part of the test.
Last Examination Date
The Chemistry GCSE course was examined for the last time in June 2012. Students wishing to study Chemistry for June 2014 or later years should instead study our brand new Chemistry International GCSE Course.