Our collection of children's picture books featuring Black and Indigenous people and People of Color (BIPOC) is available to the public. You can use the Search Tool below to find titles. *Inclusion of a title in the collection DOES NOT EQUAL recommendation.* See our related readings page for suggested tools for evaluating books.
You can find titles by typing a keyword into the search bar below (e.g. adoption, birthday, holidays, princess, dinosaur, etc.), or by selecting one or a combo of filters on the left.
First time here? Start here!
1095 matching booksShow Filters
When Allison realizes that she looks more like her favorite doll than like her parents, she comes to terms with this unwelcomed discovery through the help of a stray cat.
A young girl describes how her family makes and flies a kite.
A Chinese American girl provides rhyming descriptions of the great variety of colors she sees around her, from the red of a dragon, firecrackers, and lychees to the brown of her teddy bear.
"An eight-year-old girl decides to make a list of all the things she likes and dislikes about dealing with her autistic brother"--
Illustrations and simple, rhyming text show different ways that peace can be found, made, and shared.
"A nonfiction picture book that introduces very young children to the concept of separation and divorce in a resassuring and straightforward way."--
"A wordless picture book in which two friends follow a young fox deep into the woods and discover a wondrous and magical world"--
Three children can't play outside because of the rain-- and discover they can have fun inside, too.
Eric and his best friend Tommy decide to play a trick on his little sister Julieta, who believes she is going to see a dragon during the school trip to the museum.
"Music is for everyone is sure to get you excited about making music! Singer-songwriter Jill Barber takes her young readers through many different kinds of music - hip hop, jazz, classical, folk ̂- and instruments in an energetic, rhyming tour. Sydney Smith's gleeful illustrations capture all the joy that comes from making music - in all its forms!"--