That sounds like a wonderful goal and I'm happy to help! The following 8 words describe admirable traits, and teaching them to your kids can help to strengthen their characters and give them something to strive for beyond physical beauty. 

1. Generous 

Being generous means showing kindness by giving something to someone else. It can be time, money, care, or belongings, but the act of generosity conveys a kind, caring heart. 

2. Ambitious 

Being ambitious means having goals and striving to accomplish them. Having ambition and aspiration gives someone purpose in life, and the feeling of accomplishment is good for mental health. 

3. Intelligent 

Intelligence is like a superpower. It builds self-confidence and enables you to strive toward your goals with a greater chance of success. Intelligence levels aren't fixed and brains can be trained to improve at all sorts of cognitive functions, so this is a worthwhile goal to set for oneself. 

4. Trustworthy

Someone trustworthy will demonstrate reliability, making it easier for them to form friendships and other interpersonal relationships throughout their lives. 

5. Open-Minded

Being open-minded allows someone to bolster their knowledge to expand their intelligence while also forming connections with people from different lifestyles and cultures. Open-mindedness is often associated with friendliness and a laidback demeanor, which is attractive to friends, employers, and loved ones.  

6. Inquisitive

Inquisitive people never stop learning and growing from their experiences. Science has linked a curious nature with better analytical abilities and problem-solving skills. 

7. Thoughtful 

Being thoughtful means taking the time to care about someone else and their feelings. Thoughtfulness helps to strengthen friendships and assists in establishing a positive mindset.  

8. Kind 

Kindness is good for the mind and heart. Being kind can bolster immunities, reduce anxiety, and boosts the production of oxytocin, which is the feel-good hormone in the brain.
