The effect of Egyptian cobra
(Naja haje) on BP and chronotropic response of the heart might be dose dependent as reported in a study based on an experiment conducted on rats (10).
Poisonous snakes most commonly found in Zululand Puff adder (Bitis arietans) Night adder (Causinae rhombeatus) Gaboon viper (Bitis gabonica) Mozambique spitting cobra (Naja mossambica) Rinkhals (Hemachatus haemachatus) Zebra, western barred, or black spitting cobra (Naja nigricincta) Forest or white-lipped cobra (Naja melanoleuca) Snouted or banded Egyptian cobra
(Naja annulifera) Black mamba (Dendroaspis polylepis) Green mamba (Dendroaspis angusticeps) Vine or twig snake (Thelotornis species) Boomslang (Dispholidus typus) Table 3.
A neurotoxic fraction of Egyptian cobra
, Naja haje has been shown to modulate insulin and glucose turnover and cause sustained hyperglycemia (El-Fiky, 1999).
I'm mesmerised by a dung beetle's determined attempts to push a dung ball up a hill, and I even witness a very unusual kill - an Egyptian cobra
pouncing on a small frog.
The venom of Egyptian cobra
(Naja haje; L.) is complex and it has been considered as a good source of short neurotoxins and several cytotoxins.
The right poison can achieve a quicker and more pleasant death than the Naja Haje, the Egyptian cobra
, which is believed to be the snake Cleopatra used in her death, she said.
* Contrary to legend, Cleopatra probably did not die from the bite of an asp, an Egyptian cobra
. "No one knows the truth" of how she poisoned herself, wrote Plutarch, a Greek biographer, less than a century later.
But as he posed with an Egyptian cobra
96 days in, he was bitten.
Appropriately christened the ASP, the name ostensibly stems from the acronym for Advanced Sighting Plane, but there's no doubt that the enigmatic craftsman enjoyed the connection to the archaic term Asp, for the Egyptian cobra
, so often associated with the suicide of Cleopatra.
Kapuscinski's vivid descriptions--of his life-or-death battle with an Egyptian cobra
, of his encounter with a desperate mass of beggars trapped in the courtyard of an ancient church, of a terrifying video recording the torture and death of Liberia's president, Samuel Doe--make the book difficult to put down, but occasionally his flair for the dramatic leads the author into generalizations that make him sound more like a pedantic tourist than a veteran foreign correspondent.
Cleopatra eventually decided on the bite of an Egyptian cobra
, also known as an asp.
Nowadays, the term asp is applied to both the Egyptian cobra
(Naja haje) and the Saharan horned viper (Cerastes cerastes).