Sick of adverts? Click here to join up for free and be rid of them.
Make a three-dimensional model of the periodic table.
Start with the enjoyable task of making this ingenious and colourful tower model which shows all the elements which have so far been discovered. They spiral downwards according to their electronic structures, hence, the name chemical helix.
The tower has eight sides and so, those elements which come above and below each other on the tower share chemical properties, just as they do in the conventional periodic table.
Included is an extensive minibook packed with ideas and explanations about the elements.
Having been a chemistry buff with a somewhat inventive mind (as the repair bills on my highschool chem lab can attest) I have always been an advocate of a better way to illustrate the relationships between chemical elements, than the good ol' Periodic Table.
Finally, these two authors have created possibly one of the most brilliant models accessible to children, and interested adults.
The Helix Tower has all the elements, from Hydrogen right through to Ununnilium (yup, that's it's real name) in an elegant helix-and-tanble combination that makes it very easy to understand the relationship between the elements, see the electron valence shell and how it determines chemical properties, atomic weight, neutron count, the lot.
The book even has enough room to include a cute mobile that illustrates the electron shell theory and family-groups, giving yet another 'handle' on atomic structure and it's connection to chemical properties.
With the wonderful minibook common to this series, containing all the theory, information, diagrams and explainations, this would have to be classed as a truely comprehensive guide to atomic theory. With the models giving great a learning for those with a kinethetic and visual-cue leaning style, it is simply a brilliant addition to any highschool chemistry lab... along with comprehensive accident insurance.
Overall, I am impressed that such learning resources are now available, and slightly miffed that I had to learn it all the hard way because no-one was able to develop it back when I was blowing holes in benchtops with sodium and water.
There are currently no comments on file. Will you click here and be the first?
Random listing from 'Books'...
In 1955, at seventeen years of age, Judith Graham entered the Dominican Order and began her life as Sister Stephen. In this compassionate yet frank account she recalls her years as a Dominican nun during the repressive pre-Vatican II era.
The vows of a nun - those of poverty, chastity and obedience - encapsulated in the commitment of 'death to self', proved too much for Sister Stephen. Her battle for acceptance and spiritual ... more...
All trademarks, images and copyrights on this site are owned by their respective companies.
This is a free public forum presenting user opinions on selected products, and as such the views expressed do not necessarily reflect the opinion of KIWIreviews.co.nz and are protected under New Zealand law by the "Honest Opinion" clause of the Defamation Act of 1992. KIWIreviews accepts no liability for statements made on this site, under the assumption that they are the true and honest opinions of the individual posters. In most cases, prices and dates stated are approximate and should be considered as only guidelines.
"Are there specially reserved parking spaces for 'fully-abled' people at the Special Olympics?"