1) Photos and videos of the training session
Photos: Ice-breaker inside/outside circle (assessment)
Photos: Ice-breaker: Summary of the first day, (assessment).
Photos in group of all trainees, Videos, Ice-breaker and interview.
2) Names of teachers trained, where they were trained (name of school), number of students impacted.
a) Names of teachers trained and number of students impacted:
1- Ceraphin Michel (480)
2-Chedner Brunot (100)
3- Djoubens Severe (10)
4- Eliver Jean (10)
5- Franco Noel (2130)
6- Islourde Joseph (100)
7- Jean Brissot Hilaire (203)
8- Luxene Joseph (150)
9- Micul Pierre (130)
10- Renald Mene (20)
11- Roberne Saint-preux (300)
12- Rubens Sensuel (150)
13- Sauvena Lorena (15)
14- Sedec Andreus (15)
Total students impacted (3813)
b) They were trained at Antenor Firmin School (Antenor Firmin Street). Saint-André school was not available.
3- Ice-breaker used as a warm up
Inside /outside circle in which we asked the teachers to tell an important or special story relative to their lives during 2 minutes.
Ice-breaker used: a big circle in which we asked the teachers to introduce themselves, where they are from, their favorite fruit and tried to remember all the information about the others (from the first one to the last one).
4- Described how Communicative Language Teaching (CLT) was introduced.
Communicative Language Teaching was introduced as a useful tool that the teacher needs to have in his method of teaching. But to have it, a message has to be sent, received and provoked a reaction. We checked how the teachers work on it according to the assessment.
5- Described how SWBATs were introduced and SWBATs that the trainees developed.
A) SWBATs were introduced as the goal of lesson plan. At the end of the lesson the students will b able to.
We took an example: A song: with the song the students will be able to:
- Learn new vocabulary.
- Improve their listening.
- Know different tenses of the verbs.
- Improve their grammar rules.
B) How the trainees developed the SWBATs
They performed SWBATs with the human body according to them, students will be able to:
- Identify different part of the body.
- Write the words correctly.
-Use it in the real-world and sharing with others.
6) Described how lesson planning was introduced and that trainees developed.
The lesson planning was introduced as something that the teacher has to do before each course he is going to dispense to avoid being improvised.
The trainees develop the lesson planning in choosing a subject that they are going to teach to the students. In that lesson, they say what they are going to see with the students, and at the end of the subject the students will be able to. (The SWBAT is appeared). The way the trainees develop the lesson planning shows us they understood it. They appreciated it and they are ready to use it in their classroom.
7) Described how trainees were trained on the four skills and the strategies that were employed.
The four skills are: Listening, reading, speaking and writing (LRSW(Y)).
The trainees were trained on the four skills by: presenting the big <<W>> with each symbol, through the symbols we explained the trainees the importance of each of them as a tool to teach to the students in a classroom.
- For listening (L): they can use CDs, Radio cassettes (tapes).
- For reading (R): they can use books, news paper, novels and magazines.
- For speaking(S): they can make dialog, conversations, debates and discussions. We showed also them how to use OPI (Oral Proficiency and Interview) to test the speaking level and TPS (Think-Pair and Share) of their students.
- For writing (W): they can use topic, opinions to write about.
8) Described how trainees were trained on assessment rubrics and what trainees shared about their rubrics.
We introduced the rubric as a table of three (3) parts (levels or performance, criteria and descriptor) that they can use in classroom to evaluate their students. After explanation of the three (3) parts of the rubric, we used a letter as assessment in which we evaluated them. They didn’t know anything about it, and for the time being they are going to do their best to use it in classroom.
9) Described how training helped the trainees prepare their students for using English outside the classroom, in real-world situations.
The training was so important, so helpful and impacted to them; with that, they are going to prepare their students for using English in real-world situations as:
- Good interpreter to earn money
- To interact with other people
- To learn the culture of other people
- To get a good job with an International Organization
The training process was excellent according to us. We invited the trainees, they came and the feedback was positive according to their testimony. It was very successful because they didn’t have methods, and now they are going to use the new stuffs learned in the training. Everything worked well, except the Ice-breaker we used in the second day. They ignored its importance, they thaught it was a game, but after evaluation in assessment, they saw it was a memory test. They understood its importance.
Next time, we’ll take more days for the training and we’ll make them work more to the assessment.
The report was prepared by Mr Marc Arthur ESPERANCE and Mr Shester SEVERE. Best regards to you Ms Lisa and all the guys of Monterey.