WASHINGTON — The red-brick house on Capitol Hill served for decades as a national headquarters and dormitory for the so-called iron-jawed ladies lobbying for equal rights, even as male members of Congress sought to raze it to make room for offices for themselves.
British soldiers set it on fire during the War of 1812 to squelch American resistance, and generations of Washington brides and grooms have held their wedding receptions in its historic halls.
On Tuesday, President Obama designated the Sewall-Belmont House and Museum as a national monument for women’s equality, declaring the three-story structure a symbol of the American fight for civil rights at a time when the country could be on the cusp of electing its first female president.
“This house became a hotbed of activism, a centerpiece for the struggle for equality, a monument to fight not just for women’s equality, but ultimately for equality for everybody,” Mr. Obama said. He proclaimed it a monument, he said, “to help tell the story of these suffragists.”
Mr. Obama added, “In these rooms, they pursued ideals which shouldn’t be relegated to the archives of history, shouldn’t be behind glass cases.”
It was an unusual use of the president’s executive powers under the Antiquities Act to preserve an aspect of women’s history. The house, which will now be known as the Belmont-Paul Women’s Equality National Monument, recognizes two pioneers of the women’s rights struggle in the United States: Alva Belmont, a wealthy socialite who used money from her divorce to finance the National Women’s Party as it pressed for and won voting rights for women in 1920, and Alice Paul, who founded the party and led that effort.
“I want young girls and boys to come here, 10, 20, 100 years from now, to know that women fought for equality, it was not just given to them,” President Obama said, adding that he wanted future generations to be “astonished” to learn “that there was ever a time when a woman had never sat in the Oval Office.”
Left out of the name of the monument was Robert Sewall, who built the house around 1800 and then rebuilt it in 1820, after the British burned it to the ground in 1814 because it housed Americans resisting the invasion of Washington.
But the house’s name will remain the same. “It will always be the Sewall-Belmont House — that will never go away, and we don’t want to get rid of that history,’’ said L. Page Harrington, the executive director of the Sewall-Belmont House and Museum. “But if you’re talking about a women’s history monument, you want to pick women to name it for.”
Mr. Obama, who has made the push for equal pay a priority, announced the new monument on Equal Pay Day, an annual observance marking how many additional days a woman would have to work to earn the same amount a man did the year before.
“I’m here to say we will close the wage gap,” Mr. Obama said. “And if you don’t believe that we’re going to close our wage gap, you need to come visit this house because this house has a story to tell.”
That story was very nearly lost to history.
Ms. Paul moved into the house in 1929, as the party began a push for women’s rights legislation and an equal rights amendment. She lived and worked there until the mid-1970s and hosted a continually rotating cast of women who traveled to Washington to press their cause.
“Women would come here to the headquarters and they would learn how to politically engage, but they needed a safe place to stay and they needed to be able to have chaperones with them,” Ms. Harrington said. “The women that lived and worked here were extremely dedicated.”
Ms. Harrington said the house itself had been integral to the push for women’s rights because of its proximity to the Capitol, where Ms. Paul led lobbying efforts on hundreds of pieces of legislation and succeeded in winning passage of as many as 300.
“She developed lobbying strategies that were unheard-of at the time,” said Kristen Brengel, the vice president for government affairs at the National Parks Conservation Association. “When you walk in the house, you can read all of her index cards from when she lobbied members of Congress, and then she’d call their wives and get their wives on board.”
Even as she fought for women’s rights, Ms. Paul had to fend off efforts to encroach on her prime real estate. In 1968, a group of congressmen drafted legislation to confiscate the house to make room for a driveway for a new Senate office building. They were unsuccessful. A similar effort surfaced in the 1970s, when Ms. Paul enlisted the help of Patricia Schroeder, then a Democratic representative from Colorado, to fight efforts to tear down the house to make way for the Hart Senate Office Building.
“The guys were building the Hart building, and they were going to tear this thing down because it was insignificant and in their way,” Senator Barbara A. Mikulski, Democrat of Maryland and the chamber’s longest-serving woman, said in an interview. “I joined with other women of the House at that time — 15 or 16 — and said, ‘We’re not going to tear down women’s history so 50 guys can have offices.’”
Last year, Ms. Mikulski drafted legislation to designate the house as a National Park Service site and wrote to Mr. Obama asking that he use his presidential power to proclaim it a monument.
“There are a lot of monuments around here in Washington, and we thought that there ought to be a national monument to women — to our struggle and our success,” she said.
Since the 1990s, as the membership of the National Women’s Party dwindled and other women’s groups attracted more attention and money, the aging house struggled. It survived in part through event rentals, including many wedding receptions, bringing in about $100,000 at its high point in 2007, Ms. Harrington said.
But a mold outbreak in the library in 2014 cost $75,000 to fix, forcing her to switch two full-time staff people to a half-time schedule to cover the cost. Heavy snowfalls in January and February ripped off the copper gutters. Repairs ate up Ms. Harrington’s budget for Women’s History Month programs last month.
The monument designation means that the National Park Service will now perform such maintenance, and the museum can continue to operate. The weddings, Ms. Harrington said, are a thing of the past.