Digital Badge Tasks
E-safety 1 (KS1)
To earn this badge you need to show you can use technology safely and respectfully, keeping your personal information private. You will need to identify where to go for help and support when you have problems online, and show that you can be a safe user of online technologies.
Task 1: Use technology safely
Write a story about something you have done that involved using technology. Make sure you explain the steps you took to make sure you used the technology safely.
For example, how you decided whether an email was safe to open, or knowing that some computer games are only suitable for older children to play.
Task 2: Keep personal information private
Keeping personal information private is one of the most important elements of e-safety.
For this task, you need to demonstrate how you kept your personal information private when using the internet.
Task 3: Use technology respectfully
The World Wide Web freely offers a great deal of information that we can use, but it is important we consider very carefully how we use that information so as to remain safe and legal.
For this task, you need to demonstrate that you have used technology respectfully. For example, using other people’s images or research online.
Task 4: Identify sources of help and support
It is important that you know what you would do if you experienced a problem while using the internet.
For this task, you need to show that you can identify appropriate ways to respond to problems you experience when using the web.
You might want to write about what you do and who you talk to when you see something bad online, or write about websites and other resources that help to keep you safe when browsing the web.
E-Safety 2 (KS2)
To earn this badge you will need to show that you can use technology safely, respectfully and responsibly. You will need to demonstrate that you can recognise the difference between acceptable and unacceptable behaviour online, and identify a range of ways to report concerns about content and contact.
Task 1: Use technology responsibly
Demonstrate that you know how to use technology safely and responsibly.
There are many ways you could do this. For example, you could explain the possible dangers of opening email attachments, the importance of keeping passwords safe, or explain issues around data protection when filling in online surveys.
Task 2: Reporting concerns about contact
In this task you need to show that you can raise concerns about problems you might face online. These problems might include unwanted contact from another person, an unpleasant email or dealing with online bullying.
Demonstrate that you know a number of different ways to raise concerns.
Task 3: Reporting concerns about content
Sometimes we find content on the internet that we feel is inappropriate, unsuitable, or offensive.
Demonstrate that you know a number of different ways to report your concerns about web content.
Task 4: Recognising acceptable/unacceptable behaviour
There are millions of people using the internet every day to communicate in a vast variety of ways.
For this task, you need to create a piece of evidence that shows you can recognise the difference between acceptable and unacceptable behaviour on the web.