Baby had been listened to music by parents since she was still in the womb, you can continue to keep listening music to baby after she is birth. Babies who usually listens music as long as she was still in the womb tend to be easy calmed when she gets fussy. You can also get used to baby to listen music when she wants to sleep.
The recent research shows that listening music to baby is one of the best ways to learn about rhythm, movement, and voices for babies and children.
Most babies at 6 months old feel happy when are swung in your lap or you can wiggle her body by following to the beat. Baby can also imitate music by hitting her toys to the table or by producing happy sounds using her mouth. Baby likes to play with her toys that can produce sounds since it will draw her attention to more and more making sounds using the toys.
There are numerous toys that can produce sounds or music, but your baby may more like the simple objects that are also able to produce various sounds, such as frying pan, tin, or bucket that can be acted as a drum to be hit by spoon. By this way, baby will learn about causal matter; when baby hits objects, it will produce sounds.
Another way to provide home-toys for baby you can fill the bottle with beans or dried paste and close it. Baby will enjoy the sounds produced when the bottle is moved. But, you have to assure that the bottle won’t be opened, because if it is opened it can endanger baby since the small objects inside it can be swallowed by baby and it is really dangerous. You can also teach baby to hold 2 plastic bowls then slap it to each other. She must be like it, in this way you also teach baby to clap.
Listen and produce many sounds can help baby to recognize sounds and patterns of conversation. You can help baby to develop her hearing skill, that will need when she’ll learn to talk, by conducting ‘musical conversation’ with her. Give your baby a rattle, you also have a rattle in your hand, then shake your rattle and baby will respond it by following you shaking her rattle.
Songs that are using when you play a game with baby will help baby to remember when is the time to clap when you sing certain song. Also, by tapping the rhythm from words that are sung, you have helped baby to remember words and to use it in the conversation later. Baby also can enjoy the rhythm when sitting on your lap while your feet are tapped following to the beat of the rhythm. Encourage baby to make a move, to sing, or to play her rattle toy when she is listening music.
Most of babies at this period of age like to stand, and you can make this moment to do dancing with baby as a fun activity between you and her. The choice of music is up to you, but it is better if it is suited with the kind of movements. Generally, baby will imitate your behavior when dancing, and it will help her to increase her skills in coordinating her body parts.