Addictions - Including Substances, Parenting Issues ADD and ADHD Coping Strategies
Addictions - Including Substances, Parenting Issues
While some people can use prescription or recreational drugs with no negative effects, many others become addicted and face dramatic health and lifestyle problems as a result. Substance addictions negatively affect relationships, home, school or work, leaving the person feeling ashamed, helpless and isolated.
Physical symptoms of substance abuse and addiction are varied depending on the drug of choice, but the symptoms of the addiction itself are similar. People who are addicted to substances may neglect their responsibilities, take potentially dangerous risks and get into trouble with the law. As their drug use spirals out of control, they will lose interest in activities that used to be enjoyable and continue to take drugs despite knowing the harm it causes.
Substance addicts tend to build up a tolerance to their drug of choice, and get angry when they can't get more of it. Withdrawal symptoms are highly probable when an addict goes without it for too long. Depression, nausea, insomnia, sweating, restlessness, anxiety and shaking are all common withdrawal symptoms.
Psychotherapy can help you to overcome substance addiction by focusing on correcting maladaptive behaviors. Substance abuse is usually a coping mechanism against emotionally overwhelming past events or memories. Substances are often used to provide instant gratification instead of facing certain issues.
Therapists are equipped to help clients deal with addiction recovery through empowerment and helping them set simple short term targets. The first target is sobriety, followed by empowering the client with adaptive skills and finding new coping strategies that deal with the issues that caused the addiction. Substance addiction can be ended, allowing the person to live a healthy, productive life.
If you need a counsellor or psychologist to help you address the effects of substance addiction, you can search the directory below to find a professional with the approach best suited to your situation.
It's not until we become parents that we realize just how daunting a task we have to raise a human being. Pregnancy is a miracle for most, and small babies are adorable, despite the restless nights. However, long months of precious little sleep and caring for a helpless infant who can't verbalise their needs in language we understand can take its toll on the strongest of people. These are just some of the many parenting issues people around the world face every day.
Little people have their own unique personalities, needs and quirks and being responsible for them is not always the easiest thing to do. Of course, most parents don't have the luxury to spend every waking moment with their offspring, as we face work stress, marital issues, complicated family relationships, financial pressure and much more. Most children are left with caregivers for most of the day, where they create other relationships and where personalities are shaped in different ways.
While parenting is not for the faint hearted, it certainly is one of the most rewarding aspects of being a human on Mother Earth.
Parenting therapy can help parents to better cope with this daunting tasks by learning how to deal with outside influences, and how to cope with the demands of a young child or a teenager. It can help parents to be more cognizant of what they say to their children and how to cope with stressful or traumatic events, peer pressure, sibling relationships and day-to-day pressures faced by their children.
If you are looking for a counsellor or psychologist who offers family counselling to address your parenting issues, you may want to search the directory to find a professional whose approach will suit you best.
ADD and ADHD Coping Strategies
Therapists offer a wide range of approaches and ADHD coping strategies that can be valuable in overcoming the challenges of ADD/ADHD. Coaching is an effective tool in the treatment of ADHD. While traditional psychologists offer a range of approaches to deal with emotional problems, those who work with ADHD clients help implement practical solutions that improve situations in everyday life. Known as behavioural therapists, they offer strategies to help you prioritize tasks, structure your environment and manage your finances.
Organizing your work and home environment for optimum results can make life a lot easier and therapists can help with that. They may come to your home or office and look at ways to improve the organization and make suggestions for increased efficiency.
If you have ADD/ADHD and you could benefit from learning how to organize your environment and to prioritize tasks, have a look at the counsellors listed below.