Opening statement, begin the debate with :
Much of the debate over same sex marriage centers on one's belief of whether homosexuality is a sin. If homosexuality is asin, and marriage is ordained by God to be between a man and a woman, then the faithful can be tolerant of a sin but they cannot support it. None of the major Abrahamic religions Judaism, Christianity, or Islam support homosexuality or gay marriage.
The Judeo-Christian belief that homosexuality is a sin is based on the relatively few scriptures that can be found in the Old and New Testament of the Bible.
First, let us define ‘homosexuality' as sexual activity between two people of the same gender and ‘Islam' as the high tradition of Islamic law. From the perspective of traditional Islamic law, same-sex marriage would make no sense; In Islamic law, sexual relations outside of marriage are prohibited, and marriage is defined as a contract between a man and a woman which allows them to engage in sexual intercourse.
The traditional belief in Judaism, Christianity and Islam is that God forbids homosexuality, and therefore same-sex marriages as well. For example, in the Old Testament, Genesis 19, we see the story of Sodom and Gomorrah, where Lot implores the people of his town not to act wickedly and to leave his male guests alone. The story goes on to describe the persistence of the townsfolk in wishing to indulge in homosexuality and the subsequent annihilation of the two communities. Other verses in the Old Testament also prohibit homosexuality.
Scriptures--> Leviticus 18:22, 20:13. In the New Testament, we see similar proscriptions in I Corinthians 6:9, I Timothy 1:8-10, Romans 1:26-27 (the translation used is the New American Standard Bible). (PICK TWO MAIN SCRIPTURES)
The known history of homosexuality in Judaism begins in Leviticus, which describes intercourse between male homosexuals as a capital offence. The historically prevalent view among Jews was to regard homosexual intercourse as sinful, arguing that it was forbidden by the Torah. "You shall not come close to another person for the purpose of committing a sexual crime"
If God had intended the human race to be fulfilled through both heterosexual and homosexual marriage, He would have designed our bodies to allow reproduction through both means and made both means of sexual intercourse healthy and natural. Homosexual anal intercourse carries a high risk of disease, this is recognized in Scripture where gay men are said to receive in their bodies the due penalty for their error (Romans 1:27).
Allowing gay couples to wed will further weaken the institution of marriage.…