Indiana Ceramics and Other Objects
The collection focuses on decorative ceramics by Indiana ceramic artists. The all-encompassing collection features major methods and styles from the 1880's to current works by contemporary artists.
The diverse range of artists includes independent ceramic artists as well as those from the academic world and industry. They have taught or are still teaching at colleges and universities around the country after gaining considerable ceramic experience in Indiana. They have been instrumental in advancing ceramic art in Indiana. They are primarily known by the students they have taught, and through museum and major gallery exhibitions across the country.
Wide Variety of Methods and Styles
The Museum displays a broad range of ceramics made with a variety of firing and glazing methods, including wood fired, raku, gas reduction, electric kiln, pit fired, salt glazed, and saggar fired pieces. Works reflect influences in each artist's life, and range from very traditional vases to non-traditional vessels and abstract sculptures.
The ceramic art is shown alongside the historic Indiana paintings and American furniture for which the museum is known.
The collection shows the progression of ceramics in Indiana, beginning with Laura Fry, who was a decorator for Rookwood Pottery in the 1880's. The Overbeck Sisters from Cambridge City, who started their pottery around 1911, were next. They were followed by the Brown County Pottery in 1932. Karl Martz worked for them for two years until he started the Karl Martz Pottery in 1935 in Nashville along with his wife, Becky Brown. He started the ceramics program at Indiana University, and his influence continues to be felt today through the work of his students and others who came in contact with his work.
The works of the contemporary ceramic artists are shown on our Flicker image gallery. Click on the button below to open the ceramics album, which shows a sampling of the best works of the artists in the collection in alphabetical order.