Hemp is one of the oldest crops in the world and has been valued for its beneficial properties for thousands of years. Deal with it!
The legendary hemp automobile of Henry Ford caused a stir back in 1941. The fibers of the renewable raw material were used for the body of the car and hemp oil for fuel. Today, hemp is indispensable as a building material, hemp plastic, clothing, food, paper or in medicine.
CBD - what is it?
Cannabis plants contain cannabidiol, also called CBD. Since CBD is not psychoactive, the substance has no intoxicating effect.
However, CBD hemp has many positive qualities that are now appreciated and used by many people. With its valuable ingredients, CBD hemp has a relaxing effect on the nervous system and increases the quality of life in many cases.
SONNENTOR has been using dried hemp leaves in various products for around 10 years and adheres to strict specifications *.
NEW: CBD hemp ensures well-being
The leaves of the CBD-containing variety Cannabis Sattiva impress with truly positive properties. To ensure better absorption of the plant’s valuable ingredients, add a source of fat such as oils or milk in the tea. CBD hemp leaves are available both loosely and in a practical infusion bag.
Hemp as a food companion
SONNENTOR has had a hemp variety with a lower CBD content in its product range for quite some time. The popular hemp leaves are available loose, and now also in infusion bag. This variety has a bright yellow colour and is a perfect food companion due to its mild taste. It goes perfectly with maki and sushi. In addition to its numerous positive properties, it is also full of flavour! Again, adding a source of fat helps with the maximum absorption of the CBD.
Hemp has become indispensable in everyday life - as a building material, hemp plastic, clothing, food, paper or medicine. The famous hemp automobile of Henry Ford caused a stir in 1941. The fibers of the renewable raw material were used for the bodywork, and hemp oil as fuel.
Hemp is a regional plant that can adapt perfectly to changing climatic conditions. It is also brilliant for organic farming as it has excellent resistance to pests.
Hemp has been used as a crop for more than 10,000 years. Textiles were produced in China 5,000 years ago, and hemp fiber paper around 2,000 years ago. Rembrandt, for example, did his first oil painting on hemp. In the 20th century hemp fibers were increasingly displaced by synthetic fibers. The hemp ingredient CBD is said to have numerous health benefits.
* SONNENTOR has been using dried hemp leaves in various products for about 10 years and adheres to strict guidelines. We only process hemp varieties which are:
in the catalog of varieties of the EU in accordance with Article 17 of Directive 2002/53 / EC, or
are listed in the Austrian list of varieties in accordance with § 65 Seed Act 1997 and
their content of tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) does not exceed 0.3%.