of drug overdose deaths were tied to opiate painkillers, such as morphine, OxyContin, and Vicodin.
people over age 12 had a substance use disorder in 2014.
4 of 5
new heroin users started out misusing prescription painkillers.
What Are Substance Abuse Disorders?
Substance Abuse disorder occurs when a person’s use of alcohol or another substance (drug) leads to health issues or problems at work, school, or home.
Many who develop a substance use problem have depression, attention deficit disorder, post-traumatic stress disorder, or another mental problem. A stressful or chaotic lifestyle and low self-esteem are also common.
Substance use disorder: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia. [online] Medlineplus.gov.
Available at: https://medlineplus.gov/ency/article/001522.htm [Accessed 30 Jan. 2019].
Most commonly used substances in Georgia include:
- Opiates & Opioids
How We Can Help
Outpatient Substance Use Disorder Treatment
Outpatient Substance Use Disorder Treatment services includes a wide variety of services, programs and curriculums. All Outpatient Centers (Lawrenceville, Newton, Norcross, and Rockdale) offer both ASAM Level 1 and ASAM Level 2.1 programming. We provide services to both court ordered and voluntary clients. Some Centers also provide Treatment Provider (TP) services as part of the DUI Intervention Program. Co-occurring Programs are available for clients that may struggle with both Substance Use Disorders and Mental Illness. Evidence-Based Practices utilized may include: Seeking Safety, Dialectical Behavior Therapy (DBT), Eye Movement Desensitization and Reprocessing (EMDR), etc. Substance Use Disorder services and programming vary at each location. Please contact the site you are interested in attending to find out more about their specific program.
Our Court Services Program provides evaluations to those who are recommended or required to complete them by a Judge, probation officer, attorney, DFCS worker or other third party. Staff will complete mandated DUI, substance use and mental health evaluations utilizing standardized assessment tools in conjunction with a face-to-face interview. The findings of the assessment will be provided in a letter to the client and the referring source. Our evaluators are on the Georgia DUI Intervention Program Clinical Evaluator registry and are qualified to provide evaluations to meet the needs of the courts. Clients who receive these evaluations may or may not be referred to attend treatment groups, classes or services, depending on their individual need. The Court Services program does NOT provide psychological evaluations, psychosexual evaluations, or parental fitness assessments.
Substance Abuse Disorder Specialized Day Treatment
This Day Treatment Program give individuals a chance to make a new beginning in recovery and receive quality individualized treatment based on the most recent medical understanding of addiction in an Intensive Outpatient setting.
Substance Abuse Disorder Residential Services
The GRAN Recovery Center is a 32 bed intensive residential treatment facility that offers a highly structured program of least 5-6 hours of programming daily that includes group, individual, education and skills training. With an emphasis on maintaining a positive therapeutic community, treatment interventions focus on promoting abstinence from substance use, shifting from addictive behaviors and effecting change in individuals’ lifestyle, attitudes and values. This program provides a chance to make a new beginning in recovery and receive quality individualized treatment based on the most recent medical understanding of addiction in a 28 day Intensive Residential Community.
The Substance Abuse Disorder Residential Program is a longer-term program designed for individuals who have at least 30 days of sobriety and a little farther along their recovery journey. We provide a supportive, safe long-term residential recovery environment with care that is person-centered and tailored to the unique strengths and interests of individuals served. Residents are supported in getting back to doing meaningful things in their lives like work, school and community engagement.
Crisis Stabilization Program
The Adult Crisis Stabilization Unit (CSU) is a medically monitored, short term stabilization program that provides psychiatric and behavioral healthcare for adults needing detoxification for substance use. While at the CSU, the clients participate in DBT skills (Dialectical Behavior Therapy) groups, substance use groups, medication monitoring and recreational activities. The average length of stay is approximately seven days. We encourage each family to participate in treatment and transition planning as well as our Family Program. Each family is able to participate in our Family Program to learn more about the skills the clients learn as well as have questions answered about community resources and support. Each client is discharged after treatment back to the community with transition planning.
The first step to accessing care at View Point Health is to visit one of our four centers for an assessment. Our certified clinicians will work with you to determine what your specific needs are, and then will provide a treatment plan best suited to those needs. We offer many programs at our various facilities that might be available to you depending on your assessment.
Visit A Center
Who to call
5030 Georgia Belle Court
Norcross, GA 30093
Main – 678-209-2745
Fax – 678-212-6321
175 Gwinnett Drive
P.O. Box 687
Lawrenceville, GA 30046
Main – 678-209-2411
Fax – 678-212-6306
977-A Taylor Street
Conyers, GA 30012
Main – 678-209-2655
Fax – 678-212-6309
8201 Hazelbrand Road
Covington, GA 30014
Main – 678-209-2600
Fax – 678-212-6319