During the composting process, as plant matter decays into a substance rich in soil nutrients, it's normal to smell things such as grass or leaves that are in the pile or bin. But the odor should never be foul when the compost pile is well-managed. Knowing what to put in the pile and what to leave out will eliminate a lot of potential odor problems and keep that compost healthy for both your garden and the environment in general.
What's That Smell?
If there's a horrid smell coming from the compost pile, there's a good chance something in the pile does not belong. Animal-based matter such as fish skins, chicken bones and skin and leftover scraps from a steak has no place in a compost bin -- it can rot and stink as it begins to break down, and it's probably going to attract flies and vermin. Dairy products will likewise cause odors, as you may have noticed if you've ever smelled spoiled milk. Fats and greases from the kitchen likewise cause odors that may become even more rancid in the heat of a compost pile. All of these things should be kept out of compost piles. Healthy compost smells earthy, a bit like rich soil or a walk through a wooded area, once it decomposes.
Keep These Out of Compost
Odor alone isn't the only reason to keep certain things out of the compost pile. Pet waste may contain bacteria, parasites and viruses that are harmful to people. Plants treated with chemical pesticides also need to stay out of the pile, as these chemicals kill off beneficial substances as well, and trace amounts of the chemicals are likely to remain in the final compost. Diseased or insect-infested plant matter can pass the problem on to healthy plants via the compost.
Beneficial Compost Materials
Much of the waste from a yard, kitchen or garden can be composted. Grass clippings, leaves, pine needles, twigs and the like all break down when composted, as do coffee grounds (and their paper filters), fruit and vegetable peels and pieces, straw and newspaper.
Proper compost maintenance techniques keep the area free of nasty odors. A healthy compost pile contains roughly equal amounts of both "brown" and "green" matter. Twigs, dried leaves and the like are "brown" matter, contributing carbon to the pile, while fruit and veggie clippings are "green" matter, contributing nitrogen. The combination of both creates a reaction that breaks organic matter down into compost, with a little help from you. The pile needs to be aerated from time to time and also requires a little moisture. Turn the pile with a rake or pitchfork once a week or so to aerate and check up on the pile's progress. Cut large items such as twigs or banana peels smaller so they break down more easily. Add more materials as you like, burying fruit wastes within the pile and placing brown matter (dried leaves, twigs) on top.
- Martin Poole/Digital Vision/Getty Images