This simple act could result in your data being stolen, according to security experts
If your smartphone battery drops into the red, you probably would not think twice about plugging it into a computer or public charging station to recharge.
But this simple act could result in your data being stolen, according to security experts.
Data is transferred between your smartphone and the charger it is plugged into as soon as the connection is made, researchers from Kaspersky Lab have claimed.
The name of your device, the manufacturer and model, serial number, firmware information, file system and electronic chip ID could all be shared with the computer.
Kaspersky Lab says the amount of data shared between the two devices will vary depending on the manufacturers and models.
But every device transfers the same basic set of information, including device name, manufacturer and serial number.
Kaspersky Lab says the amount of data shared will vary depending on the manufacturers and models
And this information alone is enough for a hacker to brake into the smartphone and take control of your device, researchers from Kaspersky Lab has claimed.
Public charging stations should only be just plugged into power supply, Kaspersky Labs claim, but in fact they may have any kind of hardware installed on the other end, which provides data connection in addition to power through the same USB port which you use for charging.
Using only this basic PC hardware and a regular USB cable, security experts were able to install a "root application" on a dummy smartphone which compromised the device.
Hackers have previously used this method to steal data from a mobile connected to a computer in 2013, as part of the cyberespionage campaign Red October.
The notorious Hacking Team group has also employed a similar method to load a smartphone with crippling malware, while it was connected to a computer.
Hackers have previously used this method to steal data from a mobile connected to a computer
By analysing the basic set of information exchanged between the charging smartphone and computer – hackers were able to tailor their attack to a specific device.
Kaspersky Lab researcher Alexey Komarov warned: "The security risks here are obvious: if you’re a regular user you can be tracked through your device IDs; your phone could be silently packed with anything from adware to ransomware.
"And you don't even have to be highly-skilled in order to perform such attacks, all the information you need can easily be found on the Internet."
Apple's iOS operating system – which powers its iPhone, iPad and iPod Touch devices – does offer some protection against this type of attack.
When you connect your Apple device to a computer or other device for the first time, an alert asks whether you trust the computer.
Apple's iOS will as whether or not you want to share information with the computer
Trusted computers are allowed to sync with your iOS device, create backups, access your device's photos, videos, and contacts.
These computers will remain trusted unless you change which computers you trust or erase your iOS device.
If you choose not to trust a computer, you block its access to content on your device.
Android also offers multiple options when you first plug your device into a computer, including Charging Only, Transfer Files, Transfer Files, and MIDI.
USB Charging is the default, and means no data is sent between the phone and the computer. Only the required five-volt power is active.
Kaspersky Labs has also offered some advice to help against this type of attack –
- Use only trusted USB charging points and computers to charge your device
- Secure your phone with a password, or with a fingerprint or iris scanner. Do not unlock the mobile while it is charging
- Use encryption technologies and secure containers to protect the data
- Install an antivirus software capable of detecting malware even if a "charging" vulnerability is used