Energy Experiments for Kids
Posted on 02-27-2017
For most kids, doing a science project isn't on the list of fun activities to do at home. Most kids would rather spend time playing games on an iPad or watching TV. Why not get your kids interested in science by engaging in some scientific experiments as a family? EIA.Gov has some great science fair projects listed by age range that are easy to do and will engage your kids. Here are a few from the website.
Science Fair Experiments
The Light Bulb Experiment - Find out which light bulb produces more heat. Have an adult put one fluorescent bulb in a lamp. Observe the type of light it produces. Then hold a thermometer six inches from the bulb for one minute. Write down the temperature. Next, have an adult switch out the bulb for an incandescent light bulb. Turn the light on, observe the light it produces, and then hold the thermometer six inches from the bulb for one minute. Write down that bulb's temperature. Compare the two bulbs. Which light was brighter? Which produced the most heat? Which bulb uses less energy?
Fan Cooling Experiment - Test the effectiveness of running a fan to cool a room. On a warm day, place a portable fan on a table and grab a thermometer to record the temperature in the room. With the fan running, hold thermometer three feet from fan with the wind blowing on thermometer for one minute. Write down the temperature. Next, hold the thermometer two feet away with the wind on it for one minute and record the temperature. Repeat this step one foot away from fan. Compare all three temperatures to come to your own conclusion on whether or not the fan actually works to cool a room.
The Ice Experiment - In order for something to freeze, heat must be removed. Find out which freezes faster - cold water or hot water. Find two styrofoam cups and label one cup "Hot" and the other "Cold." Have an adult fill "Cold" cup with cold water and "Hot" cup with hot water, keeping both at equal levels. Place both cups in the freezer for about 15 minutes. Check to see which cup is freezing first and write it down. Keep them in the freezer and check the next day. Remove ice from cups and check to see if there's any difference in the size. Which froze first? Did they freeze the same?
Go to EIA Energy Kids for more ideas!
Did You Know?
Solar cells convert light energy into electricity.