The Australian Dietary Guidelines
recommends that all Australians limit their intake of drinks containing added sugar, including sugar-sweetened soft drinks and cordials, fruit drinks, vitamin-style waters, flavoured mineral waters, energy and sports drinks.
Sugary drinks are not required for good health and may cause health problems if drunk in large amounts. Drink plenty of water instead of drinks with added sugars.
Reasons to limit sugary drinks
Drinks containing added sugar include sugar-sweetened soft drinks and cordials, fruit drinks, vitamin-style waters, flavoured mineral waters, energy and sports drinks. Consumption of sugary drinks provides additional energy (kilojoules) to the diet, but no other essential nutrients such as protein, minerals vitamins or dietary fibre.
There is strong evidence of the association between the consumption of sugary dinks and excess weight gain in both children and adults, as well as reduced bone strength, and tooth decay .
Limit artificially sweetened soft drinks
Some soft drinks contain artificial sweeteners instead of added sugar. Artificially sweetened drinks add very little energy (kilojoules) to the diet and therefore do not contribute directly to weight gain. However, artificially sweetened drinks still maintain the ‘habit’ of drinking sweet drinks and there is some evidence that consumption of all soft drinks, both diet and sugar sweetened, may lead to decreased bone density as people may drink less milk.
Whether sweetened with sugar or artificial sweeteners these drinks are acidic. Frequent consumption can contribute to the erosion of tooth enamel, a major factor in tooth decay.
For good oral health, tap water has an advantage over many commercially available drinks as it has the beneficial effects of added fluoride. Tap water is also the best choice of drink for hydration (replacing the fluids you lose).
Drinking reduced fat milk helps people to meet their target for the food group ‘milk, yoghurt, cheese and/or their alternatives’.
The amount of sugar in soft drinks
Soft drinks are now commonly sold in 600 ml bottles, which means people are consuming up to 16 packets (teaspoons) of sugar with each large sugary drink consumed.
Recommendations for Australians
The Australian Guide to Healthy Eating
provides people of different sex, age and life stage with a recommended eating plan that includes all the nutrients you need to grow and develop, and to live a healthy life.
A variety of foods from the five food groups provide valuable nutrients for the body, while discretionary (‘sometimes’ or ‘extra’) foods and particularly drinks provide additional energy (kilojoules), but do not generally satisfy hunger. For adults, sugary drinks do not usually contribute to feeling full, people tend to eat their usual meal – leading to excess energy intake and weight gain over time.
Discretionary foods and drink, including sugary drinks, are not an essential or necessary part of our dietary patterns. If chosen, they should be included only occasionally and in small amounts.
Where to get help
This page has been produced in consultation with and approved by:
Department of Health and Human Services - MHW&A - Prevention and Population Health - Food and Nutrition
Content on this website is provided for information purposes only. Information about a therapy, service, product or treatment does not in any way endorse or support such therapy, service, product or treatment and is not intended to replace advice from your doctor or other registered health professional. The information and materials contained on this website are not intended to constitute a comprehensive guide concerning all aspects of the therapy, product or treatment described on the website. All users are urged to always seek advice from a registered health care professional for diagnosis and answers to their medical questions and to ascertain whether the particular therapy, service, product or treatment described on the website is suitable in their circumstances. The State of Victoria and the Department of Health & Human Services shall not bear any liability for reliance by any user on the materials contained on this website.