Media Tech's Mission
The mission of AHS Media Tech is to provide an environment in which all individuals in Antioch are empowered to become life-long learners and effective creators and users of information, ideas, and technology.
Meet the Team
Mrs. Lorna Wise, CTE
9th Grade & Introduction to Computers
Ecology is Placed
Students learned about Ecological Succession in their Biology class. One student decided to build a series of ecological systems in Minecraft to represent what he learned in the lesson.
"My name is Nixon Lazo. In the days leading up to fall break, I purposed a joke idea to my biology teacher, Miss Escobar, 'What if I built a forest in Minecraft for extra credit?', and she said, 'Sure'. So I decided that since I usually have a lot of free time during breaks, I decided to take up the opportunity to do so. I was passionate about building a forest, however abrupt plans and procrastination happened, and I was left with more or less 3 days to build the forest, however with such a complex game like Minecraft, almost anything can get done even with such little time."
In Multimedia, students spend 9 weeks learning the ins and outs of Adobe Animate. Their final project is a production of a 35 second animation in story form. Each of their animations consists of up to 1000 frames of original graphics. Using the tools in Adobe Animate, students are able to bring computer graphics to life.
For semester II, students learn to create web pages with HTML and CSS. After learning advanced HTML and CSS, they begin to work with a web developer toolkit known as BootStrap. Students begin to build responsive and interactive websites that incorporate PhotoShop and Animation objects created in the first semester. The following links are student samples of what they are doing in Web Design.
For this game, you are able to use the Arrow Keys for movement, Space to shoot, and hold Shift to slow down. Defeat all of the enemies while dodging many bullets, grazing the bullets for more points, and get a high score!
For 9 weeks, students learn about digital photography and use editing software such as Adobe PhotoShop. At the end of the unit, student create a digital project showcasing their photo-taking skills and PhotoShop editing skills. Here are some samples of student work.