a device that searches a band of radio frequencies for the presence of radio signals.
See Real Time Analyzer (RTA). SPL (sound pressure level) The level or intensity at a point in a sound field (loudness). The deviation above and below normal atmospheric pressure. The unit of measurement of Sound Pressure... the microbar. One microbar is equal to the sound pressure of 1 dyne per square centimeter, which is a sound level of 74 dB above the threshold of hearing (0.0002 microbar.) It is also equal to approximately one-millionth of normal atmospheric pressure. Sound pressure levels are stated in decibels as follows: Where P is the RMS sound pressure in microbars, and the reference is the threshold of hearing of 0.0002 microbars (50% of young men, 1 to 4 kHz). SPLITTER A box into which one microphone or signal is connected and has two or more individual outputs available for that signal. Used when a separate monitor mix is required.
An instrument that identifies the amplitude of signals at various frequencies.
a analyzers frequency selective power meter that our on levels source power
a device that is used to examine the waveforms of spectral composition of optical, acoustic or electrical data
a device which reads and video-displays the broadcast spectrum
a heterodyned, synthesized instrument with a tracking source
a laboratory instrument that displays signal amplitude (strength) as it varies by signal frequency
a light weight, compact and easy to use portable analyzer ideally suited for field or bench use
a light weight, compact and easy to use portable analyzer i ------------------ Your prompt reply is appreciated
a low frequency, high performance analyzer
an invaluable tool for examining the components of a signal spectrum
a receiver that automatically plots the signals in a frequency span on a display screen for analysis
a suitable instrument for this type of measurement
a tool (may be hardware of software) which shows the frequency content within a sound (or radio wave or whatever)
a tremendously helpful tool for comparing EQ curves, and there are now affordable, software-based ones
a valuable tool for evaluating fixture effectiveness, and we have a few to choose from
a versatile RF troubleshooting test instrument that can troubleshoot these problems
Device that measures the frequency components of a radio signal. It provides a visual image of how the amplitude of a radio signal varies in relation to its frequency.
an instrument used for measuring radiofrequency signal intensity and frequency. When used with a calibrated antenna, a spectrum analyzer is capable of measuring power density.
An instrument which can be used to view signals across a wide range of frequencies.
A measuring instrument capable of displaying the distribution of energy in a signal or sound. With contemporary techniques, frequency resolution can be almost whatever one wants, from 1 Hz (or many other fixed-bandwith options) to a variety of percentage-bandwidth options, such as fractional-octave displays. Most employ FFT methods, and some can display results in 'real time', others not. See: FFT, Real-Time Analyzer.
An electronic device that can show the spectrum of an electric signal.
An instrument which displays the frequency spectrum of an input signal.
An electronic device for automatically displaying the spectrum of the electromagnetic radiation from one or more devices. A cathode ray tube display is commonly used to display this power-versus frequency spectrum. [ Test Equipment Manufacturers
A spectrum analyzer is a series of vertical light bars that "dance" according to the output of different frequency bands. Digital equalizers include a spectrum analyzer on the display to give you an idea of how your response curve looks. A spectrum analyzer also adds a bit of flair to your system as it moves to the beat of the music.
A scanning receiver with a display that, among other capabilities, shows a graph of frequency versus amplitude of the signals being measured.
Electronic device that measures a particular spectrum or frequency band and displays information about that particular spectrum or band.
A spectrum analyzer is an instrument used to analyze the frequency content and characteristics of a signal.
a device that shows the energy level within each section of a given frequency band (or spectrum).
An instrument that measures the frequency spectrum of a signal. Spectrum analyzers are used over a range of frequencies, and may have different names, depending on their applications.
Instrument used to display the frequency domain of a waveform plotting amplitude against frequency.
A device that displays a frequency response curve, in real time, as the curve, changes.
A spectrum analyzer is a device used to examine the spectral composition of some electrical, acoustic, or optical waveform.