Citation and Reference is an important issue for the researchers. Proper citation helps researchers to avoid Plagiarism. ULAB Library helps researchers to use citation on their scholarly works. It provides training to the researchers on citation and reference.
What is a Citation?
Citation is a key information of quoted source which is taken from book, journal, news paper, AVM or any other publications.
A citation manager is a tool which helps you to store, organize and output your citation in the format you prefer.
What is Reference?
Reference is a list of bibliographical information of referred books or publications in a scholarly work.
What is Quotation?
Quotation is a group of words taken from a text or speech and repeated by someone other than the original author or speaker.
Why Cite Sources?
High-quality academic work is based on conscious use of key scholarly sources, and uses them to build on existing knowledge. Your references will reflect the scope of your work. They are also evidence of your integrity in using other scholar’s work. For these reasons, referencing is one of the factors that will be taken into consideration while writing thesis.
• Bibliography is the list of publications you consulted.
• Reference is the detailed description of the document from which you have obtained the information.
There are two principal components to citing references
• the way you acknowledge, cite the source in your text
• the way you list your sources at the end of your work to enable identification, i.e. the bibliography (or reference list )
A citation style dictates the information necessary for a citation and how the information is ordered, as well as punctuation and other formatting.
American Psychological Association (APA) style :
APA is an author/date based style. This means emphasis is placed on the author and the date of a piece of work to uniquely identify it.
Harvard style :
Harvard is very similar to APA. Where APA is primarily used in the USA, Harvard referencing is the most well used referencing style in the UK and Australia, and is encouraged for use with the humanities.
Modern Languages Association (MLA) style :
MLA is most often applied by the arts and humanities, particularly in the USA. It is arguably the most well used of all of the citation styles.
IEEE style :
IEEE citation style includes in-text citations, numbered in square brackets, which refer to the fullcitation listed in the reference list at the end of the paper. The reference list is organized numerically, not alphabetically.
For more styles please click here
Citation management tools
Citation management software can help organize research results and make writing papers easier by creating properly formatted bibliographies and footnotes. There are different citation management tools. The most common tools are as follows: