Grade 4 - Basic 4 Subject Set
Looking for an easy way to get started? Our Basic 4 subject sets include our recommended subject sets for the four core subjects for each grade level.
Master Books Basic 4 Bundles include teacher and student materials for 36 weeks of coursework in language arts, math, science, and history - including suggested daily schedules, instruction, student worksheets & quizzes, and answer keys.
Math Level 4:
Language Lessons 4:
101 Favorite Stories from the Bible:
America's Story 2 (Student):
America's Story 2 (Teacher Guide):
Adventures in the Scientific Method: Level 4:
The Basic 4 Subject sets include our grade appropriate, recommended solutions for math, language arts, history, and science. The Basic 4 set for grade 4 includes the following:
Math Lessons for a Living Education: Level 4
Finally, a homeschool math curriculum for the real world! Math Lessons for a Living Education 4 brings concepts to life through a Charlotte Mason flavor of engaging stories, copy work, oral narration, hands-on experience, and practical application. Equivalent to a fourth grade level.
Language Lessons for a Living Education 4
Language Lessons for a Living Education 4 is a Charlotte Mason–flavored approach to elementary language arts. Enjoy an engaging and effective language arts program for your elementary student. Students will move beyond pages of text and memorization to make real-world connections. This exciting new series will help guide your young learner toward mastery of reading, grammar, and vocabulary, as well as the mechanics of communication and writing. Utilizing observation and reading comprehension through poems, stories, and real books as the foundation, your student will continue to build paragraph writing skills.
101 Favorite Stories from the Bible
The parting of the Red Sea, David ad Goliath, Jesus and the Samaritan woman, Lazarus being raised from the dead-- these stories and many others form a solid foundation for children learning about the Bible for the first time. As children learn about their faith and hear these exciting stories, the Bible truly comes alive for them. The colorful illustrations included with each story will be loved by children of all ages and provide a solid image in children's minds to establish the reality of the stories.
America's Story 2
America’s Story 2 brings history alive through a Charlotte Mason approach as it teaches upper elementary students (grades 3-6) the amazing history of the United States of America. O’Dell’s lively storytelling brings the settings and characters to life as students study American history from the Civil War through the early 1900s.
Adventures in the Scientific Method: Level 4
Your fourth-grade level student will love exploring marine biology, chemistry and more using Adventures in the Scientific Method, Level 4 of Master Books award-winning Let’s Talk Science homeschool series. They will also learn about worldview and how important it is in how we interpret evidence! Through conversational lessons, hands-on experimentation, observation, and documentation, students encounter God’s design as they explore matter, elements, the carbon cycle, measurements, worldview, classification, the ocean, tide pools, coral reefs, algae, seagrass, and marine life.
|Title||Grade 4 - Basic 4 Subject Set|
|Publisher||New Leaf Publishing Group, Inc.|
|Weight (in lbs)||12.7|