Wydea: Science and Technology:The goal of this site is to help people understand and appreciate science and technology in the world around us. Here you'll find a collection of fun and friendly animated videos and other formats explaining topics in an easy-to-understand, interesting way. Some of the topics are "What is the Internet", "Computers, How Do They Think" and etc. (http://www.wydea.com/)
Queen Anne’s County Public Schools (QACPS) has integrated their technology standards with the voluntary state curriculum for grades 1 through 5.This is an awesome site to get a new computer teacher up and running. Contains PPP, Word documents, Excel documents, and links to interactive sites. 5 Stars!
This is a site with technology lesson plans for elementary school children. There are activities for word processing, spreadsheets and graphing, PowerPoint presentations, graphic arts, multimedia, internet research and more. (http://oakdome.com/k5/)
helps you master a skill needed in today's computer oriented world and the best part - it's FREE! KID'S TYPING SKILLS will help you learn keyboarding, or typing (as it was called when typewriters were the major method of putting words on paper). You can learn about the keyboard and which finger presses which key. Practice with keyboard drills, character drills, and word drills. Take timed tests to determine and improve your typing speed.
KID'S TYPING SKILLS
will run under Windows 7, 95, 98, 2000, Me, NT, XP or Vista. Use the link below to download KID'S TYPING SKILLS to your computer. Download the zip file to a temporary folder. After unzipping the file, run the SETUP.EXE program to install KID'S TYPING SKILLS.
This site includes Technology Integration Lesson Tools to Use; Technology Lessons for Math, Science, Social Studies, and others; Elementary Computer Lab Lessons, Computer-Technology Lessons, and Problem-based Lessons by Grade Level and Subject. (http://cmcss-tech-lessons.wikispaces.com/)
Using Microsoft Office
A Shopping Spree with spreadsheets, Toys-R-Us, and Wal-Mart. A kid's dream come true! (http://www.ncwiseowl.org/kscope/techknowpark/FreeFall/ShoppingSpree.html)
Almost Everything You Need to use spread sheets in the classroom
Technology Integration Made Easy from NC State University. Mac/PC Claris/Works/Word Files with teacher scripts and student templates. (http://www.ncsu.edu/project/middletech/lambert/TIME/)
General Resources Covering All Subjects and Grades
We’ve got educational games for kids in the following categories: Math Facts, Math Games, Language Arts, Science Songs, Animal and Nature Games, Word Games, Art and Music Games, Logic Games, Memory Games, Hand-Eye Coordination Games, Preschool Games, Keyboarding Games and Geography Games. We’ll be adding new educational games often so make sure to come back and check us out frequently.
This website provides games for students aged between 5 and 15 (year one to year 10). The interactive games provide a fun way to perhaps achieve some of the student's outcomes. Activities may be chosen by students, parents or teachers and are designed to provide an interest in maths, English, science, art and general knowledge.
BBC Schools: Educational Resources from BBC (http://www.bbc.co.uk/schools/)
BBC Schools: Words and Pictures (http://www.bbc.co.uk/schools/wordsandpictures/index.shtml). CVC, Consonant Clusters, Long Vowel Sounds, High Frequency Words, and Phonics Year 2.
Free Worksheets and Games across the curriculum
Softschools.com provides free math worksheets, math games, grammar quizzes, and phonics worksheets and games. Worksheets and games are organized by grades and topics. The printable math and phonics worksheets are auto generated. (http://www.softschools.com/). One has to put up with advertisements though.
Primary Interactive English Games and Activities http://www.woodlands-junior.kent.sch.uk/interactive/
The Math Machine:
http://www.educationworld.com/a_tech/archives/mathmachine.shtml Here in The Math Machine you will find links to more than 50 online games that will help you teach and reinforce important math skills. Search the list below for games you might use with your whole class in your school’s computer lab, or you might schedule students to use these games on computers in your classroom computer center. These games make great “reward time” activities too. Thirty-six games are described below; you will find 25 more games listed in the sidebar on this page.
50 One-stop learning activities that take 15-30 minutes each. Here are all the quick, compelling one-session activities you need to incorporate interactive learning and technology into your curriculum. Each activity requires no prep and can be completed in 15-30 minutes.
Use these 50+ activities in the computer lab.
Build excitement and discussion when you introduce a new topic.
SlimeKids, an excellent website for elementary/middle school-age kids with educational games and literacy-related resources. It's a free site that you can link to from your webpage to make it easily accessible. Here's the address:
Kids ESL Games! Free Grammar, Vocabulary, Printables, and Classroom Games for ESL Students. Kids ESL Games are devoted to providing students and teachers with free online games that practice grammar and vocabulary skills in and outside the classroom. At Kids ESL games we offer Printable Games, Classroom Game Ideas, as well as Grammar and Vocabulary Games which are great for individual self learning and group learning.
Tux Paint is a simple, free, drawing program for children (ages 3 and up). Kids are presented with a blank canvas complete with an easy-to-use interface, fun sound effects, and drawing tools to help students be creative to help them be creative.You only need to download the program and begin creating.
Drawing for Children is a free drawing program for children with many nice options. You can draw with many different pens, you can put stamps on your drawings, create all sort of text effects, and much more. The program is suitable for very young children and has a child mode especially for them. But it also provides lots of fun to older kids. It is used by hundreds of thousands of kids all over the world. The best way to see what is possible is to simply download it and install it. (http://drawing.gamemaker.nl/)
Wordle is a toy for generating “word clouds” from text that you provide. The clouds give greater prominence to words that appear more frequently in the source text. You can tweak your clouds with different fonts, layouts, and color schemes. The images you create with Wordle are yours to use however you like. You can print them out, or save them to the Wordle gallery to share with your friends. Check out the one I created for our Pat Cummings: My Story unit. (Illustrator Word Cloud)
FreeTypingGame.net is a premiere site to play free typing games, lessons, and tests. No downloads, installations, or registration required. Although very heavily splattered with advertisements. Some may not be appropriate for primary grades.
Find out how fast you can type with tests that work in your web browser and takes only a couple of minutes to complete. The students selects a time and the text to type. After the quick test, he/she will see the typing speed, accuracy, and net speed.
One typing speed test that uses capitals, punctuation, quotes, but no returns. Type changes to red when an error is made. Good quick assessment tool to use after thorough instruction is given and/or to use as a precursor for a student's beginning keyboarding skill.
Each field trip provides quick suggestions for using targeted Websites for teaching a specific topic. Within each area, you'll find field trips in an alphabetical list of topics. Topics covered are Reading/LA, Science, Social Studies, Math, and Technology.
How would you like to take a field trip without having to collect money, recruit chaperones, assign groups, make reservations, endure the long bus rides and crowds? Well, teachersmousepad.com offers you the "What, Why, Who, Where, and When of Virtual Field Trips.