How to Appraise the Ability of a Person
Managers can use work product to effectively appraise employees’ technical abilities that include tests and reviews. Personal attributes, such as sense of humor, loyalty and emotional maturity are subjective and more difficult to appraise. To be fair, managers should develop standard measurements of technical and personal abilities to appraise the work of all subordinates.
Review Employee Actions
Develop a list of behaviors expected of employees and use that list when conducting performance appraisals. Measuring behavior is not as subjective as determining attitudes and personal traits. For example, count the number of meetings employees are expected to attend and use attendance as a measurement of accountability. By relying on behavior markers, managers are less likely to include personal biases or judgments based on opinions in their appraisals.
Rate Performance Levels
Devise checklists that allow for managers to rate employees based on a system applicable to all staff members. Develop a rating system for required abilities that can’t easily be measured, including both technical and personal skills. For example, use a scale assigning numbers from one to five, with five being the highest possible score. Some line items might include teamwork, timeliness, contract-management skills and customer service. The ratings could augment data-driven analysis derived by statistics like the number of sales closed or the number of times an employee clocked in late.
Break Down Objectives
Rarely does one employee excel in every aspect of the job. Instead, staff members exhibit both strengths and weaknesses that should be clarified in performance appraisals. Managers should break down personal and technical skill areas and rate each separately to accurately assess each employee. For example, one employee may have exemplary attendance but need constant supervision on the job. Another may be habitually late, but work well independently and rarely require interventions at work. Separate important skills and duties and clearly define each in the performance appraisal forms given to managers.
Get Employee Input
Very often, employees get defensive or passively accept the manager’s decisions in traditional performance appraisals. Employee participation in the process provides a base for compromise and negotiation. Employees and managers should fill out identical questionnaires prior to the review and compare notes during the meeting. When they take part in the appraisal, employees feel more empowered to make appropriate changes and they take ownership of their strengths and weaknesses. Many may be surprised to learn they are harder on themselves than their managers when they compare notes, which could increase self-esteem. Common concerns are noted and agreements on how to improve are easily negotiated. Differences provide managers and employees a platform for further discussions and open communication.
Linda Ray is an award-winning journalist with more than 20 years reporting experience. She's covered business for newspapers and magazines, including the "Greenville News," "Success Magazine" and "American City Business Journals." Ray holds a journalism degree and teaches writing, career development and an FDIC course called "Money Smart."