Correlations: Mathematics (NCTM)
The National Council of Teachers of Mathematics (NCTM) content standards for school mathematics describe the mathematical
understanding, knowledge, and skills that students should acquire from
pre-kindergarten through grade 5. The five content standards encompass specific expectations in Number and Operations, Algebra, Geometry, Measurement, and Data Analysis and Probability.
The correlations below have been created to easily identify which
LevelUp resources teachers may incorporate into their mathematics learning program. Titles are chosen to provide students with
additional resources to help them understand relationships among numbers and number systems; analyze mathematical situations and structures using algebraic symbols; analyze characteristics and properties of two- and three-dimensional geometric shapes; identify appropriate tools and formulas to determine measurements; and develop and evaluate inferences and predictions that are based on data.
In the PDF attachments below, each correlation is listed by Lexile and reading
Correlations: Science (NGSS)
The Next Generation Science Standards (NGSS) correlations below have been created to easily identify which LevelUp resources teachers may incorporate into their science program. Each list is organized to provide material for teachers to connect the ...
Correlations: Social Studies (C3)
The College, Career, and Civic Life (C3) Framework for Social Studies State Standards is developed to emphasize the application of four core dimensions in social studies education: Civics, Economics, Geography, and History. The correlations below ...
Correlations: Social and Emotional Learning (CASEL)
The Collaborative for Academic, Social, and Emotional Learning (CASEL) framework is developed to emphasize the application of five areas of competence in social and emotional development: self-awareness, self-management, social awareness, ...
Integrating LevelUp Resources to Support Content Area Literacy
LevelUp includes over 2,400 texts that may be used within the literacy block of the instructional day. This includes hundreds of fiction and nonfiction texts that may also be used to support the content areas of math, science, social studies, social ...
For detailed information on the theoretical and practical applications of the Lexile framework, how other technologies are used to support LevelUp, and the ways in which digital resources can enhance learning environments, select from the PDFs below. ...