Arrival of the Restauration
Arrival of the Restauration
On October 9, 1825, the sloop Restauration arrived in the United States, marking what is often considered the first organized emigration from Norway to the US.
Norsemen from Greenland and Iceland were the first Europeans to reach America, led by Leif Erikson around the year 1000. They founded a settlement in present-day Newfoundland, Canada, but didn’t remain due to conflicts with the indigenous people.
Later, in the 1600s, small groups of Norwegians settled in America, particularly New York and Pennsylvania. The first large migration wouldn’t occur until 1825, however. At that time, a group of Norwegians joined together to travel to America for religious reasons. They were members of the Religious Society of Friends (Quakers) and the Haugeans.
On July 4, 1825, a group of 52 Norwegian immigrants boarded the single-masted sloop Restauration (also known as Restoration, Restaurasjonen, and Restorasjon) in Stavanger harbor. Often called the Norwegian Mayflower, it was only about half the size of that famous ship. During the three-month journey, the ship’s occupancy increased by one, with the birth of Margaret Allen Larsen.
The Restauration finally arrived in New York on October 9, 1825. Upon arrival in America, the captain was arrested for carrying 52 passengers, far too many for such a small ship. President John Quincy Adams pardoned him a month later. The passengers from the ship established their first settlement at Kendall, New York.
Over the next century, some 800,000 Norwegian settlers would follow them to North America, with the majority of them settling in the US.
The Norse-American Stamps
US #620 and its companion, #621, are known as the Norse-American stamps, honoring the arrival of Leif Erikson and the Restauration. These were among the handful of stamps produced since the 1901 Pan-Americans to feature bi-color printing, a costly and time-consuming process.
Because the stamps took so long to print, they were produced in much smaller quantities than other stamps of the day. Producing large quantities of the stamps was difficult too, because they were printed in sheets of 100, rather than 400, like most stamps at that time.
When the stamps were released, they were in great demand, with post offices around the country receiving several calls for them daily. A second printing was suggested, but was far too costly to follow through with. It has been estimated that less than 300 post offices received the stamps, with some only getting one or two sheets each, making them even more difficult to find today.
Click here to see what else happened on This Day in History.
7 responses to "Arrival of the Restauration"
7 thoughts on “Arrival of the Restauration”
Unable to rate article.
There is some debate as to the first Europeans reaching America. Was St. Brendan from Ireland the first?
A few years ago we took a cruise that tracked the Viking-founded coastal towns from Dublin to Bergen. One speaker even made the claim that Columbus was a Viking descendant. Evidence for his claim was that Columbus did not speak Italian or Spanish. He communicated in Latin.
Bay Ridge, Brooklyn was home for many years to a large Norwegian population. Although most have moved away, they still return to have the annual Norwegian Day Parade in Bay Ridge with floats, native dress and Miss Norway. It is celebrates Norwegian Constitution Day.
Like to have
You failed to mention that this was the origination of the Sven and Olly jokes…
Thank you Mr Bond, James Bond. I remember watching a television program (documentary?). And in it, it was mentioned that if you ask most any Irish school children who discovered America, they will answer: St Brendan! He would have arrived more than 100 years before Leif Ericsson. There is a structure in the State of Maine, which suggests that the Phoenicians may have arrived in North America some 3,000 years ago. Ra and Kong-Tiki Expeditions, suggest such a possibility