Two squares (A1, A2; Fig. 2) were opened. They revealed wall remains belonging to two architectural units, a northern one in Sq A1 and a southern one in Sq A2. The two units were built in two phases dated to the Roman period on the basis of the ceramic finds.
The Southern Unit
The Early Phase. A rectangular room (1) was partially exposed. Its walls (W13, W29, W31; Fig. 3) were built of basalt fieldstones and river pebbles founded on a layer of travertine. The floor of the room was made of yellowish, nearly white mortar and was set on the travertine layer as well. A small surface of small fieldstones in the southern part of the floor probably served as a work surface. Numerous pottery sherds from the Roman period were found in a deposition layer (L15) overlying the floor.
The Late Phase. The plan of the unit was altered, and two walls (W14, W18), partitioning Room 1 into two rooms (2, 3), were erected. The rooms were partly excavated. The floor of Room 2 was made of a layer of tamped earth (L28); no datable finds were found in it. A layer of brown soil (L20), which contained numerous pottery sherds from the Roman period, covered the floor. The floor of Room 3 was similar to that of Room 2, and was covered by a layer of brown soil that contained only several sherds, also from the Roman period.
The Northern Unit
The Early Phase. Remains of four rooms (4–7) were partially excavated. Their walls (W19, W21, W22, W30; Fig. 4) were built of basalt fieldstones and river pebbles founded on a layer of travertine. The floors of the rooms were made of yellowish, almost white mortar and like the walls were laid on a travertine layer. A deposition layer of brown soil (L12, L16, L23, L27) covering the floors yielded Roman-period pottery sherds.
The Late Phase. An open channel was built along an east–west axis above the tops of the unit’s walls. The channel walls (W25, W26; Fig. 5) were built of small river pebbles. The channel was sealed by a layer of brown soil (L24) that contained Roman-period pottery.
Both units were constructed atop a layer of travertine (L10), in which sherds from the Chalcolithic and Hellenistic periods were found. The ceramic finds from the Chalcolithic period included a red-slipped V-shaped bowl (Fig. 6:1), a carinated jar with an incised decoration beneath its handle (Fig. 6:2) and a lug handle of a churn (Fig. 6:3), all of which are characteristic of the Ghassulian culture. The pottery from the Hellenistic period included a fragment of a red-slipped hemispheric bowl (Fig. 6:4) that dates from the late second–early first century BCE.
The deposition layers overlying the units’ floors in both phases yielded sherds from the Roman period dating to the first and second centuries CE, among them numerous Galilean bowls that have a flat base and a grooved rim (Fig. 7:1–3), Galilean casseroles with a ledge rim, carinated body and a handle drawn from the rim to the ridge on the body (Fig. 7:4–6), a cooking pot (Fig. 7: 7) and Galilean jars with an everted rim (Fig. 7:9–12). In addition, a locally produced closed bowl dating to the second and third centuries CE was found; it is curved and has an everted rim and ribbed body (Fig. 7:8).
The excavations at Dalhamiya indicate that the site was first inhabited during the Chalcolithic period and continued to exist until the latter part of the Early Bronze Age 2. Following a long hiatus, the site was settled from the Early Roman period until the end of the Byzantine period. The excavation revealed the remains of two architectural units from the Roman period, which were probably part of a building that stood on the western fringes of Khirbat Dalhamiya. The settlement at Khirbat Dalhamiya during the Roman period was evidently small and did not extend across the entire area of the mound.