Today is essential to be able to produce electricity from so called renewable resources. Renewable power is booming as innovation brings down costs and starts to deliver on the promise of a clean energy future. Solar and wind generation are breaking records and being integrated into the national electricity grid without compromising reliability.
This means that renewables are increasingly displacing "dirty" fossil fuels in the power sector, offering the benefit of lower emissions of carbon and other types of pollution. The world's energy future is being shaped by the dual challenge of climate change and growing demand for electricity, with renewable energies set to play a crucial role in this new environment.
To became responsible for a cleaner environment means taking these realities into account by investing heavily in renewables, and particularly in solar and wind energy that they are abundant, clean, flexible, efficient and competitive. Through our manufacturing partners we are developing our positions in solar photovoltaic and wind power generation.
We supply complete installation for our industrial and commercial customers fro 500 kW to 100 MW and more. Our projects are integrated with the best products existing in the market to obtain maximum performance and with Energy Storage Systems.
Storage is quite possibly the greatest challenge currently facing the renewables industry. This means storing energy during the day and distributing it during the night or when needed.
We are convinced that optimizing energy storage is key to the expansion of renewable energies, because today it's backed by technologies that are safe and competitive, both economically and technically.
Energy Storage Systems are engineered solutions designed to match the bespoke challenges facing each business.
Energy storage systems are the set of methods and technologies used to store various forms of energy. Energy storage is particularly important for the development and integration of renewable energy technologies.
Fundamentally, countries worldwide are actively making steps towards creating more energy efficient and yet cleaner cities. As the energy industry moves away from carbon-heavy production, renewable energy and storage is being critical for delivering on the demand while securing the future of world energy and playing a prominent role in a grid that is migrating to a higher penetration of renewable energy, smarter grids, and flexible grids.
However, high penetration creates power transmission instability challenges, thus Grid Operators require stringent dynamic and static grid support features for Power Conversion Systems. For a stable transmission and distribution, the power grid operators need a real-time match between electricity supply and consumption.
For the challenge of energy stability, energy storage systems plays an important role in this balancing act and helps to create a more flexible and reliable grid system. Challenges that Energy Storage Systems can address.