Last week’s Supreme Court decision about the use of race in drawing election districts, in the case of Cooper v. Harris, will have important political consequences, especially in southern states.
The court emphatically held that except in the most extraordinary circumstances, the government cannot use race in drawing districts.
The composition of the court’s majority was unusual: it was a 5-3 decision, with Justice Elena Kagan writing for the majority, joined by Justices Clarence Thomas, Ruth Bader Ginsburg, Stephen Breyer and Sonia Sotomayor. Rarely in his 26 years on the court has Thomas joined with the liberal justices to create a majority.
The Supreme Court has decided many cases about when the government may use race in drawing election districts, and great confusion had developed in the law. In the 1990s, the court considered a number of instances where the government had used race to create more election districts where African Americans or Hispanics were a majority so as to increase political power for racial minorities. In a series of 5-4 rulings split along ideological lines, the conservatives on the court disapproved this.
Reflecting their opposition to all forms of affirmative action, the conservatives held that the government cannot use race as the predominant factor in drawing election districts unless it met a very heavy burden, showing that its action was necessary to achieve a compelling government purpose.
But in 2001, the court made the law in this area far more confusing when it held that the government may use race in drawing election districts if race is employed as a proxy for political party affiliation. In that case, the court said the North Carolina Legislature could use race as a way of identifying who was likely to vote Democratic because African Americans in that state overwhelmingly vote Democratic.
This reflects the law that partisan gerrymandering — drawing districts to maximize safe seats for the political party that controls the legislature — is permissible, while racial gerrymandering is not.
For the past 15 years, the lower courts and the Supreme Court have struggled with how to decide if race or party is responsible for drawing the election districts. It is important to keep in mind that the political context of litigation over the use of race in drawing election districts has changed greatly over the last 25 years.
In the 1990s, the litigation concerned challenges to using race to create districts where racial minorities were the majority to increase the likelihood of electing minority representatives. Liberals favored this and the conservative majority of the court disapproved.
The cases now, like the one decided last week concerning North Carolina and one last year involving Alabama, involve the use of race to achieve partisan gerrymandering that benefits Republicans, such as by packing African Americans into fewer election districts.
Cooper v. Harris involved two congressional districts in North Carolina. Both were drawn to create an African American majority. In one of these, the state argued that it looked to race as a proxy for political party, that it was engaged in permissible partisan gerrymandering seeking to maximize congressional seats for Republicans.
Kagan wrote that race cannot be used in drawing election districts even if the goal is giving an advantage to the incumbent party. The court declared: “In other words, the sorting of voters on the grounds of their race remains suspect even if race is meant to function as a proxy for other (including political) characteristics.”
This is a very significant change in the law; no longer can racial gerrymandering be justified on the grounds that it is done as a proxy for political party affiliation. No longer do courts need to engage in the impossible inquiry of whether it is race or party that caused the legislature to draw election districts because those two considerations are often intertwined, given that African Americans overwhelmingly vote Democratic.
It is striking that the conservative justices who usually condemn government decisions based on race — John Roberts, Anthony Kennedy and Samuel Alito — were willing to allow this here. Apparently, their usual opposition lessens when it is the use of race in districting to help the Republican party. But Thomas, a fierce opponent of the government’s use of race in decision-making in all circumstances, joined with the liberals to create the majority.
This decision is going to matter enormously in voting litigation. In many states, especially in the South, legislatures used race in drawing election districts and justified this by saying that they were acting to help the political party that was in the majority: Republicans. Racial minorities were the losers in their political strength.
But the court’s decision in Cooper v. Harris means that no longer is this an excuse for using race as the predominant factor in districting. The court’s ruling will provide a constitutional basis for challenging districting in many states and should create a much fairer election process.
Erwin Chemerinsky is dean of the UC Irvine School of Law.