The origin of the name Tamar is Hebrew
This is how Tamar is written in Hebrew:
תָּמָר = Tamar
The biblical meaning of the name Tamar is palm-tree.
Tamar was the daughter of David by Maacah, sister of Absalom, and rape victim of Amnon her half brother, another son of David. also was the widow of Er, the son of Judah; fiancee of Shelah, another son of Judah; wife of Judah and mother of Pharez and Zerah. The daughter of Absalom was also Tamar, Tamar is also a place on the southern border of Gad
The name Tamar appears in the bible in the following verses:
Genesis 38:6 KJV
And Judah took a wife for Er his firstborn, whose name was Tamar.
Genesis 38:11 KJV
Then said Judah to Tamar his daughter in law, Remain a widow at thy father’s house, till Shelah my son be grown: for he said, Lest peradventure he die also, as his brethren did. And Tamar went and dwelt in her father’s house.
Genesis 38:13 KJV
And it was told Tamar, saying, Behold thy father in law goeth up to Timnath to shear his sheep.
Genesis 38:24 KJV
And it came to pass about three months after, that it was told Judah, saying, Tamar thy daughter in law hath played the harlot; and also, behold, she is with child by whoredom. And Judah said, Bring her forth, and let her be burnt.
Ruth 4:12 KJV
And let thy house be like the house of Pharez, whom Tamar bare unto Judah, of the seed which the LORD shall give thee of this young woman.
2 Samuel 13:1 KJV
And it came to pass after this, that Absalom the son of David had a fair sister, whose name was Tamar; and Amnon the son of David loved her.
2 Samuel 13:2 KJV
And Amnon was so vexed, that he fell sick for his sister Tamar; for she was a virgin; and Amnon thought it hard for him to do any thing to her.
2 Samuel 13:4 KJV
And he said unto him, Why art thou, being the king’s son, lean from day to day? wilt thou not tell me? And Amnon said unto him, I love Tamar, my brother Absalom’s sister.
2 Samuel 13:5 KJV
And Jonadab said unto him, Lay thee down on thy bed, and make thyself sick: and when thy father cometh to see thee, say unto him, I pray thee, let my sister Tamar come, and give me meat, and dress the meat in my sight, that I may see it, and eat it at her hand.
2 Samuel 13:6 KJV
So Amnon lay down, and made himself sick: and when the king was come to see him, Amnon said unto the king, I pray thee, let Tamar my sister come, and make me a couple of cakes in my sight, that I may eat at her hand.
2 Samuel 13:7 KJV
Then David sent home to Tamar, saying, Go now to thy brother Amnon’s house, and dress him meat.
2 Samuel 13:8 KJV
So Tamar went to her brother Amnon’s house; and he was laid down. And she took flour, and kneaded it, and made cakes in his sight, and did bake the cakes.
2 Samuel 13:10 KJV
And Amnon said unto Tamar, Bring the meat into the chamber, that I may eat of thine hand. And Tamar took the cakes which she had made, and brought them into the chamber to Amnon her brother.
2 Samuel 13:19 KJV
And Tamar put ashes on her head, and rent her garment of divers colours that was on her, and laid her hand on her head, and went on crying.
2 Samuel 13:20 KJV
And Absalom her brother said unto her, Hath Amnon thy brother been with thee? but hold now thy peace, my sister: he is thy brother; regard not this thing. So Tamar remained desolate in her brother Absalom’s house.
2 Samuel 13:22 KJV
And Absalom spake unto his brother Amnon neither good nor bad: for Absalom hated Amnon, because he had forced his sister Tamar.
2 Samuel 13:32 KJV
And Jonadab, the son of Shimeah David’s brother, answered and said, Let not my lord suppose that they have slain all the young men the king’s sons; for Amnon only is dead: for by the appointment of Absalom this hath been determined from the day that he forced his sister Tamar.
2 Samuel 14:27 KJV
And unto Absalom there were born three sons, and one daughter, whose name was Tamar: she was a woman of a fair countenance.
1 Chronicles 2:4 KJV
And Tamar his daughter in law bare him Pharez and Zerah. All the sons of Judah were five.
1 Chronicles 3:9 KJV
These were all the sons of David, beside the sons of the concubines, and Tamar their sister.
Ezekiel 47:19 KJV
And the south side southward, from Tamar even to the waters of strife in Kadesh, the river to the great sea. And this is the south side southward.
Ezekiel 48:28 KJV
And by the border of Gad, at the south side southward, the border shall be even from Tamar unto the waters of strife in Kadesh, and to the river toward the great sea.