Which dynasty built the Sun temple at Modhera?
the Chaulukya dynasty
The Sun Temple is a Hindu temple dedicated to the solar deity Surya located at Modhera village of Mehsana district, Gujarat, India. It is situated on the bank of the river Pushpavati. It was built after 1026-27 CE during the reign of Bhima I of the Chaulukya dynasty.
Who built the Sun temple at Modhera Why?
Synopsis. The Modhera Sun Temple was made by King Bhima I of the Chalukya dynasty in the early 11th century. It is a temple made to honour the Sun God in Modhera village of Mehsana district on the bank of River Pushpavati.
How many steps are there in Surya Kund in Modhera?
It is believed that originally, there were 108 temples on the steps. How many remains today I really do not know. But these small temples on the Kund look extremely beautiful and pleasing to the eyes.
What is the Speciality of the Sun temple of Modhera?
The Modhera Sun Temple, located in Gujarat, is dedicated to the Sun-God, or ‘Surya. ‘ It is an architectural achievement maintained by the Archaeological Survey of India (ASI). With its intricate carvings and the splendid rectangular step-well, Surya Kund, the structure is beyond grand.
Who built Sun Temple?
Bishu MaharanaKonark Sun Temple / Architect
How old is Modhera Sun Temple?
996Modhera Sun Temple / Age (c. 1026)
Who made the Sun Temple?
How old is modhera Sun Temple?
Which is the oldest Sun Temple in India?
Konark Sun Temple
Konark Sun Temple at Konark, Odisha, built by Emperor Narasingha Deva I (1238–1264 CE) of the Eastern Ganga dynasty, it is now a World Heritage Site.
Why was Sun Temple built?
The temple was built by King Narsimha Deva of the Ganga Dynasty in 1250 AD, to mark his victory over the Muslim invaders.
How to reach Sun Temple Modhera?
Sun Temple ModheraSun Temple at Modhera is one of the few shrines that are dedicated to the Sun God. Situated on the banks of Pushpavati River in Modhera, Sun Temple is easily accessible from Ahmedabad, the largest city of Gujarat. The nearest station to Modhera is located at Ahmedabad, which lies at a distance of 102 kms.
What is the history of Modhera temple?
In 1026, the temple was built by King Bhimdev of the Solanki dynasty (believed to be the descendants of the lineage of Sun God). This ancient temple revives the reminiscences of Sun Temple at Konark in Orissa. Turning in the pages of history, one can notice the mention of Modhera in the scriptures like Skanda Purana and Brahma Purana.
Where is sun temple situated in Gujarat?
The Sun Temple is a Hindu temple dedicated to the solar deity Surya located at Modhera village of Mehsana district, Gujarat, India. It is situated on the bank of the river Pushpavati.
What is the style of construction of Gudhamandapa temple?
The temple complex is built in Māru-Gurjara style (Chaulukya style). The temple complex has three axially aligned components; the shrine proper ( garbhagriha) in a hall ( gudhamandapa ), the outer or assembly hall ( sabhamandapa or rangamandapa) and a sacred reservoir ( kunda ).