Radicalization of young people online and toxicity in gaming/online communities
How and why are a lot of young people getting influenced by alt right and extreme radically conservative political groups online and getting exposed to toxicity in gaming (and how gaming and extreme political takes have any connection), and if there is a way to solve this. Use sources please (5+), also i watched some good youtube videos on this topic, you should watch these for background info, but doesnt need to be a source – https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=P55t6eryY3g – https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=o13Yi9pZ3Hg – https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4LqZdkkBDas If you dont know what to put for a certain question just put whatever you think is best. Heres the assignment guide.
Classical Method Reframed for Dimensions of Citizenship Introduction
(Exordium) – (Scope of past, present, and future; framing the content/topic and tone; some ethnography)Citizens and Membership
1.What statistics from any source and relevant personal story from your ethnography interview can you use as attention grabbers? (Start with the statistic to cast a wider net. Then, narrow the focus with relevant personal story. Keep the focus narrow by addressing the following questions.)
2.What does it mean to be a citizen/community member of the community you arechoosing to focus on?
3.Who does this community lean on?
4.Who leans on this community?
5.How might audiences within and outside of the community respond to shifting ideas of/practices within the community? In other words, how might audienceswithin and outside of the community respond to change within the community?
6.How are you related to the community? (You must have some kind of relationship to the community, or you can not write about the community.)
7.What relationship do you have to the community issue you are focusing on, and what makes you a valuable source to frame it’s remedy?
8.How can you clarify why the issue is important?
Statement of Case (Narratio) – (past; the history lesson; context; some ethnography)Governance, Affinity, and Circumstance
1.What have the traditional views of citizenship/membership been, and who were the gatekeepers of that membership?
2.What are the modern views of citizenship/membership, and who are the gatekeepers of that membership?
3.How is power distributed among the community?
4.What is the community known for?
5.How does the community support its members?
6.How does the community oppress and/or police its members?
7.How does the community treat people from outside of their community?
8.How does the community coexist in relation to other communities?
9.Is the community a perfect living realization of individual community members values and beliefs? How do you know?*
10.Is the community a perfect living realization of its collective values and beliefs?How do you know?*
11.Using any of your interviews, what are community members saying the community’s impact is in the world?*
12.Using any of your interviews, what are community members saying thecommunity is embodying?*
13.Using any of your interviews, what are community members saying about wherethey think the community could grow?*
(*=adapted from Assessment Fractal in Emergent Strategy by Adrienne Marie Brown)
Proposition (Propositio) – (present and a nod to the future; the proposal ofchange/action; thesis)
Disruption and Transformation
1.What kind of disruption of old structures is needed to address the community issue in focus?
2.How is the seriousness of what is at stake exhibited by community members?
3.How is the seriousness of what is at stake exhibited by people from outside of the community
4.How should the transformation of old structures be executed?
5.How can the community go about an exchange of needs during the transformation, as opposed to a person’s needs being achieved at the expenseof another’s needs (the aim is to set up Rogerian elements)?
Refutation (Refutatio) – (a nod to the past and present; some ethnography)
In Plain Sight
1.What popular images of the community exist that you can defy? (Think of this like a television special that says something along the lines of “Apple pie and countyfairs—this quaint little town seemed perfect. However, if one were to look closer,they would see a hellish tint to each pie—one that would haunt the town for many years thereafter.)
2.What cliche notions about where the community exists can you dispel?
3.Narrowing the focus, what is a counterargument to your thesis?
4.What logical fallacies are present in that counterargument?
5.What does the opposition expressing that counterargument need to know to be aware of in terms causes or effects of that logical fallacy?
6.What does the opposition expressing that counterargument need to know to reap the benefits of removing themselves from that logical fallacy line of thought?
7.How can those benefits be augmented by and a support for your thesis?
8.Narrowing the focus, what is a second counterargument to your thesis?
9.What logical fallacies are present in that counterargument?
10.What does the opposition expressing that counterargument need to know to be aware of in terms causes or effects of that logical fallacy?
11.What does the opposition expressing that counterargument need to know to reapthe benefits of removing themselves from that logical fallacy line of thought?
12.How can those benefits be augmented by and a support for your thesis?
13.Narrowing the focus, what is a third counterargument to your thesis?
14.What logical fallacies are present in that counterargument?
15.What does the opposition expressing that counterargument need to know to beaware of in terms causes or effects of that logical fallacy?
16.What does the opposition expressing that counterargument need to know to reap the benefits of removing themselves from that logical fallacy line of thought?
17.How can those benefits be augmented by and a support for your thesis?
18.Overall, how can you undermine conventional boundaries of the community?(Address how to go about an exchange of needs.)
Confirmation (Confirmatio) – (present and a nod to the future; basically an English five-paragraph argumentative essay in the middle of this research essay; may use ethnography sources in addition to five peer-reviewed academic sources) (dont worry about this peer review stuff)
Architecture of Belonging
1.What is the focus/topic that you will develop and support a case on?
2.What is the hidden obvious?
3.What framework will you propose for remedying the community issue?
4.What five academic sources support your remedy imaginings?
5.Do different stakeholders in the community have different roles in remedying the community issue?
6.How achievable is the remedy?We will talk about how to develop this section more during our lab days.
Digression (Digressio) – (future; narration is the main rhetorical pattern; mixture of fact and fiction that combine technical and geopolitical histories, mythologies, and imminent technologies with reflections on and projections beyond contemporary conditions
1.What would the community look like if the remedy is not implemented?
a.What would be the sites of exclusion?
b.What would be the sites of expulsion?
c.What would be the sites of refuge?
d.What would be the sites of resistance?
2.What could the community look like if the remedy is implemented?
a.What would be the sites of sanctuary?
b.How might life become more utopian?
Conclusion (Peroratio) – Civitas
1.If public space is constructed by public actions, what should any community’s actions be?
2.How can we as citizens be more than we are alone?
3.How can we as collective individuals be more than we are alone?
4.What’s the main takeaway from your exordium section?
5.What’s the main takeaway from your statement of case section?
6.What’s the main takeaway from your proposition section?
7.What’s the main takeaway from your refutation section?
8.What’s the main takeaway from your confirmation section?
9.What’s the main takeaway from your digression section?
10.Above all, what is the main takeaway from your entire research essay?
11.What is the most immediate call-to-action for the audience/readers, and/or what could they do to increase decentralized strength in the community?
Top-quality papers guaranteed
100% original papers
We sell only unique pieces of writing completed according to your demands.
We use security encryption to keep your personal data protected.
We can give your money back if something goes wrong with your order.
Get free features with our reliable essay writing service
We offer you a free title page tailored according to the specifics of your particular style.
Include your preferred formatting style when you order from us to accompany your paper.
Get a list of references to go with your ordered paper.
24/7 support assistance
Reach out to our support agents anytime for free assistance.
Calculate how much your essay costs
What we are popular for
- English 101
- Business Studies