Electric guitar is a popular string instrument. It has steel cored strings which can be made louder with the aid of amplifiers and speakers. Mostly these guitars have six strings but sometimes guitars having more than six strings are also manufactured. They accompany a variety of music genres like rock, pop, jazz etc.
Acoustic guitar employs acoustic methods to project the melodies or sounds produced by it. Electronic amplification is required to make the sounds of acoustic guitar audible.
It is another string instrument played with the aid of a bow. Violin produces enchanting melodies that accompany a variety of music genres.
Another famous musical instrument of modern India is harp. The components of harp include strings and resonator. Harps come in a variety of sizes and its strings are made of a variety of materials like nylon, gut, wire or silk. Harps accompany both folk as well as Indian classical music.
Piano is one of the most melodious musical instruments, which is played with the help of a keyboard. It is widely used along with Western music in solo as well as group performances. It is also useful in composing music and rehearsing them. Piano is a versatile instrument that is played along with a variety of music. Often it is categorized in both stringed and percussion instrument.
Drum is a percussion instrument. It is enlisted among the most ancient instruments of the world and the fundamental design of the drums has remained unchanged since ages. Drums are tuned according to various pitches and often, a group of drums are played together.
Conga is another percussion instrument. It is similar to a drum having a tall, narrow and single headed structure. Originally Congas were made with salvaged barrels but now a variety of materials are employed to manufacture them. Conga accompanies different forms of music providing great rhythms.
Bongo comprises of two small drums and is categorized as percussion instruments. Two drums are of different sizes out of which the smaller one is called macho and the bigger one is called hembra.
Saxophone is a musical instrument belonging to woodwind family. It is played with the help of a single reed mouth piece resembling a clarinet and is usually made up of brass.
Trumpet is also an ancient musical instrument that is still prevalent in the modern India. The origin of trumpet dates back to 1500 BC. It is made of brass and is used for accompaniment in different forms of music such as classical, jazz etc.
Other Musical Instruments of Modern India
In addition to these, other Musical Instruments of Modern India includes Keyboards, Djembe, Clarinet, French horn, Silver flute, Pan Flute, Darbuka etc.
Musical Instruments of Modern India attained their present forms after undergoing through various transformations. Many ancient instruments have been changed and modernized to augment their effect, sounds and melodies. These instruments are an integral part of the cultural heritage of India.
(Last Updated on : 17-04-2014)
|More Articles in Indian Musical Instruments (150)|