What is the pectoral region?
What is the pectoral region?
The pectoral region is the anterior region of the upper chest where there are four thoracoappendicular muscles (also known as the pectoral muscles): pectoralis major. pectoralis minor. subclavius. serratus anterior.
Where is the pectoralis located?
The pectoralis major is the superior most and largest muscle of the anterior chest wall. It is a thick, fan-shaped muscle that lies underneath the breast tissue and forms the anterior wall of the axilla.
Is the breast in the pectoral region?
The major portion of the human breast or mammary gland is embedded in the superficial fascia of the pectoral region. Thus, it lies superficial to the pectoralis major muscle and fascia.
Is the breast part of the pectoral region?
Where may breast tissue be found? Breast tissue may be found anywhere along the mammary or milk line from axilla to groin, but usually in the pectoral region between the clavicle, sternum, costal margin and axilla.
What is the function of pectoralis?
The function of the pectoralis major is 3-fold and dependent on which heads of muscles are involved. With the origin fixed, the pectoralis major adducts, medially rotates, and transversely adducts arm at glenohumeral joint. It assists in extension of the arm (via the sternocostal head) at the glenohumeral joint.
What does the pectoral muscle look like?
The major muscle in the chest is the pectoralis major. This large fan-shaped muscle stretches from the armpit up to the collarbone and down across the lower chest region on both sides of the chest. The two sides connect at the sternum, or breastbone.
What is the area under breasts called?
In human anatomy, the inframammary fold (IMF), inframammary crease or inframammary line is the natural lower boundary of the breast, the place where the breast and the chest meet. The choice of the term depends on the prominence of the feature. It is also sometimes called the inframammary ligament.
What are the 3 pectoral muscles?
If you’re a gym lover, you’ll hear these muscles also being referred to as the pecs muscles. The pectoralis major has a broad origin, based on which it is divided into three parts: clavicular part, sternocostal part and abdominal part.
What muscle is under your breast?
Underneath the breasts there is fibrous tissue and muscle. The pectoral muscle passes underneath the breast and connects the chest and the arm. Lying further below the pectoral muscle are the ribs which are connected by intercostal muscles, which raise and lower the rib cage when breathing in and out.
Where is a women’s pectoral muscle?
Whats the biggest part of the chest?
For starters, we have what many people confuse as being the upper and lower chest: the pectoralis major and pectoralis minor (aka “the pecs”). They are in fact NOT fancy words for upper and lower. Instead, the pectoralis major is the big fan shaped muscle that makes up the majority of your chest musculature.
What do the pectorals do?
The pectoralis major extends across the upper part of the chest and is attached to a ridge at the rear of the humerus (the bone of the upper arm). Its major actions are adduction, or depression, of the arm (in opposition to the action of the deltoideus muscle) and rotation of the arm forward about the axis of the body.