Babies are diagnosed with intrauterine growth restriction (IUGR) if they appear to be smaller than expected. This would happen if an ultrasound indicates that the baby’s weight is below the 10th percentile for their gestational age (weeks of pregnancy). It’s also called fetal growth restriction (FGR).
What causes small fetal stomach?
It can be caused by a multiple pregnancy, placental complications, or preeclampsia. Infections in the mother may also cause IUGR, especially rubella, syphilis, toxoplasmosis, and cytomegalovirus. There may also be chromosome abnormalities or birth defects that cause a baby to fail to develop normally in the womb.
Should I be worried if my baby is measuring small?
No, there’s not necessarily anything wrong if your baby is small for dates. Babies grow at different rates and some are simply smaller than average. Measurements aren’t always accurate either. Your midwife may offer you a growth scan though, to be on the safe side.
What does it mean when abdominal circumference is small?
Source: Beinstock JL, et al. Small fetal abdominal circumference in the second trimester and subsequent low maternal plasma glucose after a glucose challenge test is associated with the delivery of a small for gestational age neonate.
What are the symptoms that baby is not growing in womb?
But a baby with FGR may have certain signs after birth, such as:
- Low birth weight.
- Low blood sugar levels.
- Lower body temperature.
- High level of red blood cells.
- Trouble fighting infections.
What do they do if baby is measuring small?
If the measurement (fundal height) is smaller than your due date indicates it should be (this is called “small for dates”), she’ll follow up with an ultrasound to pinpoint your baby’s size and weight. You may measure small because your due date (based on your last period) is wrong.
Are all IUGR babies born early?
IUGR babies are sometimes born prematurely (before 37 weeks of pregnancy). Babies with IUGR are at greater-than-normal risk for a variety of health problems before, during and after their birth.
What happens if baby is measuring small?
Some babies are small because their parents are small. But most babies who are small for gestational age have growth problems that happen during pregnancy. When the unborn baby does not get enough oxygen or nutrients during pregnancy, they don’t grow as much as normal. The condition is often suspected before birth.
Can a small fetus catch up?
Most babies born too small for their gestational age catch up over the first two or three years of life. However, in about a third, complete catch-up growth does not occur.
What causes small babies?
The most common reason why a baby is smaller than average — weighing less than 2.5kg at birth — is prematurity (being born before 37 weeks’ gestation). The earlier the baby is born, the smaller they are likely to be. This is because the baby will have had less time in the womb to grow.
What is a normal abdominal circumference?
For your best health, your waist should be less than 40 inches around for men, and less than 35 inches for women. If it’s larger than that, you may want to talk with your doctor about what your next steps are, including losing weight. You can’t spot-reduce your waist, or any other part of your body.
What happens if abdominal circumference is more?
Fetuses with larger abdominal circumferences on antenatal ultrasounds are more likely to be macrosomic with birth weight >4000 grams (OR 2.496, p < 0.0001). Increasing fetal AC is associated with the later development of gestational diabetes (OR 2.343, p=0.0023) and polyhydramnios (OR 2.938, p=0.0003).
When should a baby with IUGR be delivered?
The following are guidelines for delivering babies with IUGR: Baby has IUGR and no other complicating conditions: Baby should be delivered at 38-39 weeks.