UV rays not only have adverse effects on human beings but also destroy furniture, among other stuff in your home.
When sunlight penetrates through the windows, your carpets, wood floors, and furniture can lose their actual appearance. And with that said, do curtains block UV rays?
Curtains do block UV rays, though it depends on the fabric you choose for your windows. For instance, those proved to block the rays properly are wool, silk, nylon, and polyester. Some prevent a good proportion of the rays than others. Hence you should opt for the one matching your requirements.
Curtains are very important, and you need to know the proportion of rays they can block. In this article, I will explore everything regarding curtains and UV rays.
And with that, you’ll have a clear picture of which curtains you can have in your home.
How Much UV Does Curtains Block?
This depends on the type of curtain, though blackout materials block over 90 percent of the UV rays. These curtains are better at blocking sunlight than the other fabrics.
Most window treatments allow light to get in your house through the sides.
However, curtains are made to cover the whole window.
This, therefore, implies light will not penetrate your room. And even though your house may be darker, the curtains block harmful rays from going through the window.
Once there are no rays, your furniture will be safe, and your TV screen won’t have a glare.
How Much UV Does a Window Block?
A window blocks over 90 percent of the UV rays.
This is according to reports from the International Ultraviolet Association.
The obstruction is on windows that are made from standard glass.
The type of ultraviolet rays obstructed is known as UVB and UVC. However, only UVA passes through the window. Among the three classes of rays, UVA and UVB are linked to tanning and sunburns, and A is believed to repress the immune system.
The two are also connected to tanning beds. There is danger associated with the overuse of this type of bed. UVC is produced by sunlight and specialized lights.
The rays that get into your home and harm your skin can lead to increased sensitivity to the sun. And thus, it can cause rashes. However, nowadays, some techniques can lower the potential of UVA going through glass.
For instance, you may install a solar window film on the inner side of a window. The film blocks UVA and can keep your room cool since it reflects some of the heat.
Property owners can install most of the window films since they only need some drops of the dishwashing soap and water.
You choose to add the solar films, then assess it first. You need to do this because not every film can stop or reflect UVA light penetration.
Do Blackout Shades Block UV Rays?
Blackout shades block UV rays. By doing so, they lower the costs associated with the rays. And they do that by decreasing the amount of light and UV rays entering your room. Besides, they also protect your home from any destruction caused by the sun.
For instance, fading of your floors and furniture. This, therefore, makes all those expensive items in your house to be very reliable.
Over the past years, curtain materials for room darkening have improved.
Like the hotel curtains with plastic sensation polyester, also the soft and slightly static prone alternatives, you may use the blackout shades in spaces that get most of the light in your home.
You can pick them during the hottest times of the day. Ensure you use them in places where you do not want the light to penetrate.
Take note It can be more expensive to acquire blackout shades than non-blackout materials.
But despite this, blackout shades help you prevent unexpected aging of your house fabrics and furniture.
Do Sheer Curtains Block UV Rays?
Sheer curtains block UV rays, though it only prevents a small proportion.
Therefore you can add them to your windows because apart from giving UV protection, they also filter in the natural light. This happens in a less invasive way.
Regardless of being fairly translucent, sheer curtains can help you alter the quantity of natural light filtering in your house. Though some places like living rooms and bathrooms always require some sunlight.
Thus, you can pull back the opaque drapes or open blinds to expose those areas to the heat from the sun.
The sheer treatment provides additional control over the amount and frequency at which sun rays go through a window.
As much as it’s fascinating to have the rays stream in your room, it can cause the fading of colors much faster.
If you need to keep your painting work, carpeting, and furniture from fading or getting destroyed by the rays, then add sheers.
You can do that on windows getting plenty of sunlight.
Do Thin Curtains Block UV Rays?
Thin curtains can block UV rays, provided they are closed. Though the type of materials they are made of also matters.
The fabrics have an important role in the protection from UV rays.
Some of the best materials include synthetic silk, linen, and velvet.
What Kind of Curtains Block Sunlight?
Different curtains block sunlight. Besides, they are all unique. Here are some curtains;
Blackout curtains here on Amazon!
These curtains are a more attractive type of window treatment because they considerably decrease rays exposure. For this reason, they also reduce the cost of energy.
They also prevent close to a hundred percent sunlight from passing through your window.
If your house has these curtains, the place will feel cooler when the sun’s heat is high or during the summer.
You can get them in desirable solid colors. Also, they are made from fabrics like cotton and vinyl.
Reflective Curtains here on Amazon!
Reflective curtains are best for two reasons. Their reflective trait enables them to keep out heat. And this can help you If your residence lacks an air conditioner.
The curtains’ fabric does not absorb heat as the sun rays get reflected. Reflective curtains also prevent sunlight from penetrating your space. They are made of plastic and with the shiny side being outwards.
When it reflects sunlight, it deters it from entering your room. Since they are created out of plastic, they are resistant to fading and are also more reliable. Hence you get to save extra cash if you buy them.
Sheer Curtains here on Amazon!
They may appear like they are translucent and very thin to block UV rays from getting through your windows. However, they can only give minimal protection.
You can place the sheers in front of the heavy curtains created from vinyl, polyester, or cotton.
This will enable you to lessen UV rays, radiation, and exposure. Still, you can decide to layer them over the blinds
Layered Curtains here on Amazon!
Curtains with many layers function well as sunlight obstruction. This implies you hang over one curtain. It can be two, three, or more.
The layers will always form great protection from the light. Some thick draperies and those evening light lace curtains are an excellent combination to cover the layered curtains.
You can choose to tie the thick curtains in the twilight.
These curtains are mostly best for getting a cool breeze in hot afternoons.
Draperies with Lining
Draperies with Lining here on Amazon!
Apart from these curtains preventing light from getting into your space, they also obstruct noise. In case you have curtains without blackout fabric, a lining can be of great help.
Some curtains have a lining when you acquire them, while for others you need to buy and then stitch together.
Still, if you can not do it yourself, then you can reach out to a tailor to help you. The linings are of different sizes and lengths. And you’ll have to measure the curtains before buying them.
This is to ensure they will fit perfectly. You should ensure they match the color of your curtains.
Light Colored Curtains
Light Colored Curtains here on Amazon!
These curtains are great for the summer season.
And it is because they help prevent sunlight from getting into your room. Many people use them in their offices and houses during hot periods.
The ones they use the most are peaches, creams, and white. Sun blockers love them because they can reflect sunlight. This is unlike the heavy colored ones like blue, green, and black, which always absorb the light.
Therefore, keep in mind that the color of your curtain determines the amount of heat absorbed. The light colors block lots of heat and light compared to the heavy ones.
You now know that curtains do more than just decorating your house, right? Their operational qualities allow them to achieve all your requirements.
For this reason, you need to explore the different curtains to get one that specifically suits your home.
Hopefully, you will get the best out of the one you choose to buy!