Are you attempting to teach your Black Norwegian Elkhound to sit? The technique of sitting up is effortlessly taught to little dogs, yet larger doggies are a different story. It is challenging for them to keep their balance.
Teach Your Black Norwegian Elkhound to Sit: Preparation
Sitting up is one of the 1st tricks that should be taught to your Black Norwegian Elkhound and lays the ground work for quite a few other skills. To train a Black Norwegian Elkhound to sit up, put together some snacks as a reward, and place the Black Norwegian Elkhound on her butt in a corner, to ensure that she will not fall either backward or sideways and has very little or no room to lose balance.
Teach Your Black Norwegian Elkhound to Sit: Acquaint Her With The Phrase
Prevent her from pitching to the front by maintaining one hand under her chin and with your second hand dangle her snack above your Black Norwegian Elkhound’s nose. Keep repeating deliberately and distinctly, “sit.” Don’t make her sit too long at one time, but repeat the instruction frequently and reward her regularly with lots of appreciation and snacks.
Teach Your Black Norwegian Elkhound to Sit: Help Her Maintain Balance
During her first lesson she will need a surprising amount of help and support from you to prevent her from pitching forward, but as she gets better control of the balancing muscles and knows what you want her to do, she will rely less and less on your hand to hold her in position. Gradually, you can give her less help til you’ll only have to leave one hand in position 2 or 3 inches from her neck or chin, to be ready to stop her from falling forward; eventually you can probably withdraw the hand entirely and just suspend the snack just over the level of her face.
Teach Your Black Norwegian Elkhound To Sit: Remove the Aids Slowly
With consistent practice your Black Norwegian Elkhound will sit up for a long time after you get her to sit. Afterward she should be set up against the wall, so as to give her assistance for her back only. When she has figured out this and can maintain her posture effortlessly, practice with her up against chair legs, pillows or other things that give her less and less help. Eventually she will understand how to preserve her equilibrium and sit up without needing something to rest on.
Teach Your Black Norwegian Elkhound to Sit: Putting It All Together
During the course of all these lessons the phrase "sit up" will have been impressed upon her psyche through regular repetition. Now here's the final lesson to teach your Black Norwegian Elkhound to sit up as quickly as she hears the command. It's highly likely, if she has been diligently instructed, you will only have to get her out into the room, show her a snack, hold it up a reasonable distance from the ground, say "sit up" and she will do so. Then you give her the snack while still in position.
The only necessity for perfection is to train with her multiple times a day until she can sit up when commanded to and without being shown a reward; give her the rewards only once she has obeyed the command.
Teach Your Black Norwegian Elkhound Other Tricks
You have now the foundation for teaching your Black Norwegian Elkhound many other skills. She now can learn how to beg by waving your hand up and down in front of her paws, which she will move in rhythm with yours. She can also be taught to salute by moving one paw up to the side of her head, or to hold a toy in her mouth, or to wear a cap on her head or wear other clothes.
In training a Black Norwegian Elkhound to tolerate being dressed up, do not try to get her to wear too many garments at one time. Try at first with a hat. After she becomes accustomed to that you can put on a coat and steadily introduce her to more clothing.
Take pleasure in "teaching your Black Norwegian Elkhound the sit up trick" and most importantly have fun along the way!
Don't forget to check out these other articles about Black Norwegian Elkhounds
Was this post helpful? If so, please take a minute to Tweet and Share below on Facebook. I would also love to know your thoughts so leave me a comment 🙂