Fix Sciatic Pain Fast
In this article, I am going to show you how to relieve sciatic pain naturally without the need to take any medication. Keep reading to find out more.
In this article:
- What Is Sciatica?
- What Causes Sciatic Nerve Pain?
- What Are the Sciatic Nerve Pain Symptoms?
- My Way of Relieving Sciatic Pain Is Amazing
How to Relieve Sciatic Pain
What Is Sciatica?
Sciatica is the back pain caused by an issue with the sciatic nerve. This is a large nerve that starts from the lower back and extends to the back of the leg. In cases where you put pressure on the sciatic nerve or suffer from an injury on or near this nerve, you may feel sciatic nerve pain. This pain may start from the lower back and extend to the leg, buttock, or hips. Pregnant women are more prone to sciatica because pregnancy may put pressure on the sciatic nerve. Generally, people who are 30 to 50 years old may suffer from this condition.
What Causes Sciatic Nerve Pain?
Like many other types of health issues, sciatica has its own causes as well. Here are the causes:
1. Infection or Injury
Injuries, such as fractures, infection, and muscle inflammation in the leg area or any area that can affect the sciatic nerve, can lead to sciatica if the injury irritates or compresses the nerve.
Sacroiliitis is the swelling of one or both sacroiliac joints, the point where the lower spine meets the pelvis. This condition can cause lower back pain and may spread to the buttocks and legs. Infection, pregnancy, injury, and arthritis can cause sacroiliitis.
3. Piriformis Syndrome
Piriformis is a muscle located deep inside the buttocks, connecting the upper thigh bone and lower spine, and runs over the sciatic nerve. When this muscle experiences spasms, it may put pressure on the nerve and trigger sciatica.
4. Spinal Tumor
Tumors growing in the spine or along the spinal cord may trigger the symptoms of sciatica, but this happens in rare cases only. When the tumor gets bigger, it can put pressure on the nerves near the spine, which includes the sciatic nerve.
5. Spinal Stenosis
Spinal stenosis is the natural process of wear and tear of the vertebrae that leads to the narrowing of the spinal canal. This condition can put pressure on your sciatic nerve and then trigger sciatica. Spinal stenosis is more common in people who are 60 years old or older.
6. Herniated Disc
Disc herniation is the most common reason for developing sciatica. Your spinal discs serve as cushions for your vertebrae, and these discs get weaker as you age. When the gel-like center of the disc pushes out for some reason, this presses on the sciatic nerve roots, which triggers sciatica.
What Are the Sciatic Nerve Pain Symptoms?
Typically, people with sciatica experience lower back pain that runs to your hip, buttock, and leg. For example, you have sciatica pain on your right side. You have to realize the sciatic nerve comes from the point right through the butt, under the sciatic notch, down to the back of your hamstring all the way through your leg. If you have chronic pain on the outer side of your leg, then that is not sciatica.
Sciatic Notch Definition: A notch located in the ilium, one of the bones that comprise the pelvis. It lies between the human ischial spine and posterior inferior iliac spine.
It usually affects just a single leg and can get worse upon sitting, sneezing, or coughing. You may also feel a tingling sensation, weak, and numb with the affected leg. The symptoms may appear suddenly and can last for several days or even weeks.
My Way of Relieving Sciatic Pain Is Amazing
A lot of times, the way people treat sciatica is completely backward. If you apply what I am going to show you, it will be amazing, but you need help from another person to do this. I can also tell you how to do it alone, but it's more difficult to execute. You have the freedom to choose which way you want it and what's more convenient for you.
1. How to Relieve Sciatic Pain with Assistance
To relieve sciatica pain you feel on your right side, you have to work on the opposite side—the left leg. So what you do is press the opposite side of that nerve. You start at the same point, right through the butt under the sciatic notch, pressing on the nerve while tracing it down.
This way, you're stimulating the nerve on the opposite side where leg pain is present. Why? Because this nerve is like a circuit, curving the butt area down to your legs. This is one of the things where you don't have to believe me. Just do it because it provides pain relief.
You can do the pressing slowly all the way down to your leg. When you press on the opposite side, it's going to be very tender and maybe twice as painful as the side that hurts. You can work on pressing the nerve until the pain goes down. The important thing is to always work on the opposite side of the nerve and not the part that's actively hurting.
2. How to Relieve Sciatic Pain Alone
If you do my recommended physical therapy yourself, you're going to lay on your back, and you'll be sitting, but you need a tennis ball for this. The first thing you need to do is sit on the ball, hitting the starting point of the nerve pain, and then move slowly down to your leg while letting gravity put pressure on the point you're pressing. When you reach your calf, you can self-massage it all the way down. It may be a little difficult doing the therapy alone, but you can still do it yourself.
Learning how to relieve sciatic pain using my suggested method can free you from this pain naturally. The important thing to remember is to work on the opposite side that's not affected to completely relieve the pain. Whichever way you choose, remember to work your way slowly from your lower back down to your leg to completely eliminate the pain.
Are you experiencing sciatic nerve pain? What are your ways to treat it? Let us know in the comments section below.
- 4 Causes for Kidney Low Back Pain on Ketogenic Diet
- Fasting and Chronic Inflammation
- Fat Storing Hormone Fat Storing Hormone Resistance and Belly Fat SIMPLIFIED
Disclaimer: Our educational content is not meant or intended for medical advice or treatment.
Previous blogDr Bergs Health Coaching Training