Did you ever think about the long, tedious hours of research that has gone into our storehouse of information? Mankind started out with no instructions about how to proceed, or how animals lived, or how Earth and the universe was put together, for that matter. The caveman wasn’t even instructed how to build a fire.
We still don’t have much to go on, groping around in the cosmos trying to figure out if life ever existed on other planets, for instance, and struggling to learn just what the human being is all about.
The knowledge that we have stored in books, computers and data banks has all been acquired by diligent people striving for millions of hours to discover the details. I was thinking particularly of our knowledge of life on Earth and the life histories of animals and plants. I was reminded of the intricacies of research by a book “Return to Warden’s Grove” by Christopher Norment, a book about the study of one bird — the Harris’s Sparrow, Zonotrichia querula — and the summer field studies he did in Canada over a period of years.
The Harris’s Sparrow is the largest of the native sparrows. It winters in the Midwestern states and migrates to nesting places in the Northwest Territories completely to the edge of spruce groves where the tundra begins. It wasn’t even known where they went until some were seen near Churchill, Canada in 1900 by Edward Preble. Researcher George Sutton was the first to find a nest and see the eggs in 1931.
Author Norment details the laborious 1,600-mile journey of the Harris’s and how it ends up at the edge of spruce groves in May when snow storms can still occur. Norment and a student aide rebuilt a cabin and established themselves for two months after being transported by a bush plane, 180 miles to the closest settlement. Here they spent grueling hours finding nests and patiently observing the activity each day, despite swarming black flies and mosquitoes.
The only way to know about natural life histories is to watch, and thus the slow accumulation of data is compiled for the bank of knowledge. Wolves, bears, muskox, shrike birds, and a host of other wilderness animals all were part of this revelation game.
Norment said, “I keep returning to the fundamental question of what actually occurs in a bird’s mind when it settles in a particular spot: What mix of sensory cues leads it to chose one place over another? If I have watched and listened long enough, my intuition will allow me to do what measurements and statistical analyses will not: Develop some sense of what an animal is about and how it views the world.
“One should never underestimate the ability of an animal with a one-gram brain to do nothing other than wait — to persevere in the face of what, for this human, was utter tedium.”
For every living creature, mass amounts of study, waiting, watching, has gone into learning about their life histories.
“We stand on the shoulders of past researchers.
“To do science is to search for repeated patterns, not simply to accumulate facts. The person best equipped to do this is the naturalist who loves to note changes in bird life on a mountainside, or changes in plant life from mainland to island, or changes in butterflies from temperate to tropics. But not all naturalists want to do science and connect the lines of fragmental patterns.”
— Ecologist Robert MacArthur
Rex Burress is a retired naturalist, photographer and artist, who lives in Oroville.