Skin tumors: Ephelides and Lentigo
Called freckles, these purely pigmented spots are very common. Always multiple, they are localized on the face, partly on the neck, shoulders, outer surface of the arms, very rarely on the torso.
skin tumors surgery 2022
Called freckles, these purely pigmented spots are very common. Always multiple, they are localized on the face, partly on the neck, shoulders, outer surface of the arms, very rarely on the torso. The individual spots can be point-shaped or up to 2-3 mm in diameter. In summer and after prolonged exposure they become darker, and in winter they decrease and are temporarily erased. Blond people and some nationalities are inherent. They are a type of pigmented nevi inherited.
This is the most common pigmented nevus. It is rare to find a person without such a pigmented germ. It is more common in brunettes. It appears in the form of a rounded dark slightly raised spot 2-3 mm in size, sometimes larger, with or without single hairs on it. The lentiginosis are usually single, but can sometimes be numerous (lentiginosis profusa). When such a nevus suddenly begins to hyperpigment, become very black and enlarged, then its malignant degeneration is certain and extremely dangerous (lentiginosis maligna s. Progressiva). The formed melanoma metastasizes simultaneously to the lymphatic and bloodstream and soon metastasizes to internal organs, spinal cord, bones and other organs. The familial predisposition to such malignant degeneration is sometimes obvious.
Hemangiomas (naevi vasculosl)
Angiomas are tumors of the skin and mucous membranes in the form of tumors or spots of over-formed and dilated blood vessels.
The etiological and pathogenetic factors that determine them are not entirely clear. The theories discussed to explain the origin of various nevi apply almost entirely to angiomas.Cutaneous angiomas can be independent or combined with various neural syndromes and diseases, suffering of some internal organs and the nervous system.
Of great importance is the question of the topographic location, metamerism and systematization of some angiomas and angiomatosis, through which the central nervous, sympathetic and peripheral nervous pathogenesis stand out.
According to general statistics, about 67% of angiomas are on the head, capillary and mouth, 17% are on the limbs, 8% affect the neck and torso, and only about 1% – the genitals.
Depending on the clinical form, flat angiomas are most often located on the forehead, cheeks, nose, eyelids, ears, neck. Star angiomas are found on the cheeks, around the nose and eyelids. Tuberous angiomas affect the forehead, forearm, ribs, thighs, scalp, tongue. Cavernous angiomas are most common on the tongue, lips, mouth, inner cheeks, eyelids, genitals. Systematized angiomas and annua are most common in the trigeminal nerve (40%) and brachial plexuses (more on the outside).
The influence of gender stands out. Females have a big advantage (70%). According to the form, the most common are flat angiomas (39%) * followed by tuberous (34%), stellate (15%) and cavernous (12%). The systematized ones account for 57%, and the non-systematized ones about-43%.
In addition to some neural diseases and syndromes, liver disease, senile degeneration, angiomas occur in some common dystrophies and degenerations (cretinism. Idiocy) and are combined with dental, skin, nail anomalies and dystrophies, as well as changes in the eyes.
Haemangionia planum Flat hemangiomas are characterized by telangiectasic spots at the level of the skin, ranging in size from small dots to large plaques. Sometimes they are systematized, metamerically located and cover mainly the outer sides of the limbs.
Naevus flammeus. It is a spot of different size and shape, formed by numerous capillaries in the surface layers of the dermis. His tone changes depending on the cold, heat, mental disorders, mechanical and other irritations. The most common location is on the face, forehead, ears, but can be found anywhere singular or plural. It is sometimes combined with tuberous or hypertrophic hemangiomas and some essential telangiectasias. It usually appears in the first weeks after birth and then tends to decrease with age. Those who appeared later may remain or expand.
Naevus anemicus. It is a kind of vascular capillary dysembryoplasia, expressed by one or more collected spots with a pale anemic tinge, most often localized on the chest unilaterally in the periclavicular area. In mechanical friction and irritation, the contrast between these spots and the violent vasomotor reaction of the surrounding capillaries is clearly manifested. It is not so much about quantitative capillary changes as it is about vasoconstriction and reduced blood circulation.
Hello our dear visitor. Welcome to the largest ongoing health tourism site in Turkey. Do not make any attempt to benefit from any health service in Turkey without consulting us.
You can write to firstname.lastname@example.org for any questions you may have.