You should spend about 40 minutes on IELTS writing task 2.
More and more people are migrating to cities in search of a better life, but city life can be extremely difficult. Explain some of the difficulties of living in a city. How can governments make urban life better for everyone?
Give specific reason and explain them with examples from your own experience or knowledge.
You should write at least 250 words in IELTS writing task 2.
Topic : Living
Type : Double questions
A town provides many amenities and opportunities that are not within a rural region, but not with a price tag. Pollutions, frenzied contest, higher cost and not as personal attachment among individuals often make cities hard to reside in. The government has a great deal to do to enhance the life span of the town dwellers.
The overwhelming cost is the principal issue for anybody who goes to a town in the metropolitan area or a small city. The expense of schooling, treatment, home rent, food and everyday commodities are much higher in a town. Pollution in towns is the 2nd most acute issue, and it creates metropolitan areas less acceptable for kids to develop. Another disadvantage of living in a town is that the social classification and difference between rich and poor. Social discriminations in town areas are much higher than the different areas of the nation.
Additionally, people in small cities and towns have fantastic bonding, and they understand each other well, which can be quite the reverse in a town. Someone must compete to acquire in a public auto, await his turn to satisfy with the physician, wait a few hours in the traffic jam and then struggle very tough to have an excellent job. The contest is so large that a kid has to go through a difficult fight to be approved in a college.
I think there are lots of measures that a government may take to handle these difficulties. First, the authorities should control the costs of everyday commodities and construct more high climbing buildings to decrease the home lease. More people buses with more fabulous amenities must be introduced to decrease traffic jam. Decentralisation and the maturation of the provincial cities will allow the government to change many businesses to those areas and so lower the strain on the towns and metropolitan locations.
In summary, the government must take initiatives to enhance town people’s living standard and ensure rural regions and towns have lots of job opportunities to decrease the pressure on towns.
Read more related post :
- IELTS Writing Task 2 : Your first impressions when you meet someone are always right
- IELTS Writing Task 2: International sporting events contribute greatly to peace