Why Having Strong Core Muscles is More Important Than Abs
Did you know that your core muscles are responsible for even some of the most mundane tasks of daily living? Find out how you can strengthen them here.
Your core muscles are the central link in a chain connecting your upper and lower body. It doesn’t matter if you’re mopping the floor, hitting a tennis ball, or bending to tie your shoelaces. The necessary motions you make either originate in your core or move through it. According to Harvard Health, having weak or inflexible core muscles can impact how well your legs and arms function! So, if you’re looking to strengthen your core, you’ve come to the right place. Know that this is more important than building rippling abs.
The Benefits of Strong Core Muscles
It’s not just athletes who can benefit from a strong core—anyone can! A strong and flexible core supports almost everything you do. It spares the spine from excessive load and transfers force from the lower body to the upper body, and vice versa.
It makes it possible to do simple and everyday acts.
Basic activities of daily living like bathing and dressing require some core strength. Sitting in your chair, standing still, and turning to look behind you are mundane actions that rely on your core as well.
It prevents back pain.
Harvard Health wrote that 4 out of 5 Americans suffer from lower back pain at some point in their lives. This can be prevented by doing exercises for abs to promote resilient core muscles. Having a strong core shifts some of the weight off your lower back.
It improves balance, stability, and posture.
Your core stabilizes your whole body—allowing you to move in any direction and lessen your risk of falling. Having weak core muscles contributes to slouching. But good posture supported by a strong core lessens the wear and tear on your spine, letting you breathe deeply. It also helps you maximize the full benefits of your exercises too.
Exercises to Help Build a Strong Core
Instead of developing washboard abs, aim your efforts to build a stronger core instead. These basic exercises for core strengthening can help! You to do them either.
10 abdominal chair crunches
Doing abdominal chair crunches increases core and back strength, which helps improve your posture.
To do this exercise, lie on your back with your legs comfortably resting on a chair. Put your fingers behind your head and lift your chin up. Tighten your abdominal muscles and use these muscles to raise your shoulders off the floor. Slowly lower yourself back to the starting position and repeat.
Hold a bridge pose for 10 seconds and repeat
In , the bridge pose offers many benefits aside from core strengthening. It stretches the spine, back of the neck, and thighs. It also stimulates your abdominal organs and thyroid glands, improvising digestion and .
Lie on your back with your legs bent to a 90-degree angle and your feet flat on the floor. Lift your hips and back toward the ceiling until the thighs are about parallel to the floor. Make sure your body is parallel to your shoulders and knees. Hold this position for 5 to 10 seconds before lowering to the floor. Repeat 10 times.
Lower to a plank and hold for 30 seconds
Planks help strengthen the skeletal system and even how you breathe. It’s also considered one of the best core exercises that can improve your flexibility. Start by kneeling on the back of your mat with your toes tucked and your butt resting on your heels. Walk hands forward to an all-fours position with knees under your hips and wrists under your shoulders. Lift your knees to form a straight line from your heels to your head. Keep your hips high and your abs engaged as you hold this pose for 30 seconds. Repeat 2 to 3 more times.
Stay sweat- and odor-free while doing these core exercises by using Rexona Natural Brightening Fresh Sakura Roll-on. Formulated with MotionSense Technology, it keeps you fresh for up to 48 hours.
After putting in the work, don’t forget to treat yourself to a . Reward yourself with Dove Care & Protect, which marries antibacterial features with Dove’s signature ¼ moisturizing cream, as well as Love Beauty and Planet Hope and Repair Shampoo, which has coconut oil to revive dull locks and boost its natural radiance.
Having strong core muscles allows you to do any movement you want with confidence. Developing abs over time with the exercises above is just a big bonus!