Cranbury School students are teaching each other first hand about the meaning of respect.
Eighth grade students are leading these efforts during a “Week of Respect” that began on Oct. 1 and will continue through Oct. 7.
The eighth graders, who are serving as peer leaders, are presenting lessons on the importance of respect for students in kindergarten through fifth grade.
“The ‘Week of Respect’ is a symbolic reminder of the value that our school community places on maintaining a positive school culture and climate,” said Susan Genco, principal of the Cranbury School.
According to school officials, the peer leaders will be reading the book “The Crayon Box That Talked,” by Shane DeRolf to kindergarten through second grade students. The overall message of the book is about cooperation.
Students in the classes will have a discussion about the value of respect and then afterward have the opportunity to color in their very own crayon which will be displayed on the “Respect Week” bulletin board.
According to officials, the peer leaders will be teaching their lessons during the morning meeting, lunch and recess periods.
The eighth grade peer leaders will also be working with third through fifth grade students where they will read “What Should Danny Do?” by Ganit and Adir Levy.
This book teaches students how people have the power to choose. The book discusses the importance of how an individual’s choices can affect themselves and others. The book is interactive by allowing readers to decide what the character should do next.
Students then have a class discussion about people’s power to choose and how to do so respectfully.
During this week, students will also be able to take a pledge of respect during their lunch periods.
Students will have the chance to sign their name on one of the letters that make up the word “Respect,” which will be on display.
Each day has a theme as well, where students come to school dressed up as that theme or color.
For example, on Oct. 1 students could have worn pajamas or sweatpants or on Oct. 3, student’s could have worn their favorite sports team’s jersey or color.
“I hope our students appreciate the diversity of perspectives and identities in our student body and community and know that each of them has the power to make a difference,” Genco said.