Great Spring Crops To Grow in a Greenhouse
Gardening is a great way to get some fresh air and enjoy the fruits (and vegetables) of your hard work. With spring right around the corner, now is the time to start considering some of the crops you want to grow this season. Depending on the climate of your area, some crops may do better in an indoor environment where you have more control over the temperature and humidity. If you have the facilities for it, here are some great spring crops to grow in a greenhouse.
Depending on where you live, tomatoes may be one of the harder crops to grow due to their peculiar structure and reaction to temperature changes. However, tomatoes generally thrive in greenhouses. You want to make sure that they get enough sunlight and that you plant them in nutrient-rich soil. Also, stay on top of their need for water, especially as you get further into the growing season.
Honeydew melons grow well in a greenhouse, or they’re great for shipping container farms. Melons grow best when you plant them in small mounds with a moat-like surrounding area. Honeydew melons should have about three feet of space, so create your mounds with adequate space for them to grow.
Bell Peppers are a great spring crop to grow in a greenhouse because you can use the controlled temperature to keep them safe. Many species of peppers struggle with the colder temps, so an unfortunate cold front during an otherwise pleasant spring may undo all your hard work. Use an indoor planting area to help maintain a warm climate for them, and you can have delicious peppers throughout the season.
Onions are strong, hearty vegetables that grow well indoors and outdoors. However, one of the main reasons why onions are good vegetables for greenhouses is because they require a steadier stream of water. And it’s easier to set up a system for them in a controlled environment. Even though onions can typically come back from a minor drought, it helps to feed a consistent supply of water to your bulbs.
Beans work best in a controlled interior environment because they grow along vines and require stakes or trellises to climb. However, unlike many other crops, beans are unlikely to survive transportation, so it’s best to maintain a stable environment for them during their entire growth period.
Other articles you may enjoy
Best Plants for Beginning Growers
Top Soil Vs Compost