Philodendron ‘prince of orange’
There is a huge variety of philodendrons, at What The Flower we are big fans of the Araceae and philodendrons in particular!
There's something for everyone: Philodendron 'pink princess' with pink speckled leaves, 'prince of orange' with its beautiful yellow, orange and red shades, 'gloriosum' with its huge, velvety green leaves...
Philodendrons can be found in different parts of the world, mostly in Asia and South America, in tropical forests. There are about 700 species.
Philodendrons come in an incredible variety of leaf shapes and colours.
As with the Monstera deliciosa, in the wild, the majority of philodendrons climb trees using their aerial roots, although some are a horizontally creeping port on the ground surface like the Philodendron gloriosum .
The name Philodendron comes from the Greek word phileo, meaning "to love" and dendron meaning "tree".
The Philodendron 'prince of orange' takes its name from its beautiful foliage with unique shades that change colour over time.
The youngest leaves are yellow, then change to coppery orange tones and finally to more or less darker shades of green.
This beautiful hybrid develops very similarly to a Congo Philodendron.
The Prince of Orange appreciates a bright location, out of direct sunlight. In terms of substrate, like many Philodendrons, he will appreciate a mixture of 50% white peat, 40% coconut fibre bark and 10% perlite.
For watering keep the substrate always fresh by letting it dry slightly on the surface and do not hesitate to mist it regularly or to install a humidifier nearby.
The Philodendron prince of orange, like many araceae, is made of a crystal called calcium oxalate. These crystals accumulate in all parts of the plant.
If any part is ingested, it causes mild to severe symptoms depending on the amount taken. Be sure to keep the plant out of the reach of children and pets.
- Choosing a selection results in a full page refresh.
- Press the space key then arrow keys to make a selection.
- Use left/right arrows to navigate the slideshow or swipe left/right if using a mobile device