Literature Review/Policy Analysis
Part 1: Selecting a topic. Will be reviewed in the first class. (module 1-due 7.5.2020)
Part 2: Literature review- understanding the issue. (assigned module 1; reviewed in module 2; due module 6- 8.8.2020)
The literature review as an advocate is imperative to understand an issue from multiple perspectives. How can you advocate for a topic if you do not truly understand it? How can you persuade others or create change if you do not truly understand it?
For the literature review 8 peer-reviewed articles are required to be synthesized in a 6-8 page paper (this is suggested page length and does not include the title page or references page). The paper should do the following:
1) Make sure all your articles are peer-reviewed. (watch announcement video from week 3 on this) Make sure you have 8-15 articles and you have read all your articles. Outline the main themes of your articles and form an outline.
(2) You now have an outline that you want to start weaving together your research articles in to.
Tips for writing a literature review:
Title page (in APA style; see how to do this on Purdue Owl)
Introduction: write a 2-4 sentences introducing the problem, trend or need.
Theme 1: cite multiple sources (2-3 paragraphs; length will vary for each theme. If you can only find one article that talks about a theme, then it is probably not a theme. At this point I would suggest broadening the theme).
Theme 2: cite multiple sources
Theme 3: cite multiple sources
(theme 4 if needed)
Opposing side of the issue: see if you can find research that looks at the other side of the issue or maybe reasons the issue (problem) exists.
Conclusion: write 4-6 sentences wrapping up your literature. In this section you can suggest areas of need for future research (gaps in the research) or limitations that you have witnessed in your research.
References Page: (not bibliography or citations…in APA style it is called a References Page).
You can using headers. I encourage it. It really helps to ensure that you move topically rather than from article to article.