This Research Dossier supports the Report Card on HIV Prevention for Girls and Young Women in Kenya produced by the United Nations Global Coalition on Women and AIDS (GCWA). It documents the detailed research coordinated for the GCWA by the International Planned Parenthood Federation (IPPF), with the support of the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA), United Nations Program on AIDS (UNAIDS) and Young Positives. The Report Card provides an "at a glance" summary of the current status of HIV prevention strategies and services for girls and young women in Kenya. It focuses on five cross-cutting prevention components: 1. Legal provision; 2. Policy context; 3. Availability of services; 4. Accessibility of services; 5. Participation and rights. The Report Card also includes background information about the HIV epidemic and key policy and programmatic recommendations to improve and increase action on this issue in Kenya. This Research Report is divided into two sections: Part 1: Desk research: This documents the extensive desk research carried out for the Report Card by IPPF staff and consultants based in the United Kingdom. Part 2: In-country research: This documents the participatory in-country research carried out for the Report Card by a local consultant in Kenya. This involved: Two focus group discussions with a total of 19 girls and young women aged 15-24 years. The participants included girls and young women who are: living with HIV; in/out-of/school; involved in sex work; living in urban and suburban areas; and working as peer activists. Five one-to-one interviews with representatives of organisations providing services, advocacy and/or funding for HIV prevention for girls and young women. The stakeholders were: a country representative of an international NGO; a nurse at a national NGO focusing on sexual and reproductive health; a counsellor at an NGO/government voluntary counselling and testing centre; a programme officer of a United Nations agency; and a Technical Adviser of an international donor agency. Additional fact-finding to address gaps in the desk research.
Global Coalition on Women and AIDS
Record created by