In the Garden: Don’t like deer? Grow deer-resistant plants
Through June is a peak sales period for local greenhouses and garden centers. It seems like every spring there is a greater concern about damage by deer to plantings, bedding or potted plants in particular. There are more deer in my back yard and garden areas each year.
A primary step to avoid damage is to select annuals, perennials or other plants deer do not like. In recent years, I have taken notes on some plants in my garden that seldom have deer damage. A few never show damage.
I consider most areas of Ontario to have high deer pressure. It has been that way for many years. I have many friends who garden in urban areas such as Mansfield, Shelby, Galion and Crestline who never see deer in their gardens. That is one less problem for gardeners in those areas to worry about.
No list of deer-resistant plants is perfect for all garden areas. The best I can do is share names of those plants that survive deer browsing year after year. There are many more plants I don’t grow that are likely deer resistant.
You may want to trial test several new plants to see how they fare to deer feeding. The following annuals have survived and performed well in deer territory. There are fewer annuals in the deer resistant group than perennials.
Annuals (seldom or rarely damaged): White sweet alyssum, dwarf marigolds, dusty miller, morning glory, Victoria blue salvia, annual vinca, lobelia, snapdragon and zinnia.
Annuals to trial test for deer damage: Celosia, cleome, cosmos, calendula, ageratum, four o’clocks, portulaca, verbena, nasturtium and heliotrope. While typing this at 7 p.m., I stopped to go out and chase two deer from a flower bed!
Perennials (seldom or rarely damaged): Bleeding heart, butterfly bush, butterfly weed, baptisa, blue fescue, campanula, coneflower, coreopsis, daffodil, hardy geranium, ornamental onion, pachysandra, shasta daisy, sweet woodruff, yarrow and yucca.
Vegetables: There are only three types that haven’t been damaged by deer. They include onions, garlic and rhubarb, plus the herb chives. I’m sure there are a number of herbs that will survive deer damage.
A wise veteran gardener told me many times that if a deer is hungry enough, it will eat anything, especially during a winter with severe cold and lots of snow. I think if a deer survived this past winter, it will survive future winters!
Another means of keeping deer away from garden plantings is the family dog. Many of my friends tell me a dog will begin barking as soon as a deer is spotted in the neighborhood. A deer quickly takes off at the first sight or sound of a dog.
The same goes for rabbits. They take off quickly when a dog runs after them.
Janie yellow marigold
A reliable deer-resistant marigold is the dwarf Janie Yellow variety. Plants are 8 to 10 inches tall and should be spaced at 10 inches. Keep plants deadheaded each week for repeat blooms. Other colors in the Janie series are orange, flame and primrose.
Short Janie marigolds work well in a border or edging of a medium to large bed. Or plant them randomly in the landscape in “pocket” plantings. They prefer a sunny location.
Plenty of time left
There is no rush to get all annuals and vegetables planted by May 31. There are at least two to three weeks to make most plantings.
Long season plants such as melons, pumpkins and winter squash should be planted by early June.
Richard Poffenbaugh is a retired biology teacher and active home gardener since 1960. He is a member of the Mansfield Men’s Garden Club and was editor of the club newsletter “The Greenhorn” for 21 years. He resides in Ontario with his wife, Barbara. Reach him at 419-529-2966.