Uses of medjool date palms
A medjool date palm has a wide variety of uses among which includes medicine as well as construction of shelter and various transport devices. For many centuries the Arabs have always considered date palms to be very special not only because they provide them with food but they also provide raw materials which can be used for many purposes. We are going to look at some of the uses of date palms particularly medjool date palms;
Medjool date palms in medicine
Scientists in the U.S. have been carrying out extensive research on California dates and they have revealed that medjool date palms can be used for the production of tannins. Tannins are widely used in medicine for treating kidney diseases. Tannins have proven to be effective at fighting notorious viruses such as poliovirus and herpes simplex virus. Tannins also have antibacterial properties which can be used to fight undesired bacterial growth in the GIT. Tannins are also used in medicine as anti-inflammatory agents that treat esophageal and duodenal ulcers.
Medjool date palms for stockfeeds
Date palms can be used as stockfeeds in regions where pastures are difficult to cultivate. Young date palms can be given to camels and goats as stockfeed. Date palm seeds can also be ground to make very nutritive feed for livestock. Even in areas where pastures are plenty date palms can still be given to livestock as they supplement a wide variety of essential nutrients.
Medjool date palms in the manufacturing industry
A Medjool Date palm can be extruded to produce oil that can be used in manufacturing soaps and cosmetics. Date palm seeds can be used as a source of oxalic acid. The sap of date palms can be extracted to make syrup that is used in manufacturing foodstuffs.
Medjool date palms in religion
Date palm leaves are used by Christians during Palm Sunday. Palm leaves have a spiritual significance in Christianity and where used to decorate the path Jesus moved on when entering his home town.
Medjool date palms in construction
Medjool date palms can be used as poles to construct houses while palm leaves are used in making roofs. Date palms are also used in making rafts and fishing boats. Date palms are also used in constructing small bridges as the material is not very durable and can only withstand small weights.
Medjool date palms in making ornaments
Medjool date palms can be used to make decorative ornaments such as baskets, mats, fans, screens and hats.
Medjool date palms can be used for many things and if you want to know more visit www.medjool-dates.com, where all your questions about medjool dates will be answered.GHTime Code(s): nc