Following the “Kindergarten Education Curriculum Guide” (2017) and based on the principles of fostering children’s comprehensive development, our Kindergarten has formulated a diversified curriculum. Through six Learning Areas, namely “Physical Fitness and Health”, “Language”, “Early Childhood Mathematics”, “Nature and Living”, “Self and Society” and “Arts and Creativity”, our curriculum aims to help children achieve five developmental objectives, which are “Moral Development”, “Cognitive and Language Development”, “Physical Development”, “Affective and Social Development”, and “Aesthetic Development”. By encouraging children to participate actively in school activities, and arousing their interest and motivation in learning, children will not be afraid of failure, will have the courage to try and will be ready to accept new challenges. Their foundation of lifelong learning will hence be consolidated.
We follow the “Kindergarten Education Curriculum Guide” (2017) to plan curriculum. Children of nursery classes will not be asked to write, and there will not be mechanical copying exercises and drills on calculation.
Teaching with Picture Books
Story books will be used to arouse children’s learning motivation. Based on children’s abilities and daily experience, specific activities and games will be designed for them, so that children’s self-confidence and self-learning abilities will be enhanced. Through diversified learning activities, children’s potential will be developed, and they will become active and positive learners.
Children will be guided to understand and abide by the rules, to learn good behaviors such as politeness, patience, caring for others, and being willing to share with others. These will help them to develop good habits and conducts, promote the healthy growth of their body and mind, and build up self-confidence and sound self-concept. We will inspire children to understand the mysteries of the universe, the wonders and love of the Creator, and to establish a close relationship with Christ so that children can continue to pursue the truth in the future and establish a sound foundation for their life.
Support to non-Chinese speaking (NCS) students
The government is committed to encouraging and supporting the integration of NCS students (notably students of diverse races) into the community, including facilitating their early adaptation to the local education system and mastery of the Chinese language. EDB also provides various education services for NCS students. Please visit the following website for more details:https://www.edb.gov.hk/en/student-parents/ncs-students/about-ncs-students/index.html
We also employs NCS teacher, through the interesting and interactive group activities that connected to life experiences can brush up NCS students’ Chinese listening, speaking, reading and writing skills, thus helping them integrate into the community.
Orff Schulwerk Music Education Programme
The Orff Schulwerk music education programme is a fun program offering arts experience. It consists of a rich range of learning activities covering different art domains, e.g. music, dance, drama, literature and drawing. Drawing upon children’s everyday life experiences, the program uses musical games, music appreciation activities, music instruments, rhythms, beats and other musical elements to let children experience, explore and create, thereby promoting their cognitive skills, constructing their knowledge and cultivating their creativity and imagination skills. Children are able to attain a balanced development in the Orff Schulwerk music world.
Through the Montessori teaching materials, children can make the abstract numbering concepts into concrete learning.
JELIC Multiple Intelligences Programme
JELIC Multiple Intelligences Programme consists of 450 learning boxes which divided in 7 levels to develop and stimulate children’s potential. The programme balances the development of both hemispheres of the brain and can be divided in 6 learning domains, including Intelligent reasoning, Mathematical Deduction, Combinational Thinking, Life skills, Linguistic Capabilities and Aesthetic Creation. The programme enable the children to widen the concentration span and develop self-management skills.
English & Putonghua Learning
Our native English-speaking teachers and Putonghua teachers develop children’s language skills in an easy and efficient way. Lively stories, interesting nurseries and beautiful songs are used to help children develop a foundation for reading and writing, thereby ensuring a better learning performance.
We continuously promote art activities for children to help children develop the abilities of art creation, art appreciation and sharing. Our art education broadens their horizons in art, allowing them to enjoy the fun of creating art and developing their thinking and creativity.
Sensory Integration Activities
Through participating in regular physical activities, children will acquire basic life skills and develop a good physique. School-based sensory integration elements are incorporated in the activities to create a pleasurable atmosphere for promoting children’s sensory integration, motor coordination and vestibular system.