Dairy products contribute to the harmonious growth and development of the child. They supply the body with calcium, the main “building blocks” of which the teeth and bones are built. The habit of eating dairy products must be formed from infancy. At 6 months, the baby should receive kephir. Farmer cheese and cheese should be introduced to the diet a little later. Up to 2.5 years, the permanent teeth primordia begin to form, so it is necessary that calcium-supplying products are included in the diet daily. It is not difficult at all, since children’s yogurts, milk, and kephir are becoming tastier and more varied every day.
Small children love sweets very much, but these products have a significant impact on the appearance of dental diseases. Sweets are an excellent medium for the active reproduction of pathogenic microflora: for example, streptococci are formed when sugar is consumed. By processing sugar, bacteria secrete acid, which destroys tooth enamel. As often as possible, including fresh fruit and vegetables in the diet of the child, because the sugar and fruit acids contained in them do not pose a danger to the teeth.
A significant multiplication of microbes in the child’s mouth occurs in the first months of life, especially with the kisses of parents and relatives, when parents or babysitters lick feeding nipple from the child’s mouth or when they try food from a baby spoon before feeding the baby. Do not allow this.
All this leads to the fact that a huge amount of pathogenic microflora enters the oral cavity of the child, which provokes the occurrence of caries and various inflammatory processes. The remains of food, being in an oral cavity, are an excellent nutrient medium for all types of microbes. Therefore, it is very important to follow all the necessary procedures for oral hygiene.
Pediatric dentists of Avanto clinics have sufficient experience and qualifications for treating children’s teeth in the most comfortable conditions. We also hold consultations for young parents on young children ‘s proper oral hygiene. Our experts are doing everything possible to maintain your healthy teeth and a beautiful smile from an early age.
Avanto (Center) Dental Clinic
1. By Metro – Palace Ukraine, walk to the side of Predslavynska St., left turn into Novopecherskyi Lane. The clinic is placed in Prestige Hall residential complex, the entrance is from the side of Vasyl Tyutyunnik St.
2. By car – you can get to the central entrance to the clinic from Ionna Pavla II St. (the former – Patrisa Lumumby St.), turn into Vasyl Tyutyunnik St.
Avanto (Podil) Dental Clinic
1. By Metro – Kontraktova Ploshcha, walk on the street Kostiantynivska towards “Zhovten” cinema. The entrance to “cinematographic” arche.
2. By car – you can get to the central entrance of the clinic from Kostiantynivska St. through “cinematographic” arche. It is also possible to park a car in the parking lot near the square on the street Yaroslavska.
Avanto (Pechersk) Dental Clinic
1. By Metro – Pecherska, walk on the street Lasya Ukrainka to the side of The Ivan Bohun Military High School. The building where the clinic is placed is located behind the CEC building and has a wave-shaped roof.
2. By car – the first arrival to the central entrance of the clinic is possible from Lesya Ukrainka St. behind The Ivan Bohun Military High School. Also it is possible to get there from the side of Staronavodnytska St., the turn is near the pointer of TSARSKY sport club. The building where the clinic is placed has a wave-shaped roof.