Vascular – Exotic
Herbs - Dicotyledons other than Composites
The National Vegetation Survey (NVS) Databank is a physical archive and electronic databank containing records of over 94,000 vegetation survey plots - including data from over 19,000 permanent plots. NVS maintains a standard set of species code abbreviations that correspond to standard scientific plant names from the Ngä Tipu o Aotearoa - New Zealand Plants database.
R. flammula is a perennial herb with bright yellow, butter-cup like flowers. The leaves are linear to lance-shaped, upright and not divided.
Throughout most of the North and South Island.
Wet sites such as drains, ditches, ponds and swamps.
A fleshy perennial herb with small pale yellow flowers (1o to 15 mm in diameter). Stems are slender, creeping or upright to 50 cm or more long. The leaves at the base of the stems are up to 8 cm long, and occur on stems up to 10 cm long. The stem leaves are comparatively smaller, lanceolate, entire or finely toothed.
No other buttercup (Ranunculus) has an undivided lanceolate leaf.
October to March
Water fowl feed on fruit and disperse seed and also seeds may be dispersed by water movement.
Europe, Caucasus, Northwest Africa
Reason for introduction
Unknown, possibly a seed contaminant or ornamental pond plant
Not usually controlled in New Zealand, but may be controlled manually, mechanically or herbicidally depending on situation.
ranunculus: From the Latin ‘rana’ frog, meaning little frog and probably refers to the plants typical marshy habit where frogs abound
Factsheet prepared by Paul Champion and Deborah Hofstra (NIWA).
References and further reading
Popay et al (2010). An illustrated guide to common weeds of New Zealand, third edition. NZ Plant Protection Society Inc, 416pp.
Johnson PN, Brooke PA (1989). Wetland plants in New Zealand. DSIR Field Guide, DSIR Publishing, Wellington. 319pp.
Coffey BT, Clayton JS (1988). New Zealand water plants: a guide to plants found in New Zealand freshwaters. Ruakura Agricultural Cente. 65pp