The Stream, April 27: Clean Water and Sanitation Concerns After Nepal Earthquake
The Global Rundown
Water is a growing concern in the aftermath of a deadly earthquake in Nepal. Nitrate pollution are threatening drinking water in Minnesota, conservation efforts are making progress in the Colorado River Delta, and more water permits are expired in California’s national forests. The Islamic State recently captured a strategic dam outside of Baghdad, and droughts are adding to conflicts in Mali.
“What we know that at this point is there are nearly a million children who are severely affected. Our biggest concern for them right now is going to be access to clean water and sanitation, we know that water and food is running out.”–Christopher Tidey, emergency communication specialist for UNICEF, on worries about waterborne illness and essential supplies in the aftermath of a 7.9-magnitude earthquake in Nepal. (Reuters)
By The Numbers
616 permits Number of expired water-related permits for taking water from national forests in California. The Desert Sun
16 communities Number in Minnesota that violated the state health limit for nitrates in drinking water sources. Groundwater pollution from nitrates is a costly problem in the state. Minneapolis Star Tribune
98 kilometers Distance west of Baghdad to the Tharthar Dam, which controls inflows to the Tigris River and was recently taken by Islamic State militants. Bloomberg
Science, Studies, And Reports
Efforts to reforest and restore the shrinking Colorado River Delta in Mexico are finding success after the first pulse flow of water was released last year. The highly utilized Colorado River has not reached the sea on a regular basis since 1960. Aljazeera America
On The Radar
The expansion of the Sahara Desert and more frequent droughts are contributing to conflicts in Mali by putting pressure on food supplies. Rainfall in Mali has declined 30 percent since 1998, according to a study released in 2013. Reuters
A news correspondent for Circle of Blue based out of Hawaii. She writes The Stream, Circle of Blue’s daily digest of international water news trends. Her interests include food security, ecology and the Great Lakes.
Contact Codi Kozacek
Leave a ReplyWant to join the discussion?
Feel free to contribute!