If your child has experienced a fainting episode, it can be very alarming and you need to know why it happened. Fainting, also called syncope, is often harmless in children. However, if an underlying health condition results in syncope, it may not be harmless and your child needs the best possible treatment. At Children’s Cardiology Group in Orange, Newport Beach and Mission Viejo, California, the team of experienced, board-certified pediatric cardiologists can diagnose the cause of syncope, and provide treatment to prevent fainting, and address any underlying cardiac issues. To schedule an evaluation for pediatric syncope, call the nearest location, or request an appointment through the online scheduling tool.
Syncope, or fainting, refers to a short loss of consciousness that occurs due to inadequate blood supply to the brain. Most of the time, syncope isn’t serious. However, if your child experiences syncope, you should seek an evaluation because it can indicate the presence of a severe medical condition.
In addition to fainting, your child may experience the following signs and symptoms:
The team at Children’s Cardiology Group recommends that children drink water and sit with their head between their knees or lie down with their legs elevated for 10-15 minutes following a syncope episode.
Several conditions can lead to a decrease in blood flow to your child’s brain. Some of these include:
Orthostatic hypotension, a drop in blood pressure that occurs when changing between sitting and standing positions, can also result in syncope.
To determine the cause of syncope in children, the experts at Children’s Cardiology Group perform a physical exam, review your child’s health history, and check their blood pressure and heart rate. They also ask you questions about your child’s nutrition, hydration, and what they were doing right before they fainted.
Your provider may also order diagnostic tests, such as an electrocardiogram (ECG), which analyzes the electrical activity of the heart to detect arrhythmias, or an echocardiogram, which uses ultrasound to create a full image of your child’s heart.
Once your cardiologist determines the exact cause of syncope, they recommend an appropriate treatment. For cardiac conditions that cause syncope, treatment may involve medication or an interventional cardiology procedure to address structural or electrical problems within the heart.
If another condition causes your child’s syncope, your cardiologist may recommend that they see another specialist, such as a pediatric neurologist.
Pediatric syncope alarms many parents. The caring team at Children’s Cardiology Group can determine the exact reason your child faints, so they can receive the appropriate treatment. Call the clinic nearest you, or request an appointment online today.