A stroke is something that you can’t take lightly. But did you know that there are different types of strokes? In this article we’ll look at what are the two types of strokes. And why it’s important to know the different.
No matter what the type, a stroke is a potentially life-threatening situation. And is definitely a life-altering event.
An Overview of Strokes
Strokes usually happen when there is limited or blocked blood flow to the brain. This deprives the brain of oxygen and nutrients that it usually gets from the blood.
Without the nutrients and the oxygen, the brain dies within minutes. Another cause of stroke is sudden bleeding in the brain. If the bleeding causes damage to brain cells, it will result in a stroke.
What Are the Two Types of Strokes
There are two main types of stroke: the hemorrhagic and ischemic stroke.
What’s the difference between these two, and why is it important? We’ll take a look at these questions below.
First, there’s hemorrhagic stroke, which is the stroke caused by bleeding. This type of stroke is less common. It only accounts for about 13% of all strokes that occur.
A hemorrhagic stroke usually happens when an artery in the brain ruptures, or leaks blood. Because of this, the leaked blood puts too much pressure on brain cells. The end result is damaged brain cells that cause stroke.
So, what causes this hemorrhage? High blood pressure and aneurysms are some health conditions that can potentially cause a hemorrhagic stroke.
Now, there are actually two types of hemorrhagic strokes. Here they are:
- Intracerebral hemorrhage – This is the most common type of hemorrhagic stroke. These occur when an artery in the brain breaks or bursts. The result is blood flooding the surrounding tissue.
- Subarachnoid hemorrhage – This type is a less common type of hemorrhagic stroke. This happens when there’s bleeding in the area between the brain.
The second main type of stroke is the ischemic stroke. This is caused by blockage of an artery, or veins. 87% of all strokes are ischemic.
As the blood flow to the brain stops, the brain cells and tissues begin to die. All of this can happen very quickly. In fact, this can all go down in a matter of minutes.
There are also two types of ischemic strokes:
- Thrombotic strokes. These are caused by blood clots that develop inside the brain’s blood vessels.
- Embolic strokes. These happen when there’s blood clot or plaque debris anywhere else in the body.
If you suspect that you, or a loved one is having a stroke attack, make sure to call 9-1-1 right away. Time is of the essence during a stroke, and you want to get emergency help as soon as possible.