Over the last few years, waste production and reduction have become a hot topic within the hospitality industry. Some aspects of the industry can produce a large amount of waste, but the industry is not looking to reduce waste production.
Restaurant and cafe owners are now interested in trying their best to reduce environmental harm. They are opting for sustainable practices within their restaurants instead. Some sustainable practices that restaurant owners can adopt include:
Localizing your supply chain – Buying produce directly from distributors who buy from smaller businesses and farmers rather than from a larger chain.
Recycling programs – Recycling is one of the best ways to reduce waste. Your food packaging, bottles, and cans can be used in various recycling programs so they don’t end up in our environment.
Bulk buying – Food items such as pasta, honey, nuts, and spices can be bought in bulk, which decreases costs and the environmental impact of transportation and packaging.
So, do these sustainable practices at your restaurant have anything to do with customers? Yes.
Consumers in the modern era are much concerned about the environment and sustainability. Restaurants earn a name through mainly great food, but nowadays, with increasing concerns of climate change, customers are conscious and want to feel good about enjoying your great food without adding to the problem.
When a restaurant goes ahead and acts sustainably, they give power to their customers a way to help the earth every day, without having to even think about it.
Sustainable practices at your restaurant give your customers another reason to want to eat with you and gives you a point of difference compared to other eateries.
Apart from enhancing your customer’s loyalty, sustainability in a restaurant delivers a huge number of benefits to your business and the environment.
Increased Customer Base
When a customer spreads the word, it is the best form of advertisement for any brand. If customers are also here about your sustainability practices, it will entice them to want to come and try your restaurants, and then your great food will have them returning.
Increased Savings and Environmental Benefits
Sustainable practices can help you save money in the long term by buying bulk and decreasing your energy and water consumption. Cutting down on waste itself means saving. This also created a positive environmental impact and reduced your carbon footprint. Savings all around.
Milky Lane is one of the restaurants in Australia that ensure they make small changes to create a big impact. They avoid using single-use plastics and use glass and paper straws when serving drinks. They also have plant-based food options on their menu, which is another important sustainable practice.
With all these small practices, customers are attracted to the restaurant, and the great good will surely bring customers back for a second visit. Implementing sustainable practices is the best thing your restaurant can do for the planet.