In the past, cutlers and craftsmen had to rely only on high quality hard and exotic woods in production. Today, thanks to stabilization, it is also possible to use wood on which beautiful and unique artwork has been drawn by rot and fungus.
Stabilization of materials - Stabilization of wood
Professional stabilization of wood.
We use a unique technology for the stabilization of wood using a resin developed and manufactured by us that combines the advantages of PMMA resins and epoxy resins used by other manufacturers of stabilized wood. Our stabilized wood retains and emphasizes the beautiful grain of the wood as well as maintaining a simple procedure for finishing - polishing to a high gloss. Stabilization will enable the complete filling in of cracks and fissures. We also provide a guarantee for hidden defects of stabilized wood. If you discover a defect that inhibits its use, please contact us immediately. We will either replace the block or refund your money in accordance with your wishes. The absorbency of the stabilized wood is nearly zero (less than 0.1%).
What does stabilization do to wood?
1. It increases the weight of the stabilized block by 20-150%, depending on the type and condition of the wood (porous wood like spalted maple (affected by rotting) receives far more resin than dense and hard wood species such as ebony).
2. The reinforcing and increasing of hardness occurs. The wood no longer warps and is resistant to moisture and water.
3. The absorbency of the stabilized wood is nearly zero (less than 0.1%). Water absorption is dependent on the type of stabilized wood and how much resin the wood can hold.
4. The release of tension in the wood occurs and the risk that due to ambient conditions deformation and shrinkage could occur is minimized.
How is stabilized wood worked?
Working stabilized wood is the same as for non-stabilized wood. You just need to count on the fact that the wood is filled with tough resin, and therefore the dulling of the tool occurs slightly earlier than in the processing of non-stabilized wood. During working, fine dust is released - we therefore recommend using a respirator.
When grinding, do not use a high speed sanding belt, at temperatures higher than 150 ° C, the melting of resin occurs, which may lead to faster clogging of the sanding belt. By following these procedures, the stabilized wood can be sanded and polished very well to a high gloss.
Achieving a high gloss surface of the stabilized wood can be achieved by progressively sanding with the coarsest sand paper to sand paper with a granularity of 400 to 600 and subsequently repolishing it with abrasive paste and a cotton wheel or cloth.
Who uses stabilized wood?
Stabilized wood from us is used by manufacturers of knives, pool cues, jewelers, manufacturers of exclusive pens and ballpoint pens. Stabilized wood is also used for shoes, handles and weapon grips. It is also used in many other fields.
What kind of wood can be stabilized?
Do you stabilize material supplied by the customer?
Yes, below you will find the conditions under which we perform stabilization of the materials supplied to order:
1. Before sending the blocks, make sure that there are no metal parts - nails, staples, etc. in the wood. In addition, the blocks must be clean, natural and free of any deposits of waxes, oils or colors that would prevent performing wood stabilization. Moreover, the wood must be dried naturally, air-dry, meaning dried to about 12-15% moisture.
2. We recommended lightly sanding all the edges of blocks with sandpaper with a granularity of 80 before stabilization. This will help clean up the edges of the wood and will result in a clearer and brighter color and in the case of colored stabilization, also a more vibrant color..
What is the price for the stabilization of 1block?
The price for stabilization depends on the type of wood - some species are very difficult to stabilize and depending on the type of wood, the stabilization process may take several days. Furthermore, the size of the block and the amount of stabilizing resin which the block holds also plays a role. The price is also affected by the state in which the wood is delivered for stabilization, i.e. humidity, surface, etc.
The final price for the stabilization of a single piece of wood of standard dimensions consists of the following items:
The fee for 1 block - 155,-CZK
The fee for each gram of resin which the block holds 1.30 CZK/g. 1g resin is 1 ml, i.e. 1 cm3.
Prices include VAT 21%.
Standard block size approx 20-40 x 40-50 x 110-140mm
Each block is weighed before the start of stabilization. The value is entered in the stabilization protocol and is weighed again at the finish and the value is again written into the log. This is used to calculate the final price for the stabilization of the order.
On average, each block holds about 70 g (70 ml) of resin, meaning a block the size 30x40x120mm holds a quantity of resin almost one half of its volume.
P.M.P. Company s.r.o.
Staré Buky 162
tel: 608 123 414