This Body is the Only One You Get.
Our bodies are incredible machines that we usually take for granted. But like any machine, it needs to be taken care of. Responding to the needs of your body can make the difference between surviving and thriving. To live more fully and be in excellent health, follow the suggestions below.
You Are What You Eat.
One of the toughest challenges for our bodies is the Western diet—unhealthiest of all the developed nations. It consists of processed foods loaded with chemicals, meat heavily laced with antibiotics . . . Your body thrives on fresh, wholesome, organic food. Balanced pH is important, so aim for 80% alkaline and only 20% acidic.
Meditate as If Your Life Depended on It.
The health benefits of meditation are impressive. Thousands of scientific studies have shown the benefits include stress reduction, better sleep, lower blood pressure, decreased depression and anxiety, improved cardiovascular function, and strengthened immunity. Meditating only 5-10 minutes a day lifts your mood. You’ll feel increased peace, clarity and confidence.
Exercise Keeps Your Body Strong and Healthy.
It’s essential to exercise a minimum of three times a week. Your fitness regimen should include strength training, agility, flexibility, balance and cardiovascular exercises.
It’s Important to Relax.
Daily relaxation is more beneficial than you might think. With relaxation, your mood will quickly improve. You’ll sleep better. Your stress levels will decrease. Your memory will improve. It’s easier to concentrate. No matter what you’re doing, every two hours take a break to relax for a few minutes. Like anything else, relaxation takes practice.
Make Adequate Sleep a Priority.
Sleep is one thing many people seem to be shortchanged on. Sufficient sleep is the key to health because your body recuperates during sleep. To have higher quality sleep, develop a regular schedule where you go to sleep and wake up at the same time every day.
Consistency Defines Your Health.
Your state of health is largely determined by your daily habits. Your body will either thrive or deteriorate from what you consistently do. Decide which habits you’d like to stop and which ones you’d like to engage in more regularly. Allow new habits to grow by mastering one stage of consistency and then moving on to the next.
You Choose the Quality of Your Life.
Once you’re regularly engaging in healthy behaviors, it’s important to keep it up. It’s easy to relax your vigilance and slip into old unhealthy practices. Your daily habits will determine your quality of life. You choose what to engage in regularly. The power is in your hands.