The beginning of a new year is usually a good time to make good decisions that will help us lead a healthier life. Among them, cholesterol control is common to avoid the accumulation of fat in our blood and arterial walls and its negative consequences. The upright news is that a healthy diet and exercise can help lower cholesterol levels. Here are some tips on how to achieve your goal and improve your quality of life.
1.Eat Fresh Fruits And Vegetables Daily
The presence of fresh fruits and vegetables in our diet has shown to have a protective effect against cardiovascular diseases. It recommends consuming five pieces a day, if this amount is exceeded there will be no additional benefits.
2.Eat Nuts In Moderate Amounts
Almonds, hazelnuts, walnuts have a high caloric content. 30 grams a day is enough to reduce cardiovascular risk by 30%.
3.At Least One Day A Week Eat Fish
The protective effect of fish against cardiovascular disease attribute to the content of omega-3 fatty acids.
4.Substitute Unsaturated For Saturated Fatty Acids
The former is found mainly in animal products (butter, meat, dairy) and some vegetable oils (coconut and palm). Unsaturated fatty acids divide into monounsaturated (olive oil and nut oil) and polyunsaturated (fish and vegetable oils).
5.Bet On Virgin Olive Oil For Cooking
It is preferable to consume virgin olive oil since the refining for each type of oil can affect its nutritional profile since it eliminates healthy compounds.
6.Avoid Trans Fatty Acids To Lower Cholesterol
It is a subclass of unsaturated fatty acids that are particularly harmful due to their adverse effects on both total cholesterol, which increases, and HDL (good) cholesterol, which decreases. These fatty acids made during industrial processing (tempering) and found in margarine, cookies, industrial confectionery. Forget about them if you want to lower your cholesterol levels.
In Spain, according to a 2015 study, the vast majority of food groups contain trans acids below 2%, so the average intake with a balanced diet also expect to be very low.
7.Include Foods With Fiber In Your Diet
Look for legumes, fruits, vegetables, and whole grains (oatmeal, barley). Fibre, especially soluble fibre, has a direct hypocholesterolemic effect. Since it retains part of the cholesterol we consume, preventing its absorption in the intestine. Therefore, high-fibre carbohydrates are a good substitute for saturated fats if we want to lower our cholesterol levels.
8.Say No To Refined Sugars
Foods and beverages based on refined sugars (ready meals, carbonated drinks or sugary cola) not recommend to replace saturated fats.
9.Say Yes To Dairy
Dairy products (milk, yogurt, cheese) are healthy because they provide proteins of high biological value. And minerals such as calcium.
10.Alcohol Only On Special Occasions
Consumption of three or more alcoholic drinks a day associates with a high risk of cardiovascular disease. Abstainers are people with the lowest risk of heart disease, and any degree of alcohol consumption associate with blood pressure, avoidance, and a higher body mass index.
Our lifestyle determines cardiovascular risk regardless of the genetic risk category. Betting on a healthy diet will greatly help you lower your cholesterol levels. If you add exercise practice to this. success is guaranteed. It is difficult to develop healthy lifestyle habits in the beginning, but the rewards are worth it. Your heart and arteries will thank you.