The Tesla Purple Plate™
The creation of The Tesla Purple Plate™ was inspired by the work of the famous inventor Nikola Tesla, and was designed by Life Technology™ to heal, strengthen and protect the mind body and soul.
Nikola Tesla understood that the cosmos is in resonance. Everything that exists possesses a unique vibratory rate which resonates with the heart of the cosmos. It was this discovery which inspired Tesla to invent The Tesla Personal Oscillator in the early 20th Century.
Nikola Tesla marketed his Personal Oscillator as being a free energy antenna capable of enhancing the human energy field. It is claimed That The Tesla Personal Oscillator was one of the most popular gadgets of the time and was widely used in The USA and Europe.
Life Technology™ are priviledged to have been given exclusive access to some of Nikola Tesla's papers and have been able to update and upgrade the original design of The Tesla Personal Oscillator.
The final product, The Tesla Purple Plate™ combines the original Tesla principles of harmonic oscillation and Tesla design considerations in an advanced state of the art energy enhancement tool designed by Life Technology™.
100 years after Tesla's original invention of The Tesla Personal Oscillator, Life Technology™ have created The Tesla Purple Plate™, a device whose uniquely synergistic effects are profoundly more effective and powerful than the original Tesla device.
The Inspiration And Science behind The Tesla Purple Plate™.
The Tesla Purple Plate™ was developed by Nikola Tesla and Ralph Bergstresser.
The Tesla Purple Plate™ is created using the Tesla/Bergstresser process and allows the device to resonate with the cosmic energy particles known as tachyons.
The Tesla Purple Plate™ emits a positive tachyon field with a radius of approximately 10 meters which is capable of penetrating any material substance or living organism.
Nikola Tesla first described tachyon fields at the end of the 19th century and used this energy in some of his inventions. Tachyon energy is observed to affect subatomic structures in an ordering way, aligning molecular structures uniformly, harmonizing life energy and by neutralising disruptive or dissonant fields.
Tesla said, that when tachyons are slowed down, they produce energy fields of high density. As conveyors of intrinsic energy fields they are said to have a very beneficial effect on living organisms and to neutralize negative fields.
The Tesla Purple Plate™ generates a field that slows down the cosmic particles known as tachyons. In this manner the surface of The Tesla Purple Plate™ gets charged with subtle energy which is then conveyed to the energy field of the user.
The Tesla Purple Plate™ has a unique crystal lattice structure which is identical to that of rubies and sapphires which share the same chemical composition. Coincidentally, rubies are highly prized in many parts of the world for their healing properties, particularly in India where they are known as Power Stones and are commonly worn by men to enhance their health, vitality and strength.
The Tesla Purple Plate™ has the ability to transfer specific information rich energy from the Schumann Resonance Field to the human bioenergetic field. The Schumann Resonance Field is a natural magnetic field with a unique harmonic frequency of 7.83Hz. It is scientifically recognised that The Schumann Resonance Field performs a vitally important function of sustaining all life on the planet through its ability to support and maintain the electromagnetic energy field of all organisms.
The Inventor Of The Original Purple Energy Plate Was Ralph Bergstresser.
Linda Goodman mentions in her book "Star Signs" that the person who created the plates with Nikola Tesla preferred to remain anonymous. However, after the inventor's death the company which produced the plates decided to give him due credit. The inventor, Ralph Bergstresser, was born in 1912 in Pueblo, Colorado of German parents who immigrated to the United States.
He was extremely interested in free energy, or Zero Point Energy as it is now called in scientific circles. Bergstresser carefully studied anything written about Nikola Tesla's experiments, and attended many lectures given by Tesla. Eventually, they were introduced and quickly became friends due to like interest in free energy.
Over the course of the next 20 years until Tesla's death they had numerous conversations on the process of tapping free energy. After Tesla's death Bergstresser was able to discover the secret of altering the aluminum in the Positive Enery Plates from clues and notations in Tesla's notebooks. Also instrumental in leading Bergstresser to the discovery of healing energy was an incident which took place while he was a guest of a maharaja in India some 50 years ago.
Wrote Bergstresser; "The maharaja had an 8-month old son that was very sick. I asked if he was going to get a doctor. He said 'no, we have sent a man to obtain some holy water from the Ganges River.' In 3 days, the man came back with one gallon of water.
They fed the water to the sick child and...and like magic, the child was healed and back to normal. To me, a miracle is an inability to understand a scientific fact. How could the water cure the child? That was the problem. It was this incident that triggered my curious mind to find the answer and this led me into the present knowledge. "
He explains why the water of the Ganges purportedly has the power to heal. " For thousands of years the native population of India have used the water from the Ganges for healing. Gallon jugs of this water from the Ganges have been stored for over half a century at the University of Calcutta, and are still completely free if bacteria. What causes the water to have such fantastic healing powers?
A tributary of water, that eventually finds its way into the Ganges River, originates and begins its long journey from high into the Himalayan Mountains. It is there, high in the mountains where the atmosphere is clear and clean, that nature begins the natural process of creating special water. This process starts when the mountain and its snow cover is bombarded by the higher energies of the Universe known as cosmic energy.
This bombardment by cosmic 4th dimensional energy alters the atomic and molecular structure of the rocks and granite that constitute these magnificent mountains, and in turn, changes the chemistry of the snow and water as it flows over them and down to the lowlands. This chemistry change is adding the Life Force Energy to the water. It is the Life Force Energy, which has now become an intricate part of the water, that produces the healing miracles of the Ganges River. The key to this phenomenon is now known and utilized to produce the purple energy plates and products."
Bergstresser, who was also the author of a handful of metaphysical books, died in 1998 at the age of 86.
Measurable Effects Of The Tesla Purple Plate™.
In the field of quantum physics it is observed that all material objects and living organisms have an individual frequency of Angstrom Units (light waves) per second. This value is also known as the Light Quotient (LQ).
The energy levels of The Tesla Purple Plate™ in terms of Angstrom Units can be measured using specialist radionic equipment known as The Bovis Biometer.
When using the angstrom measurement scale, the Light Quotient of a normal healthy human being would be approximately 10,000 - 15,000 angstroms.
When The Tesla Purple Plate™ is held in the hand or worn in a pocket, the user's Light Quotient rapidly increases to approximately 80,000 - 85,000 angstroms.
When worn continuously, The Tesla Purple Plate™, will enable the user's Light Quotient to increase to 100,000 angstroms and higher which indicates an optimisation of energy flow throughout the entire organism.
The Light Quotient enhancement properties of The Tesla Purple Plate™ are such that a tangible positive light field is produced uniformly in all directions from the centre of the plate.
This light field has a diameter of approximately ten meters and is actually visible to certain sensitive individuals like psychics or clairvoyants.
The Tesla Purple Plates were originally written about in Linda Goodman's 1987 book "Star Signs" under the "Purple Plates for Purple Leprechauns" section. In the chapter she explains various interesting and beneficial ways to utilize these magical plates to bring about healing and extra energy.
In his book "Beyond Ascension" Joshua Stone refers to The Tesla Purple Plates:
"One of the most extraordinary tools I have found to raise my overall energy and even my light quotient is the Tesla Purple Plate. I am not one for gadgets. I have seen them all and I use almost none of them. The one exception I make is the use of The Tesla Purple Plate, which I am sure many of you have seen. It is actually a free-energy plate. The Tesla Purple Plate not only cleared the food of all negative energy, but also energized the food. Now I put all my food on it and continue to be amazed." Stone also goes on to claim that no matter what your diet is, if you use The Tesla Purple Plate it will guarantee that you will get the positive energy that you need. "...I don't own stock in the company, nor do I know the person who invented them. I am just very excited about all the ways Tesla Purple Plate can be used."
Benefits Of Using The Tesla Purple Plate™ Include:
1. Enhanced Energy.
2. Enhanced Vitality.
3. Enhanced Positivity.
4. Enhanced Creativity.
5. Enhanced Sense Of Wellness.
6. Enhanced Manifesting Abilities.
7. Enhanced Meditation.
8. Enhanced Sleep.
9. Enhanced Intuitive Skills.
10. Adaptogenic = Stress Buster.
The Tesla Purple Plate™ Represents The Synergy Of Futuristic Free Energy Tesla Technology With Contemporary Holistic Healthcare.
The Tesla Purple Plate™ is credit card sized (90mm x 60mm) and is an ideal size to be carried in a wallet or pocket.
The Tesla Purple Plate™ Wholesale Discount Pricing.
The Tesla Purple Plate™ Wholesale Pack Of Two is priced at $179. Save $20.
The Tesla Purple Plate™ Wholesale Pack Of Four is priced at $359. Save $40.
The Tesla Purple Plate™ Wholesale Pack Of Six is priced at $539. Save $60.
The Tesla Purple Plate™ Wholesale Pack Of Eight is priced at $719. Save $80.
The Tesla Purple Plate™ Wholesale Pack Of Ten is priced at $899. Save $100.
The Tesla Purple Plate™ is supplied complete with instructions.