Any individual, group or organization who provides formal or informal education and outreach to K-12 school groups, college students, camps, community organizations, service learning teams, families, or individuals about stewardship of our aquatic resources, including pollution prevention, water quality, ecology, biodiversity, and sustainability.
Delta Environmental supports water ecology in the Genesee, Lake Ontario and Finger Lakes Watershed through education and awareness. Since 1971, Delta Environmental provides environmental education with hands-on programs for K-12 students and the larger community on water resources and quality. Our outdoor field trips and in-school activities allow students opportunities for actively supporting the care of our water resources.For Field Trip Support, Stream Testing, Presentations, and Community Events, see adopt-a-stream.org for more information.
Rochester Institute of Technology – Program in Environmental Science
The Environmental Science program at RIT is where love of nature meets cutting- edge research to create a sustainable future for our planet. Our faculty and students are involved in education, research and community engagement to increase our understanding of the world around us and the complex environmental problems our society faces, and to develop innovative solutions.
RIT faculty and students engage in community based research and stewardship activities across the region. Current activities include urban ecology, ecosystem restoration, development of pollinator gardens, evaluation of green infrastructure practices, and outreach about water quality and invasive species. Contact: Christy Tyler
The Water Education Collaborative (WEC)
The Water Education Collaborative (WEC) is a coalition of organizations that work together to increase awareness and improve water quality education of the Genesee Regional Watersheds of Lake Ontario. In 2007, the Water Education Collaborative (WEC) started an awareness campaign that educates the residents of the Genesee Regional Watershed of Lake Ontario about the enormous impact they can have on the water quality in our area. Check out the website at H2Ohero.org for more info.
Greentopia is an environmental non-profit based in High Falls which runs two programs: a green workforce development programs called Green Visions and the newly formed High Falls EcoDistrict. Through these programs Greentopia is committed to promoting sustainable living and resilient communities. Our passion is to see the underutilized asset that is the High Falls neighborhood become a connected and vibrant part of our downtown riverfront corridor.
Seneca Park Zoo Society
Seneca Park Zoo inspires our community to connect, care for, and conserve wildlife and wild places as well as be a national leader in education and conservation action for species survival. We host camps, classes, and ZooMobiles dedicated to aquatic education as well as species survival and local ecology.
U.S. Coast Guard Auxiliary
The US Coast Guard Auxiliary offers a boating safety course through their program Teaching Safe Boating Practices and Good Waterways Stewardship. Monthly classes are offered.
Impact Earth is Rochester’s local zero waste solutions provider. They prioritize education in all of their programs and actively work to create the next generation of zero waste ambassadors in our community.
St. John Fisher College
At St. John Fisher College, faculty across the college work with community organizations on service learning projects that link course in biology, chemistry, political science, ethics, sustainability and others to pressing community issues like aquatic ecosystem stewardship. Current opportunities: Service Learning Partnerships in chemistry, biology, sustainability; Undergraduate research. See the Center for Sustainability for contact information.
NY’s Great Lakes Ecosystem Education Exchange
New York’s Great Lakes Ecosystem Education Exchange (NYGLEEE) is a program administered by New York Sea Grant and the New York State Department of Environmental Conservation, partnering with educators in New York’s Great Lakes watershed to develop an experiential environmental education program that promotes the next generation of environmentally literate, stewardship minded citizens and environmental professionals in NY’s Great Lakes watershed.
The New York Water Environment Association, Inc.
The NYWEA was founded in 1929 by a group of professionals and is made up of 2,500 members today. The purpose of the organization is to protect the environment. The Genesee Valley Chapter Industrial Issues Committee (IIC) has instituted a program through which grants are made to not-for-profit organizations to promote environmental awareness and education. Funds are allocated based on the approval of a majority of the committee members in attendance at any bimonthly meeting. Request grant eligibility criteria and an IIC Grant Application from email@example.com