Humans are all creatures of habit. Some habits help you improve while others drag you down. So if you are not as successful as you wish, you need to tweak a few habits to go from negative to positive.
Every morning, you wake up, then what do you do? Exactly! You have a routine. That is what habits are, something that you repeatedly do. No longer thinking about it, like Nike, you “Just do it”!
With this in mind, think of the person you wish to become, then take action in that direction.
For example, let’s say that you want to become more fit for the summer, then create a simple habit that will grow into something big. Start with walking for 10 minutes each day—no need to get on a treadmill for hours. Habits should start simple and not feel like a hassle because they will be your self-improvement’s compounded interest. I assure you that those 10 minutes will seem like nothing in a few weeks, and you will begin adding time. Meanwhile, your body will start re-shaping itself into the person you wish to become.
Create your routine. Each day will look similar, so ensure to be rehearsing good habits repeatedly until you become automatic like a system. Remember that you do not rise to the level of your goals and expectations. Instead, you will fall to the level of your systems. If you have a broken system, you should only expect to fail.
Schools and Politicians (aka the government) are great examples. It doesn’t matter which teacher or politician takes charge; they keep failing over and over again. So, are they all that bad? Not really. There are plenty of great teachers and politicians as well. But, sadly, the system used to run schools, and the government is broke. So, everyone within that system will fail regardless of how great they are individual. The same goes for you. You may be a great person, but it becomes harder to succeed if you have bad habits.
Forget about goals. Goals are great for giving you direction. Rather, focus on your systems instead. Systems are best for making progress.
How did I double the output of my co-workers?
I created a system. I prioritized the boss’s projects on a calendar for the beginning of the month. Then, all the small projects were spread daily throughout the week.
Every morning, I did the projects that I knew wouldn’t take me much time. I knocked out 3-4 little projects every morning. In the afternoon, I started taking down the big projects. Some took me all afternoon. Others were partially complete.
If I cannot finish the big project the same day, I will write it down for the next business day.
On the next business day, you have 2 options:
1. Do the little projects in the morning and the big projects in the afternoon.
2. Finish the big project from the previous day in the morning and use the afternoon for everything else.
I like to keep the routine or system running the same. That means I keep doing the small and quick projects in the mornings and leave the big projects for the afternoon. Finishing those little projects gives me a sense of pride and confidence that I carry into the afternoon to knock out the big projects.
I remove all distractions from my work area. Once I’m focused and in the zone, I can go for hours without stopping. Unfortunately, my co-workers spend too much time looking at Facebook, Twitter, and Instagram. You may not think about it, but try it for yourself. Remove your phone from your work area and see how much you can get done without distractions.
The only exception to changing my routine is that a big project is due soon, and we need to ensure it’s complete by a specific upcoming date.
A similar thing happens when it comes to investing. I have invested and subsequently have a more significant net worth than all my co-workers. Do you want to know why and how?
Simple, I have a system to invest my money every month automatically, and I have consistency.
For more lessons, tips, and tricks, read the book by James Clear titled “Atomic Habits.” You will find easy and proven ways to build good habits. For creating businesses that don’t need you to operate, read “The 4-Hour Workweek” by Timothy Ferriss.
That is how you can do the same. Look at your habits. Transform yourself by removing bad habits by replacing them with good ones. Those good habits will compound into even better habits, and you will become the person you always dreamed you could be. Create a daily system that will incorporate the routine you will use from the moment you wake up, have breakfast, go to work, lunch, work the second part of the day, exercise or practice a hobby, return home, enjoy some family time, and bed head. You can add or subtract things as needed. But know that systems are everything. You have to be the designer of your life. Take charge!
Now, begin your Road to Wealth!
Leave your comment below. If you liked it, pay it forward. Please share it on social media and help others become successful as well. Your success will be the result of two things: Knowledge and Action.
Follow me on TWITTER, PINTEREST, INSTAGRAM, LINKEDIN, FACEBOOK for more posts and updates. You can also reach me here with any questions.
DISCLAIMER: Please read our disclosure policy here. This post contains affiliate links, and I earn from qualifying purchases at no cost to you. There is a very high degree of risk involved in trading. Past results are not indicative of future returns. Road-to-wealth.com and all individuals affiliated with this site assume no responsibilities for your trading and investment results. The indicators, strategies, columns, articles, and other features are for educational purposes only and should not be construed as investment advice. Information for any trading observations is obtained from sources believed to be reliable. Still, we do not warrant its completeness or accuracy or warrant any results from the use of the information. Your use of the trading observations is entirely at your own risk, and it is your sole responsibility to evaluate the information’s accuracy, completeness, and usefulness. You must assess the risk of any trade with your broker and make your own independent decisions regarding any securities mentioned herein.