https://www.foreignaffairs.com/Related: Pesquisar • Business News
WECIQ 2012 » Workshop-School in Quantum Computation and Information » Quantum Algorithms In quantum computing , a quantum algorithm is an algorithm which runs on a realistic model of quantum computation , the most commonly used model being the quantum circuit model of computation.   A classical (or non-quantum) algorithm is a finite sequence of instructions, or a step-by-step procedure for solving a problem, where each step or instruction can be performed on a classical computer . Similarly, a quantum algorithm is a step-by-step procedure, where each of the steps can be performed on a quantum computer . Although all classical algorithms can also be performed on a quantum computer, the term quantum algorithm is usually used for those algorithms which seem inherently quantum, or use some essential feature of quantum computation such as quantum superposition or quantum entanglement . All problems which can be solved on a quantum computer can be solved on a classical computer.
No longer the world’s favourite airline - British Airways faces a £183m fine over a data breach BRITISH AIRWAYS (BA), the country’s flag carrier, used to make much in its advertising of being “the world’s favourite airline”. That slogan, which the airline used between 1989 and 2004, trumpeted its status as the world’s largest carrier by international passenger numbers. British Airways also claimed to provide some of the world’s best service, for instance, by introducing the world’s first fully-flat airline seats in 1995. But now it is an airline that both passengers and journalists love to hate. In recent years it has got rid of free food and drink in economy class on most short-haul flights, squeezed 20% more seats onto some of its planes and—horror of horrors—removed fresh flowers from its loos in first class. But nothing has so exemplified the falling standards of service at BA as much as a data hack last summer in which around 500,000 people had their personal data, including their credit-card details, stolen by hackers.
Israel/Palestine Over the past two days Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu has taken his most aggressive—and outlandish—tone yet on critics by accusing them of anti-Semitic tropes, following a collapsed effort to sanction Israel at the international soccer association, FIFA. Speaking to Knesset today Netanyahu said his country’s “actions are being twisted,” telling his parliament those who speak against Israel are initiating “false libels.” Al Jazeera reports: Adoption of a bill by Israeli cabinet ministers aimed at imposing tougher penalties on stone-throwers is the latest discriminatory measure by Israel, singling out Palestinians, a Palestinian diplomat has told Al Jazeera.
What Have We Done Wrong/Right in the War on Terror There's a terrific piece in the National Journal today, adding up the costs of the "war on terror" and pointing out that unlike some other costly wars in American history, this one has produced almost no economic benefits. That is, unless you think people standing in TSA lines are using those idle minutes (hours?) to dream up lots of innovative new ideas that will fire up the U.S. economy. I rather doubt it. Musk Says ‘Time To Break Up Amazon,’ Fueling Feud with Bezos Tesla Inc. Chief Executive Officer Elon Musk said it’s “time to break up Amazon” in a tweet Thursday, escalating a rivalry with Amazon.com Inc. CEO Jeff Bezos, another billionaire investing in space exploration. “Monopolies are wrong,” Musk tweeted while tagging Bezos, the world’s wealthiest man.
The Sunday Times Bonmarché blames Brexit and weather for sliding profits new Bonmarché, the discount clothing retailer, blamed a string of factors, from bad weather to Brexit, for sliding annual profits and its failure to increase market share. The company, which specialises in clothing for women aged over 50, complained that last year had been more challenging than it had expected and that it had not managed to...Bonmarché, the discount clothing retailer, blamed a string of factors, from bad weather to Brexit, for sliding annual profits and its failure to increase market share.
The 2013 Bit9 Cybersecurity Study Help Determine the Impact of Today's Advanced Cyber Attacks For survey results, please view the 2013 Cyber Security Study report. To review further survey analysis, please register for the webinar. From the board room to the data center, global organizations are increasingly aware of the damage that can be caused by today's most sophisticated cyber attacks, including the advanced persistent threat, targeted attacks and malware.
Poultry Industry Executives Indicted Over Alleged Price-Fixing Scam The Justice Department on Wednesday indicted four current and former executives from chicken producers Pilgrim's Pride and Claxton Poultry Farms over allegations of conspiracy to fix prices and rig bids between 2012 and 2017, the first charges in an ongoing antitrust investigation, according to a statement from the agency. The four executives charged with one-count indictments include Pilgrim's Pride CEO Jayson Penn and former vice president Roger Austin, as well as Claxton Poultry Farms president Mikell Fries and vice president Scott Brady. The Justice Department launched an investigation into potential price fixing between major poultry producers last year following years of accusations and litigation against producers like Perdue Farms, Sanderson Farms and Tyson Foods. According to the Wall Street Journal, poultry prices rose 11% between 2012 and 2018, then fell 27% between 2019 and February 2020 due to ramped up production and expansion. Big number 17%.
Meet The Forbes Under 30 Founders Leading The Next Billion-Dollar Startups “It was difficult to get anyone to take me seriously because I’m not a 60-year-old white male and in my industry that is very much the norm,” says Gaurab Chakrabarti, the cofounder and CEO of specialty-chemicals company Solugen. “While trying to have some authority, it’s always in the back of your mind, like, ‘Well, this person has been in the industry longer than I've been alive.’” But Chakrabarti, who cofounded the company with his friend Sean Hunt during his final year of medical school, persevered, getting $120,000 in funding from top accelerator Y Combinator in 2016. The duo snagged a spot on the 2017 Forbes Under 30 list at 27 years old each for their groundbreaking discovery: a sustainable process to create food-grade peroxide from plants.
McDonald’s Creates Swimwear From Plastic Straws To Advertise Environmental Moves In an effort to promote its environmental credentials in Europe–and how it is removing plastic straws in its branches–McDonald’s has created swimwear in its iconic red and yellow striped design from its plastic straws. McDonald’s has often been criticised for its promotion of throwaway culture and specifically, its reliance on single use plastics. In 2017, it came under renewed criticism for using plastic straws in its restaurants (a SumOf Us petition in the U.S. gained nearly 500,000 signatures in protest). In 2018, the company announced a switch to paper straws in Ireland and the U.K. but ironically, these appeared to be less recyclable than the old plastic straws.
Hacker Gives Away 386 Million Stolen Records On Dark Web—What You Need To Do Now "I've made enough money now" ShinyHunters said as stolen data is offered for free in a commercial dark web hacker forum. In just the first two weeks of May 2020, a hacker, known only as ShinyHunters, offered an astonishing 200 million stolen data records for sale on the dark web. Not repurposed data from old breaches, but fresh to the market and, therefore, very valuable.
Subscription needed for full access but a good amount of free content is available upon registering for a free account. US-centric. by sgsmlibrarian Sep 28