SOME writers have so confounded society with government, as to leave little or no distinction between them; whereas they are not only different, but have different origins. Society is produced by our wants, and government by our wickedness; the former promotes our happiness positively by uniting our affections, the latter negatively by restraining our vices. The one encourages intercourse, the other creates distinctions. The first is a patron, the last a punisher.
Society in every state is a blessing, but government even in its best state is but a necessary evil in its worst state an intolerable one; for when we suffer, or are exposed to the same miseries by a government, which we might expect in a country without government, our calamities is heightened by reflecting that we furnish the means by which we suffer! Government, like dress, is the badge of lost innocence; the palaces of kings are built on the ruins of the bowers of paradise. – Common Sense
Why does anyone care anything about these people? Instead of mobs with torches and pitchforks; these murderous, in-bred, psychopaths get your adoration.
I’m sure most of the 750 million people who watched Charles’ and Diana’s wedding are divorced now. How many of you can have your ex-wife publicly murdered and get away with it? How many dead bodies can be found at your house before you get sent to prison?
I know it is difficult to get over local or long standing prejudices, yet if we will suffer ourselves to examine the component parts of the English constitution, we shall find them to be the base remains of two ancient tyrannies, compounded with some new republican materials.
First.- The remains of monarchical tyranny in the person of the king.
…The two first, by being hereditary, are independent of the people; wherefore in a constitutional sense they contribute nothing towards the freedom of the state.
…There is something exceedingly ridiculous in the composition of monarchy
…How came the king by a power which the people are afraid to trust, and always obliged to check? Such a power could not be the gift of a wise people, neither can any power, which needs checking, be from God
…though we have and wise enough to shut and lock a door against absolute monarchy, we at the same time have been foolish enough to put the crown in possession of the key.
…The prejudice of Englishmen, in favor of their own government by king, lords, and commons, arises as much or more from national pride than reason.
…MANKIND being originally equals in the order of creation, the equality could only be destroyed by some subsequent circumstance
…the distinction of men into KINGS and SUBJECTS. Male and female are the distinctions of nature, good and bad the distinctions of heaven; but how a race of men came into the world so exalted above the rest, and distinguished like some new species, is worth enquiring into, and whether they are the means of happiness or of misery to mankind.
…Government by kings was first introduced into the world by the Heathens, from whom the children of Israel copied the custom. It was the most prosperous invention the Devil ever set on foot for the promotion of idolatry. The Heathens paid divine honors to their deceased kings, and the Christian world hath improved on the plan by doing the same to their living ones. How impious is the title of sacred majesty applied to a worm, who in the midst of his splendor is crumbling into dust!
As the exalting one man so greatly above the rest cannot be justified on the equal rights of nature, so neither can it be defended on the authority of scripture; for the will of the Almighty, as declared by Gideon and the prophet Samuel, expressly disapproves of government by kings.
Monarchy is ranked in scripture as one of the sins of the Jews, for which a curse in reserve is denounced against them. The history of that transaction is worth attending to.
…it unanswerably follows that original sin and hereditary succession are parallels. Dishonorable rank! Inglorious connection! Yet the most subtle sophist cannot produce a juster simile.
…To the evil of monarchy we have added that of hereditary succession; and as the first is a degradation and lessening of ourselves, so the second, claimed as a matter of right, is an insult and an imposition on posterity. For all men being originally equals, no one by birth could have a right to set up his own family in perpetual preference to all others for ever, and though himself might deserve some decent degree of honors of his contemporaries, yet his descendants might be far too unworthy to inherit them. One of the strongest natural proofs of the folly of hereditary right in kings, is, that nature disapproves it, otherwise she would not so frequently turn it into ridicule by giving mankind an ass for a lion.
Secondly, as no man at first could possess any other public honors than were bestowed upon him, so the givers of those honors could have no power to give away the right of posterity, and though they might say, “We choose you for our head,” they could not, without manifest injustice to their children, say, “that your children and your children’s children shall reign over ours for ever.” Because such an unwise, unjust, unnatural compact might (perhaps) in the next succession put them under the government of a rogue or a fool. Most wise men, in their private sentiments, have ever treated hereditary right with contempt; yet it is one of those evils, which when once established is not easily removed; many submit from fear, others from superstition, and the more powerful part shares with the king the plunder of the rest.
This is supposing the present race of kings in the world to have had an honorable origin
…England, since the conquest, hath known some few good monarchs, but groaned beneath a much larger number of bad ones
… But it is not so much the absurdity as the evil of hereditary succession which concerns mankind. Did it ensure a race of good and wise men it would have the seal of divine authority, but as it opens a door to the foolish, the wicked; and the improper, it hath in it the nature of oppression. Men who look upon themselves born to reign, and others to obey, soon grow insolent; selected from the rest of mankind their minds are early poisoned by importance; and the world they act in differs so materially from the world at large, that they have but little opportunity of knowing its true interests, and when they succeed to the government are frequently the most ignorant and unfit of any throughout the dominions.
Another evil which attends hereditary succession is, that the throne is subject to be possessed by a minor at any age; all which time the regency, acting under the cover of a king, have every opportunity and inducement to betray their trust. The same national misfortune happens, when a king worn out with age and infirmity, enters the last stage of human weakness. In both these cases the public becomes a prey to every miscreant, who can tamper successfully with the follies either of age or infancy.
…In England a king hath little more to do than to make war and give away places; which in plain terms, is to impoverish the nation and set it together by the ears. A pretty business indeed for a man to be allowed eight hundred thousand sterling a year for, and worshipped into the bargain! Of more worth is one honest man to society, and in the sight of God, than all the crowned ruffians that ever lived. – Common Sense
2 billion sleep-walking sheep watched two ne’er do wells get married on T.V.
Next – the public consummation.
Now, Her Highness is knocked up in the Royal Family Way. Oh yes, Celebrate, you filthy peasants, but don’t you dare call the hospital to ask if Kate is still throwing up. They’ll kill you for that.
Two Australian DJ’s called the hospital on-air. Mel Greig, (a woman) gave her best QEII impersonation and the nurse who answered the phone believed it and put the call through. The Duchess didn’t answer. Her attending nurse answered and also believed she was talking to the Queen.
It’s all fun and games until someone gets murdered by a hit-man
Jacintha Saldanha, the nurse who first answered the prank call was apparently so distraught over being fooled by these shock jocks, she was so overwrought with shame because she had helped those two Australian descendants of criminals to dare mock her gods of the English throne, this troubled her so much, that she felt that she would be better of dead and thus killed herself.
Can you hear the sarcasm in my voice?
The shock jocks will not be on-air until, further notice. Maybe being out of work, and the shame and guilt of this situation will drive them to commit “suicide” also.
In short, monarchy and succession have laid (not this or that kingdom only) but the world in blood and ashes. ‘Tis a form of government which the word of God bears testimony against, and blood will attend it. – Common Sense
- Map: Which of the world’s monarchies allow female royal succession (washingtonpost.com)
- U.K. Gets Commonwealth Consent to Change Royal Succession … – Bloomberg (bloomberg.com)
Public School Defends Posting Nativity Scene, Air Force Base Won’t Remove Nativity Scene, Menorah, Bill Press Tells Tebow: ‘S-T-F-U!’ About Jesus, Cops Summoned To Florida Elementary School After Girl Kisses Boy, Senate legalizes bestiality in the Armed Forces, A new study shows that mothers who return to the workforce are happier than mothers who choose to stay at home to raise their kids.
I reckon those mothers spent so much time away from home; they forgot who their kids were and wound up making out with them in public. Did you see the mother and son rolling around on the gym floor like they were going to make a baby right there in front of everybody? Her new grandsonson? His new little sisdaughter?
Stupid principal said that normal red-blooded, freedom-loving, God-fearing Americans are upset because we saw the video on YouTube and took it out of context. Oh, sorry Principal Wollersheim. We took it out of context. I’m glad you explained the whole situation to us. Oh wait; you gave no explanation. What is wrong with you? I recall public displays of affection being disallowed at every school I’ve attended. I don’t think context matters.
Principal Wollersheim; I don’t accept your weak apology with the stupid little smirk on your fat face. I’ll accept your apology right before your sentencing. You are guilty of the same crimes committed by the strip-search scammer, David R. Stewart. I pray that the people of your county in Minnesota are calling your Superintendent and demanding your termination. I pray that next, they call the D.A.’s office and demand you be charged and dragged into court.
Newt Gingrich’s statement about poor kids working in their schools outraged people. Rush Limbaugh made a good point about this when he asked; why were people upset about suggesting schoolkids working? Aren’t many Americans unemployed and desiring work? Isn’t the President pushing a “Jobs Bill” now? Limbaugh asked, isn’t public school preparation and training for work? Well, if suggesting schoolkids work is controversial, then maybe public school isn’t about work. Maybe it is all about indoctrination.
If this man doesn’t rot in prison; this will be one more proof to us that there is an agenda to dumb down the American people so that we will accept anything that is imposed upon us.