Breath analysis using online mass spectrometry is proving to be a valuable tool for identifying prospective disease biomarkers and tracking the disease evolution and progression of therapeutic therapy. The uptake of molecules from inhaled air into the lungs may also be measured via mass spectral breath analysis.
Volatility, solubility and polarity all play a role in uptake, with certain substances flowing through the blood-air barrier more easily than others for distribution throughout the body. For risk assessment linked to short- or long-term exposure, accurate calculation of a potentially hazardous compound’s absorption is important.
Figure 1. Analysis of human breath at 5 Hz by a TOFWERK Vocus 2R PTR-TOF over a period of 10 minutes. The subject inhales air from the laboratory and exhales into the breath inlet of the instrument. The time evolution of acetone (blue), isoprene (green) and N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone (red) are reported. The latter is an air contaminant originating from the laminate used in the laboratory flooring and is always present. In these data, its concentration is consistently higher in the inhaled air and lower in the exhaled air, indicating uptake of the compound in the lungs.
TOFWERK is a global leader in time-of-flight mass spectrometry, delivering sensitive instruments for laboratory, industrial, and field analyses. Our customers’ interests range from materials science and geochemistry to metabolomics and trace-gas
TOFWERK engineers and scientists collaborate with research laboratories and OEM customers to develop custom MS solutions based on our modular design platform. This platform enables rapid design and manufacturing of novel instrumentation for research laboratories and OEM customers.
Our end-user product line includes the icpTOF, Vocus PTR-TOF, IMS-TOF, and EI-TOF for GC. These mass spectrometers bring the speed and sensitivity of TOFMS to many disciplines and sample types.
Sponsored Content Policy: News-Medical.net publishes articles and related content that may be derived from sources where we have existing commercial relationships, provided such content adds value to the core editorial ethos of News-Medical.Net which is to educate and inform site visitors interested in medical research, science, medical devices and treatments.