Public Policies become more efficient with the use of technology addresses Sergio Santana Jr
Photo – Sergio Santana Jr in Legislative Assembly of the State of São Paulo – Brazil Digital transformation has radically changed the global economy in recent decades. Even though there is public…
Photo – Sergio Santana Jr in Legislative Assembly of the State of São Paulo – Brazil
Digital transformation has radically changed the global economy in recent decades. Even though there is public funding, it was a movement driven by private sector companies. The challenge for the coming years is the adoption of best practices in technological innovation by governments around the world.
Understand the concept of technopolitics
Currently, technological practices produce fundamental effects on power relations. Sergio Santana Jr explains that the most profound dilemmas in political, ethical, legal, social and communicational terms today are compounded by the dynamics forged by a technological culture. This happens when there is an automation of thought, that is, when thought becomes calculation and we see technology as a solution to our social and political problems, in a kind of digital utopianism.
Instagram - URL
Twitter – URL
Linkedin – URL
Facebook - URL
Technology seen as absolute truth
Sergio comments that the problem is amplified when technology is used as an absolute truth, without people realizing that algorithms and automated data produced on a large scale were created from political choices that are not neutral. Sergio says that in banks, for example, e-scores are used to predict the possibility of people's default based on where they live or with whom they report. Criminal prediction devices, on the other hand, seek to predict whether the person will commit a crime again or even determine their sentence to be fulfilled, taking into account the color of their skin, where they live, whether they have friends with experience in the police, among other proxies that configure (often prejudiced) opinions. in code format.Media ContactContact Person: Sergio Santana JrEmail: Send EmailCountry: BrazilWebsite: URL