Go to the Pew Media Center’s “State of the News Media” site and select a news industry (or several) you care about for the most up-to-date economic information. The “Six Key Takeaways” offers a helpful overview.
► Picard, Robert G. (2018). The economics of journalism and news provision The economics of journalism and news provision – Alternative Formats . In Tim Vos (Ed.), Journalism: Handbooks of communication science (Vol. 19). (pp. 281-296). De Gruyter Mouton. https://doi.org/10.1515/9781501500084 Chapter doi: https://doi.org/10.1515/9781501500084-014
►Chapters 1 and 2 from Meyer, P. (2009). The vanishing newspaper: Saving journalism in the information age Click for more options The vanishing newspaper: Saving journalism in the information age – Alternative Formats (2nd.). University of Missouri Press. (Read the chapters from this print-centric book from more than a decade ago, and consider in the context of what Meyer is arguing and the extent to which he may be correct.)
►McAllister, M. P., & Proffitt, J. M. (2020). Media ownership, autonomy, and democracy in a corporate age Media ownership, autonomy, and democracy in a corporate age – Alternative Formats . In L. Wilkins and C. Christians (eds.) (2nd ed.) The Routledge handbook of mass media ethics, 465-478.
And be sure to add your own insights from research and information about how the changing economics and other things have affected news industries.
For this assignment, you will demonstrate your mastery of writing well; this includes using Associated Press style. Your paper should illustrate your comprehension of the module readings analyzing key points for each. See the Course Schedule for the due date. Follow the instructions below to complete the assignment:
Explain the readings in ways to show that you’ve done the readings.
Point out specific arguments that are particularly cogent or specious.
Tell me what struck you about each reading – what you liked or didn’t like – and why.
Ask questions that you would like to see discussed for the week.
Provide at least two writing prompts based on the readings (including page numbers) that could become the online discussion topics.
It can be based upon compare/contrast of different approaches, or why you think one approach would be best for journalists while another would not be good.
Evaluate those arguments.
Compare disparate arguments, and draw conclusions in favor of the argument that seems the most cogent to you.
Persuade readers why you’re right and others may be wrong.
Validate those arguments, as you can, using examples from your own experience or from other information.
Why Work with Us
Top Quality and Well-Researched Papers
We always make sure that writers follow all your instructions precisely. You can choose your academic level: high school, college/university or professional, and we will assign a writer who has a respective degree.
Professional and Experienced Academic Writers
We have a team of professional writers with experience in academic and business writing. Many are native speakers and able to perform any task for which you need help.
Free Unlimited Revisions
If you think we missed something, send your order for a free revision. You have 10 days to submit the order for review after you have received the final document. You can do this yourself after logging into your personal account or by contacting our support.
Prompt Delivery and 100% Money-Back-Guarantee
All papers are always delivered on time. In case we need more time to master your paper, we may contact you regarding the deadline extension. In case you cannot provide us with more time, a 100% refund is guaranteed.
Original & Confidential
We use several writing tools checks to ensure that all documents you receive are free from plagiarism. Our editors carefully review all quotations in the text. We also promise maximum confidentiality in all of our services.
24/7 Customer Support
Our support agents are available 24 hours a day 7 days a week and committed to providing you with the best customer experience. Get in touch whenever you need any assistance.
Try it now!
How it works?
Follow these simple steps to get your paper done
Place your order
Fill in the order form and provide all details of your assignment.
Proceed with the payment
Choose the payment system that suits you most.
Receive the final file
Once your paper is ready, we will email it to you.
No need to work on your paper at night. Sleep tight, we will cover your back. We offer all kinds of writing services.
No matter what kind of academic paper you need and how urgent you need it, you are welcome to choose your academic level and the type of your paper at an affordable price. We take care of all your paper needs and give a 24/7 customer care support system.
Admission Essays & Business Writing Help
An admission essay is an essay or other written statement by a candidate, often a potential student enrolling in a college, university, or graduate school. You can be rest assurred that through our service we will write the best admission essay for you.
Our academic writers and editors make the necessary changes to your paper so that it is polished. We also format your document by correctly quoting the sources and creating reference lists in the formats APA, Harvard, MLA, Chicago / Turabian.
If you think your paper could be improved, you can request a review. In this case, your paper will be checked by the writer or assigned to an editor. You can use this option as many times as you see fit. This is free because we want you to be completely satisfied with the service offered.