The water cycle is the process of water moving around between the air and land. Or in more scientific terms: the water cycle is the process of water evaporating and condensing on planet Earth in a continuous process.
What is water cycle for Class 4th?
They are evaporation, condensation, precipitation and collection.
What is water cycle class3?
Answer: The water cycle describes how water evaporates from the surface of the earth, rises into the atmosphere, cools and condenses into rain or snow in clouds, and falls again to the surface as precipitation.
What is water cycle in short class 7?
Answer: The constant flow of water from the Earth to the atmosphere and back to the Earth is known as the water cycle. The two main steps involved in water cycle are evaporation and condensation. Evaporation is the process in which water changes into vapour due to the heat of the Sun.
What is water cycle in short Class 2? – Related Questions
What is the water cycle Class 5?
In the water cycle, water from lakes, rivers, and oceans evaporate and enter the atmosphere where it cools, condenses into liquid water, and comes back to Earth as rain.
What is water cycle BYJU’s?
the cycle of processes by which water circulates between the earth’s oceans, atmosphere, and land, involving precipitation as rain and snow, drainage in streams and rivers, and return to the atmosphere by evaporation and transpiration. Suggest Corrections.
What are the 7 steps of water cycle?
- THE WATER CYCLE.
What is water cycle with diagram?
The water cycle is defined as a natural process of constantly recycling the water in the atmosphere. It is also known as the hydrological cycle or the hydrologic cycle. During the process of the water cycle between the earth and the atmosphere, water changes into three states of matter – solid, liquid and gas.
What is transpiration class 7th?
The loss of water in the form of water vapour from aerial parts of plants is known as transpiration.
What is water cycle for Class 9?
The process in which water evaporates and falls on the land as rain and later flows back into the sea via rivers is called water cycle. (1) Water evaporates from hydrosphere(oceans, seas, river, lakes, ponds)with sun’s heat and form clouds.
What is Toppr water cycle?
The water cycle or hydrological cycle is a continuous cycle where water evaporates, travels into the air and becomes part of a cloud, falls down to earth as precipitation, and then evaporates again. This repeats again and again in a never-ending cycle.
What is water cycle for kids?
The Short Answer: The water cycle is the path that all water follows as it moves around Earth in different states. Liquid water is found in oceans, rivers, lakes—and even underground. Solid ice is found in glaciers, snow, and at the North and South Poles. Water vapor—a gas—is found in Earth’s atmosphere.
What is the definition of water cycle for Class 8?
What is Water Cycle? The water cycle, also known as the hydrologic cycle, is the continuous movement of water from the earth’s surface to the atmosphere and then back to the ground. It is a continuous process. Hence, it does not have a starting or an ending point.
What is the importance of water cycle Class 6?
Water cycle is important because of the following reasons: (1) Water cycle makes fresh water available in the form of rain: The sea-water is highly salty which is not fit for drinking by animals or for the growth of plants. But the rain water is pure water. It can be utilised by animals as well as plants.
How long is the water cycle?
A drop of water may spend over 3,000 years in the ocean before evaporating into the air, while a drop of water spends an average of just nine days in the atmosphere before falling back to Earth.
How are clouds formed Class 6?
Water present on the earth’s surface gets evaporated due to sunlight, and then rises up in the atmosphere. On reaching a certain height, water vapour present in air condenses to form tiny droplets of water. These water droplets collect to form clouds that float in air.
How is soil formed Class 9?
Answer: Soil is formed by breaking down of rocks at or near the surface of the Earth through various physical, chemical, and biological processes by various factors such as the sun, water, wind, and living organisms.
What causes wind class 9?
Answer: Winds are caused due to unequal heating of atmospheric air. This phenomena can be easily seen near coastal regions during the daytime. The air above the land gets heated faster and starts rising. As this air rises, a region Of low pressure is created and air over the sea moves into this area Of low pressure.
How is rain formed Class 9?
Rain is droplets of water that are condensed as a result of evaporation. During the water cycle formation of clouds takes place. Rain is also called precipitation. Water is absorbed from different water bodies, a large amount of which vaporizes and enters the atmospheric air.
What causes dry weather?
The dry weather has been caused by a high-pressure ridge of air that rises four miles above the Earth’s surface and stretches from Canada to Mexico. The air on top weighs heavily on the air below, causing it to sink under its own weight.
What is rain for kids?
Rain is the liquid form of water that falls from the sky in drops. Rain fills lakes, ponds, rivers, and streams. It provides the fresh water needed by humans, animals, and plants. If too much rain falls, however, dangerous flooding may happen.