top of page
FINE ARTS WORKSHOPS
Offering summer classes, 1-day workshops, and an intensive camp in various art forms from pottery to drawing!
AIR DRY CLAY FOR THE YOUNG ARTIST!
Dive into clay to learn the basics of hand building, sculpture, and texture! Clay building also helps improve eye/hand coordination and build both gross and fine motor skills, including the small muscles in hands and fingers.
PAINTING FOR THE YOUNG ARTIST!
Introduce your kids to painting! Young students learn to develop creative problem solving skills, communicate opinions in a variety of ways and adapt to and respect other points of view. Not only that, when a child is able to express him or herself in a creative way, he or she develops self-esteem, self-discipline and self-motivation – all key life skills.
Dive into clay to learn the basics of hand building, sculpture, and texture! This is a beginning ceramics class for students who are interested in acquiring knowledge to all basic aspects of sculptural and functional clay.
Dive deeper into the painting world, while learning about acrylic and watercolor painting techniques! This course introduces students to a range of painting techniques through exercises designed to develop an awareness of line, volume, form and color.
PAPER ARCHITECTURE WORKSHOP
This STEAM based class will combine Art + Architecture. Students will learn to create 3D structures through artistic exploration. This class uses everyday materials like paper, cardboard, legos, recyclable and natural materials to create interesting 3 dimensional structures.
VISUAL ARTS INTENSIVE
Explore your creative potential during our week long Visual Arts Intensive camp! This camp offers an arts focused program for 10 and above aspiring artists. Ideal for students who want to learn acrylic and watercolor painting, clay building and mixed media skills, this camp will help explore your creative possibilities!
ANIME MANGA WORKSHOP
Join other fellow manga artists during this camp to dive deeper into the world of drawing manga! We will look at today’s artists that study manga and incorporate manga into their own masterpiece by developing our own skills and experimenting with various mediums to create interesting and exciting works of art!
PAINT LIKE A MASTER
Create a painting inspired by a famous artist!
bottom of page