You may have to register before you can download all our books and magazines, click the sign up button below to create a free account.
This Third Edition is the first English-language edition of the award-winning Meilensteine der Rechentechnik; illustrated in full color throughout in two volumes. The Third Edition is devoted to both analog and digital computing devices, as well as the world's most magnificient historical automatons and select scientific instruments (employed in astronomy, surveying, time measurement, etc.). It also features detailed instructions for analog and digital mechanical calculating machines and instruments, and is the only such historical book with comprehensive technical glossaries of terms not found in print or in online dictionaries. The book also includes a very extensive bibliography based on ...
The bibliography offers information on research about writing and written language over the past 50 years. No comprehensive bibliography on this subject has been published since Sattler's (1935) handbook. With a selection of some 27,500 titles it covers the most important literature in all scientific fields relating to writing. Emphasis has been placed on the interdisciplinary organization of the bibliography, creating many points of common interest for literacy experts, educationalists, psychologists, sociologists, linguists, cultural anthropologists, and historians. The bibliography is organized in such a way as to provide the specialist as well as the researcher in neighboring disciplines with access to the relevant literature on writing in a given field. While necessarily selective, it also offers information on more specialized bibliographies. In addition, an overview of norms and standards concerning 'script and writing' will prove very useful for non-professional readers. It is, therefore, also of interest to the generally interested public as a reference work for the humanities.
This book constitutes the refereed post-proceedings of the IFIP WG 9.7 International Conference on the History of Computing, HC 2013, held in London, UK, in June 2013. The 29 revised full papers presented were carefully reviewed and selected from numerous submissions. The papers cover a wide range of topics related to the history of computing and offer a number of different approaches to making this history relevant. These range from discussion of approaches to describing and analyzing the history through storytelling and education to description of various collections, working installations and reconstruction projects. The papers have been organized in the following topical sections: the importance of storytelling in museums; spotlight on some key collections and their future plans; thoughts on expanding the audience for computing history; spotlight on some research projects; integrating history with computer science education; putting the history of computing into different contexts; celebrating nostalgia for games - and its potential as Trojan horse; the importance and challenges of working installations; and reconstruction stories.
This book is a study of the major events and publications in the world of translation in China and the West from its beginning in the legendary period to 2004, with special references to works published in Chinese and English. It covers a total of 72 countries/places and 1,000 works. All the events and activities in the field have been grouped into 22 areas or categories for easy referencing. This book is a valuable reference tool for all scholars working in the field of translation.
This dictionary is intended for anyone who is interested in translation and translation technology. Especially, translation as an academic discipline, a language activity, a specialized profession, or a business undertaking. The book covers theory and practice of translation and interpretation in a number of areas. Addressing and explaining important concepts in computer translation, computer-aided translation, and translation tools. Most popular and commercially available translation software are included along with their website addresses for handy reference. This dictionary has 1,377 entries. The entries are alphabetized and defined in a simple and concise manner.
This book contains revised selected papers presented at the IFIP WG 9.7 International Conference on the History of Computing, HC 2016, held in Brooklyn, NY, USA, in May 2016. The 13 full papers included in this volume were carefully reviewed and selected from numerous submissions. The papers cover a wide range of topics related to the history of computing and focus on the history of pre-existing relationships and communities that led to triumphs (and dead-ends) in the history of computing. This broad perspective helps to tell a more accurate story of important developments like the Internet and provide a better understanding of how to sponsor future invention and innovation. They reflect on histories that foreground the international community along four broad themes: invention, policy, infrastructure, and social history.
One of the most impressive computer systems ever was the vacuum tube based behemoth AN/FSQ-7, which was the heart of the ''Semi Automatic Ground Environment''. Machines of this type were children of the Cold War and had a tremendous effect in politics. They also generated a vast amount of spin-offs which still shape our world. This book focuses on the technological achievements and details of this marvelous machine and of its predecessor Whirlwind. The various developments, ranging from magnetic core memory to data transmission via telephone lines, are covered in detail with schematics, circuit descriptions and small programming examples. This book is a treasure trove for those interested in the technology of early digital computers and those interested in the impact these machines had and still have on our current computer systems.
Orreries—mechanical models of the Solar System and its motions—are found everywhere. They appear in paintings, on computers, across natural landscapes, and in museums all over the world. The more you look, the more you find, yet their significance is often overlooked aside other great astronomical inventions. This book reclaims the history of the orrery, offering a fascinating look into its evolution over the centuries. With a particular focus on London society and clockmakers, it weaves together historical narrative with practical know-hows and scientific fact, showing how the orrery changed from a fanciful toy to a high-tech instrument to a vessel for art and education. The first edition, Orrery, explained what an orrery is and how it got its name. This revised edition goes several steps further, tracing the instrument back to the time of Ptolemy and forward to planetariums and star projectors. In addition, it features new sections on how to construct your own orrery at home. This book will appeal to anybody interested in astronomical mechanical devices, scientific instruments, horology, or the history of clocks.
This book provides an overview of the confluence of ideas in Turing’s era and work and examines the impact of his work on mathematical logic and theoretical computer science. It combines contributions by well-known scientists on the history and philosophy of computability theory as well as on generalised Turing computability. By looking at the roots and at the philosophical and technical influence of Turing’s work, it is possible to gather new perspectives and new research topics which might be considered as a continuation of Turing’s working ideas well into the 21st century.