Play and exciting activities are wonderful ways to help a baby or toddler’s brain develop. Play might be a game, talking, or singing to actively engage your child’s brain.
Some activities for your 2-year-old children are as follows-
This is the best and easier indoor activity for 2-year-olds. You have to hide your toy somewhere in the house and ask your child to find it. You can also use flashlights for the search or hide several objects at one time.
Decorate a Crayon Carrier
In this activity, you have to cover a table with newspaper, zip the bag, glue stick, pompoms, and crayons. Let your child use the glue stick to coat the Ziploc bag and help him stick on the colorful pompoms. He can fill the bag with crayons when it dries. Your toddler will be excited to use his creativity again.
Trace His Body
In this activity, you have to lay your toddler on a large piece of paper, and then trace the outline of his body. Through this, your toddler will be able to self-control.
Craft a Collage
In this activity, you have to give them leaves, flowers, stones, marbles, and other decorative things and a picture of the family. So, that they can easily be made a handmade collage. Through this, they can get new things to know.
Sing your favorite song of your child and through lyrics draw a simple picture of what is happening in the lyrics.
Pass a Ball
Stand at the opposite end with your toddler, take turns lifting each end to roll a ball back and forth. It helps them to know about teamwork and coordination.
On Fububox there is a collection of bubble activities that are great for nurturing a child’s sense of curiosity.
Managing Messy Sensory Play with Toddlers
Messy play is fantastic to play for babies, toddlers, and preschoolers- it’s important for their growth and development. It helps them learn, explore, and engage with the world in a way no other play can.
Fububox is here to nourish your curious young minds with a delectable mix of books from across the globe. It is the subscription model that curates the most ideal activity pack suited for your kid. Our choices are driven by your little one’s interests and a panel of esteemed experts. Specifically focusing on the early brain development, stimulating their thinking with every carefully picked pack.
Choose the age-appropriate Box
0-2 yrs- (2-3) Board Books
2-4 yrs- 3 Picture Books
4-7 yrs- 3 Picture Books
Choose the subscription plan
6 months or 12 monthsWhere to Buy- https://www.fububox.com/