Who Is the Greek God of Law
In this literary work, Themis is portrayed as the mother of Prometheus. Promeththius received the prophecy from Themis that war would not be won by force or force, but by craft. Other sources, however, portray Prometheus as a nephew rather than a child of Themis. Not much is known about the origin of Themis, but we do know from Hesiod that she was one of six children from Gaia and Uranus. This makes her one of the original six titans. However, she seems best known for being one of Zeus` wives. Together, Zeus and Themis had six children—three Horai or hours and three Morai or destinies. The three Horai children represented life and the three Morai children represented death. Each of his children had different functions and was important in his own way.
As the prophetic goddess of the Oracle of Delphi, Themis was present at the birth of Apollo. Themis helped Leto care for Apollo, who even received nectar and ambrosia directly from Themis. A set of established rules that apply to all is the root of a just and just society, and Themis remains a reminder that even divine powers could not keep the peace for very long without first maintaining law and order. Thus, the name is very synonymous with divine laws and the word of the gods. Unlike the word nomos, it does not actually apply to human laws and decrees. Themis is justice personified and symbolizes justice, rights, balance and, of course, law and order. Those who pray to Themis ask the cosmic forces to bring them justice and justice to their lives and efforts. This great change in divine power also benefited the female titans, as each of them was given a privileged position and a specific role as a leader.
Themis became the goddess of divine law and order, and even the goddess of justice. Themis was present in Delos to witness the birth of Apollo and cured him with nectar and ambrosia. In his De Astronomica, Hyginus mentions Themis alongside the nymph Amalthea as the adoptive mother and nurse of the young Zeus.  In a fragment of Pindar, Themis was taken by the Moirai (and not their daughters in this version) from the sources of Oceanus to Olympus, where she became the first wife of Zeus (not the second) and by him the mother of Horae.  Pausanias, the Greek traveler and geographer, vividly described her temple in Thebes and the three shrines near the Neistan Gate. The first was a sanctuary of Themis, with an idol of the goddess in white marble. The second was a sanctuary for the Moirai. The third was the sanctuary of Zeus Agoraios (from the market). In ancient Greece, Themis was never depicted blindfolded. More recently, his Roman counterpart, Justitia, has been depicted blindfolded to symbolize that justice is blind.
As one of the original twelve Titan gods and goddesses of Greek mythology, Themis was the goddess of divine law and order. She was seen as the personification of justice and equity, law and order, wisdom and good advice, and she was depicted with several symbols to symbolize her relationship with justice. She has also been credited with oracle powers, visions, and foresight. Despite the similarities in their names, Themis should not be confused with her sister Tethys, the goddess of the sea. Themis was portrayed as a beautiful woman, sometimes holding a pair of scales in one hand and a sword or cornucopia in the other. A similar image was used for the Roman goddess Iustitia (Justitia or Lady Justice). Themis followed his mother Gaia in the occupation of the oracle at Delphi. In some traditions, Themis created the oracle.
Eventually, she handed over the Delphi desk to Apollo or his sister Phoebe. The Temple of Themis in Athens is located west of the Theatre of Dionysus.  The temple of Themis at Dodona is tetrastyle pronaos in antis with a cella, an entrance on the north side and outside was a large altar. The columns of the temple of Dodona were Ionic in local sandstone.  Their name means „alloce“ or the one who draws lots. The role of the Lachesis was to measure the threads spun on the spindle of Clotho and to determine the time or life assigned to each being. Her instrument was a stick that helped her measure wires, and she was also responsible for choosing a person`s fate and appearance. Mythology says that Lachesis and his sisters appeared shortly after the birth of a baby to decide the fate of the baby. Some myths suggest for her husband the titan Iapetus, with whom Themis was the mother of Prometheus (providence). She gave him the knowledge that helped him escape Zeus` punishment. In some myths, however, Prometheus` mother was rather Clymene. In early Greek representations, another goddess of justice, Dike, carried out the decisions of fate.