Soil and Water Conservation District
About Taylor SWCD
The mission of the Taylor Soil and Water Conservation District is to provide the administration of programs to conserve soil and improve water quality and quantity on private lands in Taylor County.
What We Do
The Taylor Soil & Water Conservation District works closely with the U.S. Department of Agriculture Natural Resource Conservation Service (NRCS) creating ways to conserve water, prevent soil erosion, convert irrigation systems and inform the public about conservation problems.
A Code of Ethics has been adopted by the district. For Code of Ethics Information.
View Code of Ethics Here.
The Taylor SWCD operates under Florida Statutes 582 under the Florida Legislature.
Assist land owners in their efforts to secure financial assistance through Farm Bill Programs to implement conservation practices
Conservation education, programs and information
Assist growers with development of low volume irrigation systems
Develop and update irrigation water management plans
Soil surveys and historical maps
- Local government advice and assistance
- Youth education
- Invasive plant control
The annual Envirothon, Poster & Speech Contest and Land Judging are some of the educational programs with which we are currently involved.
If you are interested in volunteering for any of these programs, in having a district supervisor work with you on a project or in offering your support for our work, please contact:
- Aquatics – water ecology, water chemistry, water quality, and aquatic life.
- Current Environmental Issues – annually selected topics such as energy sources, ground water, Gulf of Mexico environmental concerns or other current issues.
- 2016 Topic is Invasive Species
- Forestry – tree identification, tree ecology, insects, and timber.
- Soils – classification, formation, soil properties, profiles, and site suitability.
- Wildlife – habitat, identification, food, disease, and management.
Each team consists of five students. Schools can enter more than one team, but no more than six teams. The five-member teams are led by an advisor in studying prepared resource materials in the five areas including a selected current environmental issue, which for 2016 is “Invasive Species, a Challenge to the Environment, Economy and Society.”
Schools can enter more than one team, but no more than six teams. During the competition, the students will rotate to the five testing stations.The Regional Envirothon is sponsored by Taylor Soil and Water Conservation Districts, bringing together soil scientists, wildlife experts, foresters, park and recreational leaders, and other environmental specialists to challenge students to learn about our natural resources.
Each year, the poster contest starts at the district level. Individuals and teachers with questions regarding district contests should contact their local district. To locate your local district search our state directory. District winners advance to the state level. For questions regarding state competitions, districts should contact their state association. Finally, state winners advance to the National Contest. National winners are recognized each year at the NACD Annual Meeting.
**PLEASE NOTE: Check your state poster contest sponsoring group to determine deadline and theme topic and correct poster size. Each state coordinates their own contest. Posters must follow your state’s guidelines to be eligible for the national contest.
Go here for more information.
Check back for more details coming soon.
The skills the teens use at the contest involve principles that can be valuable in career fields like environmental and agricultural management, natural resources conservation, home building, engineering, and construction. Students can compete at the local, state, and national levels.
The Taylor Soil & Water Conservation District host local middle and high school students in FFA and 4-H to test their knowledge by judging soils from four pits that are selected by a Soil Scientist with USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service.
In each class (Middle 4-H, High 4-H, Middle FFA, High FFA) the local county winner may compete at the state contest in that respective class.
Top placing teams in the state contest are eligible to compete at the National Land Judging Contest held at the end of April.
To view the District’s annual financial report visit the Department of Financial Services:
- View Financial Reports Here
- VIEW AUDIT Fiscal Year 2016 here.
This includes the final, complete audit report for the most recent completed fiscal year ending September 30.
Get in Touch!
Taylor Soil and Water Conservation District
203 Forest Park Drive
Perry, FL 32348