Serve or pitch? Dates on various products leave consumers puzzled
Knowing how long food is safe to eat can be confusing.
Many labels read “Best by,” “Best before” or “Sell by” — but what do such terms really mean?
Not much, according to at least one food-safety expert.
The dates have little bearing on a product’s freshness, said Michael Hansen, a senior scientist with Consumers Union, the policy and advocacy arm of Consumer Reports in New York.
“They have nothing to do with safety,” he said. “Those are just meant as some kind of quality indication.”
Yet the dates carry plenty of weight with consumers, many of whom equate them with food safety.
Such an association, experts say, leads to enormous amounts of food being thrown away unnecessarily each year.
“An estimated 30 to 40 percent of food (in the United States) gets wasted when it doesn’t have to,” Hansen said.
In a 2014 survey by NSF International, a public health-and-safety organization based in Ann Arbor, Mich., 36 percent of consumers said they threw out foods past their “sell-by” dates.
The amount translates to $161 billion in wasted food, according to Jennifer Tong, a food-safety expert with NSF.
“Throwing out good food too soon contributes to the growing problem of food waste,” Tong said in an email interview.
Conversely, she said, confusion about packaging dates can also lead consumers to “keep food too long and expose themselves to food-borne pathogens.”
The same study showed that 27 percent of Americans keep foods well beyond their expiration dates — a problem that, Tong said, raises concerns about consumers exposing themselves to harmful bacteria in spoiled foods.
The worst offenders for keeping food too long are middle-aged and elderly consumers. Younger consumers, meanwhile, tend to discard foods too quickly, regardless of the date.
For most products, consumers are at the mercy of a system with no rules.
Except with infant formula, food labeling — as it pertains to freshness — carries no universal regulations, according to the Food Safety and Inspection Service of the U.S. Department of Agriculture.
Only 20 states, including Ohio, have some rules.
Ohio law requires that eggs, shellfish, baby food and packaged perishable foods with shelf lives of fewer than 30 days be dated.
Fresh fruits and vegetables typically have no dates; but most, when stored in a home refrigerator, begin to deteriorate within a week.
Even a label with a seemingly clear meaning isn’t a guarantee of quality, Hansen said.
Milk, for example, typically carries an expiration date, but if it has been improperly handled along the way — say, not stored at the proper temperature — it could go bad much sooner, he said. When properly stored, milk usually remains good for several days past the date on the carton.
Canned goods are safe to eat for years beyond their expiration dates.
“I just ate a can of soup the other day (for which) the expiration date was 2008, and it was still fine,” said Hansen, although he acknowledged that its chalky consistency wouldn’t have been present in a fresher batch.
Unless a can is damaged or bulging, or the seal disrupted, the food inside is good indefinitely, said Katie Calligaro, communication manager for the Canned Food Alliance in Pittsburgh.
Bulging cans — an indication of bacterial contamination — should be discarded.
The heat process used for canning kills all bacteria and essentially creates a sterile environment inside the can.
“We typically say two to three years from date of purchase, but it’s really fine, from a safety standpoint, forever,” Calligaro said.
Food manufacturers, she said, put dates on packages to satisfy consumers.
“The only reason some might have a best-by date is because people started asking for them and looking for it. But it doesn’t really need it.”
Food companies, however, prefer to have foods eaten when they taste and perform the best — so that customers have a pleasant experience.
Because a cake mix contains baking powder, for example, the powder loses its ability over time to leaven the cake. An expired mix isn’t harmful and might taste fine but might not rise during baking.
So what’s a consumer to do?
First, understand what grocery codes mean or don’t mean.
Use-by or expiration dates typically correlate to product safety.
Dairy products and uncooked meats, when kept too long, pose the biggest safety threat, said Tong, who recommends carefully following such dates.
Sell-by dates tell retailers how long to display a product, and consumers should buy the product before the date has passed. Some such products, however, have only short lives after the date. (See the chart at left.)
According to information from the Institute of Food Technologists, roughly a third of a product’s shelf life remains after the sell-by date, Tong noted.
Consumers with questions, Calligaro said, shouldn’t hesitate to call the toll-free numbers printed on most cans and boxes.
And, as Hansen advised, “Always use common sense.”