Indigestion Causes, Symptoms and Remedies
Indigestion or medically referred to as Dyspepsia is one of the common bowel ailments affecting at least 20% of the United States population every year. This functional disease has specific causes; can be identified through distinctive symptoms and remedies are available in abundance.
PHOTO BY FLICKR.COM/RENNETT STOWE
Indigestion Causes - Determine to Diagnose
There are several factors that are attributed to indigestion causes
. Very often, gastrointestinal and non-gastrointestinal diseases such as thyroid, diabetes, extreme kidney disease and hyperparathyroidism are related to indigestion. Gastroesophageal reflux disease occurs when gastric contents move through the food pipe causing damage to the organ. This eventually results in dyspepsia. Drugs are the second most important indigestion causes. Certain non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs like ibuprofen, estrogen and antibiotics have been reported to cause indigestion in certain individuals. Stomach produces a strong acid for digesting food and layer of mucus that lines the stomach and oesophagus protects these organs against the acid. Where the mucus layer is damaged, the acid can infect tissues beneath. Lifestyle factors causing indigestion include over consumption of alcohol, anxiety and stress, smoking, certain foods like chocolate, coffee and obesity. In certain women, pregnancy is also considered as a reason for indigestion.
Symptoms of Indigestion - Distinctive Signs
Indigestion is often easily recognized because of distinctive symptoms or signs, the disease exhibits. These symptoms of indigestion
clearly indicate trouble in the stomach area. Such signs are common and associated with your digestive tract. You could be suffering from indigestion when you experience one or more of the following factors: discomfort, fullness and pain in the upper abdomen or chest, heartburn, flatulence resulting in belching or burping, stomach ache, nausea, bloating of stomach, nausea, appetite loss, acid regurgitation and uncontrolled burping. Usually, duration of symptoms of indigestion is dependent upon the inherent cause. While some subside quickly with minimal or no medical intervention, others such as unexplained weight loss, continuous signs especially if you are 55 years or older, severe and worsening pain and specks of blood in vomit demand visits to GP at the earliest.
Indigestion Remedies - Long and Short-Term
There are several over-the-counter medications that you can buy from your neighborhood pharmacist. Such indigestion remedies include antacids containing aluminum or magnesium for neutralizing stomach acid and medications containing alginate. Your medical practitioner can suggest a proton pump inhibitor for two weeks. Taking prokinetics even when symptoms continue to occur beyond two weeks is another remedy. Where lifestyle triggers are the prominent cause of indigestion, remedies usually need to be spaced out to ensure the problem does not arise again. It is important to shed excessive weight, cut down intake of fatty foods like beverages and alcohol, avoiding smoking, minimizing stress and eating slowly.