Pain around the mouth, tongue and teeth is a common complaint that often fades with time, but there are some sensations that you shouldn’t ignore. While many people hesitate to visit a doctor or dentist over a little discomfort, persistent or acute pain can indicate serious problems. When in doubt, it’s a good idea to seek professional diagnosis and treatment to ensure there are no underlying conditions.
Sensitive And Bleeding Gums
Gum sensitivity is one of the most common complaints patients make to their dentists. Over-zealous brushing habits may be to blame, but so could gingivitis or severe nutritional deficiency. Dentists can advise their patients on healthy brushing practices that balance plaque removal with preserving gums and tooth enamel. Sensitivity or bleeding that continues to grow worse should be addressed by a medical professional.
A sharp or prolonged toothache is a great reason to contact a dentist in your area. Cavities and tooth decay may begin with occasional pangs of pain, but this discomfort can quickly become constant and unbearable. Delaying dental care for tooth pain can mean the difference between a minor procedure and major surgery.
Lumps Or Swelling
Lumps can form inside the mouth following an unfortunate missed bite, but they could also be a sign of a much more dangerous condition. Cancer of the mouth or tongue can present itself as a small, barely perceptible lump at first. Painful swelling in the mouth can also be a sign of an infection, which can become life-threatening if it spreads to the brain. Any unusual lump or swelling that doesn’t subside within a couple days warrants a formal diagnosis.
Sores along the gums, tongue or lips are a common problem for many people. Foreign objects, broken teeth and other dental equipment can easily damage the sensitive tissue lining the interior of the mouth. Painful sores are also a possible symptom of an ongoing infection or chronic health disorder. If you have sores with no apparent cause or ones that don’t heal within a week then you should consider talking to a doctor to pursue a detailed diagnosis.
Even minor mouth pain can become a major inconvenience, especially when it interferes with vital daily activities like eating, drinking and talking. While there are plenty of over-the-counter pain management products available to treat temporary discomfort, they are not a long-term solution. Getting a professional diagnosis early on can make treatment much easier and help avoid serious risks to your health.
Looking for a 100% all-natural liquid tooth oil and mouth rinse? Check out OraMD Original Strength and OraMD Extra Strength. Subscribe to our Trusted Health Club newsletter for more information about natural living tips, natural health, oral health and skincare. If you are looking for more health resources make sure to check out the Trusted Health Resources list.
Anica Oaks is a professional content and copywriter who graduated from the University of San Francisco. She loves dogs, the ocean, and anything outdoor related. You can connect with Anica on Twitter @AnicaOaks.
Founder Ray Spotts has a passion for all things natural and has made a life study of nature as it relates to health and well-being. Ray became a forerunner bringing products to market that are extraordinarily effective and free from potentially harmful chemicals and additives. For this reason Ray formed Trusted Health Products, a company you can trust for clean, effective, and healthy products. Ray is an organic gardener, likes fishing, hiking, and teaching and mentoring people to start new businesses. You can get his book for free, “How To Succeed In Business Based On God’s Word,” at www.rayspotts.com.