Germany’s vaccine advisory board on Wednesday recommended against using Moderna’s Covid-19 shot in people under 30 due to evidence suggesting a very small risk of heart inflammation, joining France and a string of other European countries restricting the vaccine as coronavirus cases across the continent soar to record levels.
The Standing Commission on Vaccination (STIKO), a body of experts that advise German states on vaccination policy, said only the Pfizer-BioNTech Covid-19 vaccine should be offered to people under the age of 30.
Young recipients of Pfizer’s shot showed slightly lower rates of heart inflammation than those who received the Moderna shot, the group said, according to multiple news outlets.
The draft recommendation, which covers both booster vaccines and those receiving their first shots, will now be evaluated, and possibly revised, by a separate group of experts and the German states, according to Deutsche Welle.
Health experts in France put forward a similar recommendation earlier this week, citing a nationwide study suggesting a “very rare” risk of heart inflammation linked to the Moderna vaccine.
The body, which advises the French healthcare sector, said the risk of rare heart inflammation in under 30s appears to be around five times less with Pfizer’s shot than Moderna’s, according to Reuters.
Germany and France are the latest European countries to restrict the use of Moderna’s Covid-19 vaccine in younger people, joining a string of Nordic nations including Finland, Sweden, Denmark and Norway. All cite studies indicating a very limited risk of heart inflammation in young recipients of mRNA coronavirus vaccines, which includes Pfizer and Moderna shots. For both vaccines—of which these countries have an abundant supply—data indicates a very low possible risk, one that is slightly higher with the Moderna jab. None of the studies cast doubt on the vaccines’ effectiveness or the benefits they bring by safeguarding against Covid-19 and studies suggest the risks of heart inflammation are substantially higher in those infected with Covid-19. Overwhelmingly, regulators and experts agree that the benefits of vaccination outweigh the possible risks, even in young people and children at lower risk of serious illness, and are urging their populations to get the jab. The decisions come as Covid-19 cases soar across Europe, with the WHO warning the continent is “once again, at the epicentre” of the pandemic. Europe is now leading the world in terms of cases and deaths and many countries, including Germany, are seeing record highs as they struggle to contain outbreaks.
STIKO also recommended that pregnant women only receive the Pfizer-BioNTech shot, regardless of age.
What To Watch For
U.S. regulators are delaying a decision on rolling Moderna’s shots out to children while they evaluate international data on the possible risks of heart inflammation after vaccination.
Moderna and U.S. at Odds Over Vaccine Patent Rights (NYT)
France advises against Moderna for under-30s over rare heart risk (AFP)
Myocarditis is more common after covid-19 infection than vaccination (New Scientist)