Our Solar System
There used to be 9 planets and more than 170 moons in our solar system.
The 9 planets are Mercury, Venus, Earth, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, Neptune and Pluto.
But in August 2006, the International Astronomical Union decided to re-classify Pluto as a “dwarf planet”, and not in the same category as the 8 planets.
So now there are 8 planets in the solar system.
Each planet goes around the Sun on its own path called orbit.
Anyway we cannot see the paths because they are invisible.
Earth takes about 365 days to orbit the Sun.
This is called one Earth year.
And each moons moves around its planet in its own orbit.
The size of the planet from the smallest to the biggest:
On April 12, 1961, Yuri Alekseyevich Gagarin became the first person who went to space.
People travel to space in a spacecraft or spaceship.
Aliens in Jupiter 3
Please click here for Aliens From Jupiter 2
Written and illustrated by: Ahmad Ali
It was Kamosa’s spaceship! Kamosa left it on planet Earth the last time he went to Earth to visit his friends. Kamosa met Goplaga on planet Earth. Goplaga invited Kamosa to fly in his spaceship to Saturn. Then Kamosa’s human friends sent Kamosa’s spaceship from Earth to Saturn.
Kamosa invited Goplaga for a trip to Neptune. Over there Goplaga and Kamosa met the Neptune alien named Hilama. Hilama has two purple wings, light blue face and one red eye.
Kamosa wanted to play the ‘4 players chess’, but Kamosa left the cheess set in Goplaga’s room on Saturn. Kamosa was very sad…
The next day, Goplaga’s iPhone reminded him of Kamosa’s birthday. When Goplaga heard the reminder ringing, Goplaga rushed to Alien Express and bought another ‘4 players chess’ set.
To be continued in Aliens From Jupiter 4.
A Smiling Face In The Sky
Last night I saw a sweet smiling face in the sky.
The eyes were made up of two planets.
They were Planet Jupiter and Planet Venus.
The mouth was the crescent.
But there was no nose.
It was smiling at me.
It looked like my drawing when I was little.
But in my drawing the eyes were stars.