Cecile Andrews is a Seattle-based author and community educator focusing on simplicity, sustainability and the slow life.
We think that if we’re rich, we’ll be happy. In truth, after a certain point, more money does not correlate with greater happiness. In fact, it could hinder it, particularly as the income gap grows. (The biggest predictor of the health of a nation, as measured in longevity, is the wealth gap. Even the rich person in this country does not live as long as the average person in Denmark, where the gap is small.)
The biggest contributor to happiness is connection with others, something that has continued to decline.
Our consumerism is destroying the planet: polluting, using up resources, and causing global warming/climate crisis.
Our goal is to create a belief system that moves from “Every man for himself” to one in which “We’re all in this together.”
Simplicity as Clarity: Living an uncluttered life, reducing chaos in terms of things as well as emotions.
Simplicity as True Wealth: Reducing outer wealth so we can increase inner wealth.
Simplicity as the examined life: Making conscious choices about our behavior for the well-being of people and the planet.
Simplicity Circles: An Approach to Personal and Social Change
Assumptions: We learn and change best when we learn from each other. We learn best when we examine our own lives, with books and experts ideas used only as a catalyst. In Simplicity there are no experts; the wisdom is in the people.
Money: Simplicity helps people save money and stay out of debt.
Things: Simplicity helps reduce clutter and consumerism.
Work: Simplicity helps us find a way to do our true work and reduce our “false” work.
Time: We’re meant to be enjoying and savoring our lives. Simplicity helps us find more time for things that matter and learn to move in a leisurely fashion that allows us to feel and think deeply.
Connection with Others: Happiness comes from connection with others with empathy, community, and joie de vivre.
Connection with Nature: If we don’t love nature, we won’t save it; we’ll only love nature when we engage with it.
Reflection (taking time to think about what you can learn from your life)
Conversation (the essential skill for happiness and democracy)
Focus and Flow: In an age of distraction we’re less and less able to experience depth. Reduce rushing and multi-tasking.
Circle Format: Meet weekly and discuss these points. (Periodically talk first in twos or threes)
I. What did you do this week to simplify your life? What did you have difficulty with? (Consider money, time, connection with others, nature, and the universe.)
II. What new insights did you have about simplicity? (From reading, self, and media.) Keep a journal.
III. How much did you use simplicity skills? (Reflection, Conversation, and Focus/flow)
IV. Bring a quotation to share