The summer months can be a time of fun, relaxation, and getaways. But with many youth going unsupervised for longer stretches of time, the summer season also brings an uptick in juvenile crime. While most teens avoid negative situations and make good choices, teenagers often take greater risks around this time of year. This is largely because teens are testing boundaries and figuring out who they are as individuals.
It’s not uncommon for younger people to experiment with drugs or alcohol and engage in risky activities like vandalism or theft. Here’s what you need to know about some of the most common crimes committed by juveniles in the summer.
What Are the Most Common Crimes Juveniles Commit in the Summer?
Here are five crimes committed by juveniles most frequently during the summer months:
Theft is one of the most common crimes committed by juveniles during the summer months. Many teens steal items they don’t have the funds to purchase, but they also may steal because they are bored or seeking excitement. Most teens who commit shoplifting do so to get something they want but can’t afford.
Shoplifting is popular among teens because they can steal small items that don’t cost much, so the stolen goods aren’t likely to be missed. Burglary is another crime that peaks during the summer months. Teens choose to break into homes because they are likely unoccupied.
There is a spike in vandalism during the summer months, particularly when schools are out. Vandalism is the willful destruction of property. Some teens vandalize property as a way to get attention, while others do it as a way to rebel against authority.
Vandalism can lead to serious consequences including criminal charges, community service, and restitution payments. If you have teens, it’s important to keep them engaged and busy during the summer. If teens are bored and unsupervised, they are more likely to engage in risky behavior.
Drug Possession and Use
The most common drug committed by teens is marijuana. However, there is an uptick in other narcotics like cocaine and methamphetamines during the summer months as well. Drug possession and use are common crimes among teens because many try to hide their illegal activities.
Teenagers often drive unsupervised during the summer months, which increases the risk for drunk driving. Drunk driving is one of the most dangerous crimes committed by teens during the summer. It can lead to serious injuries or even death.
Loud and Disorderly Behavior
Disorderly conduct is a common charge brought against teens during the summer months. Disorderly conduct charges are often brought against juveniles who create a disturbance in public, trespass on private property, or fight with others. Teens who commit disorderly conduct do so as a way to rebel against authority and seek attention or as a way to act out.
Schedule a Free Consultation With Rubin, Glickman, Steinberg & Gifford to Learn More About Your Legal Options
It is important that parents stay diligent and keep an eye out for negative behaviors, even in teens, in order to prevent poor decisions that could adversely impact their lives and futures. In the event that your teen is now facing legal trouble as a result of their behavior, it is important to seek legal counsel.
Rubin, Glickman, Steinberg & Gifford is available to teens and their parents who need help assessing charges and advocating for lesser punishments. Call us at (215) 822-7575 or submit our contact form to schedule your consultation. We are here to help your family navigate this difficult time.