Presentation is loading. Please wait.
Published byAldous Curtis Osborne Modified over 7 years ago
TAFAD’s Agenda for FAC Reform
Formed in 2005 to promote reform of international food aid governance Most major European and North American food aid programming NGOs Combines field experience with current and new research on food assistance
To contribute to the eradication of hunger and malnutrition by improving the ability of the international community to respond to food emergencies and other food assistance needs in developing countries.
1. Scope of the Convention – what type of actions should be included? 2. Measurement of commitments – what is the nature of commitments and how should they be counted? 3. Effectiveness – better arrangements for monitoring treaty ‘outputs’
4. Nutrition - increased focus on malnutrition, especially certain groups 5. Governance – clearer relationship to other global food security and humanitarian arrangements
the predictable, timely and appropriate provision of food assistance resources for direct transfers to individuals and households for increasing the quantity and the nutritional quality of food consumed and providing short term protection of livelihoods Immediate consumption and short term consumption? Need to close the gap between emergency and long term
1. Encourage doing no harm (e.g. Local food producers, non- recipients, etc) 2. Be consistent with good humanitarian donor principles 3. Make it easy to understand, easy to track 4. Treat comparable actions in comparable ways 5. Provide incentives for the effective use of FA and avoid perverse incentives
The most important element of the FAC has been its focus on helping people (amount of food) Important to retain this commitment for the FAC > 30 million person-years of food If some donors commit to a financial amount, make these commitments flexible and review annually
Current treaty is mostly about accounting. No provision for reviewing activities against treaty provisions Existing treaty arrangements unsuited for assessment of effectiveness. 1. Move the treaty to a relevant skill centre OR 2. Link the treaty to activities of relevant skill centres.
Recognition of the high cost of child malnutrition – low cost of effective intervention. More funding needed Importance of nutrition in both food emergencies and chronic hunger Nutritional indicators key to measuring FAC impact
Build nutrition into the FAC commitments – fortification and other food-borne nutritional enhancement Include nutritional principles in FAC text Use nutritional indicators to help assess food assistance activities.
2007-8 Food Price Crisis – no role for the FAC despite serious food assistance difficulties FAC needs a ‘family’ – connect to food security bodies (e.g. CFS, GAFSP), aid bodies (OECD-DAC) and humanitarian bodies (UN-SCN, OCHA)
Close the food assistance – food security, food assistance - nutrition gaps Look for practical steps to utilize the technical expertise of other forums to improve the effectiveness of the FAC – don’t need new institution.
Future context set to be less stable (climate change, price volatility) Multilateral action is essential to meet the challenge FAC could be both an essential tool and a powerful symbol
© 2023 SlidePlayer.com Inc.
All rights reserved.