Latest news from Loughborough University
20 July 2011 | PR 11/94
Helping children explore the world of reading
A new edition of the popular guide to children’s fiction designed to help young people explore the world of reading has just been published by Loughborough University.
Who Next...? includes listings for over 750 children’s authors to help signpost young readers to new material when they have exhausted the works of their favourite writers.
With a foreword by children’s author and library campaigner Alan Gibbons, this latest guide includes a new section on those writing for teenagers; and for the first time authors who write short stories and those whose titles are available as ebooks are identified.
The guide also gives information on graphic novels, talking books and titles suitable for dyslexic or reluctant readers.
Who Next…? has been developed primarily as an information source for parents, teachers and librarians to help encourage children to enjoy reading.
When a child has completed the works of their favourite author, you can simply look them up to find a list of others who write in a similar way, and whose work will supply the answer to the question ‘what can I read now?’ The most popular titles by each author are listed, along with their best-known characters and series, to give an idea of where to start.
The book is arranged in four age groups corresponding to the Key Stages: 5‑7 years, 8-11 years, 12-14 years and 14+ years. There are links between the age groups, and information on genres and prize winners.
The editors – Viv Warren and Mary Yardley – are experienced children’s librarians and, to refine their selections, have drawn on a team of expert advisers with first-hand knowledge of children’s reading.
Claire Creaser, Director of LISU – the University’s Department of Information Science research and consultancy centre responsible for publishing the book, said:
"Research by the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development has shown that reading for pleasure is one of the most important elements in determining a child's academic and social success.
“Finding a way through the maze of books available for children of all ages can be daunting, even for the most dedicated parent or teacher. That is where Who Next…? comes in. Compiled by expert children's librarians it provides a signpost when children are ready to move on, with suggestions for new authors and new titles to try.
"We are particularly pleased that we have been able to include a section for teenage readers in this new edition, which is something that librarians have been asking for.
“Sustaining reading for pleasure with this age group can prove challenging at a time in their lives when the pressures of school work, not to mention social networking and other activities, combine to squeeze reading for pleasure off the agenda for many."
Who Next...? is available to buy direct from LISU, priced £21.99. For further information call 01509 635680 or email firstname.lastname@example.org
For all media enquiries contact:
Senior PR Officer
T: 01509 228697
Notes for editors:
1. Who next…? a guide to children’s authors, paperback, ISBN 9781905499403 is published at £21.99 (post paid UK with a 10% discount for schools and a 25% trade discount and for orders over 10 copies).
2. A jpeg image of the front cover of Who Next…? is available upon request.
3. Review copies of Who Next…? are available for the media upon request.
4. Co-editor Viv Warren was formerly Head of Library Services to Children and Young People in East Sussex. Now retired, she is on the governing board of several schools and has acted as co-ordinator for Family Learning events. Mary Yardley was formerly Head of Information Management in East Sussex and is currently working for Dorset School Library Service.
5. LISU is a national research and consultancy centre which aims to promote good management practice in information, cultural and academic services, through providing independent advice and support for advocacy, performance evaluation and enhancement. It is based in the Research School of Informatics and the Department of Information Science at Loughborough University. For further information visit: http://www.lboro.ac.uk/departments/dis/lisu
Loughborough is one of the country’s leading universities, with an international reputation for research that matters, excellence in teaching, strong links with industry, and unrivalled achievement in sport and its underpinning academic disciplines.
6. Loughborough is one of the country’s leading universities, with an international reputation for research that matters, excellence in teaching, strong links with industry, and unrivalled achievement in sport and its underpinning academic disciplines.
It was awarded the coveted Sunday Times University of the Year 2008-09 title, and is consistently ranked in the top twenty of UK universities in national newspaper league tables. In the 2010 National Student Survey, Loughborough was voted one of the top universities in the UK, and has topped the Times Higher Education league for the UK’s Best Student Experience every year since the poll's inception in 2006. In recognition of its contribution to the sector, the University has been awarded six Queen's Anniversary Prizes.
Loughborough is also the UK’s premier university for sport. It has perhaps the best integrated sports development environment in the world and is home to some of the country’s leading coaches, sports scientists and support staff. It also has the country’s largest concentration of world-class training facilities across a wide range of sports.
It is a member of the 1994 Group of 19 leading research-intensive universities. The Group was established in 1994 to promote excellence in university research and teaching. Each member undertakes diverse and high-quality research, while ensuring excellent levels of teaching and student experience.