For nearly a century, the United States was occupied by the racial segregation of black and white people. The constitutionality of this “separation of humans into racial or other ethnic groups in daily life” had not been decided until a deliberate provocation to the law was made. The goal of this test was to have a mulatto, someone of mixed blood, defy the segregated train car law and raise a dispute on the fairness of being categorized as colored or not. This test went down in history as Plessy v. Ferguson, a planned challenge to the law during a period ruled by Jim Crow laws and the idea of “separate but equal” without equality for African Americans. This challenge forced the Supreme Court to rule on the constitutionality of segregation, and in result of the case, caused the nation to have split opinions of support and
Plesssy v. Ferguson, Brown v. Board of education both dealt with one of America 's biggest problems segregation. Plessy v. Ferguson and Brown v. Board of Education both delt with segregation, Plessy v. Ferguson was on the Louisiana rail road act, Brown v. Board of Education was on the separate but equal clause, and they were both related.
The year of 1965 the black community let out a collective victory cry. They had finally gotten the rights they fought hard for. They could at last vote, go to school and college, and got the working condition they deserve. They couldn 't have done it without Martin Luther King Jr., but there were a slew of cases that were tried and further assisted in opening the black community 's opportunity pool. They were well known cases, like the Plessy vs. Ferguson, Brown vs. Board of Education, and the Regents of the University vs. Bakke, all very influential cases in the fight for rights.
This case all started when Plessy, who was seven eighths white, sat down in the “white” train car and was asked to leave and sit in the “colored” train car. After his refusal to leave, he was arrested and convicted for not abiding by the Separate Car Act. The Separate Car Act was one of the first acts that had separated any races from another. This sparked many controversies that had occurred in the United States
-When Scott first took this case to the St. Louis County Circuit Court, it was decided that he was a free man however Sandford issued an appeal to the Supreme Court of the state.
Plessy v. Ferguson is a Supreme Court case that legalized segregation,”separate but equal”. The Supreme Court said that “separate but equal” did not violate the 14th Amendment.This all happened because an African American man sat in a whites only train car and refused to move. He sued and said that this violated his constitutional right.
One of the Supreme Court Cases that were held was Plessy V. Ferguson, which was argued on April 18, 1896 until May 18, 1896. This issue was over the law that trains, would have to provide separate accommodations to both black and white races equally. One man who was mostly Caucasian and partially African had the rights of a white citizen. For this reason, he bought a ticket for first class, however was not allowed to be seated within this area due to the judgment of a conductor. The man who is Plessy, refused what he was told to do and as a result was taken off to be imprisoned in jail. The facts that support this is that, Plessy violated the act of the separation of blacks and whites. It also stated that what occurred conflicted with the 13th and 14th amendment. On top of this, “…the court sustained the demurrer, overruled the plea, and ordered petitioner to plead over to the facts set forth in the information…” (Plessy V. Ferguson). This was the information behind the case and would only be continued if the judge had a writ of prohibition.
Segregation was one of the key problems during most of the 1900s. Segregation is the enforced separation of different racial groups in a country, community, or establishment. Around the time when the the Civil War ended, slavery and segregation had been prohibited from the amendments of the U.S Constitution. Segregation was very wrong, because whites believed it was fair and equal. It was most definitely not. The Plessy vs. Ferguson case, also dealing with the 14th amendment, Rosa Parks and the Montgomery Bus Boycott, and the nine children in Little Rock, Arkansas, has changed this forever.
This case dates back in to 1982 when Homer Please was arrested for sitting in a “white” car of a train (Wormser, n.d.). Obviously this goes back where discrimination against black was going on. Plessy was said to pass as white due to his light skin; however, due to Louisiana law he was required to sit in the “colored” car. He was a “Creole of Color” which is used to refer to a black person in New Orleans whose ancestor were traced to the French, Spanish, and Caribbean (Wormser, n.d.). After his arrest, black civil right organization challenged the law (Wormser, n.d.). Plessy intentionally sat in the white section, and got arrested. The case ended going to the Supreme Court in 1986. Attorney for Plessy argued that the Separate Car Act violated his 13th and 14th Amendments (Wormser, n.d.).
Plessy v. Ferguson: The case occurred when Homer Plessy refused to sit in the Jim Crow car, which violated the Louisiana law and was put before Judge John H. Ferguson to challenge whether the state law conflicted with the Constitution or not. Indeed, in 1896, Ferguson concluded that the law was merely a legal distinction between two races and did not conflict with 13th amendment law. Society then adopted a system of “separate but equal” that emphasized separate facilities for blacks and whites
Plessy v. Ferguson was a supreme court case in 1896 and the decision entrenched legal segregation and it made “separate but equal” the law of the land. Brown v. Board of Education was also a supreme court case in 1954 and it ended legal segregation. Plessy was a black man (great grandmother was black) and Plessy violated Louisiana law by sitting in the white part of the train. Plessy sued based on the 14th Amendment and Equal Protection clause. Brown v. Board was a supreme court case that Brown sued the board of Education because the schools were unequal. However Brown v. Board of education showed that segregated schools were unequal and the decision of the supreme court overruled Plessy v. Ferguson case. Both cases were about segregation and
Ferguson gave a ‘constitutional nod, to racial segregation in public places; foreclosing legal challenges against increasingly-segregated institutions throughout the South” (Plessy v. Ferguson). This explains that the verdict of the case slowed civil rights movements for a longer amount of time had Plessy v. Ferguson been decided differently. “The rail cars in Plessy notwithstanding, the black facilities in these institutions were decidedly inferior to white ones, creating a kind of racial caste society” (Plessy v. Ferguson).This illuminates that although the facilities of black and white people were separate they were not equal, creating tension.“After four decades…the Supreme Court has consistently ruled racial segregation in public settings to be unconstitutional”(Alex McBride).This shows that although Plessy v. Ferguson was not decided to benefit everyone it eventually made a change. Over all, Plessy v. Ferguson indirectly started something bigger than itself although being ruled differently in the
This was one of the biggest court cases involving the civil war. Plessy vs. Ferguson was a court case in 1890 (History). It involved Homer Plessy, a man of a mixed race, and Judge John H. Ferguson. It took place in Louisiana state court. It was because of the Car Act (LII / Legal Information Institute).
after slavery was abolished, the southern states passed laws to segregate blacks and whites. The segregation included separate schools for blacks and whites. A challenge to these laws reached the U.S. Supreme Court, which ruled in 1896 in Plessy v. Ferguson that it was a reasonable use of state power to require "separate but equal" accommodations for blacks.
Have been mistreated for a certain color, race or left out because of it? Well that my friend, is segregation. The issues of segregation is wrong! Segregation has been a problem ever since which the difference of skin color and being a certain type of race. Segregation is wrong because of the following 14th amendment written in the Constitution, people 's UNFAIR rights and the equality.