When you have multiple audio devices connected to Windows, renaming them so you can identify each quickly might be something you want to do. It will suck when you select the wrong audio device to play a video offensive to others or play embarrassing music to the lousy sound device. You can save some embarrassment and rename your audio devices so you know each device attached to your computer.
Even Windows tries to display the name of the devices according to the manufacturer naming convention, and sometimes it’s hard to tell which device is which based on its name. So Windows allows users to rename devices attached to their computers with unique names. You can give each device a unique and descriptive title to tell it apart from the others.
This risewindows post will guide you on how to rename sound devices on Windows 11 or 10.
How to Change Audio Device Name on Windows 11?
To provide a unique name for your audio devices on a Windows 11 computer, do the following:-
Step 1. Firstly, open the Settings app by pressing
Step 2. When Windows Settings opens, select the
Step 3. Then, move to the right sidebar and click the
Step 4. Next, when you’re at the Sound settings page, under the “Output” section, select the sound or audio device you would like to rename. All audio devices connected to your computer (including Bluetooth speakers and headphones) will appear under the “Output” section.
You can also do the same for Input devices when you’re on the Sound page. Using a similar method, you can rename the devices under the “Input” section.
Step 5. After that, select the audio device that you want to rename.
Step 6. Now, click the
Step 7. Then, type a unique name for the device, then click the
So, you need to repeat the above steps for all audio or sound devices. The next time you want to use the output device, you can quickly find them by their names.
How to Rename Audio Device on Windows 10?
To change the name or rename Audio Device on your Windows 10 PC, do the following steps:-
Step 1. Firstly, open the Settings app.
Step 2. Now, hit the
Step 3. Then, select the
Step 4. After that, under the “Output” section, under the right side pane, from the “Choose your output device” drop-down menu, select the speaker you want to rename.
Step 5. Then, click the link
Step 6. So, type a new name for your audio device and click on the
You need to repeat the steps above for all devices you want to rename.
How to Rename an Audio Device with Control Panel?
This method is applicable for both Windows 11 and 10. To rename a Sound device using Control Panel, do the following:-
Step 1. Firstly, open the Control Panel.
Step 2. Now, select
Step 3. Then, click on the
Step 4. Next, when you complete the above steps, a Sound window will open. To rename a sound device, switch to the
Step 5. So, click on the
Step 6. Finally, switch to the
That’s it for the article.
I hope it will be helpful to you.
Good luck, friends.