Presentation is loading. Please wait.
Published byAmber Summers Modified over 7 years ago
Do Now : Tāite, 6 Here-turi-kōkā 2015
Curiosity challenge : 1) Why does your body have twice as many veins? 2) Why do veins have valves? 3) Why are veins oval?
Today’s Kaupapa: Explain what causes heart attacks...... and how they can be prevented Watch 3 videos – take notes / answer questions Why? Who cares? Every 90 minutes a New Zealander dies from coronary heart disease (16 deaths a day) Heart disease is the leading cause of death in New Zealand, accounting for 40% of deaths Many of these deaths are preventable…
Watch: “heart attack in 3D” (1min) Discuss: what actually happens inside the heart that causes a heart attack Write 3 or 4 bullet points to explain what causes a heart attack 1)A heart attack occurs when one of the coronary arteries becomes blocked 2)This blockage is caused by “cholesterol” (fat or lipids) building up in the artery 3)This blockage stops oxygen flowing to the heart muscles, so the heart cannot pump oxygen to the rest of the body. This is a heart attack. 4)High cholesterol can be caused by eating fatty foods, obesity, lack of exercise or genetics
Watch: “heart bypass surgery - actual footage” (2min) then “coronary heart bypass” (4min) 1)Why is this surgery called “open heart” surgery? The patient’s chest (sternum) is cut open so their heart is openly exposed for surgery 2)How long does this surgery take? Up to 6 hours 3)How is the heart stopped? What keeps the person “alive” while the heart is stopped? The heart is stopped by cooling. A heart & lung machine keeps the circulatory system running 4) How is the blocked artery actually “bypassed”? A vein is removed from the leg and stitched to the heart to “bypass” the blocked artery
Watch: “what is angioplasty and stenting” (2 min) 1)Describe how a stent works A blocked artery is inflated by a balloon A wire stent is then inserted to keep the diameter of the artery wide to allow blood flow around the blockage 2)Other methods? Put them in order of risk/cost…. Heart bypass surgery – is expensive and painful Stents – for partial blockages (if detected early) Drugs – statins reduce cholesterol and can remove blockages Diet and exercise – minimize fatty food!
Heart bypass surgery - a vein from the leg is used to “bypass” the blocked artery - used in emergencies, very expensive, painful and long recovery Stents - a balloon is used to inflate the partially blocked artery and a wire “stent” keeps the artery opened - used in non-emergency cases where blockages are serious but not life threatening Medication - drugs called “statins” reduce cholesterol and can prevent blockages developing Diet and exercise - eating less fatty food and exercising more reduces cholesterol naturally COST & RISK “Compare and contrast different methods for preventing heart disease”
© 2023 SlidePlayer.com Inc.
All rights reserved.