Daisy May & Me: Inspiration and positive living
Children's Books About Mental Health and Wellness
Talking about mental health with kids can feel daunting.
Sometimes we don't know what to say, or maybe we don't even fully understand, or know what to talk about, or how to bring it up, or maybe we will say all the wrong things.
Well, we've got a list of picture books up on the blog to help you talk to kids about various mental health issues and mental wellbeing too.
Kids are so visual and this gives them a tangible way to learn more about depression, anxiety, bipolar disorder, peer pressure, etc., in an inviting way.
We're so lucky that there are incredible people in the world that are tackling hard subjects so that we can better understand and help our kids to understand too.
These and other books will be a great opportunity to have very intentional discussions with our families about mental health and wellness.
What books have you read with your kids about mental health? We'd love to hear your suggestions! Leave a comment :)
Having a Healthy Relationship with Your Body: Learning from Bethany Hamilton, Ta-Nehisi Coates, and Mirna Valerio
In today’s world, it’s tough to love our bodies.
Most of us do not fit the Hollywood mold, and we are constantly bombarded by sales pitches for products, diets, and workout regimens that will help us to get the body we’ll finally love.
But will they really? And will we really? In reality, we need self-love now in order to love whatever comes down the road, or we’ll never be content. There will always be something that isn’t quite right or perfect.
And guess what? We teach that to our kids.
Our children aren’t born with body issues. We teach them that. Either directly or through outside influences that we allow into our lives.
So what do we do?
We change the curriculum.
In this blog post, we’re looking at some incredible people that teach us how to love our bodies now along with an activity and some discussion questions to talk about with your kids.
What do you think about this? How has the world affected your ability to love your body?