American Heritage® Dictionary of the English Language, Fourth Edition
- n. The ringing or sounding of bells.
Century Dictionary and Cyclopedia
- n. The ringing of a bell or of bells; a sound like that of ringing bells.
GNU Webster's 1913
- n. A tinkling sound, as of a bell or bells.
- n. the sound of a bell ringing
- Noun of action from tintinnabulate, from Latin tintinnabulum ("a bell"), from tintinō, a reduplicated form of tinniō ("ring, jingle"). (Wiktionary)
- From tintinnabulum. (American Heritage® Dictionary of the English Language, Fourth Edition)
“I just like the sound of the word tintinnabulation and if you look it up in the OED, it simply describes a sound made by the ringing of a bell.”
“It is an example of what Mr. Pärt calls tintinnabulation, a slow, introspective style, with the strings playing in a high register, that often evokes the pealing of bells.”
“It's that tripping, multi-syllabic word that sounds like a bell clanging: "tintinnabulation" that I love so much.”
“I've been looking for a way to work "tintinnabulation" into a post for a while -- very nicely done...and the fish looks delicious too!”
“I also love Edgar Allen Poe's "tintinnabulation" from his poem, The Bells (excerpt below):”
“Few settings would fail to be improved by the introduction of floating translucent orbs and music made by means of metaphysical tintinnabulation.”
“Prayer is a pure negotiation with angels on the right, two wrong too and hope, an accommodation in place of stroke, tintinnabulation of one billion clocks, stopped by a gong of long-held reservations.”
“Cave honors his own definition with songs that truly "resonate with the susurration of sorrow, tintinnabulation of grief" like "Straight to You", "Nobody's Baby Now", and the slayer "Into My Arms".”
“Today at Boing Boing Gadgets, the morning started with the shrill tintinnabulation of a green tea telephone, which we profusely stabbed with a handy philips head.”
“She lunged for her bag and retrieved the source of the tintinnabulation.”
These user-created lists contain the word ‘tintinnabulation’.
Just a list of words
compartmentalisation, compartmentalization, counterrevolution..., counterrevolutionary, electroencephalogram, electroencephalog..., electroencephalog..., electroencephalog..., electroencephalog..., electroencephalog..., institutionalisation, institutionalization and 634 more...
Words chosen as favorites for the Twitter hashtag #faveword.
Things that give you a warm fuzzy sort of feeling.
please make up a new one-word band and post it to this list. thanks!
I enjoy collecting words, for I have no fear of them ever running out.
a couple words
List of most of the words I've learned
Looking for tweets for tintinnabulation.