MACHINE LEARNS YOUR MOVE.
Our smart sensor determines your concentration level and adjusts the contents accordingly in real-time.
Concentrating in reading is difficult. You have to wrestle through so many click-bait content on the screen. This is why we invented a smart imaging system to sense your subtle reading gestures and movements, facial and eye expressions, and orientations. Through sensing your behaviors, our smart imaging system responds by changing the display accordingly. Our dynamic system helps display more relevant content that is worth your time for you to enjoy.
“Content presented after learning your reading gestures would be much more relevant to you. For example, if you happen to walk away from our system, the system pauses. When you return, the system senses your presence, recognizes you, and resumes where you left off.”
In another example, when the system senses that you have lost concentration, it will adjust the material presented with more interactive content, or change the content to your liking to bring you back to focus. If you are focused on a specific portion of the screen, our technology can re-position appropriate materials in that area. Based on your interests, our technology accesses appropriate content via different networks and presents it for you to enjoy.
Over time, our system would learn your reading habits, facial postures, body movements, and reading speeds. Through such learning, our system would present much more appropriate content to you. With optical and non-optical sensors, our system analyses different types of voluntary behaviors, including hand gestures. It can also compare measurements from several reading sessions to help set what to present to you. If you typically read at a leisurely speed and suddenly read quicker in a particular session, our system might conclude that you are skimming and not interested in the topic. Or, if you read much slower, you might be daydreaming. Based on such insights, our system can learn how to best tailor and present materials to you.