U.S. President Donald Trump's Muslim-targeted ban is sending shock waves across the world, breaking families apart and spiking hate crimes.
This brings Nazi Germany to memory, and the Holocaust. Perhaps, now is a good time to remember Muslims who risked their lives to protect the persecuted Jews -even if that meant loosing it all.
Truth will always prevail over alternative facts.
1. Si Kaddour Benghabrit
Born in Algeria, Benghabrit was in charge of the Grand Mosque of Paris when the Nazis invaded. He is credited with helping to save between 500 and 1,600 Jews by sheltering them in the mosque until they could obtain certificates of Muslim identity, allowing them to escape safely.
The predominantly Muslim country of Albania was occupied by Hitler's ally, Italy, during World War II. Nonetheless, it managed to protect all of its Jews and even accepted and protected 600 to 1,800 additional Jewish refugees. When national leaders were asked by Nazi officials to provide lists of Jews residing in the country, they refused to do so. The Pilkus, a Muslim family in Albania, are a prime example of people who risked their lives to protect Jews. They harbored young Johanna Neumann and her mother in their home during the German occupation and convinced others that the two were family members visiting from Germany, according to TIME.
3. Selahattin Ulkumen
While serving as the Turkish consul of Rhodes under German occupation, Ulkumen was able to save approximately 50 Jews. One of the individuals was even on a train bound for the Auschwitz death camp when Ulkumen intervened and was able to remove him from the train due to the man's wife's Turkish citizenship.
4. Si Ali Sakkat
The retired mayor of Tunis and a former government minister lived in retirement near to a forced labor camp for Jews in Tunisia. During an allied bombing, around 60 Jews were able to escape the camp and sought refugee at Sakkat's compound. He cared for them until Tunisia was liberated by the allied forces.
5. Khaled Abdul-Wahab
Serving as an interlocutor between the Nazi occupiers and the local residents of a Tunisian town, Abdul-Wahab overheard Nazi soldiers discussing their plans to rape a certain Jewish woman. Acting quickly, he hid the woman, her family, and approximately two dozen other Jewish families at his farm outside of town where they remained safe for four months until the end of the occupation.