Intrauterine devices (IUDs) are a modern form of birth control that are long-lasting, effective, and safe. They are shaped like a ‘T’ and fit inside the uterus. Their primary role is preventing sperm from reaching and fertilizing the eggs. IUDs may be hormonal or non-hormonal. However, there are several myths associated with IUDs and their usage that need to be debunked for the safety of women’s health. Here are six common myths to note.
IUDs can only be used by older women
IUDs are a safe and effective option for women of all ages. They are available in different sizes to suit the size of a woman’s uterus; it is not a one-for-all device. If a doctor recommends that one is too young to get an IUD, try getting a second opinion.
IUDs can cause infertility
While this may have been true for some intrauterine devices in the 70s, modern IUDs pose no risks to one’s fertility and are perfectly safe to use.
IUDs lead to infections
Earlier, IUDs (in the 1970s) were linked to Pelvic Inflammatory Disease and had to be recalled for the same. IUDs today do not cause any infections. However, they also do not protect against sexually transmitted infections or diseases, so it is advised to always use a condom, even with the implant.
Getting an IUD requires a PAP smear
It is possible to get an IUD without a PAP test as well. PAP smears are used to check the presence of cervical cancer cells and do not correlate with birth control.
IUDs are always expensive
Some IUDs may be expensive and cost as much as $1300, but that isn’t always the case. According to health agencies, it can cost as little as $0 to have an IUD inserted, depending on insurance and available healthcare assistance packages. Most IUDs are covered under insurance, so check the plan before making an appointment with a gynecologist.
IUDs make sex uncomfortable
Since IUDs are placed at the top of the uterus, they generally do not affect sex. While rough sex may cause brushing against it, it is unlikely to make sex painful or uncomfortable for the partner. If the IUD strings in the cervix are a cause of concern, speak to a healthcare provider to have them readjusted.