Solar System Lapbook & Passages | Planets | Outer Space
What educators are saying
Also included in
- This BUNDLE contains 15 interactive science kits for a reduced price! There are eleven lapbooks, two envelope books, one bag book, and a flip book. PURCHASE THE BUNDLE FOR BIG SAVINGS!FULL VALUE: $141.75BUNDLE PRICE: $95.00!As an added bonus, any new science lapbooks I make in the future will be addPrice $95.00Original Price $141.75Save $46.75
- This is a bundle of all of my Interactive Kit Bundles! Purchase all four of the bundles together for an even deeper discount! The ULTIMATE Bundle contains 34 interactive kits. Save $95.25 when you purchase them all together!FULL VALUE: $275.25BUNDLE PRICE: $180.00!The ULTIMATE Bundle includes the foPrice $180.00Original Price $275.25Save $95.25
- This is a collection of my three most popular interactive science kits:Rocks & Minerals Lapbook with Nonfiction Reading PassagesAnimal Classification Flip Book with Nonfiction Reading PassagesSolar System Lapbook with Nonfiction Reading Passages Do you find it hard to make time for science? Is yPrice $22.50Original Price $28.50Save $6.00
This solar system lapbook kit includes 10 INFORMATIONAL PASSAGES about the sun, moon, and planets, plus black line masters and step by step photo directions for making a solar system lapbook with your students. Use it to complement your own Solar System unit.
This lapbook kit contains the following parts:
1. 10 informational passages about the sun, moon, and 8 planets (in both color and black line), includes a packet cover
2. Lapbook cover with astronaut and option to insert student photo
3. Solar System vocabulary pocket and cards
4. Planet order mnemonic (My Very Eager Mother Just Served Us Nachos) with self-checking planet order strip
5. Sun fact flip insert
6. Moon fact flip insert
7. Phases of the moon wheel with visuals
8. Rotate and revolve interlocking part with visuals
9. Inner planet layered book
10. Outer planet layered book
11. Parts of the Solar System folding piece (includes visuals for planets, sun, moons, stars, asteroids, and comets)
A homeschool format is included for single student printing.
Lapbooks are an excellent way to keep students motivated and engaged in their learning. It is a nice way to keep everything in one place instead of sending home lots of loose papers. The complete lapbook makes a terrific study guide for the unit test.
This product is now a part of a BUNDLE! Download it individually, or save money by purchasing it as part of the Interactive Science Kit BUNDLE!
Are you unsure about lapbooks? Watch this YouTube video to find out why I love lapbooks and how I use them in my own classroom.
Thank you for considering my Solar System Lapbook Interactive Kit.
If you like interactive kits, you may also want to check out: