Hypervitaminosis D, or vitamin D toxicity, is a condition that can occur when someone takes too much vitamin D.
What is Vitamin D
Vitamin D is a fat-soluble vitamin that is necessary for the absorption of calcium and phosphorus. It is also needed for bone growth and bone health.
Can too Much Vitamin D Clog Arteries?
Vitamin D has the opposite effect of coronary artery calcification, meaning that an increase in vitamin D will decrease the calcification. This is because vitamin D is a fat-soluble vitamin that is carried by lipoproteins like HDL and LDL. These lipoproteins transport cholesterol, triglycerides, and fat-soluble vitamins like vitamin A, vitamin E, and vitamin D.
The human body is made up of mostly water, so it is important that fat and essential fatty acids are transported with proteins to stay hydrated. Vitamin D is involved in calcium absorption and increasing calcium levels in the blood, but calcium is tightly controlled by a lot of different factors, so it doesn’t automatically deposit in arteries and calcify them.
Ready to Start Feeling Your Best?
Take control of your life and health by giving your body the best it deserves! My Simple Life Hacks offers unbiased scientific backed guidance to take control of your health.
One factor is Vitamin K2. Vitamin K2 works with Vitamin D to remove excess calcium from the body. Vitamin D creates calcium in the body, but too much calcium can be bad for the arteries and joints. Vitamin K2 helps push the calcium into the bones, where it is needed.
To understand the role of vitamin D in the body, it is important to first understand how the body works to heal itself.
When an artery is damaged, the body’s natural healing process is to lay down cholesterol and calcium in order to repair the damage. Vitamin D is thought to play a role in this process by helping to heal the initial damage and prevent further damage from occurring.
Vitamin D is an important vitamin for keeping the arteries clear and reducing stiffness. However, it is only part of the puzzle. Vitamin K2 is also important for keeping calcium in check and avoiding any problems with excess calcium. Therefore, it is best to take both vitamins together.