RN Duties vs. LPN Duties
There are several types of nurses in a medical center. At first glance, there may seem to be little difference between registered nurses, or RNs, and licensed practical nurses, or LPNs. Both administer medications, change dressings or insert catheters. Either may work in a hospital, clinic or doctors’ office. However, there are significant differences related to critical thinking skills, care planning, nursing scope of practice, education and overall responsibilities. RNs are independent in many areas, while LPNs – also known as licensed vocational nurses – must work under the supervision of an RN or physician and cannot practice independently.
Consider Job Duties
The RN vs LPN scope of practice defines the specific tasks each position is allowed to perform in a given state. Each state has a board of nursing; some states combine RNs and LPNs in the same board, while others have two separate boards. Allied Health World emphasizes that the board determines which tasks fall under the RN license and which can be performed by an LPN. The RN scope generally includes more complex and potentially dangerous tasks, such as titrating or adjusting a dose of medication based on a patient’s condition; invasive procedures, such as inserting a central venous catheter; or giving intravenous chemotherapy.
See How Roles Differ
For all types of nurses, the nursing process consists of four steps: assessment, planning, implementation and evaluation. The LPN has a limited role in each of those steps but cannot perform any of them completely or independently. The RN generally performs the initial physical assessment of a newly admitted patient and may also perform a daily assessment. An LPN might take the patient’s blood pressure and pulse, but she would report her findings to the RN, who would determine how those readings fit into the clinical picture for the individual patient and whether any changes should be made to the plan of care.
Look at the Care Plan
Implementation of the care plan includes performing the daily care of the patient. For example, the RN would determine that the patient will benefit from walking at least three times a day and include that as an intervention on the care plan, while the LPN would actually help the patient walk. At the end of each shift, the RN evaluates the patient’s progress toward specific goals that will promote recovery and adjusts the plan as necessary, depending on the patient’s progress.
Critical Thinking vs Beside Tasks
Only RNs can develop the care plan and make changes, although LPNs can contribute suggestions. Care planning and evaluation require critical thinking skills, including the ability to analyze information, consider underlying medical conditions and integrate that information into the overall picture of the patient’s health status. All of these skills are taught in nursing school but are not included in the LPN curriculum, which is focused on bedside tasks. The RN must always see the big picture for each patient.
Review Compensation Differences
Since the scope of practice is greater and the training and education or more intense, a Registered Nurse earns substantially more than a Licensed Practical Nurse. In 2020, the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics reported that the median annual pay for Registered Nurses was $75,330 or $36.22, per hour. In comparison, the Bureau indicated that a Licensed Practical and Licensed Vocational Nurse earned a median annual salary of $48,820 or $23.47, per hour. The job outlook for these Registered Nurses and LPNs is strong at seven and nine percent respectively, between now and 2029.