In one game called, “the Making of the President”,
You are brought face to face with two of the most well know figures in American political history. You will meet the enigmatic John F. Kennedy and the controversial Richard M. Nixon,in a champaign that takes you back in time to the 1960 election. Through this political race, gamers meet and become one of the two very different political personalities. In the real life election Kennedy wins the race, but in this game, it is anyone’s game. This game allows you to find out what you will have to go through in order to be the leader of the United States.
In another game called “Die Macher” players are invited to check out the 7 political races that are conducted in Germany. This game requires the player to come up with their own party philosophy, and they must learn about how poll results are tabulated, they are introduced to how the media shapes the influence of any political race. All of these tools are available to make the political candidates, who enjoy playing this fun and exciting game go away with an in-depth understanding of German Politics.
Players of political games will also want to know how the political games work from different countries once they have experienced the process of the United States and Germany. To experience another interesting political environment, players will find the game, “Quo Vadis”, one of the more popular games. The Roman Senate is re-enacted during this game; you and the other players will have a chance to try to get your politicians in the committee’s best positions. It takes 45 minutes to find out which of your friends are the best qualified candidates.
Another political game shows another side of politics.
In this game, players learn how to plot coups and assassinate political leaders and hopefuls. The game of “Junta” starts with the election of the “El Presidente” of the Republica of Los Bananas, and then it includes the people who are looking into gettin rid of their leaders and take over the country.
Then if players want to take their investigations of political board games one step further, they will want to play the board game “Koalition” in this game the players will learn the political process that is not one, but of 12 European countriess. The players then will try to gain power ad political influence in as many places as possible, they will convince the many political parties to join up to form the colitions that this person will need in oder to build up your countries power.
If you are interested in board games and politics, they will find many opportunities available for play, which will include both options. These games help gamers learn the political processes for many different countries, and who knows maybe one day they will become “El Presidente”.