The Death Penalty
Introduction to the Death Penalty.
A brief History of the Death Penalty.
The Court Systems in Washington State.
Facts on how the Courts are structured, the Death Penalty Process in Washington State, and the appeals process.
Why the Death Penalty doesn't Work.
Simply some quick reasons it just doesn't work.
What would make the Death Penalty more effective.
My own theory on what would improve it.
In order to analyze the Death Penalty and decide what would make it more effective, its history is imperative to know. The first instituted Death Penalty laws date back into the 18th century B.C.E. known as the Code of Hammerabi. In this code there are twenty-five crimes where one could receive death as a punishment (WSU). Of noteworthy importance in the code was its concern for the rights of victims. In reality, this code may have been the first "victims' rights statute" in history. Unfortunately,
society began to neglect victims in its rush to punish the offender, with the result victims' right would not resurface until the 20th century.
Throughout history the death penalty, in some degree, has always been instituted for the crimes of Treason and Murder. The Death Penalty is simply the legal infliction of death for a most serious criminal act. This is what we refer to as Capital Punishment. The first recorded execution in the New World was in the territory of Virginia in 1608 C.E.. The convicted, Captain George Kendall, was charged and convicted of being a spy for the Kingdom of Spain (espionage) and hence, executed (DPIC). Since then, the Death Penalty has remained in our criminal law statutes.
The court system in the United States is based on the principle of federalism.
Death Penalty essays:
... book of Babylonian law, from 1700BC. (http://www.schoolsucks) The Bible mentions that execution should be used for many crimes. (Bedau1) One example of the death penalty in the bible ...
... my next point... What happens if we do get rid of the death penalty? We would have hundreds of murderers sitting in jails and mixing with many other people ... terminate that mans life for his crimes to others? The death penalty is just that; a penalty. Its intention is not to present an ...
... in jail because of the good facilities they have, which is absolutely absurd. Behavior displayed by murders should not be tolerated by any state. If people see that all states legalize the death penalty , it could potentially reduce the crime rate ...
Injustices of the Justice System. Why do wrongful convictions of the death penalty occur? This research paper describes many reasons for why wrongful convictions occur.
... use the death penalty in cases that do not mainly rely on eyewitness testimony or circumstantial evidence. In conclusion there are many ways that an innocent person can be shown the injustices that the United States' courts ...
... in the request of the death penalty. Characterizing these laws as "arbitrary and capricious," the majority ruled that they constituted cruel and unusual punishment in violation of the Eighth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution and the due process guarantees ...
... a history as vicious as ours, is racial equality in the sentencing of the death penalty an impending reality, or a continuation of the blight that blinds the eyes of American ...
... In the United States the existence of the death penalty is a matter of state law. Although it was never used as much as England in the 18th century, between ...
... defeats the purpose of their other argument against the killing of and innocent person. Those in favor of the death penalty see mandatory appeals as a way of expediting the execution process, which ...