The EduTab was developed as a tool of integrating ICT in education. Because of that, we continue to improve our offering in educational content, always researching the best Apps, Videos and Books to help your child develop the right cognitive abilities to enable them be open to life long learning.
Today, let’s cover 2 major Apps that get your child learn how to read, spell and write.
It contains Songs, Games, Tests
Jolly Phonics Lessons provides resources and lesson plans to teach phonics lessons.
Using a synthetic phonics approach, Jolly Phonics teaches children the five key skills for reading and writing.
• Letter sounds audio for all sounds
• All the Jolly songs for each letter sound
• Animated letter formation
• Action image and instructions
• Word bank and flash cards
Nkoza & Nankya
It is a fun and educational app for kids, featuring Ugandan/African Stories, Games & more.
The Adventures of Nkoza & Nankya is a 3D Animated Children’s Video and Book Series, Fostering a Love for Reading, Creativity and Storytelling. Solomon Jagwe, the Ugandan creator of Nkoza and Nankya says “Our Goal is to create an EduTainment experience that explores and teaches Youth and Adults alike, the value of Ugandan Culture, Languages, History and Geography.”
Join Nkoza and Nankya to sing Luganda songs with your children, read comics and play games.
The Apps, Videos and Books on the EduTab are created to stimulate the brain of the child in order for them to be open to life long learning. We seek to develop the following brain skills;
1- Processing Speed: The rate at which the brain receives, arranges and interpretes information.
2- Focus/attention: Staying on whatever you have decided to do despite the distractions.
3- Tenacity: Ability to endure and stay on course towards your objective despite hardships.
4- Critical thinking: Ability to ask “why” which is the foundation of innovation
Others include organisational skills, memory, prediction, decision making, etc
Every child needs the EduTab! Get your child OFF your phone, get them the EduTab today!
Price and Specs:
Specs: RAM 512MB, ROM 8GB, SCREEN 7 INCHES, WI-FI ONLY
Price: 420,0000/= ( Add 50,000/= for tempted glass screen protector)
Specs: RAM 1GB, ROM 16GB, DUAL SIM, 3G NETWORK, 5MP CAMERA, 10 INCH SCREEN
Price: 650,000/= ( Add 50,000/= for tempered glass screen protector and 40,000/= for a cover)
This Post Has One Comment
Pingback: Digital Pedagogy: American Center partnering with Yaaka and TOD Idea to train and encourage teachers | ICT Teachers' Association of Uganda (ITAU)