Titus Kaphar: Can art amend history?
Titus Kaphar's artworks interact with the history of art by appropriating its styles and mediums. Full bio
Double-click the English transcript below to play the video.
to the Natural History Museum?
is I take my kids to the museum.
to the Natural History Museum.
Sabian and Dabith.
entrance of the museum,
of Teddy Roosevelt out there.
with one hand on the horse,
but it kind of feels like it.
is a Native American walking.
is an African-American walking.
to try to explain that,
I try to do with them anyways.
would have never really asked.
of such an amazing institution."
to amend our public sculptures,
when I was born.
with his own things
is because of a woman.
fantastic, beautiful, smart woman,
about your future."
"I'm thinking about my future now."
to the junior college
to what I was registering to.
about art history.
when I went into that class.
and say, "Who's that?"
Clearly that is Van Gogh.
I wasn't a great student. OK?
that I was able to learn things visually
this became my tactic
Things were going well.
these art history classes.
I will not forget, I will never forget.
art history classes.
survey art history classes,
the entire history of art
and Jackson Pollock
but they try anyway.
was about a 14-page section
of black people in painting
let's just put it that way.
the other classes that I had,
to go over that particular chapter,
to go through it."
hold on, professor, professor.
important chapter to me.
I'm sorry, I'm sorry,
that this is significant.
because we need to talk."
out of her office.
"I can't force her to teach anything."
if I wanted to understand this history,
of those folks who had to walk,
to have to figure that out myself.
and looking at images like this.
some slight differences in the painting.
that I had been absorbing
that painting is a language.
in the composition here.
this gold necklace here.
about the economic status
of the compositional structure,
that they have quite a bit of money.
this other character here.
in research on these kinds of paintings,
in this painting --
than I can about this character here,
just put inside of this paint
of sculptures at museums?
of these kinds of paintings
of themselves all the time?
you actually had to focus. Right?
a little to the right,
in the background would come out.
the struggles of our past
and the advances of our present.
and getting rid of stuff.
do it in the same way
a law in the American Constitution,
but this is where we are right now."
understand a little bit
ABOUT THE SPEAKERTitus Kaphar - Artist
Titus Kaphar's artworks interact with the history of art by appropriating its styles and mediums.
Why you should listen
As Titus Kaphar says of his work: "I’ve always been fascinated by history: art history, American history, world history, individual history -- how history is written, recorded, distorted, exploited, reimagined and understood. In my work I explore the materiality of reconstructive history. I paint and I sculpt, often borrowing from the historical canon, and then alter the work in some way. I cut, crumple, shroud, shred, stitch, tar, twist, bind, erase, break, tear and turn the paintings and sculptures I create, reconfiguring them into works that nod to hidden narratives and begin to reveal unspoken truths about the nature of history."
Kaphar is founder/CEO of the NXTHVN, a multidisciplinary arts incubator that's being built to train professional artists and to further establish New Haven's growing creative community. His latest works are an investigation into the highest and lowest forms of recording history. From monuments to mug shots, this body of work exhibited at Jack Shainman gallery December-January 2017 seeks to collapse the line of American history to inhabit a fixed point in the present. Historical portraiture, mug shots, and YouTube stills challenge viewers to consider how we document the past, and what we have erased. Rather than explore guilt or innocence, Kaphar engages the narratives of individuals and how we as a society manage and define them over time. As a whole, this exhibition explores the power of rewritten histories to question the presumption of innocence and the mythology of the heroic.
Titus Kaphar | Speaker | TED.com