Marcia Davis: Loon's eerie call catches boaters by surprise
At first he did not want to believe what he was hearing. But to the ears of Dr. Otto Schwarz of Knox County, the unearthly wailing was unmistakable. It was the eerie voice of a common loon.
To Dr. Schwarz, slowly cruising along Tellico Lake in his trawler with his wife Bobbie, this primal cry — and the bird responsible for it — seemed terribly out of place in East Tennessee on a November afternoon. While growing up in Chicago, he spent a lot of time with his dad — an ardent fisherman — on fishing trips to the loon-inhabited northern lakes of Wisconsin, Minnesota, and Canada. "Anyone who loves nature has to take note of the voice of the common loon," said Schwarz.
The beautiful, but eerie, call of a loon at dusk is as much a call of the wilderness as the howl of a wolf. Nearly everyone associates common loons with remote picturesque northern lakes surrounded by wilderness areas of birch trees and evergreens. Such lakes are great places for nesting and raising young — but they're summer homes only.
Come fall, inland-nesting common loons must migrate south before their northern freshwater lakes freeze over. Adults usually leave before the young of the year. A lot of loons migrate from freshwater inland lakes to coastal areas to spend the winter. Others winter on inland freshwater lakes.
Bird banding studies (with individual loons identified by unique numbers on metal leg bands) and radio tracking studies show loons breeding in the upper Great Lakes in Michigan and Wisconsin migrate along the southern Great Lakes and then head south to the Gulf of Mexico. They winter from Alabama east along the Florida Gulf Coast. Fall migration peaks in late October and November. Studies show many of these loons gather in groups and layover along the way on lakes in Tennessee and Alabama. Since some remain on inland lakes for the winter, common loons can be expected in Tennessee. Tennessee is on a migration route from the Great Lakes to the Gulf of Mexico so lots of common loons pass through the state.
Look for loons on Tennessee's larger reservoirs. Rarely there are flocks of several hundred but it's more common in East Tennessee to see groups of a dozen or less. If you live on a large lake you might hear one calling — especially at dusk. Loon calls may resemble laughing, wailing, or yodeling a "yodel-ha-oo-oo." After hearing the eerie calls only a few times you'll easily recognize them.
Loons, called divers in Great Britain, skillfully dive and swim underwater using their eyes to find fish. Loons may be master divers but they can barely walk. Webbed feet (used for swimming, diving, and steering) are set so far back on their bodies that loons resort to awkward waddling, rather than walking, across the ground. This causes another problem. Loons can normally take off only from water — not from land. Occasionally a loon crash lands in a wet driveway or parking lot mistaking dark shiny wet asphalt for water. The loon may be stranded and unable to take off.
December and January are good months to look for loons — symbols of the northern wilderness — in East Tennessee. Unlike broad-billed ducks and geese, loons have bills pointed like a spear. Unlike long-necked double-crested cormorants, loons have short necks. Both loons and larger cormorants ride low in the water.
To hear the various calls and learn more about common loons visit the Cornell Laboratory of Ornithology at http://allaboutbirds.org/guide/common_loon/id. For more about loons, conservation, and problems loons face visit the International Center for Loon Conservation at www.briloon.org/looncenter.