How to learn Serbian
HOW TO LEARN SERBIAN
Most non-Serbian speakers claim that learning Serbian is hard. Serbian, as a Slavic language, differs from Romance and Germanic languages. However, we believe that those differences make it unique and interesting! We put together a few reasons for learning Serbian and offered advice on how to do that. If you want to find out more, keep reading!
The first thing you need to know about Serbian is that it uses two alphabets - Cyrillic and Latin. Learning the Cyrillic alphabet can seem daunting at first because it looks different from other types of scripts, but after some practice, you will get a hang of it. Good thing is that you can always use the Latin alphabet instead while learning the Cyrillic one. To get used to it faster, we recommend the internet since it is loaded with resources for Serbian language learners.
You can also start learning the letters one by one. Begin with the letters that look and sound familiar, such as A, M, T, O. Leave the tricky ones for the end: Š, Ć, Đ, Č, after you have already mastered the pronunciation of the easier letters. Utilize all the tools you have on hand to get familiar with the language and its intonation, such as language apps, music, films and news. These tools will help you memorize it faster as well.
Another way of learning Serbian is by attending a language course. You can sign up for individual or group classes or opt for an online programme. To learn more about this, click the link and read what we already wrote about this topic.
Now that you are equipped with several techniques to master the Serbian language, let us briefly point out why you should learn it.
Once you move to Serbia and start your studies, it would be useful to know a bit of language. Although a vast majority of young people speak English (and French, German, Spanish, etc.), elderly people often are not very fluent in it, so understanding a bit of Serbian will ease your communication with the locals and make you feel more integrated into the community. Also, it will be simpler for you to run some daily errands, for example, to pay bills, shop for groceries, etc.
Another advantage of studying Serbian is that you will set up a very good base for learning other languages of the region, such as Montenegrin, Bosnian, Croatian, and even Macedonian and Bulgarian. All these languages share some similarities and native Serbian speakers have no trouble understanding them. Would not be amazing to learn the basics of other languages while learning Serbian? Also, if you studied another Slavic language, you already have a good foundation for grasping Serbian and its grammar, probably much faster than others. You will pick up common sayings and words in no time!
Want to know more about Study in Serbia and how to learn Serbian? Check out our previous blogs and contact Study in Serbia via email, Facebook, and Instagram if you have further questions.