1 Night, 3500 Deaths: Bhopal Gas Tragedy Victims Seek Justice While Mourning For Last 35 Years
On the intervening night of December 2 and 3 in 1984, the city of Bhopal was destined to change forever as a gas leak in the Union Carbide pesticide plant would kill at least 3,500 people, and leave its scars on hundreds of thousands of residents in the surrounding areas.
It was just another December night and winter was gradually setting in when a gas leak was noticed at the Union Carbide’s (later Dow Chemicals) pesticide factory. By early morning, the winter winds carried the poisonous gas leaking from the factory and engulfed the city.
The city was so far known for its natural splendour, beautiful lakes and rich historical heritage but things would change forever after that day.
Image Credit - Raghu Rai
Never-ending tragedy and numbers
Bhopal would be thrust on the world map and the tragedy would come to be remembered as one of the most disastrous industrial mishaps in recent human memory.
Its impact was so catastrophic that in a matter of hours, at least 3,000 lives were reportedly lost. Later estimates showed that over 42,000 kgs of methyl isocyanate were released into the atmosphere from the gas leak. Because the wind was cold, most of it wafted through the city over the coming days even as the number of casualties only seemed to increase with every passing minute.
The government records now claim that over 5,295 people lost their lives whereas Amnesty International says that at least 7,000 people died within the first three days alone. Activists and NGOs further scale the death-toll to be between 8,000 to 10,000.
Image Credit - AFP
Two days after the gas leak, noted journalist and author John Elliott reached the grief-stricken central Indian city.
“When I arrived, dead animals were still on the streets, there was still a tang in the air from the gas and the funeral pyres were still burning,” he recalls.
Poison in the air
The impact of the gas leak was so disastrous because people couldn’t help not breathe the air that had been contaminated. Methyl isocyanate is a colourless, toxic and life-threatening gas which mixes with air and it had leaked into Bhopal in unimaginable proportions.
Image Credit - AFP
The total population of Bhopal stood at about 8.5 lakhs in 1984 but more than half of them had been affected. Notably, the Union Carbide alarm system did not work for hours and by the time the first rays of the sun made its way to the ground, people were rushing to hospitals with symptoms ranging from internal haemorrhage and pneumonia.
Most of the deaths occurred during the first few days after the tragedy but the story of those who suffered, with many who continue to do so, is more tragic still.
In the initial days, it has been widely reported that people complained of burning skin and eyes while also struggling to breathe and maintain their composure but the water of the city would be contaminated to the extent that even today several studies have claimed that they are poisonous. Further, disabilities would be spotted in the descendants of those who survived that fateful day.
The women who inhaled the toxic gas which leaked from the Union Carbide factory gave birth to children with birth defects in alarming numbers. 35 years on and the organisations working for Bhopal Gas Tragedy survivors claim that the data was concealed.
"The documents we have obtained from the National Institute for Research on Environmental Health reveal that its parent organisation, the Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) decided against publishing the report of a study having damning fact that the mothers exposed to the tragedy are begetting children with defects," Rachna Dhingra of Bhopal Group for Information and Action was quoted as saying by news agency PTI.
Image Credit - AFP
Their study found out birth defects in babies of gas exposed mothers to be several times higher compared to those of non-exposed women. As per the documents, Dr Ruma Galgalekar, the principal investigator found that 9 per cent of 1,048 babies born to gas exposed mothers had congenital malformations while in 1,247 babies born to unexposed mothers, only 1.3 per cent had congenital malformations.
"The study was carried out from January 2016 to June 2017 and was discussed at three meetings of the Scientific Advisory Committee (SAC). The documents further show that when the findings were presented at another SAC meeting in December 2017, members expressed concern about the high incidence of malformed children and raised several queries related to quality control of data," she alleged.
The Bhopal Gas Tragedy threw up a few challenges for India as a country to fix in the coming years but unfortunately despite 35 years of suffering, we haven’t been able to do enough. For starters, no amount of compensation could make up for the losses that Bhopalis suffered. Some had lost their closest relatives, others were suffering themselves and left to the mercy of the god.
Image Credit - AFP
Not only did we fail in providing them with the best possible treatment but also our successive governments succumbed to their own vested political interests and thereby failed to aptly punish Union Carbide for this monumental disaster. On another front, several lessons needed to be drawn from the Bhopal episode.
Most significantly, India needed to fix its disaster response system, reinvigorate its dying hospitals and prepare itself to face any unexpected disaster like the one in Bhopal. How much have we succeeded on this front, we should all be asking ourselves on this day as we mourn the day that changed things for so many, so suddenly.
The Conversation (0)
Start a conversation, not a fire. Post with kindness.