10 Tips to Treat Swollen Feet from Diabetes
Diabetes can cause fluid to build up in the lower limbs. The swelling in the feet, ankles, and lower legs can be caused by this build up.
Excess swelling of the feet and ankles is called edema. You can experience swelling in a specific site or in a general area.
Swelling is a common occurrence after eating salty foods. Some people may experience swelling due to hormonal changes. There are other causes of swelling.
Diabetes is a condition where the body doesn’t produce any or enough insulin. Insulin is a hormone that the pancreas releases. It helps your cells absorb sugar.
If your body doesn’t use insulin properly, high levels of glucose (sugar) can build up in your blood. Without treatment, high glucose levels can damage the lining of smaller blood vessels. This damage can result in poor blood circulation.
This poor circulation can cause fluid to build up in the feet and ankles, resulting in swelling.
Other causes of swelling
Over time, high blood sugar can damage the nerves in your lower extremities and other parts of your body. This can lead to numbness, which makes it difficult to detect injuries like sprains, fractures, and cuts.
Swelling can be caused by un treated injuries. Cut and scratch are at risk of being inflammatory. If you have diabetes, it is important to check your feet regularly for injuries.
If you have circulation concerns or nerve damage in your lower limbs, you should see a foot specialist.
According to the National Health Service, other factors associated with diabetes that may cause swelling in the feet include:
- “It’s obese.”
- The veins are not functioning properly.
- There are heart conditions.
- Concerns about the kidneys.
- There are side effects of medication.
Sometimes, it can be due to an increased tendency to have leaky capillaries or taking large amounts ofinsulin.
If you experience swelling from diabetes, here are some tips to help manage it.
Compression socks help maintain the right amount of pressure on your feet and legs. This can improve blood circulation in your feet and reduce swelling, per
Your calf is covered by socks. Remove them before bed if you wear them like regular socks. If you need to wear them on one leg or both, you should talk to your doctor.
It is important that compression socks are light and not too tight, so start with light compression and increase the compression if necessary. A compression sock that is too tight can affect circulation. It is important not to place socks over wounds.
There is more about compression socks for diabetes here.
Elevating your foot above heart level can also help reduce fluid retention in the lower part of your body and reduce swelling, according to the NHS. Instead of fluid collecting in your foot, fluid returns toward your body.
You can elevate your foot while sitting down.
“If you can’t keep your legs above heart level while sitting at a desk, using an ottoman or small stool may be able to help.”
The Legs Up the Wall yoga pose may also be helpful. Here’s how to do it:
- Lie on your back and make sure you are in a perfect position.
- Lying down, raise your legs and rest against the wall.
- Hold this position for a while.
Learn more about the benefits of elevation.
Exercise isn’t only helpful for weight management and improving blood sugar; it can also promote blood circulation and reduce swelling that results from inactivity, the NHS says.
You may find it beneficial to do some non-weight-bearing exercises.
According to a
Reaching and maintaining a moderate weight can help you manage your diabetes, according to the American Diabetes Association.
If your blood sugar is in the target range, you are less likely to have damage to your blood vessels that can lead to poor circulation and swelling.
Less joint pain, a lower risk for cardiovascular disease, and increased energy are some of the benefits of maintaining a moderate weight.
You can learn more about weight management.
If your body is holding on to fluid, drinking more water may be counter productive. The more fluid you take in, the more fluid you excrete. The body holds onto water when you are dehydrated.
If this is right for you, you should check with your doctor to increase your fluid intake. If you have a heart or liver problem, your doctor may advise you to limit fluid intake.
You can find out how much water you should drink.
Eating too many salty foods can also make swelling worse. The U.S. Dietary Guidelines for Americans recommend an intake of no more than
If you have diabetes, you may need to reduce your salt intake. Talk to your doctor to find out how much salt you can safely eat.
To cut back.
- Eat more vegetables and fruits.
- Purchase and eat processed foods.
- When choosing canned goods, look for low sodium.
It can be helpful to cook with herbs instead of salt.
- garlic powder
- The herb oregano.
- It was thyme.
- It is a type of seasoning called paprika.
Sitting for long periods can cause swelling. Make a point to get up at least once every hour and walk for a short while.
Nerve function and blood sugar levels are regulated by magnesium. A magnesium deficiency can cause fluid retention or swelling.
Typically adult males require 400 to 420 mg of magnesium per day and females require 310 to 360 mg, according to the
Before starting any magnesium supplements, you should speak with your doctor.
Taking high amounts of magnesium could cause a variety of symptoms. There are serious consequences of supplementation, including an irregular heartbeat and cardiac arrest.
If you have chronic kidney disease, supplementation may cause a buildup of magnesium in your blood, which can lead to muscle weakness.
You can learn more about daily magnesium recommendations.
Some people believe that certain essential oils can be applied to the skin.
You should always use a carrier oil when using lavender essential oil on the skin.
The compound in the salt helps relieve pain and swelling. You can fill a tub with water and salt to make a foot soak.
If you have diabetes, you should test the water temperature with your hands first to avoid injury to your foot.
Learn more about the foot baths here.
If your swelling is getting worse, you should contact your doctor. They can determine which home remedies are right for you.
Swelling in a person with diabetes may result from a condition associated with diabetes, such as “It’s obese.”, The veins are not functioning properly., and heart failure.
You should also see a doctor for swelling that only occurs on one side of your body. This could be a sign of deep vein thrombosis, which is a blood clot that develops in one or more of the deep veins in your leg. This condition can cause pain, swelling, or no symptoms at all.
“You should check your feet regularly for wounds to avoid infections. If you have blisters that don’t heal, you should see a doctor.”
Swelling in the feet can be caused by diabetes. Multiple causes can cause leg swelling when you have diabetes.
Home remedies such as elevating your feet, exercising, and staying hydrated can sometimes help with swelling. It is important to talk with your doctor about any swelling.