The body is constantly emitting electromagnetic frequencies, which vary depending on our changing health status. With a careful analysis of the transfer of energy occurring throughout the body, we can gain valuable insights to our health.
Recent innovations in technology have made it possible to better understand what goes on inside the body without drawing blood or using radiation. Electrodermal screening enables us to combine traditional Eastern medicine with modern Western innovations. EDS 2000 electrodermal screening works by measuring the electrical activity in hundreds of acupuncture points that run along the body’s twelve meridians. These acupuncture points each reveal information related to specific glands and organs. After a screening, the practitioner interprets the flow of energy within the major meridians and identifies any energy imbalances in the body.
At Better Health Wellness Center, we strive to provide effective holistic treatments to help optimize your health and well-being. Below we have listed a few signs that indicate it may be time to try electrodermal screening.
With new food sensitivities constantly taking the spotlight in popular culture, it can be difficult for the average person to determine which dietary change may be the key to a better quality of life. If you are having diet-related issues such as painful bloating, nausea, or diarrhea after consuming food and beverages, it is important to identify the culprit so that you can enjoy a better quality of life and make dietary choices that promote healthy digestion. Many people do this by eliminating certain foods until they find the source of their symptoms; however, this can be difficult and time-consuming. Electrodermal screening is a simple alternative that helps you identify your food sensitivities via energy analysis.
If you are currently on a treatment plan to address a health issue, it is important to periodically assess its effectiveness and adjust your regimen accordingly. If you do not feel that your prescription is optimizing your health, it may be time to speak to a healthcare professional and explore alternative options. Instead of experimenting with various medications and natural supplements, electrodermal screening can help you pinpoint deficiencies and other ailments throughout the body. Your practitioner can then recommend a new treatment plan that is tailored to your needs.
Whether you have recently been prescribed a medication or you have been on the same pharmaceutical care plan for years, it is never too late to explore natural alternatives. Electrodermal screening makes it possible to identify nutritional deficiencies, energy imbalances, and other problems that may be corrected with the right natural methods. Our physicians at Better Health Wellness Center have access to an array of highly effective holistic medicine that could help you optimize your health.
Unfortunately, many symptoms of poor health could be attributed to a number of different ailments. Examples include chronic headaches, abdominal pain, extreme fatigue, and many others. Electrodermal screening helps patients identify areas in the body that are off balance, often resulting in a clear diagnosis.
Not only does electrodermal screening help identify the specific area of concern when a patient is experiencing symptoms linked to cancer, but this process may also help enhance the quality of life for patients in early stages of their disease. By identifying areas where energy may be restored through enzymes and other natural supplements, this could help patients maintain a sense of normalcy even while undergoing strenuous forms of treatment such as radiation therapy or chemotherapy.
Contact us today to schedule your EDS 2000 electrodermal screening.