Papaya fruit may not be a favourite among all but papaya has many benefits. Columbus had referred to it as the fruit of the angels. This fruit when ripe has a rich orange and sweet flesh inside its skin. It is both nutritious and tasty. Many people resort to nutrition pills to get vitamins and minerals. But it is always better to have fruits and vegetables instead of going for their nutritional supplements. Let us see the numerous health benefits of a papaya.
Heart Diseases- Papaya has numerous benefits as it is a rich source of antioxidants, vitamin A, C and E. This wide range of antioxidants prevents the cholesterol from oxidising. If the cholesterol oxidises then it sticks to the walls of blood vessels. This accumulation increases with time resulting in an increased chance of heart attacks.
Health Benefits Of A Papaya
SHARE THIS STORY
Papaya is healthy also because it is rich in dietary fibres. These dietary fibres also help control the cholesterol levels in the blood.
The folic acid present in a papaya converts a substance called homocysteine into benign amino acids . Homocysteine can damage blood cells if unconverted. And an increased level of it may even lead to heart attacks.
Digestive System- A protein called papain which is a digestive enzyme is to be found in the papayas. That is why papayas are even used in meat preparations to make make meat tender. The enzymes in papaya breaks the complex proteins into simple amino acids thus making it easier for digestion. A papaya is very healthy to consume in case you have constipation. The papaya enzymes and fibres help in proper bowel movement thus aiding in better digestion.
Anti-inflammatory Properties- Papaya has bounty of anti-inflammatory properties. That why it is very good for people with burns or inflammations. This anti-inflammatory property of a papaya makes it an excellent remedy for people with diseases like arthritis or asthma.
Cancer- A papaya has multiple benefits. It is rich in anti-cancerous elements. The fibre in the food binds with the cancer producing toxins in the colon thus preventing the chances of colon cancer to a considerable degree. The folate, vitamin C, beta-carotene, and vitamin E in papaya have also been linked to lower the chances of cancer in human beings. They protect the DNA from the damage caused by free radicals. It is thus very healthy to eat at least a few pieces of papaya everyday to reap its benefits and reduce the chances of cancer.
You may even have this tropical fruit as a part of your diet plan as it is very low in calories too.
BDST: 1316 HRS, AUG 13, 2012
Edited by: Sharmina Islam, Lifestyle Editor
All rights reserved. Sale, redistribution or reproduction of information/photos/illustrations/video/audio contents on this website in any form without prior permission from banglanews24.com are strictly prohibited and liable to legal action.