what is a possible drawback to direct democracy
What is a possible drawback to direct democracy How might it be resolved quizlet?
What is a possible drawback to direct democracy? How might it be resolved? A direct democracy may allow a majority to dominate and silence a minority. This kind of problem can be remedied by providing all citizens with basic rights. Freedom of speech and freedom of religion are examples of basic rights.
What are the conditions of direct democracy?
Depending on the particular system in use, direct democracy might entail passing executive decisions, the use of sortition, making laws, directly electing or dismissing officials, and conducting trials.
What was an advantage of representative government quizlet?
allows for compromise so more people can support the decision.
What are some of the drawbacks of direct democracy quizlet?
Disadvantages: -Direct democracy means majoritianism, government by a simple majority -Many decisions may be too complex for the peole to understand -Direct democracy often creates emotional, rather than rational, response from the poeple and media -Can be subverted or distorted by wealthy groups who influence the …
What is direct democracy in your own words?
Direct democracy, sometimes called "pure democracy," is a form of democracy in which all laws and policies imposed by governments are determined by the people themselves, rather than by representatives who are elected by the people.Feb 2, 2022
What do you think are the advantages of these methods of direct democracy?
Advantages: -It is the purest form of democracy -It disperses power widely among the population and so prevents a concentration of power in too few hands -It means that decisions may be more acceptable to the population – It can prevent decision makers from making mistakes -It increases popular participation and …
What is a good sentence for direct democracy?
People limit themselves to saying that under modern conditions direct democracy is impossible, therefore that representative democracy is necessary. Direct democracy is also associated with important indirect effects on policymaking.
What is the importance of direct democracy?
Since constitutional law cannot be altered by state legislatures, this direct democracy component gives the people an automatic superiority and sovereignty, over representative government (Magelby, 1984).
Which best describes an advantage of indirect democracy over direct democracy?
In an indirect democracy, the citizens choose their representatives by giving their votes; The one who wins with the majority is selected as a …
Which statement best describes an advantage of indirect democracy over?
In a direct democracy, citizens have the right to change their representatives; In this democracy, the power to choose government is only given …
Which statement best describes a specific way direct democracy differs from indirect democracy?
Which statement best describes a specific way direct democracy differs from indirect democracy? In a direct democracy, the ruling power comes from winning the majority vote, but in an indirect democracy, it comes from a constitution.
What best describes indirect democracy?
An indirect democracy is a type of democratic government in which voters choose delegates to create the laws of government on their behalf. A …
Which statement best describes an advantage of indirect over direct democracy?
In an indirect democracy, the citizens choose their representatives by giving their votes · The one who wins with the majority is selected as a …
If you still have questions like the ones below, please contact us for answers:
what was the divine right of kings
what is a possible drawback to direct democracy weegy
what is a possible drawback to direct democracy how might be resolved
how can direct democracy be resolved
how might it be resolved
what was the divine right of kings weegy
what was the divine right of kings quizlet