March 19, 2022
What items are necessary to do a comprehensive physical examination?
1, to do a comprehensive physical examination, we need to check the endocrine system, through the endocrine system design can fully reflect the of students' physical and mental health. The endocrine system can be checked, including the three items of blood sugar, glycated hemoglobin and bone density. The normal blood glucose concentration is 80-120 mg%, and if it is not exceeded or below this value, the teacher needs to study the next examination. In addition, glycosylated hemoglobin can effectively reflect the level of blood glucose control management and is used to analyze the ability to determine whether diabetes is present. The middle-aged and elderly society needs to judge the degree of physical health education based on the detection of bone density.
2. Comprehensive examination includes blood system examination, which is generally routine blood examination. The routine blood test can be used to know whether there are blood diseases and to grasp the internal situation in the blood. In addition, changes in the number and morphology of red blood cells, white blood cells, and platelets can help determine the health status of the body.
Digestive system examinations are also essential. Gastroscopy, colonoscopy, abdominal ultrasound, liver function tests, and Helicobacter pylori tests can be performed to understand the health of the digestive system. Colonoscopy, gastroscopy and abdominal ultrasound are best for middle-aged and elderly people, through which they can determine whether there are problems in the stomach. In addition, liver function tests are routinely performed, mainly by the values of glutamic oxalacetic transaminase and glutamic alanine transaminase.
Figure 4. The cardiovascular system is subject to a thorough physical examination, and the health of the heart can be understood through an electrocardiogram. Generally speaking, if you live with frequent symptoms of chest discomfort, dizziness and sometimes discomfort in the precordial region, you need to have a timely ECG examination. ECG examination is an important test for cardiovascular health examination and diagnosis of various cardiac diseases.
5. A comprehensive physical examination needs to involve urinary system examination to understand the health status of the urinary system through routine urine and kidney function tests. The item that needs to be performed for middle-aged and elderly people is urine routine. By analyzing the composition of urine, we can know whether there are diseases in body organs. In addition, kidney function test is mainly through creatinine, uric acid and other values to know. If you have gout symptoms, you need to check the kidney function regularly.
6, respiratory management system is one of the must-check project techniques, through chest X-ray, lung CT, etc., to understand the patient's lung function analysis and other lung health development status, can detect early lung lesions or airway lesions. Especially we frequent smokers need a check respiratory control system to prevent respiratory research diseases.
In order to prolong your life, you need to have regular physical examinations and any physical abnormalities can be treated immediately. Since many diseases are easily treated in the early stages, they are usually difficult to cure in the advanced stages. Therefore, it is recommended to develop a good habit of regular medical check-ups in your life to protect your health.
Posted by: longac at
| No Comments
| Add Comment
Post contains 551 words, total size 4 kb.
35 queries taking 0.0273 seconds, 61 records returned.
Powered by Minx 1.1.6c-pink.