If you are a Harry Potter fan, you surely know how they used chocolate to cure different ailments. It made the readers jealous, hoping that they can also use chocolate in the same way.
However, is there a solid basis for how the book series used chocolate? Is chocolate really a treatment or is it the other way around? Does chocolate increase fever?
Well, here’s the good news for you! Chocolate doesn’t increase fever. On the contrary, research has revealed that 70% of cacao can even help fight off flu and cold symptoms.
Chocolate, specifically hot chocolate, doesn’t have medicinal properties. But it is usually enjoyed as an additive that helps ease symptoms of fever. Drinking hot chocolate in general may help fight off a fever and increase the temperature of your body.
Can You Eat Chocolate If You Have Fever?
If you are looking for the best method for fever relief, hot chocolate is a very popular option since it is cooling and comforting at the same time. Some people even believe that hot chocolate can also help lower a fever due to its caffeine content. Others also believe that chocolate itself is even soothing and helps ease fever symptoms.
Hot chocolate is an excellent way to comfort yourself if you have flu or a cold. It doesn’t only taste great because it also helps fight off symptoms of the condition. Chocolate is a wonderful way to calm your coughs and soothe your throat. In addition, it can even help prevent headaches and migraines.
Can You Eat Chocolate If You are Sick?
If you are suffering from a sore throat, for example, drinking some hot chocolate is also a good way to help soothe your painful throat and offer relief to some symptoms of your condition. Dark chocolate in this regard is especially effective since it is rich in helpful antioxidants that can reduce inflammation.
Aside from this, chocolate also has a numbing effect on your throat that can help lessen the severity of your symptoms. Hot chocolate may even offer relief for dry cough. By offering hydration to your lungs, chocolate will be able to help improve your breathing and lessen the severity of the symptoms you are experiencing.
Can You Eat Chocolate If You Have a Cough?
If you are suffering from the flu or a cold, you may be able to feel better if you drink hot chocolate. Hot chocolate is made up of milk and chocolate which makes the drink soothing and warm.
It may also help relieve dry cough and sore throat since it can desensitize the nerves in the throat. In particular, dark chocolate is also very effective since this is rich in antioxidants that can help fight off the virus.
Does Chocolate Cause Mucus?
Your body produces more mucus because of histamine. Certain foods might increase your histamine levels, resulting in increased production of mucus.
Some people might also experience increased production of mucus from specific foods while other people might not. The increased production of mucus can result in a variety of symptoms such as a sore throat and congestion.
It is also important to learn about the foods that might cause a higher production of mucus and to be extra careful if you suffer from any symptoms after you eat them.
Is Hot Chocolate Healthy?
Hot chocolate is a drink that is delicious and healthy at the same time. It has high amounts of flavonoids that help increase blood flow. This improved blood flow can reduce the risks of blood clots, lower blood pressure, improve heart health, and even help you think better made possible by the improved blood flow to the brain.
Enjoying a cup of hot chocolate on a cold winter day will not only warm you up but can also give you a healthy boost. Hot chocolate is the best drink that anyone can enjoy, and people of all ages can drink it every time and anytime they want.
Here are other benefits of hot chocolate that make it a great drink to add to your diet:
- Hot chocolate can help boost your brain power.
- Hot chocolate can lessen cases of mood swings and enhance overall mental health.
- Hot chocolate can lower blood pressure and reduce the risks of heart disease.
- Hot chocolate is rich in antioxidants that can protect your body from diseases.
- Hot chocolate is an ideal way to strengthen heart health.
Is Hot Chocolate Better Than Coffee?
Compared to coffee, hot chocolate is richer in minerals and vitamins. Coffee may also offer health benefits yet hot chocolate contains more important nutrients. Meanwhile, coffee helps with weight loss and lessens the risk of diseases such as cancer and diabetes.
Will Hot Chocolate Make You Sleep Better?
Yes, hot chocolate might help you sleep better. Remember that this drink contains milk that has long been known for its calming effects. It also contains chocolate, an agent that promotes sleep.
In addition, the high amount of sugar in hot chocolate can also help you fall asleep since the sugar is slowly released into your bloodstream. These factors all work together so you can fall asleep faster.
Is It Unhealthy to Drink Hot Chocolate?
A small cup of hot chocolate bought from a high-street café may contain approximately 20g or five teaspoons of sugar. These additional calories may lead to weight gain that can increase your risk of heart disease.
In general, sugar is not beneficial for you. It can result in heart disease, weight gain, as well as other issues. This is why you have to be extra careful with what you drink and eat.
If you want to cut down your sugar intake, try to drink hot chocolate made with low-fat milk or skim milk instead. It is also possible to prepare hot chocolate at home with low-fat or skim milk and unsweetened cocoa powder.
The Bottom Line
It seems that chocolate doesn’t increase fever. Instead, it can increase the temperature of your body and help fight off a fever. If you feel a bit sick, you might want to munch on some chocolate!