Definition of Hospital at Dictionary.com
[ hos-pi-tl ]
/ ˈhɒs pɪ tl /
an institution in which sick or injured persons are given medical or surgical treatment.
a similar establishment for the care of animals.
a repair shop for specific portable objects: violin hospital; doll hospital.
British. an institution supported by charity or taxes for the care of the needy, as an orphanage or old people’s home.
Middle School Punctuation Quiz
Correctly using punctuation is tricky. There are many different kinds of punctuation marks, from the semicolon to the apostrophe, and they each have their own rules. (Ugh! Why do punctuation marks always have to have such big names?)
Using punctuation marks correctly is important, though, because they help make our communication clear. So, let’s boost our punctuation power with this quiz!
Question 1 of 10
Which of the options below is the best punctuation for the following sentence? “Although she didn’t get the new phone she wanted for her birthday __ she did get a pair of new headphones.”
Origin of hospital
OTHER WORDS FROM hospital
min·i·hos·pi·tal, nounmul·ti·hos·pi·tal, adjectivepost·hos·pi·tal, adjective
Words nearby hospital
Based on the Random House Unabridged Dictionary, © Random House, Inc. 2020
Example sentences from the Web for hospital
When the father arrived at the hospital, he was told that Andrew Dossi was in surgery, but the wounds were not life-threatening.
By the time the ambulance arrived, over 10 minutes later, it was too late—Mills died soon after arriving at the hospital.
“The Center was actually able to get me into the hospital and get me the new medications that were available,” Thom said.
Liu had been married just two months before and his wife now stood in this Brooklyn hospital, a sudden widow because of a madman.
Both Mayor De Blasio and Police Commissioner William Bratton rushed to the hospital.
When shall we know whether they are dead or alive, whether strong and healthy or moaning upon a bed in hospital?
I knew in what manner patients were treated at the hospital, and removal thither was to the last degree abhorred.
It is curious to find that in 1821 the function of the hospital as a school for students of medicine was something of a novelty.
A few days before, Si, while passing near the hospital, saw a weak convalescent faint and fall.
Do you remember the first hospital bed you ever made, the first bed-bath you gave, the first massage?
British Dictionary definitions for hospital
an institution for the medical, surgical, obstetric, or psychiatric care and treatment of patients
(modifier) having the function of a hospitala hospital ship
a repair shop for something specifieda dolls’ hospital
archaic a charitable home, hospice, or school
Word Origin for hospital
C13: from Medieval Latin hospitāle hospice, from Latin hospitālis relating to a guest, from hospes, hospit- guest, host 1
Collins English Dictionary – Complete & Unabridged 2012 Digital Edition
© William Collins Sons & Co. Ltd. 1979, 1986 © HarperCollins
Publishers 1998, 2000, 2003, 2005, 2006, 2007, 2009, 2012
Medical definitions for hospital
An institution that provides medical, surgical, or psychiatric care and treatment for the sick or the injured.
The American Heritage® Stedman’s Medical Dictionary
Copyright © 2002, 2001, 1995 by Houghton Mifflin Company. Published by Houghton Mifflin Company.