Importance of Sleep for Athletes
You will not be at the top of your game when you don’t sleep or rest enough. Sleep deprivation can make you more vulnerable to injury and make it harder to recover from current wounds. Before contacting any family medical clinic in OKC, read on to know how you cab avoid these.
Sleep and Injury Prevention
Sleep deprivation makes it harder to finish any physical work as your cognitive and motor skills are fatigued. When you’re short on sleep, your muscles don’t react as rapidly as they would if you were well rested, and you’re suffering from concentration and attention. Sleep deprivation can influence your equilibrium and motor skills. An absence of sleep can lead to wounds as you are not ready to perform at your best physically or mentally.
According to a latest research of adolescent athletes, athletes to sleep enough every night (eight or more hours), have a lower risk of injury up to 68%. The decreased risk of injury was significantly related to the number of sleeping hours per night. Leisure was a higher consideration than how many sports the athletes have played, whether the athletes performed throughout the year, and the trend towards athletes specializing in a specific sport.
Injury recovery skeletal muscles can restore after an injury, but to do so, your body requires assistance. Sleep is a very essential component of the regeneration process, and when you are deprived of sleep, your capacity to repair weakened tissue.
A latest research indicates that sleep has a permissive function in damaged tissue recovery and that sleep loss impairs recovery from muscle wounds. Those who were deprived of sleep showed reduced signs of muscle repair and deficits during recovery.
Injury Rehabilitation and Prevention
Sleep is one of the most efficient instruments to support athletic wellness. When you get enough sleep, you are less probable to get injured during athletic activity and promote better recovery from current wounds. Athletes should always get the recommended quantity of sleep every night: adolescents usually need about seven hours of sleep. However, up to 10 hours of shuteye may be useful during intense training or recovery periods. Typically, adolescents need about nine to 10 hours of rest every night.
Use these tips to maximize your recovery and decrease the probability of sport injuries with sleep:
Prioritize Your Rest– Sleep is a more important factor in injury prevention than the amount of training hours. Do not sacrifice sleep for practice if you do not want to visit roll off dumpster in OKC frequently. Plan and make sure you have enough time every night to get the sleep you need. Figure the time you need to wake up in the morning and count back to determine your bedtime.
Mattress Meeting Your Needs– Choosing a mattress that supports your preferred sleeping position can assist you to sleep better and feel better when you wake up. You will be well backed with the correct bed and take off stress from pain points on your body. Some mattresses give characteristics that can decrease inflammation and help muscle recovery.
Avoid Late-night Exercise – exercise is usually useful for sleep, but when you practice late at night, you may feel too energized to get to sleep. It is best if you can complete operations at least a few hours before bedtime.
Practice Healthy Habits –Good sleep hygiene can help you make the most of your hours of sleep. Maintain a periodic sleep timetable and bedtime routine and create your bedroom a good, cool, dark, quiet and comfortable sleep environment.
In case of any tissue injury, you can always contact Longevity as it is a good family medical clinic in OKC.
**Disclaimer: This content should not be considered medical advice and does not imply a doctor-patient relationship.