Dispose or collect food waste with the purpose of recycling or throwing away from the production process. Follow established procedures for their disposal taking care of the environment and the safety matters according to legislations.
disposing food waste
get rid of food waste
throw away food waste
throw out food waste
recycle food waste
Skill reusability level
Relationships with occupations
Dispose food waste is an essential skill of the following occupations:
Dispose food waste is optional for these occupations. This means knowing this skill may be an asset for career advancement if you are in one of these occupations.
Hydrogenation machine operator: Hydrogenation machine operators control equipment to process base oils for manufacture of margarine and shortening products.
Pasta operator: Pasta operators manufacture dry pasta products. They unload raw ingredients from storage silos and ingredient delivery systems. These operators mix, press, extrude as to reach desired drying levels of pasta.
Coffee grinder: Coffee grinders operate grinding machines to grind coffee beans to specified fineness.
Meat cutter: Meat cutters cut carcasses of animals into large and smaller parts for further processing. They remove bones from pre-processed carcasses of animals either manually or using machines.
Industrial cook: Industrial cooks create new food designs and recipes. They prepare, measure and mix ingredients to prepare foodstuff products. They control and regulate temperatures, monitor cooking process, assign specific baking tasks, and direct workers in task performance.
Blending plant operator: Blending plant operators control equipment to weigh and mix vegetable oils used in products such as salad oil and margarines. They tend pump oils to perform the blending according to specific formulas. They draw off samples of mixed oil to examine its texture and colour and based on that make adjustments to blending processes.
Sauce production operator: Sauce production operators process, produce and manufacture sauces made from fruits, vegetables, oils and vinegars. They operate machinery and equipment for activities such as mixing, pasteurising and packaging sauces.
Baker: Bakers make a wide range of breads, pastries, and other baked goods. They follow all the processes from receipt and storage of raw materials, preparation of raw materials for bread-making, measurement and mixing of ingredients into dough and proof. They tend ovens to bake products to an adequate temperature and time.
Water treatment systems operator: Water treatment system operators treat water to ensure safety for drinking, irrigation, or other use. They operate and maintain water treatment equipment and ensure the water is safe for bottling and use in food production by thoroughly testing before distribution, and by meeting environmental standards.
Pasta maker: Pasta makers prepare fresh pasta, fillings, and other types of pasta following specific recipes and processes.
Centrifuge operator: Centrifuge operators tend centrifugal machines that separate impurities from food materials aimed to be further processed as to achieve finished foodstuffs.
Oilseed presser: Oilseed pressers operate hydraulic presses that extracts oil from oilseed.
Building cleaner: Building cleaners maintain the cleanliness and overall functionality of various types of buildings such as offices, hospitals and public institutions. They perform cleaning duties like sweeping, vacuuming and mopping floors, empty trash and check security systems, locks and windows. Building cleaners check air conditioning systems and notify the appropriate persons in case of malfunctions or problems.
Sugar refinery operator: Sugar refinery operators tend and control refinery equipment to produce sugars and related products from raw sugar or other raw materials like corn starch.
Cocoa press operator: Cocoa press operators tend one or more hydraulic cocoa presses to remove specified amounts of cocoa butter (natural oil of cocoa bean) from chocolate liquor.
Slaughterer: Slaughterers slaughter animals and process carcasses for further processing and distribution.
Butcher: Butchers order, inspect and buy meat to prepare it and sell it as consumable meat products. They perform activities such as cutting, trimming, boning, tying, and grinding beef, pork, and poultry meat. They prepare those mentioned sorts of meat for consumption.
Cellar operator: Fermentation cellar operators take charge of fermentation and maturation tanks. They control fermentation process of wort inoculated with yeast. They tend equipment that cools and adds yeast to wort as to produce beer. For the purpose, they control the flow of refrigeration that goes through cool coils regulating the temperature of hot wort in the tanks.
Dairy products maker: Dairy products makers artisanally process raw milk to make dairy products such as butter, cheese, cream and milk.
Halal butcher: Halal butchers order, inspect and buy meat to prepare it and sell it as consumable meat products in accordance with Islamic practices. They perform activities such as cutting, trimming, boning, tying, and grinding beef and poultry meat. They prepare halal meat for consumption.
Clarifier: Clarifiers operate equipment to remove sediments and moisture from oleo and oils. They heat clarifying tank with steam and strainers for the clarification process. They remove foreign matters from the surface of hot oleo or oil stacks using skimmers.
Oil mill operator: Oil mill operators tend mills to extract oil from oilseed following an artisanal techniques.
Fish trimmer: Fish trimmers cut off fish heads and remove organs from the body for fish and seafood production. They remove organs by scraping and washing, cut out areas presenting defects, and package the processed fish in appropriate containers.
Carbonation operator: Carbonation operators perform the injection of carbonation into beverages.
Fruit and vegetable preserver: Fruit and vegetable preservers tend machines to prepare and preserve fruit and vegetable products. They aim to keep preserved perishable foods in a stable form. Thus, they perform duties such as freezing, preserving, packing after sorting, grading, washing, peeling, trimming and slicing agricultural products.
Blanching operator: Blanching operators remove outer coverings or skins from almonds and nuts in general. They cut leaves and impurities of raw material and control the flow of nuts, seeds, and/or leaves in the process. They use pressure and temperature to blanch the raw material if necessary.
Fish canning operator: Fish canning operators brine, cook and package fish. They sterilise fish canning lines and introduce fishes in tanks once heads and visceras have been removed from the body. They tend cooking stoves to preheat the fish, and fill the cans either manually or mechanically with fish, olive oil or other products.
Fruit-press operator: Fruit-press operators tend power presses to extract juice from fruits. For the purpose, they spread fruit evenly in cloth before tending the press and keep filter bags between sections in the machines ready for the extraction process. They are in charge of removing filter bags or pull cart from press and dump fruit pulp residue into containers.
Malt kiln operator: Malt kiln operators tend kiln machines and equipment while supervising that the grain roasting operation maintains in specified roasting parameters.
Meat preparations operator: Meat preparations operators prepare fresh meat with ingredients such as spices, herbs or additives in order to make ready-for-sale meat preparations.
Fish production operator: Fish production operators regulate and supervise fish product manufacturing facilities. They keep stock of all required ingredients and equipment for mass manufacturing. They also perform processes such as moulding, breading, frying, freezing, setting the system’s temperature and checking speeds.
Prepared meat operator: Prepared meat operators process meat either by hand or using meat machines such as meat grinding, crushing or mixing machines. They perform preservation processes such as pasteurising, salting, drying, freeze-drying, fermenting and smoking. Prepared meat operators strive to keep meat free from germs and other health risks for a longer period than fresh meat.
Dairy products manufacturing worker: Dairy products manufacturing workers set up, operate and tend equipment to process milk, cheese, ice cream and other dairy products.
Starch extraction operator: Starch extraction operators use equipment to extract starch from raw material such as corn, potatoes, rice, tapioca, wheat, etc.
Dairy processing operator: Dairy processing operators set up and operate continuous flow or vat-type equipment to process milk, cheese, ice cream, and other dairy products following specific instructions, methods and formulas.
Private chef: Private chefs comply with food and sanitation rules to prepare meals for their employers. They take into consideration the employer’s intolerances to specific ingredients or their preferences and cook the meals in the employer’s home. Private chefs may also be asked to organise small dinner parties or other types of celebrations for special occasions.
Fish preparation operator: Fish preparation operators realize the preparation of fish and shellfish according to hygiene, food safety and trade regulations. They carry out fish processing operations, and also handle retail activities.
Kosher slaughterer: Kosher slaughterers slaughter animals and process carcasses of kosher meat for further processing and distribution. They slaughter animals as stated in Jewish law and according to rituals.
Kosher butcher: Kosher butchers order, inspect and buy meat to prepare it and sell it as consumable meat products in accordance with Jewish practices. They perform activities such as cutting, trimming, boning, tying, and grinding meats from kosher animals such as cows, sheep and goats. They prepare kosher meat for consumption.
Miller: Millers tend mills to grind cereal crops to obtain flour. They regulate the flow of materials that go into mills and adjust the grind to a specified fineness. They ensure basic maintenance and cleaning of equipments. They evaluate sample of product to verify fineness of grind.
Fruit and vegetable canner: Fruit and vegetable canners tend machines to prepare industrial products based on fruits and vegetables for storage or shipping. They perform a wide range of tasks such as sorting, grading, washing, peeling, trimming, and slicing. Moreover, they follow procedures for canning, freezing, preserving, packing food products.
Confectioner: Confectioners make a varied range of cakes, candies and other confectionery items for industrial purposes or for direct selling.
Food production operator: Food production operators supply and perform one or more tasks in different stages of the food production process. They perform manufacturing operations and processes to foods and beverages, perform packaging, operate machines manually or automatically, follow predetermined procedures, and take food safety regulations on board.
Halal slaughterer: Halal slaughterers slaughter animals and process carcasses of halal meat from cows and chickens for further processing and distribution. They slaughter animals as stated in Islamic law and ensure that the animals are fed, slaughtered and hung up accordingly.
Flour purifier operator: Flour purifier operators tend machines to blend and sift flour. They tend screw conveyors to transport flour for blending and purification processes. They operate separators to sieve blended flour and to remove lumps before it is ready for packaging.
Pastry maker: Pastry makers prepare and bake cakes, cookies, croissants, pies and alike products according to recipes.
- Dispose food waste – ESCO