The RDNO encourages residents to ReTHINK single-use items like shopping bags, straws, utensils, take out containers and cups. Single-use items made of plastic, paper, wood, bamboo or any other materials require substantial resources to make and dispose of. Choosing reusable, durable items are most often the best choice.
The increasing presence of single-use items in the environment and in landfills shows that there is an urgent need to ReTHINK consumption. Since the 1950’s, billions of tonnes of plastic waste and other disposable items have been generated around the world, much of this from the daily use of these convenience products. Small steps by each of us every day can really add up to conserve resources and reduce waste and plastic pollution!
Start a Superhabit and Avoid Single-Use Waste
Everyday actions to reduce single-use item waste are Superhabits that protect our environment. Maximize the power of your Superhabit by using reusable and durable items that you already have and getting as many uses out of them as possible!
Superhabit Tips at Home, Work and On the Go!
Superhabit content and creative courtesy of Metro Vancouver.
Federal and Provincial Single-Use Plastic Regulation and Guidelines
Preventing or reducing single-use item waste and plastic pollution requires effort from multiple levels of government. The RDNO operates waste management facilities in our region and has an interest in less single-use items ending up in our landfills. However the RDNO does not have authority to regulate the manufacture, sale or use of single-use items.
The Governments of Canada and British Columbia are establishing complementary regulations under their jurisdictions that will support the reduction of single-use plastic waste.
- The Government of Canada is regulating the manufacture, import and sale of specific single-use plastic items. Access information on scope, implementation timeline, guidance documents and fact sheets.
- The Government of British Columbia is proposing new regulation to reduce single-use and plastic waste by limiting or banning the use of certain single-use items. Access information on the proposal and plan.
Resources to assist organizations with health and safety considerations in handling reusable food and beverage containers :
- Provincial Policy on the Use of Reusable Food Containers in Food Premises in British Columbia
- BC Centre for Disease Control provides up to date information including Food Premises Guidelines