3D technology has made enormous leaps forward in the past decade. As such, it has found its way into many fields that previously relied on hand-drawn designs. One area where 3D is making huge waves is in the field of architecture, through what’s known as 3D architectural visualization.
This form of 3D modeling is helping architects and designers be more effective in the design process. But what gives it the advantage over regular images and blueprints?
While drawing designs on a piece of paper might be a time-honored tradition, it’s often expensive and time-consuming. Because architectural visualization is in 3D, it is quicker, cheaper and easier to change should the need arise.
3D architectural visualization gives architects a realistic view of their designs. Because of this, it’s easy for them to point out potential problems and fix them as necessary.
The benefit of this is two-fold:
Finally, it also allows designers to adjust for things like lighting and spacing. These design aspects are crucial to client satisfaction, so getting them right is essential.
Architectural visualization allows clients to get a better understanding of the final product. Its 3D nature makes it the best possible representation of an architect’s design.
Because it’s so pleasing to look at, it is a great way to present otherwise mundane models to clients.
Making changes to designs is something that all architects and interior designers have to do. However, the ease and speed of those changes depend entirely on the technology used. Architectural visualization holds a clear advantage over traditional 2D blueprints in this regard.
With this technology, architects can edit designs in real-time. If the client is present, they can give their feedback as well. Time is money, and all this helps to ensure that time is not wasted.
The use of architectural visualization has already taken its hold on the industry. With the wealth of computing power available and the integration of various technologies, more complex and stunning 3D renders can be made.
When it comes to 3D printing, the sky is the limit. There’s nowhere that the… Read More
360 animation is a great way to create a high level of immersion for viewers.… Read More
A 360 panorama tour is a great way of giving a viewer an immersive view… Read More
Should I use 2D or 3D animation? It’s a question that gets asked quite frequently… Read More
Architectural rendering is a way for architects to produce real, stunning 3D images to show… Read More
Architectural visualization can often lead to stunning 3D representations of an architect’s ideas. However, the… Read More