BCE to The Suffragettes
1513, Panama – Spanish conquistador Vasco Nunez de Balboa discovers a community of cross-dressing males in present-day Panama and, according to reports, feeds at least 40 of them to his dogs.
1698, England – William Minton, a 19 year old servant, is used as bait to entrap Capt. Edward Rigby, the first homosexual victim of entrapment by the Society for the Reformation of Manners. He was tried for sodomy. These Societies were formed in Tower Hamlets, London, in 1690, with their primary object being the suppression of bawdy houses and profanity. A network of moral guardians was set up, with four stewards in each ward of the City of London, two for each parish, and a committee, whose business it was to gather the names and addresses of offenders against morality, and to keep minutes of their misdeeds. By 1699 there were nine such societies, and by 1701 there were nearly 20 in London, plus others in the provinces, all corresponding with one another and gathering information and arranging for prosecutions.
The Friends of Dorothy Era and The Hayes Code
1950s The Decade the public learned heterosexual women wanted sex
The Civil Rights 60s: When the Boomers were under 30
1961 – New York Times critic Howard Taubman launches an attack on “the increasing incidence of homosexuality on the New York stage” in an article headlined “Not What It Seems: Homosexual Motif Gets Heterosexual Guise.”;
1969 – The Homosexual Information Center protests at the offices of the Los Angeles Times because of the newspaper’s refusal to print the word “homosexual” in ads. The Times would not print an ad announcing a group discussion on homosexuality.
Feminist, Gay Liberation and Lesbian Separatists: Civil Rights
1970 – The New York Times reports that the Gay Activists Alliance’s petition to incorporate as a non-profit organization was rejected because of the use of the word “gay” in the organization’s name.
The Gay Activists Alliance (GAA) was founded in New York City on December 21, 1969, almost six months after the Stonewall riots, by dissident members of the Gay Liberation Front(GLF). Some early members included Jim Owles, Marty Robinson, Tom Doerr(1947 – August 2, 1987) (who introduced the lambda symbol into the gay movement. Originally the lambda sign referred to the political work of the Gay Activists Alliance and “it was only later that it became a sign for gay liberation in general),photojournalist Kay Lahusen (born January 5, 1930),journalist Arthur Bell(November 6, 1939 – June 2, 1984),author Arthur Evans(October 12, 1942 – September 11, 2011), Bill Bahlman,author Vito Russo(July 11, 1946 – November 7, 1990),transgender rights acitivst Sylvia Rivera(July 2, 1951 – February 19, 2002),drtag queen Marsha P. Johnson(August 24, 1945 – July 6, 1992), Jim Coles,bisexual rights activist Brenda Howard(December 24, 1946 – June 28, 2005), David Thorstad(born June 6, 1941), Michael Giammetta and Morty Manford (son ofPFLAG founder Jeanne Manford). GAA’s first president was Jim Owles.
Elton John released the album Madman Across the Water.
1973 -The Supreme Court of the United States in Wainwright v. Stone finds that the sodomy law of Florida is not unconstitutionally vague, reversing a Fifth Circuit ruling.
1974 – Elaine Noble (born January 22, 1944) becomes the first openly gay or lesbian individual to be elected to a state legislature in the United States when she is elected to the Massachusetts House of Representatives. Inspired by Noble, Minnesota state legislator Allan Spear comes out in a newspaper interview. In 1986 Noble and Ellen Ratner formed a LGBT alcohol and drug treatment center in Minneapolis called the Pride Institute. More recently she has worked as a healthcare administrator and a realtor. Noble had a relationship with writer Rita Mae Brown in the 1970s and has since retained privacy regarding her personal life. She lives in Florida
November 5, 1977
ABBA had the #1 song in the U.K. with “The Name Of The Game”.
The Genderfuck Apathetics vs Yuppies : Aids the new STD on the list
The Culture Club had a hot mover (40-26)–“Church Of The Poison Mind”.
“Islands In The Stream” from Kenny Rogers with Dolly Parton floated on top once again for a fourth week on the AC chart.
1985 – The San Francisco Board of Supervisors passes legislation to protect people with AIDS from discrimination.
Whitney Houston held on to the top spot with her seventh #1 on the Adult Contemporary chart–“One Moment In Time” and sixth on the pop chart
George Michael spent a 51st week on the chart with Faith at 8 , Tracy Chapman’s debut was at #9
90s: Listserves and Email distribution replaces telephone trees for activism
1992 – A New York State Bar Association committee issues a recommendation that low-income same-sex couples be granted access to state-subsidized housing.
1992 – A clause prohibiting anti-gay verbal abuse in public schools was repealed by the Fairfax (VA) county board of education because of complaints that it encouraged homosexuality.
Jackson Browne (as the Scarecrow), Roger Daltrey as the Tin Man, Jewel as Dorothy and Nathan Lane as the Cowardly Lion appeared at The Wizard of Oz in Concert, a benefit for the Children’s Defense Fund, in Avery Fisher Hall, Lincoln Center for the Performing Arts, in New York City.
Queen released Made in Heaven, their last studio album recorded before the death of lead singer Freddy Mercury.
1998 – The US Congress kills an amendment by Rep. Frank Riggs (R-CA) which would have barred San Francisco from spending federal housing money to implement its domestic partner ordinance.
Post 9/11 – From “gay and lesbian” to “lesbigay” to “Lgbt/Lgbtq/Lgbtq2”
2004, Canada – A judge in Saskatchewan rules that same-sex couples have the right to marry in that province.
2008 – Strauss v. Horton, a legal challenge to Proposition 8, is filed. Proposition 8, known informally as Prop 8, was a California ballot proposition and a state constitutional amendment passed in the November 2008 California state elections. The proposition was created by opponents of same-sex marriage in advance of the California Supreme Court’s May 2008 appeal ruling, In re Marriage Cases, which followed the short-lived controversy and found the previous ban on same-sex marriage (Proposition 22, 2000) unconstitutional. Proposition 8 was ultimately ruled unconstitutional by a federal court (on different grounds) in 2010, although the court decision did not go into effect until June 26, 2013, following the conclusion of proponents’ appeals.
2009, Viet Nam – Pham le Quynh Tram, born intersex and assigned male at birth, successfully petitions the government for legal recognition as a woman. In 2013, he People’s Committee of the southern province of Binh Phuoc ordered the local Department of Justice to revert to recognizing Tram as a male and to refer to her as Pham Van Hiep, her birth name. In addition to the Department of Justice rescinding Tram’s initial recognition, the officials who first approved it are reportedly ordered to be penalized.
To mark the 60th anniversary of the UK singles chart the Official Charts Company published a chart which lists all the 123 songs that have sold more than a million copies since it began in 1952. Elton John was at No.1 with Candle In The Wind, No.2 was Band Aid with Do They Know It’s Christmas? followed by Queen’s Bohemian Rhapsody on 2.36million copies.
Box office figures showed that the Fredie Mercury biographical film Bohemian Rhapsody was the top money making film for the previous weekend with a total worldwide gross of $145.1 million, against a production budget of about $52 million. Despite these impressive sales figures, the film received a mixed critical reception, with several historical inaccuracies being pointed out, in particular the timing of Mercury’s AIDS diagnosis.
https://allafrica.com/stories/202111050525.htmlAfrica: LGBT Migrants in South Africa – Religion Can Be a Blessing, and a Curse – allAfrica.comAnalysis – Moral panics over sexual and gender rights are often shaped by religious beliefs. In many countries, political, cultural and faith leaders use religious rhetoric to justify exclusionary practices and constrict the space available to lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender (LGBT) activists.Show Moreallafrica.com
https://www.ctvnews.ca/world/china-lgbt-rights-group-shuts-down-in-tightening-environment-1.5653360China LGBT rights group shuts down in tightening environment | CTV NewsAn influential LGBT advocacy group in China that has spearheaded many of the legal cases pushing for greater rights is halting its work amid growing restrictions on social activism.www.ctvnews.ca
Lesbians are being named called and shunned and shamed for not dating transwomen. so if transwomen are being allowed to express their sexual frustrations about lesbians, it is not surprising that some reply comments are going to be on par with the cotton ceiling said about lesbians, that to unwanted sexual advances which ignore a no, will eventually result in defensive statements and actions.
https://www.comicsands.com/bbc-quote-terf-lesbian-cade-2655505044.htmlBBC Quotes Lesbian Porn Star Who Called For ‘Lynching’ Of Trans Women – Comic SandsThe BBC was bashed online for featuring anti-trans activist and former porn star, Lily Cade, who called for the lynching of trans women in her blog posts.www.comicsands.com
https://www.hot97.com/hip-hop-news/hot-news/tahiry-jose-joe-buddens-ex-reacts-to-him-seemingly-coming-out-as-bisexual/Tahiry Jose, Joe Budden’s Ex, Reacts To Him Seemingly Coming Out As Bisexual | Hot97Tahiry Jose, Joe Budden’s Ex, Reacts To Him Seemingly Coming Out As Bisexualwww.hot97.com
https://www.outsports.com/2021/11/5/22765264/nyc-marathon-gilbert-gaona-gay-marineGay Marine fell in love with running while he was stationed in Iraq – OutsportsGilbert Gaona has gone from serving under DADT to becoming president of NYC’s LGBTQ running club — and he did it just one step at a time.www.outsports.com
https://www.lgbtqnation.com/2021/11/gay-tour-group-caught-middle-gunfight-alleged-mexican-drug-gangs/Gay tour group caught in middle of gunfight between alleged Mexican drug gangs / LGBTQ NationTwo men “presumed to be drug dealers” are dead, but no tourists were hurt when rival groups opened fire on the beach…www.lgbtqnation.com
https://www.latimes.com/entertainment-arts/music/story/2021-11-04/abba-voyage-dancing-queen-gay-iconsHow ABBA became beloved gay icons: the surprising story – Los Angeles TimesWell before ‘Mamma Mia!’ a homemade remix of a second-tier ABBA song was the big bang of the LGBTQ community’s love affair with the Swedish foursome.www.latimes.com
https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2021/nov/05/i-am-16-and-identify-as-an-ace-lesbian-but-i-dont-want-to-come-out-to-my-parentsI am 16 and identify as an ‘ace lesbian’ – how do I tell my parents? | Sexuality | The GuardianIt sounds as if your sexuality and orientation will be no surprise to them, says Annalisa Barbieriwww.theguardian.com
https://www.eurosport.com/football/liga/2021-2022/unnamed-spanish-footballer-confirms-that-he-is-bisexual-following-josh-cavallo-announcement_sto8615085/story.shtmlUnnamed Spanish footballer confirms that he is bisexual following Josh Cavallo announcement – EurosportA Spanish footballer has announced that he is bisexual, but has not revealed his name.www.eurosport.com
there needs to be more than two sports categories,
https://www.velonews.com/culture/molly-cameron-on-racing-as-a-transgender-woman-in-mens-and-womens-events/Molly Cameron on racing as a transgender woman in men’s and women’s events – VeloNews.comVeloNews Podcast, ep. 282: Cameron is well versed in the arguments about fairness. Now, she’s focused on working with race promoters on how registration platforms work, among other things.www.velonews.com
https://www.medscape.com/viewarticle/962270Transgender Detransitioners Got Poor Care When TransitioningOver 50% of transgender people who transitioned but then regretted their decision and detransitioned felt they did not receive adequate assessment beforehand. Many had experienced internalized homophobia.www.medscape.com
Today in LGBT History by Ronni Sanlo
Today in LGBT History – November 5 | Ronni Sanlohttps://ronnisanlo.com › today-in-lgbt-history-novembe…Nov. 5, 2017 — 1698, England – William Minton, a 19 year old servant, is used as bait to entrap Capt. Edward Rigby, the first homosexual victim of entrapment …
Today in LGBT History – NOVEMBER 5 | Ronni Sanlohttps://ronnisanlo.com › today-in-lgbt-history-novembe…Nov. 5, 2018 — Today in LGBT History – NOVEMBER 5 · 1970 – The New York Times reports that the Gay Activists Alliance’s petition to incorporate as a non-profit …
Our Daily Elvis