Botanical remedies can help you look and feel like your best self. Holistic medicine may be the answer to the world’s growing addictions to powerful painkillers and anti-depressants. The dream of Holistic Medicine is to address illnesses with a natural cure. Below are 7 all-natural plants that are used in holistic medicine, with a brief description of each.

Arnica: An herb that grows mainly in Siberia and central Europe, as well as in temperate climates in North America. The flowers of the plant are used in medicine. Arnica is most commonly used for pain caused by osteoarthritis, sore throat, surgery, and other conditions. Arnica is also used for bleeding, bruising, swelling after surgery, and other conditions.

Turmeric: Deep gold in color and used for thousands of years by ancient tribes for upset stomachs, wounds, and aching joints. This substance has powerful medicinal properties. It’s an anti-inflammatory that can heal oxidative damage, brighten the skin, and decrease brain fog.

Myrrh: This compound was used by ancient Egyptians in the embalming process. It kills germs, bacteria, and microbes. Myrrh oil has been used for oral problems, to heal wounds, and to combat pain and swelling.

Cinnamon: Besides being a highly delicious spice, cinnamon is loaded with antioxidants. Studies have been done to see whether it can cut the risk of heart disease and reduce bad cholesterol. It can lower blood sugar and aid with neurodegenerative diseases.

Green tea: Not only delicious when drank hot with lemon, but green tea also boosts your heart health and may reduce your risk of cancer. It stimulates hair growth, prevents cavities, and helps with puffy eyes and acne. It even helps with stress and depression.

Ginger: A highly flavorful spice for any dish, ginger is well-known to curb appetite and aid with digestion. Ginger dates back to China and is known to help with muscle pain, soreness, and menstrual pains. It can lower cholesterol and improve brain function.

Holy basil: This plant has been used in Indian medicine for centuries. Use its fresh flowers for bronchitis, and the leaves, and seeds, with black pepper, for malaria. Use the whole plant for diarrhea, nausea, and vomiting. The essential oil is used for insect bites and eczema.
