A total of 18 species have been recognised. Crocodile size, morphology, behaviour and ecology differ somewhat among these species. However, they have many similarities in these areas as well.
A species with exceptionally similar appearance to the crocodile is the caiman. Caimans are in the order ‘crocodilia’ but are actually more closely related to alligators than crocodiles. They can be distinguished from their closest relatives by a few defining bodily features (such as longer and sharper teeth) but they also tend to be more agile and crocodile-like in their movements.
While it depends on the specific type of crocodile, the caiman rarely grows to be as large as a crocodile does. However, you are unlikely to notice this unless you are looking at the two side by side! This is one of the reasons that caimans are much better suited to filming and photography, though both species should be handled with extreme caution and care.
All crocodiles are semiaquatic and tend to congregate in freshwater habitats such as rivers, lakes, wetlands and sometimes in brackish water and saltwater. Also, all crocodiles are tropical species that, unlike alligators, are very sensitive to cold. Sadly, many species are at the risk of extinction, some being classified as critically endangered.
A crocodile’s physical traits allow it to be a successful predator. Its streamlined body enables it to swim swiftly; it also tucks its feet to the side while swimming, making it faster by decreasing water resistance. Crocodiles have webbed feet which allow them to make fast turns and sudden moves in the water or initiate swimming. Webbed feet are an advantage in shallow water, where the animals sometimes move around by walking. Interestingly their tongues are not free, but held in place by a membrane that limits movement; as a result, crocodiles are unable to stick out their tongues!
Crocodiles have acute senses, an evolutionary advantage that makes them successful predators. The eyes, ears and nostrils are located on top of the head, allowing the crocodile to lie low in the water, almost totally submerged and hidden from prey. They also have excellent night vision and are mostly nocturnal hunters.
Size greatly varies among species, from the dwarf crocodile to the saltwater crocodile and male crocs grow much larger and more rapidly than females: These animals are huge. Species of the dwarf crocodile grow to an adult size of just 1.5-1.9m! The saltwater crocodile can grow to sizes over 6m and weigh over 1000kg.
One of the most powerful and jaw-dropping species in the world, the crocodile has an iconic appearance that is simply awesome. In any visual media, moving image or stills, they are certainly impressive.
They are similar in appearance to what we imagine of dinosaurs and look as terrifying in black and white as they do in full colour. This opens up a whole world of opportunities for both photography and film.
If you’re working on brand awareness, it may be useful to consider the symbolism and meanings of the species which include wisdom, efficiency, stealth, and power.
They’re also universal; because crocodiles exist throughout the world, including the tropical regions of Africa, Asia, the Americas, and Australia, they are the subject of mythology and folklore in many of these regions’ cultures. In literature “crocodile tears” for example, is a false, insincere display of emotion (such as a hypocrite crying fake tears of grief). This is a robust creature that is awe inspiring and one that will certainly grab attention.
Please note that filming of crocodiles will have to occur on location with our highly trained handlers due to size, water and temperature needs. If studio work is required, please consider working with a caiman or one of our alligators instead. Their appearance is just as impressive; the species are incredibly similar in appearance and they are certainly easier species to work with.
We supply professional animal location handlers around the world to ensure you get all the shots you require and, as overseers to ensure the wild is not disturbed, the crew will always be safe and no welfare regulations are ever breached.
It isn’t just the animals that are well trained, our team including our handlers are also highly experienced and fully qualified experts in the field.
Your handler will take full control of any animals on set and ensure the entire shoot runs properly. They will also fully manage the welfare of all the animals both on and off set; the safety and welfare of the animals is their prime concern. All of our handling is strictly force-free and only positive, reward based practices are deployed. This way you can have total confidence that by booking With The Animal Talent everything is taken care of legally, professionally and ethically.
The Performing Animals Licence is no longer relevant (it was scrapped in 2019) and has been replaced with the Animal Activity Licence, which we hold.
Our two specialist handlers are covered by a £10 million Public Liability Insurance policy. Crocodilians require a Dangerous Wild Animal licence and expert handlers.
Crocodiles must be filmed on location. Our location has all appropriate licensing and insurance cover. Contact us to arrange filming dates today.
Caimans and alligators can travel for studio work. Our handlers will inform you of their special requirements for travel and what is expected on set. Precisely what is appropriate will vary species to species, but may include sectioned off areas where only trained handlers are allowed. In the event of large and dangerous carnivores, a specifically built green screen studio can also be supplied.