What is the formula for area of the equilateral triangle?
In an equilateral triangle, median, angle bisector and altitude for all sides are all the same and are the lines of symmetry of the equilateral triangle. The area of an equilateral triangle is √3 a2/ 4. The perimeter of an equilateral triangle is 3a.
What is the area of an equilateral triangle of side 16 cm?
The side of the equilateral triangle is 16 cm. ∴ The area of the equilateral triangle is 64√3 cm2.
What is the area of an equilateral triangle with side Root 3 divided by 4?
The area of an equilateral triangle having a side length equal to √3/4 cm is. Therefore the area of an equilateral triangle having a side length equal to √3/4 cm is 3√3/64 cm2. Hence option c is the answer.
How do you find the area of an equilateral triangle without the height?
How to Find Area of Equilateral Triangle without Height? When the height of the triangle is not given, then the equilateral triangle area can be calculated using its side length by using the formula Area = √3/4 × (side)2 square units.
How do you find the hypotenuse of a equilateral triangle?
Use the Pythagorean theorem to calculate the hypotenuse from right triangle sides. Take a square root of sum of squares: c = √(a² + b²)
How do you find the area of a equilateral triangle with just the height?
In general, the height of an equilateral triangle is equal to √3 / 2 times a side of the equilateral triangle. The area of an equilateral triangle is equal to 1/2 * √3s/ 2 * s = √3s2/4.
How do you find the area of a equilateral triangle without the height?
What is the altitude of an equilateral triangle whose sides are each 16cm long?
Answer. answer is 13.85 cm .
How do you calculate the altitude of an equilateral triangle?
– Draw a 12cm line. Take any end point and mark it . – Take a compass, draw a perpendicular bisector to this line segment. – From make a in both the sides of the given line. – Mark the points of intersection of the rays () and the perpendicular bisector as & .
How do you calculate the height of an equilateral triangle?
– The basic formula for triangle area is side a (base) times the height h, divided by 2: area = (a * h) / 2 – Height of the equilateral triangle is splitting the equilateral triangle into two right triangles. – Substituting h into the first area formula, we obtain the equation for the equilateral triangle area: area = a² * √3 / 4
How do you solve an equilateral triangle?
Identify angle C. It is the angle whose measure you know.
How to find centre of mass of equilateral triangle?
Find the average of the x- and y-coordinates. These coordinates will correspond to the triangle’s center of gravity, also known as the centroid or center of mass. To find the average, divide the sum of the coordinates by 3. For example, if the sum of your x-coordinates is 8, the average x-coordinate is /.