India is facing one of its major and serious water crisis. After two consecutive years of weak monsoons, around 330 million people are affected by severe drought. According to the Composite Water Management Index (CWMI) report released by the Niti Aayog in 2018, 21 major cities are racing to reach zero groundwater levels by 2020, affecting access for 100 million people. Groundwater, which has been steadily depleting for years, makes up 40% of the country's water supply. Other water sources are also running dry -- almost two-thirds of India's reservoirs are running below normal water levels as per Central Water Commission report in June.
Vidya Bharati schools are taking several water conservation initiatives in Awadh, Madhya Bharat and Guwahati Pranta. The schools located in these regions are organising various seminars and workshops to increase the water conservation awareness among students and teachers.
Awadh which comes under Purvi Uttar Pradesh Kshetra has taken an oath to increase the groundwater level. For this they have come up with a solution to initiate the development of soak pit near tubewells, handpumps, borewell etc so that waste water gets soaked and purified resulting in the increase of water level.
Similarly Madhya Bharat Pranta Baacha area under the slogan Jal Hi Jeevan Hai, Jal Bachao Jeevan Bachao has adopted rooftop rainwater harvesting with the usage of pipes and wood. They avoided using any commercial products for setting up this system. They created soak pit for 15 days for filtering waste water and helped to conserve groundwater for a longer duration. This soak pit is connected to the pipe of rooftop rainwater harvesting system to increase the level of groundwater. Baacha village is spreading awareness regarding new methods for water conservation which is really commendable because their efforts is leading to a sustainable usage and is preserving for future as a learning method.
Another water conservation program was jointly organized by CISF and Sankardev Vidya Niketan, Betakuchi (Guwahati) under the banner of ‘Jal Shakti Abhiyan’ where awareness programs were held. More than 82 Vidya Bharati students, 7 Acharya and 67 CRPF Jawan participated in water conservation awareness rally. Commandant Mr Harendra Narayan Ji also communicated to the children the importance of water conservation during the event. Students of Class 9 and 10 through paintings explained the importance of water conservation and raised water management awareness.
Vidya Bharati is looking for experts who can help and guide schools on water management. If you would like to volunteer to organize workshops then write to us. Many schools are facing water crisis, if you would like to support schools with tubewells or with any other water related equipment, then write to us at firstname.lastname@example.org