In 1874, a rivalry was created among two lifelong friends and entrepreneurs that would redefine the culture of America forever. A local farmer boy from a humble town in Kansas. A city slicker with something to prove from Manhattan. Both attended Oxen University in 1872 and shared their collective visions for the best donut restaurant experience in the world. What started as a shared vision between the two resulted in separation and rivalry for generations to come. Duncan P. Anderson was the founder of the popular retail donut chain, Duncan's Donuts, established in 1875. Fritz Everett was the founder of the premium donut phenomenon rival, Crispy Screams, established one year later in 1876.

• Both companies are worth a whopping $220 billion each today. Their missions are both similar and simple: to create the best donut experience for the American consumer. But in their execution, they are worlds apart.

• Duncan's Donuts has shifted its approach to its target market and business strategy over time. What started as a cost-effective donut factory grew into a sleek, modern fast casual donut experience that mostly caters to adults. The theme is dark and neon. They have a happy hour from 9pm to 2am. The chain is unique for its offerings of beverages and donuts together. One of its most successful products, the 'lit' donut, was created in 2008. It infuses the bitter, aromatic compounds of fermented malts, with the sweet, syrupy cake of a donut.

• Crispy Screams started from day one as a family experience. Each location is both a factory and a shop, allowing consumers to watch the donuts be made fresh daily. They offer one free hot donut off the conveyer belt to every family that walks in. Crispy Screams exists as a philanthropic business that donates 50% of its after-tax earnings to local families and communities. Its mission is to raise money to unite families, especially in hardships such as abuse, separation, or disability. It has donated $725 million in its 145-year journey since 1876.
