Mary-Jess tripped trying to put on her robes, ending up with her face pressed rather unbecomingly against the glass between her cabin and the train's corridor. She heard giggles erupt from the other side, probably upperclassmen if her luck was its usual acerbic self. 

"Keep moving. Keep moving! Prefect coming through!" said a girl's firm but nasally voice. 

"Oh no! Watch out for Prefect Cat! Doesn't know she's a massive prat!" one of the kids said in a singsong voice. 

"Move on, Callaway, you little muppet," said a boy's voice.

Mary-Jess managed to get herself into her robes and unstick her face from the glass. If these kids were making fun of a prefect, what chance did she stand at this magic school? Her dad hadn't been certain she should attend. She and her stepmother were the ones pushing for it. After all, there wasn't anything keeping her at her muggle elementary school. It was as if the kids there knew there was something weird about her, something that made her less than normal, something she couldn't see herself. Was she going to be too weird for this magical school as well?

The door to her cabin rolled back. The prefect girl stood in the doorway. Her bright red curls and shiny prefect pin matched her robes. She was accompanied by a boy with his hair pulled back into a tail. "You okay, first year?" the girl asked. Even her less firm tone was a bit waspish. 

"She means, what's your name, kid?" the boy interrupted, letting himself into the cabin and sitting across from her.
 
"I'm Mary-Jess. Mary-Jess Clure," she answered, feeling color rise to her cheeks. Was she in trouble? How were these kids so big? Would all the students be this much taller than her?

"Are you alright, Mary-Jess?" the boy continued, spreading out on the seat as if he was comfortable anywhere. 

"Yes, just clumsy," Mary-Jess admitted as redness and heat crept down her neck. 

"Reminds me of my sister," the boy said, talking to the prefect girl. 

"Wasn't your sister looking for a seat in a different cabin? She said the boy in hers smelt like Mimbulus Mimbletonia," the girl said. 

"Oh yeah! Be right back," the boy said, unfurling from the seat and exiting the small space.
