To calculate the average fuel consumption, divide the number of liters (4) by the distance traveled (540), and then multiply it by 100. An octane number, or octane number, is a standard measure of a fuel's ability to withstand compression in an unexploded internal combustion engine. The higher the octane rating, the greater the compression the fuel can withstand before detonating. The octane number is not directly related to the output power or energy content of the fuel per unit of mass or volume, but simply indicates the ability of gasoline against compression.
You will need the number of liters it took to fill your tank since you last filled it and the number of kilometers you traveled between fills. We think the powerful BMW M5 starts using “only 400 horsepower to save fuel (the driver can press a button to get the full 500 horsepower). Whether a higher octane fuel improves or impairs an engine's performance depends on the engine design. For starters, the chemical composition of fuel varies slightly, so simply recovering it from a local gas station will not produce repeatable results.
If the EPA conducted its fuel economy tests with a fully charged battery, the Volt would burn no gas at all. This illusion of “MPG” demonstrates why it may be more meaningful to express fuel efficiency in terms of consumption (for example, lead in the form of tetraethyl-lead was once a common additive, but its use as a fuel for road vehicles has been phased out worldwide, starting in the decade from 1970. It's a confusing system that could only make sense to politicians because the fuel economy numbers used for gasoline consumer calculations (called “unadjusted”) are not the same as those on the window sticker. Modern powered computers minimize this condition by controlling valve timing and fuel injection; however, this control mechanism can also carry a fuel efficiency or emissions penalty.
Conversely, fuels with lower octane ratings (but with higher cetane ratings) are ideal for diesel engines because diesel engines (also called compression-ignition engines) do not compress fuel, but rather compress only the air and then inject fuel into the air that was heated by compression. Precisely known octane primary reference fuels (PRF) are formed by combining isooctane, heptane and other well-known standards such as toluene. A fuel may have a research octane number (RON) greater than 100, because isooctane is not the most shock-resistant substance available today. In almost all general aviation piston engines, the fuel mixture is controlled directly by the pilot, through a knob and a similar cable or lever (and together with) the throttle control.
The label gives each vehicle a rating from 1 (worst) to 10 (best) for fuel economy and greenhouse gas emissions (i). Competition between intentional (controlled) and unintentional (spontaneous) combustion causes the energy of the burned fuel to be dispersed unevenly, which can cause damage and place a high pressure on the engine piston before it enters the working stroke (the part of the cycle in which the piston movement generate power). To determine MON, fuel is tested under the most stressful conditions of higher air temperature and engine speed. They are just a measure of the tendency of fuel to burn in a controlled manner, rather than explode in an uncontrolled way.