Pharmacies generally employ two forms of professionals: Pharmacists and Pharmacy Technicians. While both are integral to a pharmacy’s performance, they represent two different approaches to careers in pharmacy. When deciding what career path is right for you, a lot of factors come right into play. تحصیل داروسازی در فرانسه In this short article, we shall outline those two careers in pharmacy so you possibly can make the right choice!
Pharmacist- What is It?
Pharmacists are healthcare professionals that are in charge of dispensing prescription medications to patients. Typically, a pharmacist will fill prescriptions, check interactions of a patient’s prescriptions, instruct patients on proper use of a medication, and oversee pharmacy technician, interns, and many other careers in pharmacy. Many pharmacists own or manage their very own pharmacy and tend to be more business minded. Some pharmacists work for pharmaceutical manufacturers, and are mixed up in creation of new medications. The median annual wage of pharmacists is very good, punching in at $111,570 in May 2010, in line with the US Bureau of Labor Statistics.
How do I become a Pharmacist?
The road to being a pharmacist is unique- while most graduate programs require a bachelor’s degree or four years of undergraduate experience, a Doctor of Pharmacy program requires as little as two, so long as the correct prerequisites are met, such as courses in chemistry, anatomy, and biology (although some programs do require a bachelor’s degree). An entrance exam, referred to as the Pharmacy College Admissions Test (PCAT), is also required. Most programs will take about four years to accomplish, and graduates who desire a more complex pharmacist position will complete a one-two year residency program. Many pharmacists who continue to possess their very own pharmacies may also acquire a master’s degree in business administration (MBA). Graduates must pass two exams detailing pharmacy skills and pharmacy law to be able to attain circumstances license. While this technique may seem long, it pays off with one of the most rewarding careers in pharmacy.
Pharmacy Technician- What is It?
Pharmacy (or pharmaceutical) technicians help pharmacists dispense prescription medications to patients. They will usually be the people measuring out prescriptions, compounding medications like ointments, packaging and labeling pharmaceuticals, and performing routine tasks like answering phones and filling forms. The pharmacy technician works under the supervision of the pharmacist- if the client has questions about medications or health, the pharmacy technician will arrange for the client to talk to the pharmacist, as she or he may be the more trained of both careers in pharmacy. Technicians should have great customer care skills, organizational skills, and be detail oriented. The median annual wage of a pharmacy technician was $28,400 in May 2010, in line with the US Bureau of Labor Statistics.
How do I become a Pharmacy Technician?
Learning to be a pharmacy technician provides the simpler means of both careers in pharmacy. Each technician should have a high school diploma or equivalent and pass an exam or complete a formal training program, depending on the state. Many pharmacy technicians will learn their skills on-site, but some will attend vocational schools or community colleges to accomplish programs in pharmacy technology. These programs detail arithmetic, pharmacy law and ethics, and record keeping. This path allows for the quickest work straight out of high school for graduates pondering one of the careers in pharmacy.