Personal, Social Health Education
“PSHE education is a planned programme of learning through which children and young people acquire the knowledge, understanding and skills they need to manage their lives. As part of a whole school approach, PSHE develops the qualities and attributes pupils need to thrive as individuals, family members and members of society.”
THE PSHE ASSOCIATION
At SS Peter and Paul’s Catholic Primary School, we are strongly committed to the development of our young learners as well-rounded individuals. From May 2019, we will be supporting their Personal, Social, Health and Emotional Development through the scheme of work, Jigsaw PSHE.
Jigsaw PSHE is a comprehensive and completely original scheme of work for the whole primary school from the Foundation Stage through to Year 6. It brings together PSHE Education, emotional literacy, social skills and spiritual development in a comprehensive scheme of learning. It provides a mindful approach to PSHE which allows us to ensure that children have time to reflect, manage their behaviour and emotions, learn about relationships, develop respect for self and others, as well as how to keep themselves safe.
At our school, we model positive relationships and communication skills with others in all our day-to-day interactions, as well as teaching skills explicitly in P.S.H.E. lessons and during circle time activities.
SMSC (Spiritual, Moral, Social and Cultural) development opportunities are mapped throughout the Jigsaw lessons. All of these pieces of learning are brought together to form a cohesive picture, helping children to know and value who they are and understand how they relate to other people in the world.
You can find out further information about the scheme by following the links below:
The Jigsaw Approach for Foundation Stage
The Jigsaw Approach for Year 1 to Year 6
Please note that although we may touch on elements of the Changing Me unit, we follow the Diocesan approved 'A Journey In love' scheme when teaching our Relationships & Sex Education.