Untitled Art Gallery
Original Production Animation Drawing of Mickey Mouse from "Fantasia"
Original production animation drawing of Mickey Mouse in red, yellow, green, and graphite pencils; Numbered 32A lower right, and used during the production of "The Sorcerer's Apprentice" sequence of "Fantasia," 1940, Walt Disney Studios; Size - Mickey Mouse: 5 x 5 3/4", Sheet 10 x 12", Frame 16 1/2 x 19"; Framed using an acid free mat, gold wood frame, and UV conservation clear glass.
"The Sorcerer's Apprentice" was initially going to be a "Silly Symphonies" short and be a venue for a comeback role for Mickey Mouse, who had declined in popularity. However, it was eventually included in the full length feature film "Fantasia," in 1940. The Disney version of "The Sorcerer's Apprentice" is based on the 1797 poem by Goethe of the same name. Mickey Mouse takes the role of the apprentice and the only real change from the original poem occurs when the Sorcerer is stern and angry with the apprentice after he saves him from a spell gone horribly wrong.
In 1935 a young animator, born in Los Angeles, named Fred Moore gave Mickey his first makeover. Earlier animators had drawn the mouse as a series of circles, which limited his movement. Moore gave him a pear-shaped body, pupils, white gloves, and a shortened nose; all of which added to make the World's most famous mouse a lot cuter. Moore animated Mickey Mouse for the 1938 short "The Brave Little Tailor," which was to be the last significant appearance of the "pie-eyed" Mickey. For "Fantasia," 1940 the "pie-eyes" were gone and Moore's complete transformation of Mickey Mouse for the film continues to be his official look up to this day.
"The Sorcerer's Apprentice," is perhaps Mickey Mouse's most well known role (despite the fact that he never utters a single word), and as such it was the only 1940 segment that was added to the later film "Fantasia, 2000." Original production drawings and cels of the character are extremely rare and highly collected and this drawing is a wonderful full figure, eyes and smiling mouth open image of the character. This drawing is from the scene when Mickey falls asleep and dreams that he has become such a powerful sorcerer that he can command the stars of the heavens. As he stands atop a high mountain he needs only to move his hands, in order to manipulate comets and stars. This specific pose of Mickey Mouse is iconic, and it is used by the Walt Disney Company in a very large number of promotional and merchandise products. The vast majority of the drawings and cels from this specific sequence are eyes closed, so this is a very rare find. Collectors rarely sell works of this quality, and this particular drawing has been in private collection for over 20 years!
To The Gallery: CLICK HERE!
#MickeyMouse #Fantasia #SorcerersApprentice #YenSid #Disney #WaltDisney #animation #animationart #cel #animationcel #productiondrawing #animationdrawing #FredMoore #Fantasia1940 #SorcererApprentice #untitledartgallery