04/30/2018 / By Vicki Batts
The surge of autism diagnoses in recent years has left many people looking for an explanation. Oft-labeled a “conspiracy theory,” or something to that effect, the suspicion that vaccines are a potential cause of autism is on the rise. New research from the Canadian government has indirectly shown that in highly vaccinated populations, autism rates are noticeably higher. These shocking findings are sure to leave vaccine propagandists reeling while they try to somehow discredit the findings of a government agency.
As The World Mercury Project reports, Canada ranks in the “top 10” countries for autism rates. In 2018, it was revealed that 1 in 66 Canadian children were on the autism spectrum, based on data collected in 2015.
The Public Health Agency of Canada even crafted the “National ASD Surveillance System,” or NASS, to track the number of people diagnosed with autism. The system was intended to provide a look at autism diagnoses “both across regions and over time.”
The agency’s efforts proved successful, showing a steady increase in autism spectrum disorder (ASD) diagnoses since 2003 — as well as substantial differences from region to region.
As The World Mercury Project explains, six provinces British Columbia, New Brunswick, Newfoundland and Labrador, Nova Scotia, Prince Edward Island and Quebec and one Canadian territory (Yukon) were featured in the research.
The three regions with the highest autism prevalence were Newfoundland and Labrador (1 in 57), Prince Edward Island (1 in 59) and Quebec (1 in 65). Comparatively, the Yukon boasted significantly lower rates of autism, at just 1 in 125.
Moreover, the provinces with the highest rates of autism seem to have experienced a massive increase in ASD diagnoses in recent years. Newfoundland and Labrador went from 6 to 19.6 per 1,000 — a 227 percent increase, while Prince Edward Island went from 5 to 17.7 per 1,000 — marking a 254 percent increase. Most shocking, however, is the data from Quebec, which shows that ASD diagnoses went from 3.5 to 15.7 per 1,000 — a staggering 349 percent increase.
One health practitioner has dared to speak out, after noticing an undeniable “coincidence” among the provinces: Those with the highest rates of autism also have the highest rates of vaccination.
As Dr. Zimmerman, from British Columbia, notes, there was a report on vaccination coverage in Canadian kids published back in 2013 — just two years before the data for the ASD survey was collected.
And what do you know: At that time, Newfoundland and Labrador had the highest rates of vaccination, while the Yukon had the lowest. Now data also shows that Newfoundland and Labrador have the highest rates of autism, while the Yukon seems to have the lowest. Who would have thought?
While correlation does not always equal causation, the fact of the matter is that this is an association worth investigating. Moreover, countless parents have reported a sudden change in their child post-vaccination — which to any scientist worth their salt, should at least be cause for concern.
Sadly, vaccine dogma has become so ingrained in our society that the very notion of even questioning vaccine safety is seen as an outrageous act of total lunacy. Indeed, those who dare to even suggest that vaccines contain harmful ingredients are labeled as “crackpots,” “conspiracy theorists” and deniers of “real” science. In a truly Orwellian fashion, anyone who posits that vaccines have the potential to harm children is labeled “anti-science.”
In reality, the belief that vaccines are completely innocuous is what’s “anti-science,” as it disregards the mountains of evidence that vaccines can and do harm children every year. Who’s really benefiting from all this vaccine totalitarianism? (Related: Stay up to date on the latest vaccine truths at Vaccines.news or AutismTruthNews.com.)
Sources for this article include:
autism, Canada, immunization, toxins, Vaccine dangers, vaccine ingredients, vaccines, vaccines and autism
This article may contain statements that reflect the opinion of the author
Vaccines.News is a fact-based public education website published by Vaccines News Features, LLC.
All content copyright © 2018 by Vaccines News Features, LLC.
Contact Us with Tips or Corrections
All trademarks, registered trademarks and servicemarks mentioned on this site are the property of their respective owners.