Motivation For Healthy Weight and Lifestyle
Building a great self image is very important. Not only do you build confidence but ability to overcome goals. Losing weight and exercising to get the figure and weight you desire is very important for your self esteem. Becoming healthier and losing weight by exercising and eating right is free with the right commitment, information and motivation.
Improving your overall health and shedding pounds can prevent diseases and control your weight. Research has proven that eating healthy and exercising will make you lose weight. When doing physical activities your body uses excess calories that would usually be stored as fat. Don’t think of exercise as a task; include it in your daily routine.
Exercising doesn’t have to be lifting weights. Doing things you enjoy count as physical exercise. Sports, gardening, walks, riding your bike can all contribute to your daily fitness.
Only about 20 – 30 minutes a day will give you the desired result if you stick with it. Studies show that working out for this period of time will give you the greatest overall health benefits. There are a few different types of exercising. Aerobic is a type of exercise which involves large muscle training, you would walk bike or jog. Anaerobic is another type, this involves lifting weights to gain muscle mass. Also there is moderate intensity this type is done without you even realizing; this includes housework, chores, or yard work. These are done in 10 minute spurts throughout the day.
Daily physical activity will prevent strokes and heart disease by strengthening your heart muscle. Also you are lowering your blood pressure and promoting good cholesterol. By increasing your blood flow from working out you are increasing the working capacity of your heart.
By maintaining your weight and light activity you can prevent many other problems. Diabetes type 2 can be controlled by reducing body fat. Back pain is decreased by strengthening your muscles and providing endurance and flexibility. By decreasing your weight you can even prevent osteoporosis.
Two thirds of Americans are over weight. This includes not only adults but children as well. Being over weight causes more than just physical issues, it will also cause diseases and stress on your body as well.
In order to loose one pound you need to lose 3,500 calories. If you intake the recommended amount of calories a day and decrease it by 500, or burn an extra 500 calories a day by then end of the week you will have lost one pound.
Start eating healthier. Foods that sound healthy pay close attention to; say you order a salad, that sound healthy right? Well when you add dressing you are in taking tons of fat and calories. Make sure you pay attention to the little things.
Drinking soda is one of the worst things to do when trying to control your weight. If you cut soda out of your life you will shed about 5-10 pounds in the first 2 weeks, and you will feel more energized as well. Juices full of fructose are also unhealthy as well. Water is the best thing to drink. Not only is water calorie free, but it keeps your body and cells working properly and expels toxins.
If you want to lose weight, stay healthy and be confident you just need will power. Don’t make physical activity or a healthy diet an unwelcome chore. Try a Self Help CD to get you motivated. These subliminal CD’s will give you the motivation needed to complete your goals.