John had been working as an accountant for over a decade, but when the word "audit" gets mentioned he could feel adrenaline hit his system like he was still a kid fresh out of school. When his boss informed him that regulators were in the lobby ready to begin an audit of the company John knew he had to act fast. He felt the anxiety rise in his head, and the nerves flutter in his stomach. Oddly enough, it made him happy to feel it. Unlike some people, he could be powered by anxiety. 

The auditor had requested various financial documents that needed to be provided within the next 24 hours. John spent the rest of the day combing through the company's various systems and paper files, gathering relevant documents for presentation. He looked for errors or omissions that could result in further inquiries or requests from the auditors. If there were gray areas in the request he used his best judgment to decide what to include. As he worked, John could feel the pressure mounting. His heart raced, and his palms grew sweaty. He knew that a negative finding could result in corrective actions that would change the course of the business over the next year.

John groggily returned to the office early the next morning ready to submit the documents.  He had done everything he could, and now it was up to the auditor to review and make their assessment. The anxiety began to come down and a feeling of inevitability took over. It was out of his hands now. Most of the time, he ended up being harder on himself than any auditor ever was.

Days later, the audit was complete, and the auditor submitted their report. John held his breath as he read through it, scanning for any red flags or negative comments. But to his great relief, everything was in order. The company had passed with flying colors.

All the hard work and stress had paid off. He knew that audits were a necessary part of the business world, and while he couldn't help but feel grateful that this one was finally over part of him couldn't wait for the next. He hated the feeling of the audit in real-time, but he knew that deep down the rush excited him.
