Hatshepsut Hatshepsut, meaning Foremost of Noble Ladies, was the fifth pharaoh of the eighteenth dynasty of Ancient Egypt. She is generally regarded by Egyptologists as one of the most successful pharaohs, reigning longer than any other woman of an indigenous Egyptian dynasty. Although contemporary records of her reign are documented in diverse ancient sources, Hatshepsut… Continue reading Queen/Pharaoh Hatshepsut The 1st female Dual Leader!
HIStory of the African National Congress
Our struggle for freedom has a long history. It goes back to the days when the African people fought spear in hand against the British and Boer colonisers. The ANC has kept this spirit of resistance alive! Over the last 80 years the ANC has brought together millions in the struggle for liberation. Together we… Continue reading HIStory of the African National Congress
Africa’s Curse! The Thirst for control of it’s Resources by Outside Powers!
Anybody that has a head knows of the problems with the continent of Africa.The main reason it is in the condition it is (in some areas) is because of outside influences.The populations of the of some of the countries are so under developed that it will take years for them to recover from the meddlings… Continue reading Africa’s Curse! The Thirst for control of it’s Resources by Outside Powers!
50th Anniversary #Kwanzaa Celebration
We recently began celebrating the tradition of Kwanzaa in our household. This was a great event in Houston showcasing some local talent and celebrating the principals that make up #Kwanzaa http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-Ad8TAYPmFc http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-ot2iXnWatc
Hieroglyphics (Mtu Ntr)
The term hieroglyphics refers to a system of writing using ancient Egyptian symbols. The hieroglyphics involved a series of 'picture' words. Consisting of several hundred words, this system of writing was intensely complex and very labor intensive. The first hieroglyphics were used on buildings and tombs. It is believed that the Egyptians first began developing… Continue reading Hieroglyphics (Mtu Ntr)
You must be logged in to post a comment.