As I end this series, I would like to continue to address the needs of children. Today, we will end with more tips on surviving our isolation and new-world experience with COVID-19 life. This post addresses parents and children and ways to help them grow up to be healthy, responsible adults.
One thing that has grieved me throughout the years is the failure of some parents to teach their children life responsibilities. Maybe it is because they lack certain life skills themselves or maybe they are “too busy” to take time to train their children. The impact on children can be devastating as they grow into young adulthood. This writing addresses suggestions for improving your relationship with your children and training them to become responsible people.
The following are some suggestions for making it through this uncertain time with your children and beyond:
1.Protect your children from any kind of physical or emotional abuse. If your spouse or partner is prone to abuse, this would be a good time to seek counseling or even reconsider living arrangements. You don’t need to live in it and the children need your protection.
Maybe this would be a good time to start over.
2.Provide creative activities for your children such as art, music, hobbies, or anything that stimulates their mind and keeps them engaged.
3.If you live in a house, get the children outside to work in the yard, plant flowers, mow, wash cars, and clean out the garage. It is not healthy for children to sit inside and play video games all day. Now is a great time to start teaching them family and household responsibilities.
4.If they are old enough, teach them to do dishes, cook, clean bathrooms, iron, sort recycling, and “do life”.
5.Talk to all of your children. Hear their heart, their hopes and dreams.
Get to know them better.
LISTEN TO THEM–what they are really saying.
They may not talk to you because they perceive you never listen. Use this time of isolation to strengthen your relationship with them.
What they really need and want are parents who really love them and truly listen.
If this COVID series speaks to you at any level, please share this post and blog site with your friends. Subscribe at www.drbrendaramboauthor.com. Your comments and conversation are welcome.
Statements on the blog site are not intended to diagnose, treat, cure or prevent any disease nor viewed as personal medical advice, but rather for the purpose of general information. The reader is strongly encouraged to speak with his/her own physician or healthcare provider for advice.