Russian diamonds are some of the most popular jewelry gems around. So what are Russian diamonds exactly? Are Russian diamonds real? The answer to that question depends on what is meant by the term “Russian diamond.” The term “Russian diamond” can actually mean several different things. It can refer to lab-created diamonds, cubic zirconia stones or a diamond that was actually mined in Russia.
Lab created diamonds are often called Russian diamonds because the Russians were some of the first to begin creating diamonds in labs. Lab created diamonds started being produced during the start of the Cold War. Diamonds were very important for military and industrial manufacturing, and since they could no longer receive them from the west, Russia began creating their own diamonds. The concept of lab created diamonds began to catch on in the rest of the world, and they are still being created today.
Cubic zirconia is also sometimes referred to as a Russian diamond because, like lab-created diamonds, it was first produced in Russia. Cubic zirconia was created with the intent of being used for manufacturing purposes, but it was quickly discovered that the material had a lot of appeal as a jewelry stone. Cubic zirconia rings and other types of CZ jewelry designs are now one of the most popular, and affordable, types of jewelry available.
Finally, a true Russian diamond is a diamond that is actually mined in Russia. Russia is one of the world’s leading producers of diamonds, with more than 20% of all diamonds being mined there. One of the most productive mines in Russia was the Mirna Mine in Eastern Siberia. The mine officially opened in 1957, after the first diamond had been found there three years earlier. With the mine reaching 1600 feet deep, it would take a full mine truck almost two hours to reach the top of the mine. Although the mine used to produce more than two million carats of diamonds per year, all viable diamonds appear to have been recovered from the mine, and it is no longer active. Now the largest producer of Russian diamonds is the Udachny Mine which is located within the Arctic Circle. The open pit nature of this mine allows large quantities of diamonds to be mined at once. The diamonds mined there are among the largest and highest quality diamonds in circulation today. There are many parts of Russia that have not even begun to be mined yet, ensuring that Russia will be one of the world’s leading diamond producers for years to come.
Due to the frigid temperatures in many parts of Russia, many of the diamonds spend years being frozen underground before they are mined. This is believed to be the cause of the brilliant clarity and high refraction that is characteristic of true Russian diamonds. Because of their stunning beauty and clarity, Russian diamonds are highly sought after by jewelers. Any pieces designed with Russian diamonds, whether it be diamond stud earrings, or cushion cut diamond engagement rings, is highly sought after.
Lab created Russian diamonds are beautiful, but they just cannot compare to the real thing. So if you are in the market for Russian diamonds, make sure you are getting a true Russian diamond by asking to see the gemological certificate before you buy.