Spring Storytime at the Library
A child is never too young to learn to read. Research shows that reading to young children from birth significantly increases their chances of thriving in school. It is through the sharing of books and language that young children develop the reading skills needed to be ready to read. Through its seasonal storytime series, the Ascension Parish Library introduces young children to letters, words, and sounds through a variety of fun-filled programs designed to help foster early literacy skills. Library storytimes are rich with activities designed to entertain and introduce young children to the English language.
This spring, the Ascension Parish Library starts its next series of storytime programs for young children. Four types of storytimes are offered based on the needs of the developing child.
Lap-sit Storytime focuses on the needs of babies from birth through crawling. It introduces simple rhymes, songs, and books to stimulate babies with rhythmic language and sensory stimuli. These storytimes are fast paced and energetic to keep babies amused. A parent or caregiver must attend Lap-sit Storytime with their baby.
Toddler Storytime focuses on the needs of young children from walking through age 2. It introduces new words and ideas to the learning child through simple books, rhymes, and fingerplays. A parent or caregiver must attend Toddler Storytime with their child. This fosters a fun, positive learning environment for the child while allowing parents the opportunity to pick up great tips and techniques on reading to young children.
Preschool Storytime focuses on the needs of children ages 3 through 5. These storytimes are an exciting half-hour of stories, songs, poetry, and active play. Preschool children attend these sessions without the assistance of an adult to help foster the preschooler’s growing need for independence. A preschool child must reach the age of 3 by February 6 to participate in this series.
Bilingual Storytime is for children of all ages who speak Spanish, English, or both. These storytimes are an interactive half-hour of stories, songs, and fingerplays at which everything will be read in both English and in Spanish. This will introduce Spanish speakers to the English language and introduce English speakers to the Spanish language. Parents are invited to attend Bilingual Storytime with their children.
Registration begins on January 22 and is required for all storytimes. Parents can register their child in advance by either calling or visiting the library. For more information on these fun-filled, educational programs, please contact the Ascension Parish Library in Gonzales at 647-3955, in Donaldsonville at 473-8052, in Galvez at 622-3339, or in Dutchtown at 673-8699.
Here are the scheduled storytimes:
Thursdays February 7-March 28 10 a.m. Gonzales, Galvez, and Dutchtown
Tuesdays February 5-March 26* 10 a.m. Galvez
Wednesdays February 6-March 27 10 a.m. Gonzales, Donaldsonville, & Dutchtown
Tuesdays February 5-March 26* 11 a.m. Galvez
Wednesdays February 6-March 27 11 a.m. Gonzales & Dutchtown
Thursdays February 7 and 21 and March 7 and 21 11 a.m. Gonzales
*Storytime will not be held on February 12 due to the library being closed for Mardi Gras.