There are a lot of issues related to Developmental Dyscalculia in Adults. It causes troubles with your regular life.
Your options on employment can be affected, poor health and even depression has been related to developmental dyscalculia.
Other than common belief, dyscalculia affects about the same number of people compared to dyslexia. About 5%-7% of the population, so you are not alone. Dyscalculia does not get much diagnosed as there is little awareness of the condition and people seem to think that children “grow out of it”, which is absolutely not true.
Trouble with math will continue in adulthood if not properly treated. Most of the research into dyscalculia has until now been focussed on children and ignores the vast number of adults suffering every day of the consequences of this condition.
It is a lifelong learning disability.
If you want to read some of the newest research on adult dyscalculia then consider the article HERE
There is also research about the long term cost of numeracy difficulties and you can read about that HERE
For a good overview about adult numeracy and the research done for it, read this article HERE
At AdultDyscalculia.org we try to be of service to this vast population of forgotten patients of a forgotten learning disability, by providing testing, done remote via video conference, and remediation/tutoring, also done remote via video conferencing.
We also offer a video series with basic math explained without difficult busy work and lots of videos about how to use math in real life situations. See the preview video below or hit the button to go to the video series home page.
Dyscalculia is a specific but not yet extensively researched difficulty in understanding numbers. Having faced difficulties with math for most of their lives, dyscalculic adult learners might have lost motivation in the subject, making it hard to find the right support.
A quote from the excellent article out of the ELM magazine’s theme number about Adult Dyscalculia, numeracy and finance. See the whole article HERE
If you are unsure if you have dyscalculia or if you want to do something about your struggles with numbers, contact us and we will work with you to move forward.
Dyscalculia is still a very unknown learning disability. Many adults experience trouble in their daily life, their jobs or when helping their children with math homework and realize that they may have undiagnosed Dyscalculia.
This website is meant to provide resources to enable you to be diagnosed and get tutoring support if necessary.