Global Warming Paragraph.
Global Warming Paragraph.
|Global Warming Paragraph.|
1) What is global warming?
2) Why it occurs?/What are the causes of global warming?
3) What are the effects of it?
4) How can we prevent it?
5) If we can not prevent it, what may happen?
The main body of the Paragraph
Global warming is a gradual increase of temperature overall the earth's atmosphere generally attributed to the greenhouse effect caused by increased carbon dioxide levels (CO2), Chlorofluorocarbons (CFC), and other pollutant gases. Global warming occurs when carbon dioxide (CO2) and other air pollutants gases increase in the atmosphere. Most climatologists believe that greenhouse gas gases are increasing day by day in the atmosphere and these gases are the main causes of global warming. There are so many bad effects of global warming. Some of them are:
Natural disaster: Bangladesh is known as a disaster-prone area. For so much global warming the risk of natural disasters is increasing.
Temperature and Weather Changes: For global warming, the temperature of our earth is increasing. Not only in our country but also worldwide a steady increase in temperature is noticed. Here global warming is the main cause.
The weather changes from time to time: For global warming, the weather may change at any time. On the other hand, the changes in seasons will be disrupted.
Sea level rise: low-lying coastal Countries like Bangladesh are vulnerable to sea-level rise. Already polar ice is melting and increasing sea level rapidly.
Economic impacts and agriculture: Global warming has a detrimental effect on agriculture as well as on our economic impacts.
We have to prevent global warming. So we have to take some steps. In this way we can prevent:
Planting more trees: People are now cutting trees indiscriminately. So we have to plant two trees after cutting down one tree.
Avoid Chemical: Chemical is very harmful to us and also our nature. We have to avoid chemicals to stop pollution and global warming.
Avoid CFC and other harmful gases: Fridge and some other materials use CFC and other harımful gases. So, we have to use CFC-free products.
We need to be aware of ourselves about global warming and make others aware. Proper steps should be taken by the government and also full worldwide people to stop global warming. Because it is not our personal problem. It is worldwide problem and we all have to try to stop this problem. If we can not prevent it our earth will be destroyed day by day.
দয়া করে নীতিমালা মেনে মন্তব্য করুন