1.What is a high WACC?
What is considered to be a high WACC and why?
What is considered to be a high WACC and why?
Conscription, better known as the draft, was re-established in 1948 and required the registration of every eligible young man who was 18 and over. The draft continued through war and peacetime up until its end with the Vietnam War when military service reverted to an all-volunteer. Please respond to your choices from the questions below using at least 250 words.
Neuman Systems Models is a flexible and adaptive model which can be applied to various aspects of nursing disciplines. Today, the model is used globally as a nursing conceptual model to guide curriculum development, research studies, and clinical practice in the full array of health-care disciplines.
Define a nursing practice area where you could apply Neuman Systems Model. What patient population would you target? How would you use this model to guide best practices? How would nursing outcomes be determined? Use at least one current research article related to your practice example.
1. Write a project about water efficiency fixtures (sustainable)
2. Collect information from books, from Internet
· Main features
· Construction Characteristics
· Market availability
3. Add photos or drawings (from the Internet/books), highlight an element that interested you in particular
4. The project must contain 3 written pages and at least 5 pages of information (data, schedule, specs, etc.)
5. No plagiarism on written pages and cite any material you bring in
During Weeks 3 and 4, you learned about various qualitative research designs. This week, you will build on this knowledge. Select two of the five research designs. Define and explain the features of each design using the resources provided and three other quality resources. Next, develop data collection processes for each of the selected designs that include discussions of sample size, sampling technique, data collection materials, and instrumentation. You can include diagrams if you would like.
You are already familiar with the types of instruments used in quantitative data collection, but these are distinctly different from what is useful in qualitative studies. Qualitative instruments must be structured so that you are collecting deep and broad data to fully understand the research question. In most cases, you must design an instrument to extract specific experiential information from your participants. Data collection can occur through face-to-face interviews, focus groups, or observation; there are also other ways to select qualitative data.
When constructing your data collection plan, it must be clear and it must contain all the steps that you will take when collecting information from your participants. You will have to include any secondary data that you will collect. Secondary data can include documents or other evidence that can contribute to understanding the central phenomenon under study. How will you ensure a data saturation? Remember, practices like member checking, follow-up interviews, or transcript review are used by qualitative researchers to ensure data saturation.
Ultimately when writing this section of your study, it must be logical, repeatable, and reproducible. Every research decision must be based on accepted research practices; remember to include sources in your research plan to demonstrate the depth of your knowledge and the support of the academic community.
Length: 4, not including cover and references pages.
Your assignment should demonstrate thoughtful consideration of the ideas and concepts presented in the course and provide new thoughts and insights relating directly to this topic. Your response should reflect scholarly writing and current APA standards. Be sure to adhere to Northcentral University’s Academic Integrity Policy.
PLEASE USE THIS ORGANIZATION: https://www.maac4kids.org/
Introduction and overview of the NPO (no more than 1 page) (10 points)
Draft logic/impact model Week 4 handout on D2L) (15 points)
Discuss any challenges you have identified for completing the project (10 points)
Such as missing information needed for analysis or assessments, and how you propose addressing these challenges
If no challenges, please explain this briefly
Discuss your preliminary findings based on your review of the organization so far, including what the NPO currently does well and areas for improvement (15 points)
Organization’s directional strategies
In your previous assignments, you examined how today’s health care organizations prepare themselves for the present and the future through strategic management. Specifically, you analyzed how a health care organization’s external and internal environments affect its operations. You also performed a TOWS analysis to help a health care organization identify strategic objectives to drive and improve all aspects of the company.
The next step is to consider the directional pathways health care organizations take to achieve their strategic objectives. Creating a strategic vision for a health care organization involves developing or revising the organization’s mission, vision, and value statements. Here is a summary of these three directional strategies:
In a first-in-class health care organization, these three directional strategies align with the company’s overarching goals. Once strategic leaders are confident the mission, vision, and values are well formulated, understood, and communicated, they then focus on the activities that will make the most progress toward accomplishing the organization’s mission and move it toward realizing its vision. These activities are called strategic goals.
This assignment provides an opportunity for you to create a directional strategies report. In this report, you will analyze the alignment of your health care organization’s current directional strategies (mission, vision, and value statements) with its strategic goals. You will make recommendations for improvement if you identify gaps between where your health care organization currently is and where it wants to go.
By successfully completing this assignment, you will demonstrate your proficiency in the following course competencies and assignment criteria:
Your boss is pleased with the thorough and impressive work you have done to date. However, she notes that the TOWS matrix findings do not align with the organization’s directional strategies. The organization’s structure needs to more closely align with its strategic goals, so that the organization can be more efficient, competitive, and profitable. She asks for your help once again.
Her next task for you is to examine the organization’s current mission, vision, and value statements and compare them to the TOWS matrix. She requests that you recommend revisions to the organization’s mission, vision, and value statements so that they more closely align with the organization’s strategic priorities.
Knowing your boss, you understand that she wants your directional strategies report to be insightful, substantive, and brief—all at the same time. You also know that your boss is a visual person. It will serve you well to include appropriate images and diagrams, such as your TOWS matrix, in your report to highlight key information.
Write a directional strategies report that examines the alignment of a health care organization’s current directional strategies with its strategic goals.
The requirements, outlined below, correspond to the grading criteria in the Directional Strategies Report Scoring Guide, so be sure to address each point. Read the performance-level descriptions for each criterion to see how your work will be assessed.
Prepare your report using a familiar and appropriate document format used by health care organizations, such as business report or white paper.
Your report should be 4–6 pages in length (double-spaced).
Health care is an evidence-based field. Consequently, readers of your report will want to know the sources of your information, so be sure to include applicable, APA-formatted source citations and references.
Proofread your document, before you submit it, to minimize errors that could distract readers and make it more difficult for them to focus on the substance of your report.
Portfolio Prompt: You may choose to save your directional strategies report to your ePortfolio.
Article Summaries approximately 3 pages
From sources dated between September 1 through November 29, 2022, collect articles which relate to 4 of the 6 topics listed on the next page (9-point penalty for each article that is not in the above date range).
– 4 to 6 sentence summary of the article, as well as 4 to 6 sentences explaining how the event or information impacts you as an individual. See the instructions on the last page of this assignment for an example of how to set up
the summary page.
– Each printed article must be 5 single-sided pages or less with the original date, title, and source visible in the article. No blogs, editorials, or opinions! Your articles must come from one of the following sources’ websites
—– (9-point penalty for each article not from one of these sources): ———
(1) The Wall Street Journal, The New York Times, The Washington Post, USA Today
(2) Any Texas city newspaper (e.g., The Dallas Morning News, The Fort Worth Star-Telegram, The Houston Chronicle, The Austin American Statesman, The Denton Record-Chronicle, etc.)
(3) The Economist, Bloomberg Businessweek, Newsweek, Time Magazine Note: some newspapers and magazines may charge a fee to non-subscribers, while others are free or offer a free trial subscription.
Each article must relate directly to one of the following 6 topics (9-point penalty for each article if it does not)
and the topic
must be the main focus of the article selected (and not just a passing reference to the topic).
So you should have a total of 4 different articles on 4 different topics. Some articles may cover more than one topic, but each article may only be used once. These articles must relate to the U.S. macro-economy (not other countries) and not just one city, state, firm, or industry.
The six U.S. MACRO topics are:
(1) U.S. national unemployment rate (not claims)
(2) U.S. inflation rate
(3) U.S. GDP
(4) International Trade
(5) U.S. Budget Deficit
(6) The Federal Reserve and monetary policy
(1)Are articles from the sources listed in the instructions?
(2)Are articles dated between September 1, 2022 and November 29, 2022?
(3)Are the articles blogs, editorials, or opinions? If so, you cannot use them.
(4)Does each of the 4 summary pages have the topic, source, date, and title at the top of the page as illustrated in the example at the end of this assignment?
(5)Is there one cover page with all the requested information?
(6) Are the source, date, and title visible in each article?
(7) Is each printed article 5 single-sided pages or less?
Source of Article:
Date of Article:
Title of Article:
(1) Paragraph with a 4 to 6 sentence summary of article.
(2) Paragraph with four to six sentences explaining how the event or information
impacts you as an individual.
A June 1972 break-in to the Democratic National Committee headquarters led to an
investigation that revealed multiple abuses of power by the Nixon administration. Watch
the video below to learn more about the Watergate scandal. You can also refer to the
“Watergate” subsection in Chapter 26 The Conservative Turn. watch this video to do it
1. Given what you know about other impeachment proceedings from the class
(Andrew Johnson, Bill Clinton, Donald Tump (1 & 2)), where does this fall
historically? Was this something that one should have been impeached, why
or why not?
2. In times of war, how much power does the president have domestically? Was
impetus for the Watergate Scandal domestic or foreign policy? What did
Nixon stand to gain from it?
3. Nixon ultimately stepped down before he could have been removed from
office. Was this something that should have happened? Would it have been a
good or bad thing for the president of the United States to stand trial for
crimes? Why or why not?
Sufficient = 300 words, substantive and addresses the prompt
Voting restrictions today
2020 is both an election year and the 150th anniversary of the passage of
the 15th Amendment, making it an important time to consider the history of
voting rights in the United States. The struggle for the ballot is emblematic
of the struggle to make real the democratic promises of this country’s
founding narrative. As we have seen historically, the right to vote has
always been incomplete, contested, and compromised by the racism,
sexism, classism, and xenophobia of policymakers and the interests they
act to protect. Voting rights have expanded in the last 400 years, but they
have also been taken away, requiring activists to rise up, again and again,
to restore the achievements of prior generations. The fight for the ballot is
ongoing. Recent elections have brought forth the old problem of voter
suppression in a new guise — voter ID laws, voter roll purges, polling
places shuttered. This assignment is broken into several sections related to
the way in which people take part in the electoral system and the struggles
that have existed at local and national levels.
● Suppressed: The Fight to Vote documentary (35m), involving the 2018
Georgia gubernatorial election
Part A. In a paragraph or so each, answer the questions below. Be
descriptive in your discussion of your answer and make sure to back
it up with info from the materials or from the interactive websites.
1. Look at the US Government Voter Information Website
Links to an external site.
. What are voting restrictions that exist today in your state? Make a short
list below. Out of that list, what do you think is stepping over the line/not
harsh enough/should be changed?
2. Pay particular attention to the sections “Who Can’t Vote”.
Links to an external site.
What is the description of voting rights for those currently incarcerated or
former incarcerated persons in your state? What is you opinion on this
aspect of the discussion of voter rights?
3. Some discussion of voting laws focus on who people are, their national
origin, education, etc. What of the following descriptors do you accept as
limits or expansions on voting? What is your critique of these limitations?
Pick 3 of the 10 issues below that you find most reasonable to the creation
of an informed electorate. Write a few sentences on each and why you
picked these as either necessary, or the lesser evil in this case.
● Lower the voting age
● Require completion of a certain year/level of schooling
● Know something about the Constitution
● Know something about the candidates/issues being voted on
● Know how to read
● Not be a felon
● Expand voting rights to Green Card holders
● Be able to pay a poll tax to vote
● Pass a mental competency test
● Ownership of land or $20,000 in assets
How do these limitations above reflect historical limitations based on voting
that you are aware of?
4. Create a 1-page write-up/300 words, (double-spaced, Times New
Roman 12pt font) of your overall findings in this research.
Watch the short documentary Suppressed: The Fight to Vote (35m). This is
about the governor’s election in Georgia in 2018 and many of the ways
people were left out of the voting process. It also discusses issues
nationwide that disproportionately affect lower economic areas and people
of color in the United States.
Answer these questions in your write up: What historical parallels do
you see between the fight to gain the right to vote throughout the time
period of our class and the issues going on in Georgia in 2018? How do
these relate to the 15th Amendment and what suggestions do you have to
rectify this issue of contentious access to voting?
Eazyweezyhomeworks.com is a custom writing service that provides online on-demand writing work for assistance purposes. We are using Google Analytics to enhance your experience. No personal data is being tracked.
Using this service is LEGAL and IS NOT prohibited by any university/college policies. You are allowed to use our model academic papers for revision purposes only
Phone: +1 (5188) 418-5947