What a 9th Grader can Teach Us
"I hate the Holocaust."
The words rang out loud and clear. I didn't know what to make of them at first. Did she hate it because of the atrocious acts committed on Jewish people?
No, she hated it because at just ninth grade, she'd spent every year rehashing the same lessons since elementary school. The teacher would take a couple days and take the students through the raw fear of ghettos, gas chambers, experimentation and torture. Some classes concluded with a survivor of the ordeal coming to speak to the class.
These words, harsh though they may be, point to a larger issue in our history curricula: we tend to ignore the genocides and mass murders around the world.
Thanksgiving is presented as a warm roundtable of Native Americans and Pilgrims delighting in sharing food with each other. Not much is said about the smallpox and other disease epidemics.
I didn't learn about Trujillo until I picked up In the Time of the Butterflies by Julia Alvarez. The Armenian and Cambodian genocides were never taught either. And to this day I am still learning about genocides that took place close to a century ago.
The Holocaust is a critical point of history. The death toll is by far the highest, the atrocities inflicted are some of the nastiest, and the pain continues to reverberate around the world to this day. However, I think it's important to include information about other genocides that allow the class to look at issues that affected other cultures and ethnicities as well. In some cases, it can help students have a better understanding of their own cultural past and present and their identity.
I remember having a shadowy understanding of the racism and colorism that is prevalent in Dominican culture. Yet learning about President Trujillo's desire to whiten the race helped me understand why vestiges of this attitude persists to this day.
But let's not make this about me or the young lady who placed her boredom over the pain of millions of Jews. Instead- let's make this about the millions of people who have died in the many genocides in the last 100 years alone and tell their stories as well. The Rape of Nanking, the Armenian Conflict, Rwanda and the story of Cambodia all deserve to be told as well.