Posted: February 8th, 2022
Place your order now for a similar assignment and have exceptional work written by our team of experts, At affordable rates
For This or a Similar Paper Click To Order Now
Learning Goal: I’m working on a sociology question and need guidance to help me learn.Hi Students,Below are your Module 1 Part 2 discussion questions. Please remember to respond to the correct question. In addition to that, it is important for me to highlight my expectations for your responses: BE PRECISE. Avoid giving generic answers. Cite your textbook. I will not remind you every week, but I expect this standard throughout the semester.If the first letter of your last name begins with: A-I — Always answer question 1.J-R — Always answer question 2.S-Z– Always answer question 3.Explain the nature vs. nurture debate. What are some of your experiences of people attributing some facets of human development to either side of the debate?
Explain the early and later experience theory of human development. What are some experiences you had during adolescence that shaped the way you are today? Would you classify them as early or late? Why?
What is the difference between cross-sectional and longitudinal research? Then, provide an example of research for each cross-sectional and longitudinal on the same topic (e.g., alcohol abuse, drug usage, academic achievement, etc.) and discuss the advantages and disadvantages when comparing the studies. For example, if you chose academic achievement as a topic, find one study that uses cross-sectional and another one that uses longitudinal, then discuss the pros and cons based on their findings.
Bonus Question (If you don’t want to answer your question above, you can answer the one below) What is puberty? How would you explain it to someone? Why is it important to adolescent development…or is it not? Explain the gendered effects of puberty (i.e., how is puberty experienced differently between girls and boys). Provide at least 2 personal examples (or someone you know).
Requirements: 13 hour
Place an order in 3 easy steps. Takes less than 5 mins.