A harmless mucus-filled cyst inside your mouth is known as an oral mucocele. Cysts are typically painless and appear as smooth, round lesions. Most oral mucoceles are caused by trauma, such as biting your lip. Treatment is usually unnecessary because the oral mucous cyst will resolve independently. Your provider can remove large cysts or those that cause discomfort.
WHAT IS AN ORAL MUCOCELE CYST?
A painless fluid-filled cyst on the inside surface of your mouth is known as an oral mucocele. These innocuous blisters, also known as oral mucous cysts, most commonly form on the inside area of your upper or lower lip. They can also harm your inner cheek or tongue, gums, and mouth floor.
Oral mucoceles are frequently caused by minor trauma, such as lip biting. A salivary gland might be damaged or blocked due to an oral injury. When this happens, saliva flowing from that gland into your mouth may accumulate and develop an oral mucous cyst.
Oral mucoceles usually disappear on their own. On the other hand, large cysts can interfere with speaking, eating, swallowing, and, in rare circumstances, breathing. As a result, you should see your doctor to have any large oral mucoceles removed.
WHAT CAUSES A MUCOUS CYST?
Mucous cysts are most often caused by oral cavity trauma, such as:
- Biting one's lip
- Accidental rupture of the salivary gland
- Cheek biting
- Poor dental hygiene
A stress-related habit of lip biting or cheek biting can also increase your risk of developing mucous cysts. However, some people develop these cysts due to an allergic reaction to tartar-control toothpaste.
Mucous cysts most commonly happen in people between 10 and 25. These cysts, however, can occur in people of any age. They also occur equally in males and females.
ORAL MUCOUS CYST SYMPTOMS
Mucous cysts are tiny sacs filled with clear fluid. They have a smooth or glossy look and are blue-pink in hue. The cysts vary in size but are usually 5-8 millimeters wide.
Other than the presence of the mucous cyst, mucous cysts are not associated with any clinical symptoms. They can be unpleasant, but they are typically painless cysts.
Large oral cysts can make eating and speech difficult. It is also conceivable that a cyst will explode. This will cause the fluid to spill and provide an infection risk.
WHEN SHOULD YOU SEE A DOCTOR?
You should see a doctor if you notice any fluid-filled swelling in the inner surface or around your mouth. They can correctly diagnose the condition and rule out anything serious.
Mucous cysts are usually small, painless, and harmless. Cysts, on the other hand, can grow to be several centimeters in size. They may then disrupt vital functions such as breathing. As a result, it is preferable to seek treatment before this occurs.
You might not realize you have a small, painless cyst until you visit the dentist. Mucous cysts can form inside the cheeks at the back of the mouth and go unnoticed. If your dentist discovers a cyst, they may refer you to a doctor for further testing and diagnosis.
WHAT IS THE PROCEDURE FOR TREATING AN ORAL MUCOCELE?
Because many fluid-filled lesions rupture and disappear, you may not require oral mucocele treatment. It would be best if you did not remove an oral mucocele alone. Home treatment for oral mucocele can result in infection or damage to your oral tissues.
Your healthcare provider may recommend the following treatment options for recurring cysts or large mucoceles:
Cryotherapy: Your doctor will use extreme cold to freeze and destroy the mucocele cyst.
Laser treatment: Your provider will remove the lesion with a special laser.
Surgical removal: The cyst will be cut out and removed by an oral surgeon or dentist. They might also take out the salivary gland.
ARE THERE ANY NATURAL REMEDIES?
Recovery from a mucous cyst often takes time. You should check the cyst regularly to ensure it is not infected and is not growing more prominent. Warm salt water rinses may assist in hastening the healing process.
You should think about quitting if you have a habit of biting your lips or cheeks. Keep records and note how frequently you bite — it's most likely due to anxiety, stress, or boredom. You can try to stop biting your cheeks or lips once you've identified the triggers. Chewing sugar-free gum is one way to satisfy your urge to bite without injuring yourself.
While home remedies may be beneficial in treating some mucous cysts, it is critical to not self-diagnose. Your doctor can determine whether the bumps are caused by something more serious, such as oral cancer.
WHAT IS THE PROGNOSIS (OUTLOOK) FOR AN ORAL MUCOCELE?
Oral mucoceles are typically painless, superficial cysts that do not cause long-term complications. The prognosis is generally favorable. Larger oral mucous cysts, on the other hand, may interfere with speaking, chewing, and swallowing. Ranulas can cause breathing difficulties in rare cases. Your healthcare provider can remove the mucocele and eliminate any potential problems with treatment.
Oral mucous cysts are fluid-filled sacs that form in the mouth. They are usually painless and do not cause any other health issues.
Most mucous cysts are self-resolving and do not require treatment. If a cyst recurs or becomes painful, it can be treated with steroid injections, laser therapy, cryotherapy, or surgery.
Consult a doctor if you notice any swelling or growth in your mouth. They can make an accurate diagnosis and rule out any serious causes.
WHAT CAUSES CLEAR BUMPS IN THE MOUTH?
Oral mucoceles are typically caused by trauma to the salivary glands or a blockage of the salivary gland openings (duct). There is a disruption in saliva flow when your salivary gland is injured or when you have a blocked salivary gland. Saliva can accumulate and form a cyst from salivary glands.
CAN I POP A MUCOUS CYST?
It is critical not to pick or pop the cyst. This can lead to an open wound that might get infected or leave lifelong scars. The cyst will eventually break as part of the healing process. Cleaning the cyst with salt water regularly might assist in preventing infection.
HOW LONG DO LIP MUCOCELES LAST?
Many mucoceles resolve on their own in 3-6 weeks. Mucous-retention cysts typically last longer. Avoid sucking or chewing on the lower lip or cheek when lesions are present.
WHAT EXACTLY IS A MUCOCELE?
Both extravasation and retention mucoceles have a similar clinical appearance. Mucoceles are blue, soft, and semi-transparent cystic swellings that usually resolve independently. The blue coloration is caused by vascular congestion, cyanosis of the upper tissue, and fluid accumulation below.
DO MUCOUS CYSTS DISAPPEAR?
Digital mucous cysts frequently resolve on their own. If this is not the case, surgery can be an option. It would help if you did not attempt to drain the cyst alone because you risk complications like a joint infection or permanent damage to your hands or feet.