Interactions refer to the situation where two medicines interfere with each other. Amoxicillin can interact with various medicines; therefore, it is important that your doctor and pharmacist are aware of all the medications you take so they can decide whether amoxicillin is suitable for you. Below we will look at the important interactions for amoxicillin and how they can be managed if you are prescribed these medications together.
Amoxicillin can reduce the elimination of methotrexate from your body, which can increase your risk of developing side effects. If you are taking these medications together, your doctor may want to increase your normal methotrexate monitoring (testing your blood, liver, and kidneys). You should also report any side effects to your doctor, such as a sore throat.
Certain blood thinners (anticoagulants), including warfarin, may interact with amoxicillin. This may increase your risk of bleeding; therefore, it is important to let whoever monitors your blood thinner testing (INR) know you are taking it.
Allopurinol, a medication to treat gout, can interact with amoxicillin, causing an increased risk of developing a skin rash. You should speak to your doctor if this occurs.
Amoxicillin can reduce the effectiveness of the oral typhoid vaccine. It, therefore, should not be taken within three days (before or after) of the vaccine. Let your doctor know if you are taking amoxicillin and are due to have this vaccine.
If you suffer from vomiting and diarrhea as a side effect of amoxicillin, be sure that you discuss it with your doctor. If you are unable to take your other regular medication, some issues may arise. One example would be the contraceptive pill, which can put you at risk of pregnancy if you are unable to take it or keep it down. There are many other important medications that can’t be missed, and it is something to think carefully about or discuss with your doctor.
Amoxicillin is unlikely to interact with any over-the-counter medicines, however, you should speak with your pharmacist before deciding to start taking any new over-the-counter medicines alongside amoxicillin.
Some herbal medicines can interact with amoxicillin, such as acacia, chewing catha, and bromelain. There are limited studies on the safety of taking herbal medicines alongside prescribed medications, so generally, it is best to avoid doing so.
Although alcohol does interact with some medications, including antibiotics, this is not the case for amoxicillin. Alcohol in moderation can usually be taken without side effects. Amoxicillin can be taken either with food or on an empty stomach, however, taking it with food may be beneficial if the medicine is making you feel nauseous at all.
Was this helpful?
Was this helpful?