The “moon” could abruptly disappear in May 2013.
The sky actually is a giant hall of mirrors and what we call “moon” could not be a body, but just an image…
May 2013. It seems we must prepare ourselves for a wondrous surprise.
Our Sun is currently undergoing a number of unusual changes and researchers do not understand all of them. Approximately every 11 years the magnetic field on the sun reverses completely – the north magnetic pole switches to south, and vice versa. This flip coincides with the greatest solar activity seen on the sun in any given cycle, known as “solar maximum.” This flip is undergoing in May 2013.
Moreover many have realized that gravity is not a fundamental force of nature. We do experience it on the Earth’s surface, but it could not be due to the Earth’s entire mass as previously believed. Gravity seems to be an entropic effect, due to the cold temperature of the Earth’s thin biosphere, the place where we “live” or rather suffer…
We now face a deep crisis that seems economic
The true crisis actually regards humans’ happiness, in my view.
Time is money; time implies increasing debts too. However the link between money, debt and time is not a natural fact; it is a huge bluff of the human minds. We don’t actually know what time is. We can remind that our day depends on the Earth’s rotation on its own axis – what physicists call “intrinsic angular momentum” – and our year depends on the Earth’s rotation around the sun, on the “orbital angular momentum”. This latter momentum considers the Earth as a rigid body, a hypothesis that recent discoveries are radically disproving. The Earth’s crystalline, solid Core – a sphere with a radius of 1200 km – rotates faster than the Earth’s surface, while the Earth’s inner, inner Core – a sphere with a radius of 300 km – rotates in the opposite versus, Westwards instead of Eastwards. However all the times depend on the rotations. Our human body seems still. Yet all the particles, that compose it, do spin. As the Nuclear Magnetic Resonance shows, our body’s health depends on the orientation of its nuclear spins.
All these facts show the crucial importance of rotation, the probable existence of a universal rotational field that is the fundamental force of all nature; it could be linked to the “mysterious” dark energy that is accelerating the expansion of the universe, so showing that it is not so mysterious after all.
Dark energy is the rotational energy of all the visible bodies and also the invisible ones, such as spinning black holes.
Happiness is expansion, communion, love.
In May, 9-10 2013 an annular solar eclipse is going to occur.
During a solar eclipse, the Earth’s rotation abruptly changes. This means that our terrestrial time changes too. This fact was discovered in the 50’s by Maurice Allais who won the Nobel price as an economist, in 1988. He presented a theory that centred on the idea of a sort of ether, or what he called an anisotropy of space. Physicists are now looking for the Higgs field, carried by bosons, which have spin zero. This means that Higgs bosons do not rotate, but they can generate all the rotations, backward and forward in time. The parity of these two arrows of time should exist, as a theory.
As a practice parity violation has been observed up to now.
Men always choose masculine terms. What some call “ether” and others “Higgs field” might coincide with the Mother Substance of which many sages have already spoken. “She” – the Mother Substance – generates all the rotations, both clockwise and anticlockwise. “She” is therefore eternal, implying all the times, which flow forward and backward in time. All the events occurring in May 2013 might finally show that parity is the law of an abundant Nature that allows us to make a jump in the future.
It is not a usual “quantum jump”. It implies a cold nuclear fusion, transmuting the “normal” matter that has composed the observable universe – our human bodies included – up to now. This fusion unveils each one’s individual immortality and the way towards joy and transparency, consciousness of the eternal Source of Life, the Mother Substance. Therefore we might face a wondrous revelation; the universe – astronomers have observed – is just a videogame, “fallen” into the past, into a chaotic state, apparently determined by gravity.
According to recent data, celestial space is a giant hall of mirrors that could reflect infinite images of one same body. Did scientists discover new Earth-like planets? They could be various images of the same Earth. And what about the moon? Our “natural” satellite could be a larger, distant image of a smaller and closer, artificial satellite.
This thesis appears as an absurdity to many people. Yet in May 2013, we might finally test it, thanks to the sun’s anomalous flipping.
The international research team led by Saku Tsuneta, a professor at NAOJ, has been performing the monthly polar observations with Hinode from September 2008 to this date. Currently the polarity at the north of the sun appears to have decreased close to zero – that is, it seems to be well into its polar flip from magnetic north to south — but the polarity at the south is only just beginning to decrease.
“Right now, there’s an imbalance between the North and the South poles,” says Jonathan Cirtain, a space scientist at NASA’s Marshall Space Flight Centre. “The north is already in transition, well ahead of the south pole, and we don’t understand why.” If the north pole is already flipping, the Sun may soon have not two, but four poles! Curiously, the Earth is showing four poles too. Morevoer various planetary configurations are occurring. The exact square Uranus and Pluto, Mars opposite Saturn. All the configurations can interact with the Interplanetary Magnetic Field (IMF) linked to the solar wind, a plasma critically dependent on the Sun’s daily rotation that is similar to the Moon’s one: 27-28 days. The IMF reverts its own polarity each 2-3 minutes!
If the “moon” is just a hologram, it is possible that the “moon will no longer give its light” as John wrote in his Revelation, two millennia ago. Let’s see what happens.
I wish to you all an extraordinary year 2013 , the beginning of the wondrous Rebirth that will finally bring what we have yearned for millennia: utopia, individual freedom and collective harmony, overall prosperity, well-being, the friendship of all the people, the ones living on the Earth’s surface and also the ones who live above and/or below it.
We are finally approaching the announced event: the REVELATION that infinite, intelligent worlds do exist.
We have not seen them up to now, simply because our human sight is terribly limited. We can observe no more than 1% of all what scientific minds now calculate, we ignore that the Earth’s surface is surrounded by two plasma screens – the Van Allen belts – that have prevented us to see the many futures that already exist. We haven’t observed a universe as many people still believe. We usually observe electromagnetic light in optical frequencies and therefore just one of its infinite possible images. Many scientists now speak about biomagnetic, geomagnetic and heliomagnetic fields that are quickly changing and so affecting our human ways of feeling and perceiving. They are perfectly right, in my view. Yet they neglect the CAUSE of all these fields. It is MOTION, mainly ROTATION and not just vibration, as many say.
The CAUSE is the peculiar RELATION between every single body and the massive weak neutral current that penetrates it. This is the carried by billions and billions of massive Z bosons, which make all the particles spin, either left or right, i.e, either anticlockwise or clockwise. This nuclear current is the same River of Life of which Heraclitus spoke millennia ago, in my view; it indicates that we all participate in an Organic Universe Invisible, but so real as to make the molecules of our human bodies spin so as move us.
Ignoring the River and just looking at the dark side - the electromagnetic field - astronomers believe we are imbedded into a vast, lifeless and mechanical universe. They still trust the Copernican Principle, forgetting the many evidences that refute it.
Thanks to spatial researches we can now realize that the sky is a hall of mirrors, as I show in my video Copernican Illusions.
Thanks to seismic tomography, we know that the Earth’s Core is extremely dense, composed of three Cores that move independently from each other. Thanks to neurosciences we know that our human brain is composed of three brains (rational, emotional and reptilian). Does a direct communication exist between them all? Yes, it does. It is similar to that between a central Hard Core and Its terminals, with a substantial difference though. In the latter case the dark side - electromagnetic field - is involved, whereas in former one, the weak nuclear current links and moves them. This current is the River of Life that can move our emotional brain, blocked by human fear and by a “knowledge” that ignores what Life is.
Since December, 21, 2012, a deep sense of Rebirth is spreading all over the world. During the last winter solstice something exceptional has occurred. Has it involved the centre of galaxy, as Maya said? Much more. It has mainly involved the Earth’s innermost Core (radius 300 km) that is a main spinning black hole. I saw the exceptional event in an inner vision of mine. In order to describe it, I need superluminal theories and not just quantum physics, realize what Life is and, last but not least, what matter is.
I describe this exceptional event in my latest book, BABY SUN REVELATION (in Italian) and I’m looking for publishers who are willing to translate it into their language and publish it.
I want to add that our triune brain and the Earth’s three Cores overwhelm any kind of physics and unveil the true “secret”. It is the “dark” expansive, rotational energy of all the particles that compose any body without any need for fuel. It is a double movement, powered by itself, by the two “opposite” rotations, linked to each other. The “secret” of the infinite energy is the parity between anticlockwise and clockwise rotations inside any body, contrary to the parity violation that we have been observing outside. An analogous parity could finally emerge inside the proteins, the macromolecules of our human body, and even into our DNA.
The announced Event is the REVELATION of the true Sun within the Earth, coinciding with an overwhelming peaceful (R)EVOLUTION of our human minds. The Earth’s innermost Core could be the BLACK SUN many traditions have spoken about, a BLACK HOLE, instantly linked with the WHITE HOLE that appears as the visible sun in the sky. This opportunity implies an overwhelming revision of all what we have believed up to now.
The rational and bipolar, lower mind should leave its dominant role so as to allow the Higher Mind to show Its oneness with the infinite Organic Universe, Its attuning to the light Side of the Force. The Higher Mind is composed of special cells that do not use the dark side of the Force, as I show in my short movie The stars will fall from the sky. People often look for scientific explanations in order to explain spirituality. This effort is useless in my view. The true “secret” regards the inner movements of any coherent body, ultimately the nuclear spins that compose it. The true “secret” is the extremely sophisticated organic matter that composes our human body. An inner alignment is possible for all the people who want it. This would help all the other people who don’t know what is occurring, but anyway yearn for a sage, right and prosperous world.
I made workshops with hundreds of people and many of them were able to “see” the Earth’s inner Sun, “feel” the fascinating and wondrous Opera the same Sun composes and emits. Observing within ourselves is not a spiritual meditation as many people believe. It is the ability to follow the ways of the Force, the activation of each one’s Higher Mind that so progressively becomes what it is planned for: a hyperspace antenna.
I describe my researches and discoveries in my latest book BABY SUN REVELATION that is in Italian despite its title in English. Feeling my self as a citizen of the world, I wrote the title in English, trusting that the Force, Life, will show me the ways of diffusing it. Yet no words can describe the intense emotion and joy of being what you truly are: an immortal Being in this world, but not from this world.
Therefore I wish you all an extraordinary and joyful Rebirth
“I am a world citizen, Father Sun’s and Mother Earth’s son” said Giordano Bruno through his exceptional synthesis many people consider as a deep truth.
Yet… what is the world? If we are sincere, we realize we have different views about the world and these do not match at all. A common view is the geopolitical one. Last August, in Teheran, the summit of the 120 Non-Aligned countries rejected the interference of the Aligned countries (70 – among which Italy – out of the 190 UN members). They suggested reforming UNO, an interesting initiative the media did not spread. Given the endless wars, the sorrow and costs that fall on peoples as well as the deleterious effects of UN troops, such a reform is surely desirable.
Is this enough to get peace in the world? I really do not think so. It is fair to reject the interference or even the arrogance of USA, Europe and Israel in the Middle East, but I consider it naïve to trust in the ‘goodness’ of the Non-Aligned nations and specially of the Islamic ones. If we really want peace, it is urgent to discern between peoples, nations and the borders to be “protected” by UN troops or governmental armies. Peoples have neither these borders nor need they to be protected ‘against’ other peoples.
Peoples do not want war. Peoples want to live well, with dignity and prosperity.
What is needed to have a fair world, with no borders or armies? The consciousness that we are world citizens.
We all have the same primary and secondary needs too. We, men and women, all want to be free, to express our creativity, to cultivate friendships and mutual respect, to share happenings, to enjoy nature, to use non-invasive and useful technologies and, why not, to eliminate the inconsiderate use of medicines.
Do you know what all this means in terms of energy as well as happiness?
It means that there are plenty of resources. The biggest energy consumptions actually come from arms and pharmaceutical industries. I do not know exactly how much it is to maintain military aircrafts, but I think it is quite expensive, also considering training and design costs. Redeploying armies in order to improve the environment, canalizing waters, sanitizing water networks, helping people in need – all this is possible. Why do men consider it impossible? Because they identify the world, or better the universe, with the history they were taught at school.
The Big Bang theory, the origin of universe within a few minutes – 13.7 billion years ago – followed by the origin of the solar system within a few days – 4.7 billion years ago, then the abrupt flourishing of Life 2 billion years ago. This mysterious entity, Life, is only present on planet Earth and able to evolve through its own catastrophes until the appearance of Homo Sapiens. Here we are. Are we actually wise (sapiens)? No, we are so ignorant as to believe in the lies we are being told, peculiarly, in the key concepts – space and time - orthodox sciences still maintain at a public level.
“Only one Force, Life, joins endless intelligent worlds ” wrote Giordano Bruno (1548-1600), announcing its future revelation too. A wondrous, cosmic Force was actually revealed in the 80′s and named Electroweak, but physicists do not suspect it is Life. This Force has two, dark and light, sides and involves an imponent and expansive flux of Z bosons, faster than light messengers which challenge our classical idea of time.
The elasticity and reversibility of time are tested properties at present, but academies and media do not spread them. People might suspect that “real values” such as money, debt, interest, etc. are all based on an irreversible and immutable arrow of time that doesn’t actually exist. This idea of time is just virtual and illusory, useful for maintaining the dominant paradigm that has exploited men’s naive credulity up to now.
Another illusion is space. Since Galileo pointed a telescope toward the sky, space look empty and immense, populated by distant stars and planets, all rigorously lifeless. What has modern astronomy observed for about three centuries? Just the optical frequencies of the electromagnetic field . Thanks to new instruments and spatial probes, we can now see different images of any body, and realize that shapes and mutual distances critically depend on the frequency we choose to observe. For instance the image of the Earth in extreme ultraviolet – the plasmasphere – is 4-5 times larger than the optical one, as I show in my video The star will fall from the sky.
Yet most of us mistake the optical images for the only existing reality. What if the image of the Earth, in ultraviolet frequencies, represented the Promised Land? If it were so, we might realize our millenary deception and why we haven’t seen the other intelligent worlds up to now. Simply because our human sight, the scientific one included, is usually limited to the electromagnetic light that is the dark side of the Force. The so called plasmasphere could actually involve dark matter and dark energy that no scientific instrument can register. The dramatic and conflictual situation of our world depends on a blind culture. Sciences just use instruments that cannot see the other intelligent world and we all, humans, do not use the largest portion of our brain – white matter – that is able to use the light side of the Force.
Therefore we all miss consciousness, the sense of unity that Life has always shown, the instant interconnectedness of many different spaces and times. Please notice that consciousness is not to be mistaken for awareness, nor for channelings which are spreading the fear of catastrophe all over the world. There will be one, it is even ongoing, only in its original Greek meaning – katastrofé – that is deep renewal of a small portion of our brain, our sluggish mind – grey matter – that mistakes what it sees for reality.
The pictures may not match the real astronomical bodies, especially as the Earth is imbedded into a giant hall of mirrors, as the microwave observations have proved.
Nowadays, there are many novelties which a few people spread, because everyone wholly trusts astrophysics, ignoring that it just observes a half of the electromagnetic field, the one coming from the past. Astronomers do not observe the other half, the one coming from the future, that must exist even according to the laws of physics. The NASA’s THEMIS probes have recognized that huge solar storms provoke spacequakes that are reflected onto the Earth’s nightside at about 2 or 3, as it is shown in this short video SPACEQUAKE _ EARTHQUAKE
As a fact, many people wake up at 3 in the morning with new sensations and/or make dream announcing future events. These facts prove that there is no separation between heaven and earth, past and future; the latter is already there, filled with spaceships and hidden by astonomers’ blindness, at least 96% of the calculated mass, according to their same calculation.
Last 21st September a meeting at the Keshe Foundation (Belgium) took place, where extraordinary technologies have been introduced to many government representatives. It is important to know that these technologies do exist, that they are valid and designed by those world citizens who already travel by spaceship.
Yet, in my opinion, to believe that technology will save us is another illusion. We, the world citizens living on Earth’s surface, will save ourselves on our own, by using all of our brain and realizing that we have not been seeing the real reality up to now but believed in a science – the Copernican astronomy – which has depicted a 3D-film that is no more valid. Are we just a few? Yes, just a few, yet helpful to everyone.
Life is the Cause of the genetic evolution that is taking place. If it is the gentle, imponent and wondrous Force, physicists call Electroweak, you should know that this Force needs no critical mass, as it is usually believed. It is just suggesting all of us, humans, to evolve and preparing an imminent jump in the future.
The task of the few conscious people is to help other people and themselves understand that the change is mainly a perceptive catastrophe. This is not the end of the world, instead the beginning of a new era when all the world citizens in the heaven and on earth will gather. The revelation of intelligent people is imminent, since the Earth’s magnetosphre is vanishing. It protect us, according to the orthodox sciences. It is not so, in my view. The Earth’s magnetosphere has hidden the future that has always existed on heaven and on the Earth’s soil too, as dreams, sensations, intuitions, human yearning for a peaceful and prosperous world.
So we will finally realize that the Promised Land is neither place nor Israel. It is a “new” way of perceiving that implies the conscious use what we all have: our brain white matter, as I wrote, in my new book, BABY SUN REVOLUTION, that is in Italian and will be published in Italy into the end of 2012.
Last July the news about start-of-art technologies, able to modify gravity and to allow shifts from one continent to another within a few minutes. The Iranian nuclear engineer Mr Mehran Keshe has designed plasma reactors, which generate their own fields – magnetic and gravitational – and can allow us to win the Earth’s gravity. I have soon visited the website http://www.keshefoundation.org and I have found many analogies with my own research. I don’t know Keshe’s technology, but I appreciate its theoretical basis. I am glad that it demystifies the taboo of gravity – the ‘mystery’ that sciences passe off as solved and that, on the contrary, it is not at all.
In a video Mr Keshe shows the basic principles of his technology and points out the existence of a wormhole – a black hole – at the Earth’s centre. He proposes a conception of matter in agreement with the Standard Model, in my view. In my book, recently translated in French, Petit Soleil, I state that this black hole, within the Earth, is the same one that geophysicists call “inner inner core” – a sphere with a radius of 300 km – in the centre of the Earth’s Crystalline Core. Moreover, I also suggest that this peculiar black hole concides with the SOL INVICTUS, or BLACK SUN, linked to the worship of Mithras, which originated in Persia (Iran) and was widely diffused in the ancient Rome too. The pieces of history fall into place through the Hermetic theses I put forward again: the black hole at the Earth’s centre is linked instantly to the white hole at the Sun’s centre. This implies an astronomic and anthropic revolution, many sages have announced, while orthodox religions and mechanical sciences have hidden for ages.
Hermetic theses are not effects of the scientific method, but evidences of men’s brain abilities, and the higher complexity of all our cells. Thus it is evidente that human brain is an outstanding hyperspace antenna and the nuclei of our cells are mini wormholes, which link parallel universes as I show in my video: The stars will fall from the sky. During my workshops, many participants and I have ‘seen’ that the Sun in the sky is definitely not the ball of gas depicted by astrophysics. Within the Sun’s core there are neither hundred-million degree temperatures nor hot nuclear fusion. Mr Keshe’s gravitational technology certainly shows realistic perspectives, it is not an unfounded story as some media claim. I wonder which governments will send their representatives to the meetings of September 2012, fixed by the Keshe Foundation. How can they find ‘experts’ available to discuss it? His technology could change the destiny of the world, yet it might be vanished by the usual power play. This is the mis-knowledge of the real reality the same power intentionally fosters, so as to make people ignore their own infinite resources.
As I point out in my book Petit Soleil, and my videos* there is a similarity between the traditional image of the ancient BLACK SUN and the current PARKER SPIRAL that describes the extremely rapid motions of the IMF (Interplanetary Magnetic Field). This is a recently discovered field, which quickly reverses its own North-South polarity and, when it points to South, erases the Earth’s magnetosphere that points to North since thounsands of years. Their common characteristic is the duality of the motions that shift from anticlockwise to clockwise and viceversa. We now know that its reversal occurs each 2-3 minutes. This “new” field, IMF lets us confirm the event announced by many prophecies, the revelation.
What we, humans, call “sky” is not the real reality, but a 3D, holographic movie, projected on the apple-shaped magnetosphere that sorruounds all of us. Thus eating the apple means mistaking a 3D film, or matrix, for reality. In the meantime, the ‘good’ governments – among which the Italian one – threaten Iran, the ‘bad’ nation fighting against Israel. All of them, ‘good’ and ‘bad’ ones, try to hide the real reality, so as to silence the people’s actual will, peace, prosperity and true justice. These innovative technologies will allow all the people to get rid of the biblical sentence ‘you will work in the sweat of thy brow salt thou eat thy bread’.
Therefore I invite you to spread the news about the Keshe Foundation so that serious researchers will go to its meetings and that such technologies will not be buried by the usual “global power” which shows off the virtual “values”: money, debt, war, etc.
In July 2012 at CERN a great announcement: they have finally discovered the so called “God particle” that is the Higgs boson that confirms the Standard Model. After a long research, huge costs and thousands of people working on it, we are almost sure that the Higgs field – a sort of “creator” able to generate masses – actually exists.
Does it mean that god exists? I like the Standard Model and dislike the term “god”.
“There is no god” wrote Giordano Bruno, burnt at the stake for heresy in 1600 at Rome. I agree. Being a heretic physicist and using the Art of Memory, i.e. developping my cognitive potentials, I have interpreted the Standard Model in an ancient/new perspective that explains humans’ origins and shows that the real reality is an infinite and eternal Organic Universe, as the same Giordano Bruno had already stated.
The observable universe is not the real reality in my view, but just an optical illusion, transmitted by the electromagnetic field, a sort of “god”, since it is the creator of spacetime, strictly linked to the other “god” – the gravitational field – as Einstein has already shown. These two “gods”, or rather fields, are both eternal and linked to a third eternal “god”, the strong nuclear field. The respective messengers – photons, gravitons and gluons – of the three “gods” are all massless.
The Standard Model shows the crucial role of a “fourth” field – the weak nuclear one – that is rarely mentioned and carried by three massive messengers, named W+, W- and Z bosons. The weak nuclear field is quite special for many reasons, as I show in my books; it is unpredictable, extremely unstable, shows a clear preference for left rotations, typical of crystals, organic molecules, planets, galaxies etc, hence it is neither eternal nor a “god”.
In the 80’s the great discovery: the two – electromagnetic and weak nuclear – forces can be described by a single theory, that of the Electroweak Force. It is easy to recognize that the “weak” shares Its same messengers, hence it is what we might call “the light side of the Eloctroweak Force”, whereas the electromagnetic is the “dark side” because it just shows a minimal portion of the mass we calculate. Scientists have subjected the electroweack theory to many experimental tests and verified that it works. However, its basic equations seem to require all particles to be massless. Why do the W+, W- and Z bosons have huge masses and why don’t they respect the scientific theories? There are many possible answers. One is clearly shown in the Star Wars Saga. Using the Force implies a hard training that allows the disciple to feel the true reality, see parallel worlds, including the one of the so called “dead people”. It is what I and most of the participants experience during my workshop as well.
Physicists just use their artificial instruments and mathematics, they do not trust humans’ feelings and therefore they proposed a mechanism that, if added to the equations, would allow particles to have different masses. This is now known as the Higgs mechanism. Integrating it into the Standard Model allowed scientists to make predictions of various quantities, including the mass of the heaviest known particle, the top quark. Experimentalists found this particle just where equations using the Higgs mechanism predicted it should be. The Higgs mechanism works as a medium that exists everywhere and at any time. Particles gain mass by interacting with this medium of which the Higgs boson is the fundamental component, much as the photon is the fundamental component of electromagnetic light.
Ok, welcome Higgs boson. What surprises me is the common, tenaucious interest for particles’ different masses, in contrast with the lack of interest for their respective times. At least this is what most media speak about. The usual images of the Standard Model show four groups of particles: one is composed of the W+, W-, Z bosons that carry the Electroweak Force, able to operate on all the other three groups that are three different kinds of matter (each consisting of four matter particles, two leptons and two quarks for a total of twelve). Yet only one – the so called “normal matter” – is sufficient to explain the observable universe, say physicists. The other two groups are unstable and seem to differ from the “normal” one “only” in their larger mass, as they say. So doing scientific minds neglect the key problem – time – and induce us to believe that only what is stable is real.
As a fact, the one stable and the two unstable groups are all linked to the unstable and unpredictable, weak nuclear force, the light side of the Force.
“A new word is possible” many people say.
“Infinite intelligent worlds already exist” wrote Giordano Bruno in Renaissance, adding that “one only Force, Love, links and gives life to them”.
Looking at the Standard Model we can realize that “the only Force” – Love – is the weak nuclear current, carried by the Z bosons. This is so quick as to take account for most life processes, such as eros, orgasm, conception, cellular regeneration, etc. It actually involves extremely high frequencies, much higher than the daily ones that lead our waking state. Human minds are “educated” to believe in one linear time, just one rate of time, and do not suspect that our dreaming and rest states can have other rhythms as they actually have. Ww cannot find Love bombarding a target at high energies, as they do in the laboratories, but just observing our same emotions, feelings. sensations. A new, wider perception is urgently needed.
So believing, humans sustain their own slavery, their dependence on the temporal power. No conflict actually exists among sciences, finances and religions; they are all useful for making us humans dependent on the same “power” that pretends to represent eternal “gods”, and allows all the banks to link money to linear time, hence to an increasing debt.
Do we live in free democracies?
No, we suffer in a global debtcracy, afflicted by the perennial idea of a “scarcity” that doesn’t actually exist. The unstable and unpredictable “weak” nuclear current is the most powerful force of the universal Nature.
“What god has united, man must not divide” is a famous sentence, quoted during any catholic marriage and stressing god’s morbid interest in humans’ sexuality.
Looking at the true Standard Model we can realize that any “division” is just cultural and referred to much more fundamental questions than marriages. One regards masses and times and, another, the existence of antimatter.
The true Standard Model actually implies not only the previously mentioned three kinds of matter, but also three kinds of antimatter, which flow from future to past and involve antigravity. Except the “normal” one we can observe, five groups are unstable, have different times and can even reverse the flow of time. Can these compose invisible universes? Yes, they can, and can also communicate with the “normal” observable one and with each other, through the Electroweak Force. This is the “only Force, Life, that links and moves intelligent worlds” as Bruno wrote. It is Universal Life, according to my heretic interpretation, “unstable” but able to trigger fleeting event, flow from past to future and from future to past, involve Memory and Plan.
The Force implies an Intelligent Design and shows the tenacious interest of the dominant paradigm to deny it.
The Standard Model could help us to realize the oneness of various universes in which we, humans, can participate and with which we can interact at any moment, when we fall in love, we are dreaming, resting and planning a new future.
Even limiting ourselves to its more succesful version, that only considers four groups of particles, we can envisage an interesting analogy with the four ELEMENTS – FIRE, AIR, WATER AND EARTH – that the Greek philosopher Empedocles (490-430 BC) proposed at his time and are still used by astrologers.
Therefore the “discovery” of the Standard Model rather marks a “rediscovery” that sages had made long time ago, probalby realizing what is now evident and neglected: mass is energy and cannot be divided by its proper time. Since different masses exist, also different times must exist.
Orthodox physicists, or rather official media, forget it as well as the fact that any single particle or body is indissolubly linked to its own motions; it has therefore its own proper time and can fulfil actions in the present that are the effects of its memories and plans. Any action is the true quantum varialbe that creates the true reality: eternal present.
The key problem of contemporary physics is mass, whereas the true problem of our crazy society is time. If we realized that these two cannot be divided and that the real reality is made of actions, facts and not og words, theories or theologie, svirtual values such as spread, PIL etc, many conflicts would vanish.
Do different times exist? Yes they do, as it is obvious, just looking at our human perception of time or better times.
Many clues and events show that we are approaching the end of times that is the beginning of eternity, the revelation that we are in this world, but not from this world. Each of us can have different bodies, each composed of one kind of matter and/or antimatter too. According to the hermetic thesis a cosmogony, quite different from the current cosmology, emerges. The seven Elements of the Standard Model are eternally brought into union, and eternally parted from each other. Many features now indicate that they are again brought into union. A new consciousness is actually emerging and an overwhelming new cosmogony could be proved. Practicing the Art of Memory we actually “see” many worlds, clearly consisting of antimatter, therefore, anti gravity. Visiting these “antiworlds”, we “inner travelers” also experience a time reversal.
Media have produced a lot of articles about the Higgs field, but most of them forget the existence of the three kinds of antimatter. Why? Because antimatter poses the millenary problem, “forbidden” by the dominant paradigm: time.
No science knows what time is.
No religion knows what Life is.
Are time and Life linked to each other? Of course they are, simply because Life is the coherence of all the nuclear motions in an organism, the harmony of all its rhythms, a piroetting dance, composed of the individual nuclear spins, as the NMR (Nuclear Magnetic Resonance) diagnosis even shows.
Scientists’ belief in experimental objectivity is contradicted by their same discoveries.
Most people look for a paradigm shift.
I have been looking for it too and realized that this implies the transit from dualism, mainly the one between subjects and objects, to the unitary parameter or quantum variable that is made of our same human actions, ultimately, our true WILL.
If our actions are coeherent with Life PLAN – humans’ genetic evolution, the full use of our same brain and body – limits and/or eternal “gods” change.
We just need to use our Higher Mind, able to interact with the light side of the Force, the invisible “weak” energy that we can feel. We can always live Its/our fleeting events, such as love, eros, orgasm, emotions, feelings, intuitions, sensations.
Many events show that we will become also free from the eternal “gods” of physics, the gravitational, electromagnetic and strong nuclear fields.
What about the Higgs one? My feeling is that this field is changing too.
A nuclear fusion among particles and antiparticles is actually occurring, showing their union and mainly our human oneness with them all. This implies the revelation that we have been imbedded into a matrix, just one of the infinite possible ones, and this is now tansmuting.
For further details see my book Organic Universe
News from Rome, Italy: more and more people perceive their “dead” who are alive, conscious and willing to share their happiness. On the visible scenery, physical and political tremors occur, electromagnetic and gravitational fields fail, mystery deepens around the Vatican scandals. Are all these events connected? Yes, they are…
20th May 2012: a solar annular eclipse and a strong earthquake hit North Italy, an area considered as seismically safe. In South Italy terrorism kills again and, in Rome, Vatican scandals emerge. Meanwhile the Italian Prime Minister had joined the G8 in Washington and reached an agreement on ‘growth’: of what, of GDP? We all yearn for happiness, everyone’s wellbeing and overall prosperity; we want to express our own talents and don’t want to pay the debts created by the big banks. What is the main cause of the financial crisis that shakes all the governments of the world?
It could be the pillar that has supported any market for millennia: the temporal power. The Vatican has managed it so well as to make people forget that salaries, loans and debts all depend on the arrow of time that leads any being to death. This has meant a life troubled with the anxiety of the future and the need for religions that pretend to “represent” eternity. The fact is that time is not an independent and immutable “arrow” as calendars make us believe: it is instead a special effect of the electromagnetic field that, in its turn, is an effect of gravity, as Einstein has shown. Thus the temporal power has not natural foundation.
Soon after the earthquake, many were looking for its “culprits”, such as the HAARP programme, the US antenna system installed at the North Pole. Yet whatever electromagnetic field has not enough energy to cause earthquakes. HAARP has another fatal function. The Earth’s natural magnetic field is going off so much as to let us see the spaceships, showing that a future has always existed. Thus HAARP creates an artificial magnetic field that hides them and so maintains the temporal power, based on the false belief that only the past is “reality”.
In the Gospels, it is mentioned the “true LIGHT”. Announced by sages like Giordano Bruno, burnt at the stake in Rome (1600), a “new” FORCE was revealed at the end of the last century and awarded by various Nobel prizes. It is the synthesis of two already-known fields: weak nuclear and electromagnetic. Called by a difficult name – electroweak – this FORCE can ‘engender endless, intelligent worlds’, as Bruno had claimed. It involves a nuclear LIGHT having all the features of the true LIGHT that is ‘in this world, but not from this world’, as the Gospels quote: it can be the light side of the FORCE, i.e. the CAUSE that has accelerated the universe’s expansion in a few years.
This nuclear LIGHT can win gravity and even death in a few moments.
“The dead will rise”, as many prophecies sustain. Of course, it is not the powdered corpses coming back to life. It is the use of the FORCE, which allows us to perceive them and so realize that they are alive and sentient. The “dead” have been invisible up to now, simply because their bodies are composed of dark matter that doesn’t reflect the electromagnetic light, the only kind of light our eyes can see. Yet during a dream-like state we can use the light side of the FORCE, the only one able to move infinite universes that sciences calculate and cannot observe. These just observe the dark side – the electromagnetic field – as usual, i.e. the “creator” of spacetime, namely of the optical illusion that both sciences and religions maintain.
Thus we humans suffer from a profound ignorance – the meaning of LIFE. If It is the universal and eternal electroweak FORCE, as I claim, we can realize why all the organisms can perceive It, while the mechanical or artificial instruments cannot. These have no cellular structure, no blood system needed for perceiving and transmitting Its motions that we, humans, can feel as emotions.
Our common, mechanical “education” makes most humans behave like robots and lets them contribute to the “democratic” societies with their own beliefs. They just use their lower mind that is bound to sight, hence to the dark side - the electromagnetic field - of the FORCE. Our lower mind is a small portion of our brain, yet the ruling one; it trusts sciences, religions, parties, ideologies, “spiritualities” and, mainly, the good-evil division. Always looking for enemies outside, our lower mind never wonders about the main “mystery” that makes men slaves of markets: the relation between money and time, a “democratic” convention with no natural foundation.
The light side of the FORCE provides us, humans, with the energy needed to consciously use all of our brain. This also involves a HIGHER MIND, able to use the FORCE and directly interact with eternity. Many actually have dreams and sensation, not limited to spacetime. A great adventure is about to start and the events of these days indicate its main features, in my view.
The first earthquake in North Italy occurred at the same day as the eclipse – the Sun-Moon-Earth alignment. Very few know that, during the eclipses, Earth’s gravity and rotation change. This phenomenon is known as ‘Allais effect’ and was first observed, in 1954, by the French economist Maurice Allais, awarded with the Nobel Prize for economics in 1988. It is another clue that the ‘crisis’ actually concerns humans’ faith in an “objective reality” that doesn’t actually exist. As already known, a coin or a paper money, certified by the International Monetary Fund (IMF), is a just a convention. Sciences also have their “money” most people accept without discussing – the mass or its equivalent energy – which are neither objective nor limited. A “new” dark energy is heating the entire universe, so showing that global warming doesn’t depend on the “man made” greenhouse effect. A novel form of cranial energy was recently measured by prof. J. N. Hansen through a torsional pendulum. All these facts indicate that no energy limits exist. So why do most people believe in limits? Because they don’t listen to the truths our HIGHER MIND transmits.
This is the larger portion of our brain, composed of glial cells, which do not use electricity and are not linked to a bipolar view as the lower mind is. Our HIGHER MIND is the seat of consciousness, in a unanimous vision; it is sensitive to emotions, linked to eros and psyche, and supporting our same lower mind. Our HIGHER MIND could conduct the inner harmony of our nervous system, if we were not ‘educated’ to control emotions, to separate them from sexuality and to believe that reality is only what we can see and count. If we pay attention to our inner voice, our same consciousness, we can listen to the universal HARMONY that is increasing Its own intensity so much as more and more people can hear it. What about Its cost? No one.
On June, 5-6, 2012 the Venus-Earth-Sun alignment will take place. It can mark the beginning of our great adventure, A JUMP IN THE FUTURE that changes our ways of conceiving “reality”, hence our actions, relations and, mainly, motions. What kind of motions? Mainly the nuclear spinning ones we can feel as emotions that critically affect the flow of our individual time. The Venus-Earth-Sun conjunction can affect the collective time. We just need to realize that any time is an effect of rotation. The surface of the Earth turns anticlockwise and to us, observers glued to it, everything goes in the opposite direction, that is from past to future. The surface of Venus, instead, turns clockwise and to “Venusians” everything goes from future to past. The alignment of these two planets is a gate to eternity through which we can go, listening to the FORCE we can feel as truth, love, emotion, consciousness that infinite intelligent universes do exist.
According to mythology, Venus is Rome’s divine mother, the goddess of beauty, love and the sexuality, up to now conditioned by the fear of a “god” who had first created and then forbidden it. We can understand that the key of any ‘power’ actually lies in the apparent “separation” eros and psyche, between what we feel – eros – and what our psyche trusts. As the same myth shows such a “separation” ceases, when our human psyche dares to go to the kingdom of the dead.
I want to communicate that here, in Rome, more and more people are realizing that the dead are alive and that all of us, humans, are immortal.
The apparent world is just a vanishing matrix.
The real reality is the Organic Universe, involving infinite universes, all connected with LIFE and disconnected from any kind of marketing.
Was it a natural phenomenon?
According to the experts, it was the evidence of a huge coronal hole, part of the sun’s “normal physiology” and mainly due to our human brain that is trained to see patterns.
Yet the “experts” cannot explain why Massive Coronal Ejections (CME) leave these coronal holes, release huge quantities of matter and electromagnetic fields that can cause geomagnetic storms and even cancel the Earth’s magnetosphere that the same “experts” consider as a “protective shield” from the “harmful” cosmic rays.
According to me, we rather have to protect our minds from experts’ ideas and also from the catastrophic ones that circulate on the net. Cosmic rays are not at all dangerous: they compose a parallel universe in which we could even participate. Being composed of a peculiar kind of dark matter, we cannot observe it with our eyes, but we can feel its intelligence, recognize that it is linked to a future we have always felt as need for a right, sage and prosperous world.
Earth and Space sciences promote a huge illusion instead: they don’t actually know what reality is, simply because they cannot observe it. Space sciences just observe the electromagnetic field, created by the apple-like Earth’s magnetosphere. Contrary to the human brain, sciences are neither trained to see patterns nor able to understand their meaning. The Earth’s magnetosphere could be the famous, biblic APPLE that we, humans, still “eat”, as I show in my video 1 Time and Apple. We “eat” it in the sense that we mistake the illusory spacetime, that this APPLE creates, for reality. We haven’t realized it is just a 3D movie projected on the two plasma screens – the Van Allen belts – that surround the Earth’s surface. We are afflicted by false beliefs 2 The shadows of the ideas
Yet we are approaching an imminent JUMP IN THE FUTURE.
3 The stars will fall from the sky
The sun’s activity is increasing; if it will maintain this rhythm, it will reach its maximum during the first months of 2013. It is therefore crucial for all of us, who want to participate in the JUMP, to avoid panic and to help the people to realize what it is actually occurring: the end of a 3D movie we have mistaken for a real “universe”. If you appreciate my videos, please diffuse them, adding that:
“It will not be the end of the world, but rather the end of a slavery, the announced revelation of the ORGANIC UNIVERSE in which we, humans, participate. It is the great opportunity for us to be the protagonists of a peaceful and prosperous organic society on the Earth’s surface.”
Thanks and best wishes for an extraordinary new future,
J’ai la sensation claire et nette que nous sommes entrés, ces jours-ci, dans une nouvelle phase de l’évolution et que de nombreux signes, intérieurs et extérieures, le démontrent. Le 13/03/2012 une forme triangulaire est apparue sur le Soleil.
Est-ce un phénomène naturel? Oui, d’après les experts. Ce triangle est un trou dans la couronne – partie de la “physiologie normale” du Soleil. Cela nous parait étrange car notre cerveau est habitué à reconnaitre des formes connues, tel que le triangle.
Toutefois, les “experts” ne savent pas expliquer pourquoi depuis ces trous jaillissent des émissions gazeuses massives et chaotiques ainsi que des champs magnétiques se dirigeant vers la Terre. Ces derniers prennent un ordre croissant au fur et à mesure qu’ils s’approchent de la planète. Pendant que les média passent sur cet évènement, la NASA lance des alarmes: ces émissions peuvent causer des tempetes géomagnétiques, détruire le réseau des transmissions électriques de notre planète et même effacer la magnétosphère terrestre que les experts considèrent comme un “écran de protection”.
A mon sens, il faut que nous protégions nos esprits des idées des experts et aussi de celles catastrophistes qui circulent sur le net. Les Sciences de la Terre et de l’Espace ne disent pas ce qu’est la réalité car, tout simplement, elles ne l’observent pas. Normalement, elles se limitent à observer un champ illusoire, celui électromagnétique créé par la magnétosphère terrestre, laquelle est en forme de POMME. Contrairement au cerveau humain, la physique ne reconnait pas les formes ni la CAUSE des formes. La CAUSE en est le Cristal au centre de la Terre: il tourne plus vite que la surface de la Terre où nous sommes et il est comme un PETIT SOLEIL dont le Soleil au dessus de nos tetes n’est qu’un reflet, un hologramme en… dissolution.
La forme triangulaire peut être une preuve que le Soleil dans le ciel est en fait une singularité de l’espacetemps, un trou blanc en contact instantané avec le TROU NOIR qui se trouve dans le cœur du Cristal même. J’ai essayé de résumer les résultats de ma recherche en mon livre PETIT SOLEIL et aussi en trois vidéos:
Je veux contribuer au SAUT DANS LE FUTUR imminent et réduire la crainte inutile. L’activité du Soleil s’accroit et, si elle garde son rythme habituel, elle atteindra son maximum dans les premiers mois de 2013. Si vous appréciez ces vidéos, je vous invite à les partager, en ajoutant que:
“Ce n’est pas la fin du monde, mais plutot la fin d’un esclavage. C’est la révélation de la SOURCE DE VIE, le PETIT SOLEIL au sein de la Terre. C’est une occasion extraordinaire pour renaitre avec un esprit libre et pour devenir les protagonistes d’une société organique qui garantira paix et prospérité dans le monde entier.”
Je vous souhaite un nouvel avenir.