More dogs run away on Independence Day than any other day of the year – and fireworks are largely to blame. The American Humane Association estimates more than 10 million dogs and cats are lost or stolen in the United States every year. Here are 8 things you can do this holiday to keep you pets safe.
8. Keep your Pet Indoors at All Times!
It may sound obvious, even if your pet is used to being outside, the loud noise could cause them to panic and try to find safety, resulting in your pet jumping the fence. Sometimes it’s best to just stay inside and watch Netflix with your pet on the couch instead of shooting off fireworks.
7. Please DO NOT Put Insect Repellent on Your Pet that isn’t Specifically for Pet Use
You may be at the lake or in the countryside and you don’t want to leave your pet at home. If you have to take your pet out this holiday, don’t put insect repellent on your pet that isn’t meant for pet use. Remember, what isn’t toxic to humans can be toxic to animals. The ASPCA lists the poisonous effects of sunscreen/repellents on your pet as, “…drooling, vomiting, diarrhea, excessive thirst and lethargy.” DEET, a common insecticide, may cause neurological issues. Be smart when applying any insect repellent agents around your dog. It is good to apply an animal-safe repellent if you have some for ticks and other animals that may bite your animal. That’s where Don’t Get Bit, Get Gigabit comes in handy.
6. Alcoholic Drinks Poison Pets
If there’s alcohol nearby, make sure your pet doesn’t drink any of it. They can become dangerously intoxicated, go into a coma, or in severe cases, die from respiratory failure. Yes, even beer is toxic; fermented hops and ethanol are poisonous to dogs and cats.
5. Going to a Fireworks Display? Leave Your Pet at Home
The most reliable and safe place for your pet is at home, not in a crowded, unfamiliar and noisy place. The combination of too many people and loud fireworks will make your beloved pet freak out and desperately seek shelter. Locking them in the car is also not an option; your pet may suffer brain damage and heat stroke. We want you to be aware of how your pet is feeling during those periods of times.
4. Have Your Pet Properly Identified
If you do leave your pet outside and they happen to break loose and run away, without proper identification it will be more difficult to get them back. Consider fitting your pet with microchip identification, ID tags with their name and your phone number, or both. It is also a good idea to have a recent picture of your pets in case you have to put up signs.
3. Keep Your Pet Away from Neon and Glow Jewelry
It might seem fun and look cute to have these on your pet, but they could chew-up and swallow the plastic adornments. The ASPCA states that while not highly toxic, “excessive drooling and gastrointestinal irritation could still result from ingestion, and intestinal blockage could occur from swallowing large pieces of the plastic containers.” Be careful!
2. Never Use Fireworks Around Pets
Fireworks offer oohs and ahhs that we all love, but there are dangers when dealing with fireworks, even with other human beings. Animals face the same dangers and a curious pet might wander into a bad situation, potentially resulting in severe burns and/or trauma to the face and paws. Even unused fireworks can be hazardous. Also, some fireworks contain potentially toxic substances such as arsenic, potassium nitrate, and other heavy metals.
1. Thing Not To Do This Fourth of July
Don’t Give Your Pet “Table Food”
If you are having a backyard barbecue, you may be tempted to slip some snacks to your pet. But like beer and chocolate, there are other festive foods that could harm your pet. Onions, coffee, avocado, grapes & raisins, salt and yeast dough are all possible hazards for dogs and cats.
The safest and best bet for celebrating this Fourth of July with your pets is to exclude them from holiday festivities, at least as much as you can. Instead, find a safe, secure spot in the home for your pets while you go out and enjoy the loud firework shows, bright lights, and spectator fun. Your pets will appreciate the quiet a lot more than you’ll enjoy the noise, so do not feel bad leaving at home during the 4th. But if you want to stay indoors with your pet this holiday, hopefully you’re using Craw-Kan’s booming fast service to stream your favorite show in the comfort of your own home. Have a safe and happy Independence Day!