Topic: Government policies and interventions for development in various sectors and issues arising out of their design and implementation.
2) Though India has made significant developments in malaria prevention and control, challenges remain in eradicating the disease. Critically analyse the statement while suggesting way forward.(250 words)
Why this question:
India has sustained significant decline in malaria cases, halving numbers to 5.1 million in 2018 from 9.6 million the year before. This followed a 24% decline in 2017, according to the World Malaria Report 2018. This year, the cases have fallen across all states except Himachal Pradesh, Tripura, Uttar Pradesh and Lakshadweep. Despite the success, it is early days yet to declare that the country is on track to reach its goal of zero indigenous cases by 2027.
Thus, its necessary for us to evaluate the conditions around it.
Key demand of the question:
The answer must discuss in detail the current conditions around eradicating Malaria in India and the challenges being faced around it, one must explain what needs to be done.
Critically analyze – When asked to analyze, you have to examine methodically the structure or nature of the topic by separating it into component parts and present them as a whole in a summary. When ‘critically’ is suffixed or prefixed to a directive, one needs to look at the good and bad of the topic and give a fair judgement.
Structure of the answer:
In a few lines state some facts related to Malaria in India highlighting the current scenario.
The answer must discuss the following:
- Challenges in Malaria Control in India. – Porous borders and migrant movement – The North-eastern states share their border with neighboring countries such as Myanmar and Bangladesh where malaria is still prevalent and there is a persistent threat of influx of malaria cases from these countries. Anti- Malarial drug resistance, lack of physical resources /availability of resources, rural and urban conditions of malaria eradication, High endemic malaria pockets in remote areas and in tribal population etc.
- Suggest what are the policies and plans in this direction.
- What changes are required in the approach to eradicate malaria from India.
Conclude with way forward.