Definition of manifold :
1. A copy of a writing made by the manifold process.
2. A cylindrical pipe fitting, having a number of lateral outlets, for connecting one pipe with several others.
3. Exhibited at divers times or in various ways; - used to qualify nouns in the singular number.
4. The third stomach of a ruminant animal.
5. To take copies of by the process of manifold writing; as, to manifold a letter.
6. Various in kind or quality; many in number; numerous; multiplied; complicated.
conglomerate, manifold paper, mixed, complicated, intricate, multiply, procreate, composite, breed, mingled, multiple, compound, entangled, abstruse, confused, reproduce, obscure, tangled, involved, heterogeneous
car part (part of speech: noun)
cylinder, shock absorber, accelerator, headlights, hood, choke, spark plug, horn, differential, crankcase, bumper, windshield, gearshift, gear, connecting rod, bearings, distributor, dashboard, crankshaft, brake, glove compartment, camshaft, carburetor, generator, steering wheel, fan, chassis, ignition, clutch, taillights, piston, radiator, transmission, muffler, gearbox, cowl, exhaust, odometer, speedometer, fender
various (part of speech: adjective)
multifaceted, various, multiplex, multifold, polymorphous, diversiform, assorted, multiform, heteromorphous, complex, multiphase, diverse, many-sided, different, polymorphic, sundry, variegated, diversified, numerous, multifarious, motley
- He can behold Things manifold That have not yet been wholly told,- Have not been wholly sung nor said. - "The Complete Poetical Works of Henry Wadsworth Longfellow", Henry Wadsworth Longfellow.
- The only truths that burn themselves into the conscience, that work themselves out through the slow and manifold processes of the personal will into a pattern of social improvement, are the contradictions and the commonplaces! - "Marcella", Mrs. Humphry Ward.
- Thor's Cave is in a lofty rock on the Manifold River. - "Castles and Cave Dwellings of Europe", Sabine Baring-Gould.