U.S. Virgin Islands are often referred as 'America's Paradise'. Saint Thomas, Saint John and Saint Croix - the three main islands that constitute U.S. Virgin Islands - are surrounded by North Atlantic Ocean on the north and Caribbean Sea on the south. They form Virgin Islands archipelago together with British Virgin Islands, which lie on their west.
The islands are popular for their sea, surf, sand and sun and are important tourist attractions of America. Christopher Columbus is credited with discovering the islands in 1493. They were held by European colonial powers such as Spain, Britain, the Netherlands, France and Denmark-Norway one after the other. The Islands were purchased by the United States from Denmark in 1917.
Saint Thomas is the busiest and the most cosmopolitan of U.S. Virgin Islands. Charlotte Amalie in Saint Thomas is the Caribbeans' most popular cruise ship hub. Saint Thomas pampers its visitors with a wide choice of beaches, each having its own specialty. Magens Bay, St. Thomas' most visited beach, has calm waters and is ideal for swimming and children. Water sports opportunities include boating and kayaking.
Palm tree-lined beach of Lindberg Bay is picturesque and is perfect for relaxing. There are facilities for a range of water sports. Coki Point is an excellent beach for snorkeling. Saint Thomas is also a shoppers' paradise. One can have bird's eye view of the U.S. Virgin Island from St. Thomas Skyride, a cable car system.
Saint John is the smallest of U.S. Virgin Islands, but has the best beaches. Trunk Bay is a picturesque beach famous for its white sand and beautiful water. The beach is a popular snorkeling spot. Honeymoon Bay, featuring white sand and crystal clear water, is a quieter beach compared to Trunk Bay.
Hawknest Beach, Great Cruz Bay, Maho Bay and Salomon Beach are just some of the other beaches that Saint John offers. The island, of which a large part is covered by Virgin Islands National Park, has spectacular landscape with lush mountains and beautiful beaches. One can get a peek into Saint John's history and heritage by visiting ruins of sugar plantation sites and rock carvings.
Saint Croix is the largest of three main U.S. Virgin islands. This island is known for its historical sites, rainforest, beaches and hills. There are plantation villages of yesteryears and other sites related with with the plantation agriculture, which made Saint Croix a major sugar producing island. Colonial architecture coexists with modern buildings across towns of the islands. Palm-lined sunny beaches of Saint Croix present unmatched beauty. Protestant Cay, Mermaid Beach and Shoy's are some of the popular beaches of this island.