I always enjoy attending Maker Faires, as the sight of so many hobbyists learning how to create things from small but widely available parts reminds me of the early days of personal computers. Walking around this weekend's World Maker Faire in Queens, NY, several trends stood out.
First, there were a number of new kits designed to make "making" easier—for education as well as for average tinkerers. Second, I noticed a blurring of the line between "making" and manufacturing, with the emergence of new services that provide individuals and smaller companies with some of the same capabilities of larger companies.
Learning How to Make
Electronic kits designed for teaching the basics have been around since I was a kid, but in recent years, it has become much easier for ever-younger children to learn the basics of how things work with kits made up of components that simply plug or snap together.
In recent years, I've been most impressed by LittleBits, a platform with building blocks for basic electronic components. A few months ago, I used the company's Synth Kit—which includes power, oscillators, a sequencer, a mixer, a filter, and a speaker—to build a nice simple synthesizer. It may not be a Moog, but it's a great way of showing how the components function. LittleBits had a crowded booth at the Faire, with some rather complicated creations made using its products on display.
At the show, I saw a number of other companies with similar ideas but different components. Many of these built on the popular Arduino or Raspberry Pi boards, but in ways that make them more accessible to younger or less experienced makers.
For instance, I was intrigued by Microduino's mCookie kits, which are magnetic and Lego-compatible, so you can snap them together and create projects very simply. Microduino offers more than 50 blocks and 30 sensors, with modules including buzzers, lights, microphones, and speakers, and even some with Bluetooth and USB connectivity.
In a more advanced but a bit sillier package, Wunderbar contains a number of small boards with a sensor and a bridge that you can snap together to send information from the sensors to the cloud, in what is meant as a prototyping tool for software developers.
For more advanced users, a number of companies were showing off small boards with processors or microcontrollers designed for creating advanced electronic projects or prototypes for commercial products. Amtel, Intel, Microchip, and Qualcomm all had booths with boards based on their processors on display, in hopes that some maker will build the next great product based on their technology.
Teensy was showing an Ardunio-compatible board based on the Amtel AVR and Freescale Kinetis platforms, for $16 to $20. UDOO was also showing an Arudino-compatible board based on a Freescale iMX6 processor, while Qualcomm pushed its Snapdragon 410c and Intel its Edison platform.
I was also interested in several websites designed to enable individuals or smaller businesses to take advantage of the same kinds of machine and data tools that bigger companies use.
Maketime lets businesses or manufacturers find manufacturing sites using underutilised machines at manufacturing sites around the country. This is not aimed at making prototypes, but rather for small to medium amounts of actual manufacturing. You create requests for proposals, such as stating you need a certain number of hours on a CNC machine or a plasma cutter, and companies with equipment that is not fully utilized can make an offer. In a sense, this is like an Airbnb for manufacturing.
Initial State has an intriguing answer for taking the data from sensors or a project you've built with Raspberry Pi or Arduino and performing data visualisation for very little money. Essentially, it stores the data from your devices at AWS and exposes it through visualisation and APIs. The company says that beginning next month it will offer unlimited data streaming, retention, and devices for $5 per month, while you may purchase more visualisations, customized dashboards, and the ability to import files. It's an inexpensive way to explore the Internet of Things.
Fun – But Useful – Projects
When I think of Maker Faire, I usually think of robotics and 3D printers, and there were certainly a lot of those on display as well.
There are now all sorts of 3D printers at different sizes and prices, and people are building some pretty amazing devices. Ultimaker was showing off a radio-controlled vehicle that the company hopes will eventually set speed records. And not surprisingly, there were many drones, with DJI and Parrot drones the most popular.
I also saw a number of robotic arms, such as Dexter from Haddington Dynamics, which uses an FPGA for programming and is designed for 3D printing and painting.
Perhaps the most interesting thing about the Faire are the projects that individuals have made, whether these are students or individuals interested in creating something. For instance, a maker named Dan Royer was showing a DIY "Jumbotron" TV made out of strips of LED lights.
I was particularly intrigued by a number of medical projects. Victor Ty of Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center and some colleagues from Maimonides Medical Center constructed moving models of an MRI scanner built with electronics and Legos, which is designed to help teach children how the process works so they are able to have the procedure without anesthesia.
A more advanced project was the Bento Arm from the University of Alberta, designed to train upper-limb amputee patients how to use their muscle signals prior to being fitted with a prosthesis.
Some folks from Virginia Tech showed off a sculpture that demonstrates how parallel computing works. This ran a MapReduce job on a series of Raspberry Pi devices, which moved to indicate which part of the process it was doing. It was very neat.
There were many other projects that ranged from fun hobbyist toys to actual product prototypes, and which covered a wide range of technology. As usual, I had a lot of fun at the Maker Faire, but most important were the many students and children who were learning that technology is not just the province of big companies, but something they too can create.