Subscribe to WoodWorkWeb on Youtube
In woodworking, one of the most important steps is to joint the edges of boards so they are perfectly straight and smooth. This can be done with a jointer, but what if you don’t have one? In this video post, we will show you how to joint wood without a jointer! We will discuss three different methods.
What Does A Jointer Do?
A jointer is a woodworking machine that is used to create flat, smooth surfaces on wood. It can also be used to create square or rectangular shapes by removing material from the edges of boards.
A jointer consists of a base, a table, an infeed roller, and an outfeed roller. The table is where the board is placed and the rollers rotate to push the board through the jointer.
There are two types of jointers: hand-held and benchtop. Hand-held jointers are small and portable, making them ideal for smaller projects. Benchtop jointers are larger and more powerful, making them better suited for larger projects.
Want To Improve Your Woodworking?
Discover 1,000 Hours Of Step-By-Step Woodworking Videos
It’s called Woodwork101. A database of detailed videos and blueprints in crystal clear, mouth-watering HD that will take you by the hand and show you that DIY home projects done the right way are easy, fun, and always of top quality… turning dream into reality in a heart-beat. Getting you that perfect build each and every time.
Why Do I Need A Jointer And Planer?
There are two main reasons to use a jointer:
-To create a flat surface on an edge or end of a board.
-To square up the edge of a board.
The first is pretty self explanatory. If you’re working with rough lumber, you’ll need to flatten one face before putting it through your planer. The second reason is a little more complicated, but basically, if the edge of your board isn’t square, your jointer can help you fix that.
You need a planer to turn rough lumber into smooth boards. A planer does pretty much the opposite of a jointer – it takes a board that’s too thick and makes it thinner.
Most woodworkers will tell you that you need both a jointer and a planer in your shop. And they’re not wrong – if you’re looking to produce perfectly flat and square boards, you’ll need both. But what if you’re just getting started in woodworking?
Why Is It Called A Jointer?
It’s called a jointer because it’s used to shape your lumber so you can join two pieces of wood together. The jointer is a tool that is used to create flat, smooth, and 90-degree edges on your workpiece. This is done by running the workpiece through the jointer’s blades, which cuts away any unevenness on the edge of the wood.
What Is Meant By Edge Joint?
Edge jointing is the process of creating a flat, level surface on the edge of a board. This is done by running the edge of the board along a jointer. A jointer is a power tool that consists of a rotating blade and an infeed/outfeed table. The blade cuts away small amounts of wood as the board is fed through the jointer. This leaves a smooth, level surface on the edge of the board.
There are two main types of edge jointing: straight and bevel. Straight edge jointing is when the blade is set at 90 degrees to the table and cuts a straight, level surface on the edge of the board. Bevel edge jointing is when the blade is set at an angle to the table and cuts a beveled edge on the board.
There are several reasons why you would want to edge joint a board. The most common reason is to create a flat, level surface on the edge of the board so that it can be glued together with another board. Edge jointing is also used to clean up the edges of a board that has been hand-planed or sawed. And, it can be used to create a decorative edge on a board.
[Video] 3 Most Common Mistakes
When Setting Up Shop
A woodworking friend of mine shared this video by Ralph Chapman with me that helped him set up his workshop.
The video explains the benefits of Ralph Chapman’s guide about setting up an affordable workshop and avoiding the most common mistakes offers to anyone interested in woodworking.
Where Is An Edge Joint Used?
An edge joint is used to join the long edges of two boards together. This is different than joining the end grain of boards (end-to-end), which is accomplished using a spline, biscuit, or dowel.
There are many woodworking projects that require edge joints, such as building a tabletop, frame, or cabinet. Edge joints are also used when creating raised panel doors.
How Do You Get Perfect Edge Joints?
There are a few ways to get perfect edge joints without using a jointer. One way is to use a straightedge and a hand plane. This method is very accurate, but it does take some practice to get the hang of it. Another way to get perfect edge joints is to use a router with a flush-trim bit. This method is also very accurate, but it can be a bit more difficult to set up.