Many companies have been reluctant to implement automation systems powered by AI or machine learning. Above that, some employees feared for their jobs as they believed these new technology systems were here to replace them.
With this, people have been ignoring the benefits that would be in effect if companies use automation systems in their daily operations. However, their opinions have recently started to change and accepted these systems more gladly, especially because of newer trends like hyper-automation.
What is this technology and how does it work? Here is a comprehensive definition and its applications:
When a lot of people hear the word “automation,” they think of robots taking over workplaces. As opposed to that, hyper-automation is the process of using Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning in conjunction with human intelligence.
In that way, workplaces that implement hyper-automation don’t have robots only working for them. Instead, humans are augmented to direct the operations and make them more streamlined.
Hyper-automation also refers to sophisticating automation systems in discovering, analyzing, designing, automating, measuring, monitoring and reassessing operations. Primarily though, hyper-automation is involving humans in automating tasks and expanding their capabilities using the different technologies involved in it.
What is the difference between regular automation and hyper-automation? Automation usually involves AI and robotic devices programmed to do certain tasks. On the other hand, hyper-automation involves many different technology tools that form an ecosystem that is combined to create new operation methods.
Essentially, low-value tasks or those that unnecessarily take a lot of time are automated to make all efforts beneficial and efficient with little or no human intervention. When combined with human efforts, the entire workflow stays informed with the ability to efficiently use data and also improves the overall agility of the workforce.
What other technologies are used to support hyper-automation
Hyper-automation is not a sole entity that is responsible for doing all the tasks alone. Rather, since it is a mix of technologies, it’s worth knowing what other technologies are involved in producing a fully functional hyper-automation system for a company.
The two most important technologies are AI or Machine Learning and Robotic Process Automation. AI is used to power robotic devices that carry out tasks that are repetitive and waste most of the time of employees that could be better used.
The technology used in operation is programmed to do all the tasks expected from it is called Robotic Process Automation. Machine Learning is used to identify patterns and then learn from them for future applications and this is how it keeps updating its algorithms.
It generally requires little human intelligence because it recognizes patterns and that ways, it will know what next step to take. Its ability to learn from patterns enables it to optimize its procedures and operate at its optimum. There are also other technologies that are used to make these systems fully operational that are used on a case to case basis.
It’s not solely about automating tasks
Hyper-automation is not solely about automating tasks and it is more than just using technological systems to benefit people. Above using Robotic Process Automation and Machine Learning, it also involves human collaboration.
Humans are very important stakeholders in hyper-automation in making decisions, interpreting data and using common sense. As you know, robots lack in applying logic no matter how smart they are and that’s where humans step in.
For example, a marketing firm that uses Machine Learning on some of its practices needs to decide on social media marketing and customer retention. Although this company may use Machine Learning to gather data from various sources and create reports on the matter, human intervention is inevitable.
The reason behind that is because Machine Learning can’t decide on the best strategy to implement. Even though it can try making a decision, but due to its algorithmic limitations, it might not be the best one and the implementation details would be a mess.
Because of that, industry professionals are needed to make those decisions and then incorporate it into the company’s business plan. That is one good example of the positive results of good cooperation between machines ad humans.
Benefits of hyper-automation
Hyper-automation has many benefits when implemented in all workforces. The primary benefit of hyper-automation is having an educated workforce that has all the latest industry information. That information will allow employees to perform their duties to the best of their abilities and quickly.
Instead of employees focusing on repetitive tasks that waste their time, they will focus on the more important details of their work. Their efforts and time will be efficiently used in trying to solve bigger problems and contribute to the workforce’s creative thinking.
Employees will feel more satisfied and motivated about their work, which will lead to greater productivity. The end result will be more revenue streaming in because customer satisfaction might also increase when hyper-automation is used effectively. Most importantly, using hyper-automation instead of regular automation will promote sustainability.
Regular automation risks a certain amount of jobs, whereas hyper-automation encourages human intelligence augmentation in some of the tasks. That is why hyper-automation has been well-received to the general public because job security isn’t threatened.
How does hyper-automation work?
Hyper-automation is more than just one system or a single software operating. It is an ecosystem of different technologies working together. Because of that, businesses need to gather tools and apply them effectively to carry out the tasks expected from them. Acquiring software that is interoperable is very important now as the demand for hyper-automation arises.
Interoperable software is a computer program that can work with others and communicate with one another. Using those systems will make your work software scalable because whenever you would like to automate a certain process with third-party software, you will be able to do so.
Having systems that are plug-and-play will help scale operations easily when new technologies are being introduced. When purchasing software, don’t focus on the immediate results but look at the bigger picture to make the best decision.
Ask yourself, how will this system work with existing software, or how open is it to future developments? This principle can be used in all industries you wish to apply hyper-automation in.
The bottom line
Hyper-automation is a very interesting concept that would revolutionize automation in workplaces. As opposed to what many people thought of when automation was introduced, hyper-automation promotes job security. It uses various technological systems to carry out repetitive, tedious tasks that waste the time of employees. Those tasks can range through robotic processes that require physical devices or those that are autonomously completed on computers using different software.
Hyper-automation benefits businesses by using employee resources such as time and energy effectively. By augmenting human beings, this technology also promotes sustainability while saving a lot of funds and generating more revenue derived. When buying software, remember to ensure that when you expand, it will still be worthy.
John Trogdon is a digital marketer and a blogger at a-writer. He is also perfect at writing and his areas of interest include self-improvement, social media and communication. Hire him for creative writing work and he will work as a full-time essay writer for you. Find John on LinkedIn and Facebook.