This patient support community is for discussions relating to general health issues, adolescents, babies, child health, eating disorders, fitness, immunizations and vaccines, infectious diseases, and senior health.
In October, 2010 I was told by my doctor that I had a vitamin d deficiency. My level was 13. My hair was falling out, I was having a lot of back pain, trouble sleeping at night, and I was experiencing memory and concentration problems among other things. Since then I have been taking prescription strength vitamin d at 100,000 IU's per week. I've been on this high dosage for nine months. At one point my level vitamin d level went up to 32. However, they just tested me again (July 26, 2011) and my level has dropped to 26. My doctor now wants me to double my dose to 200,000 UI's for the next three months. Can you tell me why my levels are not going up, and if I should be asking for more blood work? If I need more blood work, what should I request? Any information that you can provide me with will be much appreciated. Thank you in advance.
Did your doctor administer a 25-hydroxyvitamin test to determine if you have optimal levels of Vitamin D in your blood? In order to get the proper amount of Vitamin D your body requires, you need to be able to find a healthy balance of sunlight, but still reduce your risk of skin cancer, particularly Melanoma. Wear sunscreen every time you are in the sun and keep your sun exposure to 20 minutes at a time.
Low vitamin D levels occur because of less intake of vitamin D, less exposure to sunlight or as side effects of some diseases. Toxic substances, harmful chemicals, side effects of certain medicines can also give rise to such condition that the level of vitamin D goes down the normal level. It is a rare occurrence that the vitamin D levels is low because of some hereditary diseases. Following are some of the causes for low levels of vitamin D.
Lack of Exposure to Sunlight
The layer under the skin produces vitamin D using sunlight. People of certain geographical locations like those in the northern hemisphere have living conditions such that their exposure to sunlight is minimum. Aged people and small babies often do not get enough exposure to sunlight. Aging skin of elderly people needs more time to prepare vitamin D. People with the condition of lupus are sensitive towards sunlight. So, they are advised not to stay out under direct sunlight for a long time. Under all these conditions, the factors responsible for low vitamin D, is absence of sunlight.
There are very few food substances that contain naturally occurring vitamin D. Some of the food items that provide us vitamin D are beef liver, fleshy part of the fish, egg yolk, fish oils and cheese. Therefore, vegetarians are more prone to low vitamin D levels.
Another very important element that is usually overlooked by conventional doctors is that you need to take magnesium to get the vitamin D to work properly. Usually, just a normal amount of magnesium is all that is required to get the vitamin D to synthesize properly.
I strongly recommend going to the Vitamin D Council's website to find more information about the magnesium and other supplement connection to vitamin D absorption. Yes, there were other minerals mentioned, but magnesium seems to be the most important one. I urge you to also sign up for their newsletters. Vitamin D deficiency is not funny, because it can kill. It almost killed me. Mine was only 8 when I started out.
In addition to that last post. The amount your are stating you are taking is it really that high or did you mean 1,000 or 2,000 IU? That is an incredibly high amount and seems out fo the ball park. Our experience is that we were low but not as low as you are we were around 20 to 30. The recommended daily intake is about 2,000 I.U. but you have to test your blood a few times to get it right and it takes some months for the level to go up. So I tend to absorb it well and only need 1,000 I.U. to get the Vit D to be normal but I was tested every 3 months until the level was at the right amount. My husband has to take 4,000 I.U. in order to be normal. Yes sunlight does help but you need to get out there (with sunscreen on) and it didn't go up for me after walking an hour a day in the sun. So, it depend on your diet and ability to absorb. As the last post said you need magnesium to help.
The Content on this Site is presented in a summary fashion, and is intended to be used for educational and entertainment purposes only. It is not intended to be and should not be interpreted as medical advice or a diagnosis of any health or fitness problem, condition or disease; or a recommendation for a specific test, doctor, care provider, procedure, treatment plan, product, or course of action. Med Help International, Inc. is not a medical or healthcare provider and your use of this Site does not create a doctor / patient relationship. We disclaim all responsibility for the professional qualifications and licensing of, and services provided by, any physician or other health providers posting on or otherwise referred to on this Site and/or any Third Party Site. Never disregard the medical advice of your physician or health professional, or delay in seeking such advice, because of something you read on this Site. We offer this Site AS IS and without any warranties. By using this Site you agree to the following Terms and Conditions. If you think you may have a medical emergency, call your physician or 911 immediately.