Misconceptions related to Periodontal Health
What’s the reason for bad breath? It is okay if my gums bleed? Should pregnant ladies visit a dentist? As a dental team, we have come across such questions quite often and it leaves us perplexed about the fact that people/patients do not have their basics about Periodontal Health clear. According to Dr. Kenneth Bueltmann, president of American Academy of Periodontology (AAP)
“There are still many myths about oral health that people truly believe. If we can dispel these myths and educate children and adults about the real facts of proper oral hygiene, we might be able to help save teeth and produce a lifetime of smiles.”
AAP in its report has stated that adults who suffer from periodontal disease is more than 75 percent and they all fall in the age bucket of 35 years. Periodontal disease is the end result of not taking when a patient was suffering from gingivitis. Periodontal health goes for a toss when bacterial gum infections become out of control. You will have to eventually go for tooth extraction because the bacteria will destroy the fibers that are attached along with the bone which holds your teeth in the mouth.
According to Dr. Bueltmann
“Dental cavities and periodontal disease are the No. 1 reason for tooth loss. Knowing how to identify potential problems and incorporating a daily hygiene regimen of brushing and flossing could prevent your chances of tooth decay, tooth loss and other illnesses that may be linked to infections of the mouth.”
Following are the most common misconceptions which have been listed by AAP. The misconceptions are related to oral health or periodontal health:
Removal of food debris is the primary objective of brushing our tooth
The fact is that when you brush and floss daily, the formation of plaque reduces and if it is not removed every 26 hours then plaque will start to irritate the gums. This eventually hampers your periodontal health.
It’s normal for gums to bleed
First of all – any sort of irritation in gums or if you observe that your gums are swollen do not think that the situation is normal. That being said when it comes to bleeding gums here’s a wonderful advice – RUSH TO YOUR DENTIST RIGHT NOW. Bleeding gums is a sign of gum disease and if you chose to ignore it then chances of your periodontal health going downward are really high.
Overall health remains same if oral health is spoilt
Well well well!! If you believe in this then you really do not understand the anatomy of the body. When you suffer from gum disease the bacteria will flow into your bloodstream and will reach some important organs. This pulls of other types of physical problems such as heart disease, females might end up having pre-term, weight of the baby will be less; and is extremely dangerous for those who are easily affected by diabetes, respiratory diseases or osteoporosis.
Lack of oral hygiene leads to bad breath
You can brush and floss daily but the fact is that it will not lead to fresh breath. Here you should know that there are certain kinds of bacteria which release sulfur compounds. If the sulfur build up increases, it will lead to bad breath. So in order to avoid that make sure you brush your tongue as well after you have brushed your teeth and flossed.
So what do you have to say about these misconceptions related periodontal health and how many of these did you ever believed? Do mention in the comments.