The internet is a great showcase, where shopping is more organized and research materials are just a click away. If you are starting to work with this great tool, it is important to understand some simple questions.
Firstly, have you ever asked what is hosting and what is domain? We will understand this subject in the following article.
What is domain hosting?
See the difference between hosting and domain:
Hosting is a service that enables people or businesses with systems to save pages, files, information, images, videos, or any web-accessible content.
When you build a website on the Internet, you need to host the files, pages, photos, and everything related to your site.
When you buy a domain, you are basically giving it a nickname for the Internet Protocol (IP) number sequence.
If there is no domain, we would have to memorize the IP numbers, as well as we use to do with the mobile numbers that use them the most.
We couldn’t remember the number of many pages, could we?
DNS is responsible for this encoding, which makes pages faster and detects content from virus-infected websites and even adult video content.
After purchasing your domain and hosting, you can point to the name servers in your hosting control panel. Each platform has its own method, but usually, or company support explains to the user how the process is done.
The deadline for naming name servers is 24 to 48 hours. After this period, the domain is available within the platform hosting and the site is ready to be developed.
So the equation is simple: Before you think about creating a website and attracting thousands of people to your page or website, you can save a domain and a hosting for your content.
Look: Discover The Difference Between Api, Library And Framework
How to find the best hosting
Before purchasing a hosting and domain package, do a search to understand the reputation of the chosen company. Paying chipper or even close deals with free platforms, can generate dissatisfaction and the support you will receive is practically nil.
Some platforms are widely available to offer this type of service on the Internet. In addition to being known, there are thousands of tutorials that explain how they work.
For example, the vast majority of people choose names like: Hostgator, Godaddy, Locaweb, among others, to represent their business on the Internet.
Now that you know what is the difference between hosting, domain and DNS, you can put your website online through the platform you choose.
Always remember to index your content in Google Analytics. This is a common practice among digital influencers; after the procedure, your site can be ranked through Google search engines.
To do this, create a Google Analytics account and go through Google’s own walkthrough of how to index the code provided in the theme editor of your site page.
If you have any questions about search engines, internet, domain, hosting and other issues related to this, put here in the comments we can clarify!