We’ve all heard it. You know the saying, right? Of course, you do. “You are what you eat”. And when it comes to your skin, what you consume shows up on the quality of your appearance.
When it comes to healthy foods, we are often focused on weight and how we can shed some pounds off or lower our waistline. But what we eat has a much bigger impact on our body. And you will be surprised, but even some healthy foods are not good for your skin.
Most of the foods that are bad for your skin are usually bad for your weight as well. Those include foods with a high glycemic index that contain a lot of sugar and will give you a sugar rush. But there are other foods as well.
Let’s take a look at some of the foods that are actually toxic for your skin.
Dairy products are often on the list of healthy foods. That is, of course, if you are not lactose intolerant. But cheese and yogurt are on top of the most diet plans. Even more, yogurt is a probiotic.
Not only we consume dairy products on their own, but we also use them in a number of recipes and dishes. What is happening in the past few years is that some research suggests there is a link between consumption of dairy products and skin issues like acne.
The explanation is that there are some growth hormones in milk, cheese, and other dairy products. If you think about it, logic supports the claim. After all, peak levels of growth hormone are during puberty, and those are the years when you have the most acne breakouts.
So, what can you do?
Of course, it would be stupid to ditch all of the dairy products. What you can do instead is try to reduce the amount of dairy you consume. You do not want dairy products to be your entire diet. Or, you can try some alternatives for milk, like almond milk, for example.
Breakfast cereals are another food group that can cause a number of skin issues. The problem with most breakfast cereals is that they are absolutely high in sugar. If you didn’t know, sugar has a huge impact on collagen. Sugar actually breaks down collagen in your skin and causes your skin to age prematurely.
Another problem is breakfast cereals are also highly processed. So, the next time you reach for the breakfast cereals, think for a second. Yes, it is quick and easy to make breakfast, but it is worth it? Are you ready to live with the consequences?
What you can do is try some whole grain alternative. For example, oatmeal is also quick and easy to prepare breakfast. Throw some berries or other fruits there, and you actually have a healthy breakfast that will help your skin.
As mentioned previously, there are some healthy foods on the list of foods toxic for your skin. In the past several years, rice cakes have become extremely popular as a snack among nutrition experts and diet experts.
They have little to no calories but help you satisfy your satiety because they are nutritious. The problem is the low-calorie index comes with a cost, and that is high glycemic index.
What you can do is combine rice cakes with some low-glycemic index food. For example, peanut butter or fresh fruits. Again, it is all about the combination of foods you make.
Fruit juices and smoothies are among the most popular healthy foods. We’ve seen a rise in smoothies all over the world. We classify them as the healthiest choice for a quick snack. But they also come with a price.
Yes, fruit juices are healthy. But it is all about how you prepare them. If you throw 3 to 4 fruits in one smoothie or fruit juice, you are actually consuming a ton of sugar.
Yes, that might be natural sugar, but that is way too much sugar. And same as with breakfast cereals, it will break down collagen and make your skin age.
Just try this once. Instead of a fruit juice or a smoothie, eat the whole fruit. See if you can eat all of those 4 fruits at once. And replace fruit juices with whole fruits. Instead of an apple juice, eat a whole apple. You will get much more fiber, and not as much sugar.
You probably know by now, processed meats spell only trouble for you. That includes bacon, deli meats, hot dogs, and every other processed meat you can think of. Not only they are bad for your skin, but they are also harmful to your health and well-being as well.
Processed meats are high in fats, but in terms of skin issues, they contain a lot of sodium and nitrites. Sodium and nitrites can break down collagen in the same way sugar can. And at the same time, sodium dehydrates you, making your skin look aged, dry, and rough.
Sushi is made with fish. And yes, fish is great for your skin. However, while sushi is generally considered a healthy food, it also contains some bad things.
For starters, sushi is loaded with rice, which as we know, has a high glycemic index. In addition, sushi can also contain a lot of sodium, especially if you consume with some soy sauce.
Sodium can dehydrate you, but also contribute to acne.
This seems rather obvious, but we still have to stress it. Alcohol is the worst thing you can consume for your skin. In addition to smoking, alcohol is another nasty habit that can ruin your face.
Now, in moderation, alcohol can have some benefits for your skin. For example, red wine is considered good for your skin and circulation.
However, drinking a lot of alcohol, especially hard liquor, is dehydrating for your skin. As long as you keep in moderation, alcohol is not a huge problem. But drinking a lot, can cause acne breakouts, and make your acne even worse.
Foods good for your skin
We talked a lot about foods that can be toxic for your skin. But what can you eat to make your skin glow? The short answer is a healthy and balanced diet, rich in fruits and vegetables. You need healthy fats, or omega-3 fatty acids, and protein.
Here are some quick ideas what you can consume to make your skin glow.
- Cocoa powder
- Coconut oil
- Flax seeds
- Citrus fruits
- Foods high in vitamin C
- Foods high in antioxidants
- Green tea