We come across the term veteran many times in our life. But do we know the right legal meaning of the term? If we know the meaning we can use it more confidently in our everyday life. According to Title 38 of the Code of Federal Regulations veteran is a person who has served in the active military, naval, or air service. He or she may have got discharged or released from the service. But not for their dishonourable conduct.
So this explanation of the term shows us that the person has to have actively engaged in the particular branch of military service and completed the service. So they get termed as the military veterans or war veteran. The military veterans are a unique group. They must have had lots of experiences in the war which would have given them lots of knowledge.
Many scholars like to study and research about their experiences. Many privileges by the Government are also offered to the veterans so they can transition to civilian life successfully. Know all the details about the term veteran and its importance here.
How do different countries view veterans?
Veterans get special status in the society they live in. They get respect wherever they go. But some veterans with unpopular or lost conflicts may experience some prejudice. Veterans are also represented in the media sometimes in a good and sometimes in a bad light. Many countries are following long-standing ceremonies and holidays to pay respects to veterans.
In the UK they celebrate Remembrance Day on November 11. They wear a red or white poppy in their lapel that denotes peace. They also offer flowers to the memorials of the dead soldiers.
In Russia, the married couples on their wedding day will visit the cemetery to pay respects to the dead military men and women. In France, the people who experienced injuries in the war will get the first seat on the public transports. Many countries also have appointed days such as Veterans Day to award the war veterans and remember the dead military men and women.
What benefits offered to the Veterans?
In Britain, they use the term Ex-service instead of veterans for the military men who have completed their service. They will have served in the British Empire or Commonwealth Armed Forces. Before the nineteenth century, Britain did not offer much for its veterans. But after the First World War, the country gave special attention to veterans. Furthermore, special compensations got offered to the disabled veterans.
In the United States the veteran term used for military men and women who have served actively in armed forces and completed their service. President Abraham Lincoln in 1865 is the first person to offer good treatment to the veterans. Furthermore, during the American Civil War, many organisations got created such as the Grand Army of the Republic and United Confederate Veterans.
Now the military veterans in the US get good privileges from the Government. They get many health and home benefits to experience a good civilian life. There are also independent and charitable organisations provided for the veterans.
This is the legal meaning for the term Veteran. Many countries use the term to define the men and women who performed their duties in various military services and completed it. That is why this term has a special significance.
Also read: What is The Agneepath Recruitment Scheme All About? Get An Idea