When students go in to College or University they are going in to new life style and the beginning of new adventure. Life is full of surprise and it is important for every individuals to be independent, depending on others for every problems can lower down your confidence and as well as respect from others. University is the best place to develop independence, because in students have to manage by them self to achieve good grades, they have to manage their times and as well as their financial issues. If the students keep on asking their parents for help when ever they have small little problems then that is wasting the opportunity to learn to deal by them self in life.
There was a person who was working in one of the top banks, and he said one of the most important thing in work life is having good manners. Then there was another person director of one of the big company said the "person with good manners will always shine above all" and "good manners never runs out of fashion". Students have one of the best opportunity to develop good manners during their study in university or college, students can start developing good manners by respecting their lecturers. Students should greet their lecturers and friends. Greeting with hand shake when they meets their friends and looking directly into their eyes when they are talking to others is the start of developing the right manners.
Majority of the people loves kind people, being kind to others is having respect to the people around you. Students can develop kindness in university by being kind to lecturers, staffs and also to other students. Do not be only kind to those people when you need them but be kind to every one. Being kind person always pays off well soon or later.
4) General Knowledge
Students loves to play computer games and hang out with their friends, these things are good, it is good to play now and then computer games and it is good to makes friends., but they have to be a time to develop general knowledge. University is the place where students can develop general knowledge very fast because of the international students. In one university there are student from more than 50 countries and this will help students to learn about their cultures. Learning other countries culture is one of the ways to develop general knowledge. Students should also read news and they should also read about the countries so that they can have more knowledge about other countries, student should learn about geography, they don;t have to learn according to the geography books but they can surf the internet to learn about basic things.
In conclusion I would like to tell students not to waste their time and opportunity during their times in University or College, there are a lot of things to learn and develop. Make use of the opportunity and make best of your educational life by learning and developing things that will get your through life with confidence and with pride.