Alyssa’s Law New Jersey
During the horrific school shooting on February 14, 2018, at Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School in Parkland, Florida, Alyssa Alhadeff, a 14-year-old student was one of 17 innocent people murdered at the school by a lone gunman. Alyssa’s Law was named in her memory.
Post incident investigation of the shooting at Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School concluded that a lack of adequate emergency communications, both internally and externally, and police response time were key factors in the number of injuries and fatalities. According to the FBI, approximately 70% of all active shooter incidents are finished in less than 5-minutes, stressing the critical importance of reliable, proven, and practical emergency communication capabilities. Data resulting from multiple studies on active shooter incidents clearly indicates that schools must have better communication systems in place to properly safeguard students and staff.
Requirements of Alyssa’s Law
Alyssa’s Law requires each public school, including charter schools, to implement a mobile panic alert system capable of connecting diverse emergency services technologies to ensure real-time coordination between multiple first responder agencies. Such a system must be capable of integrating with local public safety answering point infrastructure to transmit 911 calls and mobile activations.
As stated in the law, “each public school building must be equipped with at least one panic alarm for use in a school security emergency, including, but not limited to, a non-fire evacuation, lockdown, or active shooter situation.” It goes on to state, “the panic alarm must be directly linked to local law enforcement agencies that are designated as first responders to the school’s campus and must immediately transmit a signal or message to those authorities upon activation.”
TAP App Security
TAP App Security is a multi-platform hazard and threat management crisis communication system. The system works across multiple platforms, including iOS, Android, Windows, MAC, and chrome. TAP App Security integrates with other emergency alert and panic systems used at schools and public safety answering points across America. The system is reliable, proven, and practical for school environments. Schools that implement the TAP App Security system can feel confident that it not only meets the requirements of Alyssa’s Law, but exceeds them.
Learn more about implementing TAP App Security at your school or schedule a live demo by clicking here: https://www.clpsconsultants.com/request-demo