New York’s health authorities want to force the city’s 24,000 eateries to drastically slash the levels of trans fat used in kitchens, due to concerns over heart disease.
The city’s health department proposed a new health code on Wednesday that, if implemented, would give restaurants six months to switch to oils, margarines and shortening that have less than 0.5 grams of trans fat per serving. In effect, restaurants would then have until 1 July 2008 to ensure that everything on their menu has less than 0.5 grams of trans fat, per serving.
Trans fats, or partially hydrogenated oils, are found in many fast foods, baked goods and processed snacks. They dramatically increase the risk of heart disease – even more so than the saturated fats found in animal products (see Why fast foods are bad, even in moderation).
Researchers have shown that a daily consumption of 5 grams of trans fats or more raises the risk of heart attack by 25%.
“New Yorkers are consuming a hazardous, artificial substance without their knowledge or consent,” Health Commissioner Thomas Frieden says.
“Trans fat causes heart disease,” he adds. “While it may take some effort, restaurants can replace trans fat. No one will miss it when it’s gone.”
A final decision on the proposed code change could be made in December 2006. Its adoption would be a first for any US city, although Chicago is considering similar restrictions.
New York’s health authorities launched a campaign in August 2005 calling on restaurants to voluntarily limit trans fats in foods. While some establishments reduced or stopped using it, overall usage did not discernibly decline, officials say.
“If New Yorkers replace all sources of artificial trans fat, by even the most conservative estimates, at least 500 deaths from heart disease would be prevented each year in New York City,” says Walter Willett, the chairman of the nutrition department at the Harvard School of Public Health.
Trans fat, which is made when manufacturers add hydrogen to vegetable oil, increases “bad” cholesterol levels, raising the risk of coronary heart disease, according to the US Food and Drug Administration. Since 2006, the FDA has required that trans fat be listed on food labels.
In 2003, New York City’s health department banned smoking in restaurants due to health risks.