This video will show you a really fun and simple blues riff that you can do with your right hand. You can use this riff between phrases in your songs to give them more of an authentic bluesy feel.
Tag: learning piano
Blues Boogie Pattern
This video teaches you this pattern in three chords so that you can use it with the 12-bar blues. You can use this pattern in blues songs, swing, country and even some pop songs.
Fake It to Make It – How to Play Popular Piano with Minimal Note Reading
I’m here to give you some secret formulas for playing chords and you don’t need to know ANYTHING about music except the notes on the piano which I’ve included below and a short lesson on half steps.
How to Build a Chord in Three Easy (Half) Steps.
You can learn how to build a chord very easily. Believe it or not, you don’t even need to know how to read music, just follow this chart…
Just Play Piano – Chord Numbers
By the end of this video you will be able to not only play a couple chord numbers, but using the same principle play any chords with numbers.
Just Play Piano – Basic Music Theory
In just five short minutes you will learn basic music theory and trust us when we say it goes a long way to learning an instrument.
Essential Elements Piano Theory
The Essential Elements Piano Theory series is a comprehensive four-book course designed to help students master theory concepts. New concepts are clearly presented…
Piano Exercises: Make Your Hands Stronger
For the pianist, there’s no such thing as a dominant hand. Here are some exercises to strengthen hand coordination and independence.
All of Me loves “All of Me” – Learn to Play it!
So, here I am driving my car on Cambridge Street like I do 3 times a day in my town. My radio is on and I am listening to a top 40 station outside of Boston when a song comes on that I have never heard. The man’s voice astounds me and I am transported in another way entirely. It’s such a beautiful ballad and I need to find out who is singing it.
How to Play the Song ‘Happy’
I don’t know about you, but just listening to the song “Happy” by Pharrell Williams makes me want to smile, sing and dance. Even after hearing it so many times! Well, guess what? It’s not hard to play on the piano and this video will teach you how to do it.