17 Jun Food Protection Industry
The food protection and safety industry is a crucial one. This industry ensures the food we buy at the grocery store and in restaurants is safe, germ-free, and void of foodborne or airborne contaminants. Without this industry, food poisoning, worms, and many diseases could run rampant in our food and affect the health of those around the world.
Whether you work on an assembly line for a mass food producer, at a fast-food restaurant, as a hostess or waiter at a restaurant, or a grocery store, you play a vital role in keeping those who eat your food safe. Many rules come in the food protection industry, such as:
No bare hands may touch any ready-to-eat food
Employees must wash their hands before their shift starts, after visits to the bathroom, and before and after touching any raw meat or produce
Never go to work sick, especially in the COVID age
Wash and sanitize all utensils, countertops, and sinks
Wear gloves, shoe covers, masks, and hair nets when appropriate
Ensure food stays at its proper temperature
Ensure food is cooked completely
These are just a few of the essential rules to follow as someone who works in the food protection industry. At Shoe Cover Magic, all of these are important to us, but one rule that we feel is especially important: wear gloves, shoe covers, masks, and hair nets when appropriate.
All forms of PPE can help protect the food we eat, but we’re going to focus on shoe covers. Shoe covers help prevent cross-contamination, which is crucial in a food setting. Workers can unknowingly bring germs, bacteria, and other contaminants into their workplace, and without proper safety and sanitation protocols, this can spread to the food that someone else eats. For example, feces or germs on shoes could transfer to a customer’s dinnertime meal or into a cereal box on the assembly line. When shoe covers are used, this possibility of cross-contamination is lowered substantially.
This is just one reason that it is recommended that food line workers and those who work in restaurants, bakeries, and butcher shops adhere to all PPE requests and use shoe covers daily.
With our 3-step system, putting on and removing shoe covers can be done in just a few seconds, and with our hands-free products, you should never have to touch the soiled booties. In addition, we recommend placing a shoe cover dispenser in food warehouses, restaurants, and anywhere that food is handled. This adds a deeper level of protection and sanitation that will only help produce the best and most sanitary food options.
Head to our website to find out more about our products or request a quote. Our speedy, safe, and sanitary system can help in many industries, including the food protection and safety industry. Food is a necessity. Keeping it safe should be one, too.
The post Food Protection Industry appeared first on Shoe Cover Magic.
Sorry, the comment form is closed at this time.