Friuli-Venezia Giulia is one of the 20 regions of Italy, and one of the five autonomous regions with a special statute. This region is situated in the north-east of Italy and borders Slovenia and Austria. Friuli-Venezia Giulia overlooks the Adriatic Sea and is surrounded by high mountains, enclosing varied landscapes.
The impressive Carso plateau is formed by windswept rocks, and soil erosion has created a series of caves, hollows and resurgences. The mountains are spectacular as well, in the Eastern Dolomines, the Carnia and the Julian Alps. It also offers serene lakes, valleys and protected areas as perfect locations to shoot.
From its boundary with Veneto up to Mon Falcone, the coast is trimmed with lagoons and has long, sandy beaches, with several tourist resorts. From Mon Falcone to Trieste, the coast is rocky and provides a diversity of locations. The great variety of landscapes matches a rich and variegated cultural heritage that was determined by a complex history and by the confluence of different civilisations in this territory. This is why Friuli-Venezia Giulia looks like a small universe with many different traditions. It is a land of contrasts.
A natural opening to the sea for many Central European countries, the regionis traversed by major transport routes between the east and west of Southern Europe. It encompasses the historical geographical region of Friuli and a small portion of the historical region of Venezia Giulia known in English also as Julian March, each with its own distinct history, traditions and identity.
The history of this region is special, given its geographic, ethnic and cultural location as a frontier hub between central Europe to the north, the Slav regionsto the east and the Italian Peninsula to the west and south. One of the oldest inhabited Italian regions, it is believed that the first humans here dated as far back as 20,000 years ago. Its geographical position has proved to be a meeting point for peoples of different languages and cultures. This often caused conflicts and battles, evidence of which is still visible in many places of historical interest all around the region.
Friuli-Venezia Giulia spans a wide varietyof climates and landscapes from a mild Mediterranean climate in the south to Alpine continental in the north. The region has a temperate climate. However, due to the terrain’s diversity, it varies considerably from one area to another. Walled by the Alps on its northern flank, the region is exposed to air masses from the East and the West. Along the coast, the climate is mild and pleasant.
The Film Fund provides grants in cash to audio-visual productions filming in Friuli-Venezia Giulia. These contributions vary, depending on the production’s period of stay in the regional territory. Theyrange from the maximum annual grant of 1,50,000 Euro designated for productions filming in the region for a minimum 35 days, to a grant of up to 5,000 Euro designated for productions filming in the region for at least 5 days.
Deadline to apply for Film Fund:March 15 to October 15
*Each grant concerns one film only
FVG Film Fund settles some grantee liabilities:
a) At least 150 per cent of the regional grant must be spent in the region itself, with the exception of crews and investment expenses
b) Filming in the region must equal atleast 50 per cent of the total filming of the cut, except for productions filming in the region for less than 25 days, and for serials of more than two episodes (in said cases, filming in the region must equal at least 10 per cent of the entire external filming of the cut)