Hindu religion is polytheistic. It’s populated with many gods and goddesses who represent pieces of the one true God, giving a person who wishes to worship the religion an unlimited number of gods to worship. The Hindu religion consists of 33 million gods for individuals to worship. Brahman, Vishnu, and Shiva each possess special qualities, many Hindus believe they represent three properties of one god. Together, the three gods form the Hindu Trinity.
Brahman: Brahman is the first member of the Hindu Trinity. He is “the Creator” of everything in the world .“Brahman is the universe and everything in it. Brahman has no form and no limits; it is Reality and Truth.” Says Amrutur V. Srinivasan from Hinduism for dummies.
Vishnu: Vishnu is the second member of the Hindu Trinity. He consurves the harmony and order of the universe, which is regularly created by Brahma and regularly destroyed by Shiva to get ready for the next creation.
Vishnu is worshipped in many different ways such as several avatars.
Such as: Matsya, who is the first avatar of Vishnu. Matsya has a story that resembles the story of Noah’s ark. Another avatar of Vishnu is the Kurma avatar. His story is about the battle between the gods and asuras.
Shiva: Shiva is the third member of the Hindu Trinity. He is tasked with destroying the universe to prepare for its restoration at the end of each cycle of time. Shivas power of destruction is the necessary step that makes renewal possible.
Hindus customarily invoke Shiva before the beginning of any religious or spiritual endeavor; they believe that any bad vibrations in the immediate vicinity of worship are eliminated by the mere utterance of his praise or name.
Ganapati: Brahman, Vishnu, and Shiva are the three main gods of the Hindu religion. But Ganapati is also an important god. He’s also known as Ganesha, and is the remover of obstacles. Ganapati is Shiva’s first son. Lord Ganapati has an elephant head and is beloved by many Hindus because they consider him the Remover of Obstacles. “Most Hindu households have a picture or statue of this godhead, and it’s not uncommon to see small replicas of Ganapati hanging from rearview mirrors of cars and Trucks” says Amrutur V. Srinivasan from Hinduism for dummies.
Avatars: The literal meaning of the word avatar is “descent,” and it’s usually understood to mean divine descent. Avatars are savior forms of a god that descend to earth to intervene whenever help is needed to restore dharma (moral order) and peace. Two of Vishnu’s ten avatars are Rama and Krishna.Rama is one of the most beloved Hindu gods and is the hero of the Hindu epic called the Ramayana. He is portrayed as an ideal son, brother, husband, and king and as a strict adherent to dharma. Millions of Hindus derive satisfaction from reading and recalling Rama’s trials and tribulations as a young prince who was exiled from his kingdom for 14 years.
If one Hindu god’s name is known and recognized throughout the world, it is Krishna. Hindus identify Krishna as the teacher of the sacred scripture called the Bhagavad Gita and as the friend and mentor of prince Arjuna in the epic the Mahabharata. For his devotees, Krishna is a delight, full of playful pranks. But most of all, Lord Krishna’s promise to humanity that he will manifest himself and descend to earth whenever dharma declines has sustained Hindu belief in the Supreme Being over thousands of years.
Some other gods: There are 33 million gods in the Hindu religion. Here are just a few of them: Ganesha is the son of Shiva and Parvati. He is a pot-bellied elephant god, who is the lord of wealth, knowledge, and success. He’s one of the most worshiped Gods in Hinduism. He is typically depicted riding a mouse, who assists the god in removing barriers to success. Krishna is one of the most beloved of Hindu gods. He has blue-skin and is the god of love and compassion. He is frequently depicted with a flute, which he uses for its seductive powers. Krishna is the central character in the Hindu scripture “Bhagavad Gita” as well as an avatar of Vishnu, the Godhead of the Hindu Trinity. Krishna is widely revered among Hindus, and his followers are known as Vaishnavas. Rama is another avatar of Vishnu. But he is also the the god of virtue and truth. He is seen as the perfect symbol of humankind: mentally, spiritually and physically. Rama is widely believed to be an actual historical figure whose deeds form the great Hindu epic “Ramayana.” The Ramayana is an ancient Indian poem, it was written by Valmiki. And it shows the struggle of the prince Rama trying rescue his wife Sita from the evil king Ravana. Lakshmi’s name means an aim or goal. She is known for being the goddess of wealth and prosperity, both in a material and spiritual way. Lakshmi has four-arms and has a golden complexion. She is usually shown holding a lotus bud, while sitting or standing on a massive lotus blossom.