[MUSIC] Hi. Welcome again to this session on 21st Century and emotions. And today we will talk about affective computing. So, what is this? This is research field created by Rosalind Picard. Who was a, a researcher at MIT, university in which she, she tried to, to make a computational system able to interact emotionally with the users of this systems. It looks like a very simple activity but it's very difficult because emotional interaction between human beings or and even between humans and machine involved several questions. For example, emotional speech, facial expression, body gesture or, or posture, postures. Voice tone, games, electronic pets, emotional programming, languages, emotional modeling. They're not, a lot of things that really are present when we try to understand how humans and machines kind of work together. For example, I don't know if if you remember whether you remember or not Clippy that horrible Microsoft tool created initially to help users to solve the initial problems when they were trying to make things with the computers. But the, the, the truth is that Clippy was really a very annoying tool that was always trying to help you at the wrong moment, and trying to make the most stupid thing, when you really, who was, were always thinking how to disconnect this tool from the computer. The truth is I think that most of the researchers of people who switch it on, the computers for the first time, was how to disconnect Clippy from their systems. So why do we need to, to think on, on emotional interaction with, with, between human and, and computers? Because in our lives, computers are really gaining more and more spaces and more and more importance, in leisure and our working domains. And at the same time, computing is becoming more ubiquitous, even we are talking about where will computing machines computer, that are really close to our skin, close to our sons, to our friends, to our houses, to everywhere. So if our nature is emotional, we need to create emotional ways to interact with these computational systems. So we need to create new ways to interact with these machines just to improve our, our, our our work or just to improve our emotional interaction with these machines. We really are emotional devices, and we are emotional oriented. For example, when we're expect similar behaviors from similar beings with which we interact too. I hate for example, the personal talking of petrol stations when they answer you and you are finished or where you are trying to, to put fuel into your, into your car. Or, for example, the owners of, Aibo, dog really created emotional bonds with their, with their pets. They're even thought that, that their pets were smarter than they were, and they were made several studies about, about what thought, about those owners about their electronic pets. All of them really created emotional interactions, deep emotional interactions with their pets. But they even thought that their pets we're smarter, they were able to recognize them or understand them. And the truth is that from a programming perspective, it was not possible. But it doesn't matter because humans tend to extend our emotional feeling towards other things that are close to us. So it's very clear that we are always interacting emotionally with our machines. Whether we are able to create emotional machines or not, it will be represent or it will be very important in order to create better emotional states among us. Because we need to, to interact emotionally with everything. Not just with humans be, human beings, or with, with our dogs or cats. And for finally, there are more and more effective computing tools and, and devices that need to be improved in order to provide better feedback. For example, there are a lot of AI chatbots trying to assist us when we are trying to make several online activities. Buying things making reservations or just, talking for, for fun with some, some kind of this, artificial identities. So, we need more studies on effective computing just because we are working with computers, more and more we are working with this kind of, of machines, and we are emotional. So these machines need to understand our emotions. So, thanks so much and hope to see you into the next session. Bye.