Abstract art is one of the most beautiful and independent forms of art as it is purely based on your imagination and ideas. And with an amazing tool such as Photoshop, you can accomplish any kind of Abstract effect. In this showcase, we are going to present 30 Spectacular Abstract Effect Tutorials For Photoshop. These tutorials are easy to follow and very well explained and they will teach you various techniques. With these techniques, you can create some unique abstract arts with your own ideas.
20+ Amazing Food Inspired Text Effect Tutorials For Photoshop(Opens in a new browser tab)
23 Excellent Illustrator Tutorials(Opens in a new browser tab)
1001+ Best Free Photoshop Textures(Opens in a new browser tab)
1001+ Free Photoshop Shapes (CSH)(Opens in a new browser tab)
35+ Excellent Sans Serif Fonts (Free & Premium)
How To Create An Underwater Abstract Art In Photoshop
This tutorial will guide you step by step on how to bring colors and life to a simple piece of stock photo using photomanipulation techniques. You will learn how to turn pieces of photographs into your very own piece of art.
Hexagon Bokeh Effect In Photoshop
This tutorial will show you how to create a digital bokeh effect with hexagons. We will use the brush engine, patterns, blend modes and basic filters to achieve this effect. – See more at:
Create Bright Abstract Diagonal Lines Background In Photoshop CS5
This tutorial will teach you how to easily create a bright abstract diagonal lines background in Adobe Photoshop CS5 using gradients, brushes and Hue/Saturation adjustments.
Abstract Lighting Effects
Learn how to create a very colorful waves element with light effects in Adobe Photoshop CS4.
Drawing An Abstract Lightbulb
This tutorial will cover a couple of techniques, namely, Glows using layer styles, Stroking paths, Particles using brush dynamics and Bokeh effect
Calculations And Colorization
This Photoshop tutorial will show you how to create an Alpha Channel using the Calculations dialog and we’ll use it to get a really great abstract colorized photo effect.
Create A Rather Interesting, Wavy And Curving Abstract Shape Effect In Photoshop
This tutorial will show you the design processes used to make this Rather Interesting, Wavy and Curving Abstract Shape Effect in Photoshop. Along the way, we will be using the brush tool, filter effects, layer blending and some
Design Eye-Catching Laser Particle Abstract Effect In Photoshop
This tutorial will show you how you can use dynamic brush settings, motion blur filter and cloud filter to create great looking effect, which can be used widely in all sorts of occasion to spice up your design.
Design A Mystical Golden Sphere In Photoshop
This tutorial will show you the steps to create this really cool, Mystical Golden Sphere in Photoshop. We will be using some drawing techniques, plus customer brushsets and filter effects along the way, plus I will show you a clever
use of Photoshop brush to create special effect around the sphere.
Simple Glowing Floral Pattern Creation In Photoshop
This tutorial will show you the steps to create this glowing Floral Pattern in Photoshop. This effect looks cool but the steps are in fact very simple, great for beginners.
Create Beautiful Hair-Like Abstract Lines To Decorate Your Design In Photoshop
This tutorial will show you the process of creating Beautiful Hair-like Abstract Lines to Decorate Your Design in Photoshop. This is a beginner level tutorial with the aim of teaching how you to utitilise the Pen Tool and dynamic
Create Awesome Abstract Nebula Circle Shape In Photoshop
This tutorial will show the steps I took to create this Create Awesome Abstract Nebula Circle Shape in Photoshop. Along the way, you will learn how you can combine the liquify filter with nebula texture and cloud to render some very
Create Beautiful Abstract Coloured Falling Lines In Photoshop
This tutorial will show you the steps to create this nice Abstract Coloured Falling Lines in Photoshop. You can use this technique in a wide range of occasions to decorate your design.
Create A Final Fantasy VII Lifestream-Like Abstract Design In Photoshop
This tutorial will show you the steps to create this Final Fantasy VII Lifestream Like Abstract Design in Photoshop. This is a beginner level tutorial with lots of detailed screenshots.
Maxon Cinema 4D Tutorial: Use 3D To Create Colourful Abstract Art
This tutorial explains how you can easily transform a simple 3D abstract render into a big and colourful illustration.
Make A Freezing Cold Snow-Themed Abstract Piece
In this tutorial, you’ll learn how to create a snow-themed large piece. You’ll learn how to plan the composition of the piece, to add elements into the composition, how to recycle the piece itself to generate more elements for the
piece, how to incorporate pentools into a design and finally how to finish off and fine tune the piece to make it look great.
Adobe Illustrator & Photoshop Tutorial: Create An Amazing Abstract Artwork
This tutorial will take you through the necessary steps to create a balanced abstract image.
How To Create Abstract Colorful Background With Bokeh Effect In Photoshop
In this tutorial, you’ll learn how to create an abstract colorful background with bokeh effect using Photoshop’s drawing tools, blending modes, and lighting techniques.
How To Create An Interplay Of Abstract Light Streaks
To achieve this we’ll use both Illustrator to design the basic shapes and Photoshop to create the lighting effects. Since everything is going to be done with smart objects and layer styles, the final image will be scalable at any
Create A Magic Crystal Ball
This tutorial will show you how to create a Magic Crystal Ball with some nice light effects and textures happening.
Combine Renders And Light Effects For Awesome Results
In this tutorial, we are going to extract the ability of Photoshop tools to make an epic piece of digital art. We’ll look at how to manipulate a pre-made render into the composition, as well as how to utilize blending modes,
gradients and the liquify tool to achieve a brilliant abstract result.
Abstract Sci-Fi Style Energy Laser Beam Creation In Photoshop
This tutorial will show you the steps to create Abstract Sci-fi Style Energy Laser Beam in Photoshop. We will go through some interesting techniques to create these beams, on top of a space background, such as lighting effect,
colour overlay and image adjustment.
How To Create Abstract Vector Background With Colorful Bubbles In Adobe Photoshop CS5
This tutorial will give you some tips on how to create abstract background with colorful bubbles in Adobe Photoshop CS5. You will learn how to add a Layer Style, draw bubbles, apply brushes etc.
How To Create Contemporary Abstract Background Of Geometric Shapes In Adobe Photoshop CS6
This tutorial, I’m going to show you how to create an abstract compositions of colored geometric shapes. The technique is pretty simple and the whole tutorial can be done in less than one hour – though feel free to keep
experimenting in order to create your own realisation.
How To Create Colorful Flowing Lines Abstract Vector Background In Adobe Photoshop CS5
This tutorial will teach you how to easily create a colorful flowing lines background in Adobe Photoshop CS5 using gradients, brushes and Curves adjustment layer.
How To Create Abstract Colorful Swirl Waves Background In Adobe Photoshop CS5
In the following Quick Tip tutorial you will learn how to use Ellipse Tool, Brush Tool, and Gradients in Adobe Photoshop CS5 to create abstract swirl waves background. You can use these techniques and elements to create your own
abstract background for tablet or smartphone!
Awesome Abstract Glowing Wallpaper
Adobe Photoshop CS6 best tutorial for learning how to create abstract glowing wallpaper with Photoshop CS6, Watch this tutorial to create mind blowing abstract wallpaper.
How To Create An Amazing Space Scene In Adobe Photoshop CS5
This tutorial is an example of how a few simple techniques can be used to create an amazing space scene using multiple layers, masking, the Brush tool, some basic lighting and one simple noise texture.
Colorful Abstract Shapes in Photoshop
Creating cool abstract shapes in Photoshop is not too difficult if you know the right techniques and you’re creative. This tutorial will show you how to create cool abstract shapes in Photoshop using a few easy techniques.
Combining Black & White And colors Abstract Photoshop Tutorial
This tutorial will show you how to create an abstract artwork in Photoshop by combining black and white and colors. This kind of technique can be used to create beautiful abstract artworks and minimalistic wallpapers.