New Zealand Physical Activity Card for Children and Adolescents 2018
Sandra Mandic1, Erika Ikeda2, Erica Hinckson2, Scott Duncan2, Ralph Maddison3,4, Kim Meredith-Jones5, Caroline Walker6, Melody Smith7.
1Active Living Laboratory, School of Physical Education, Sport and Exercise Sciences, University of Otago, Dunedin, New Zealand; 2School of Sport & Recreation, Auckland University of Technology, Auckland, New Zealand; 3Institute for Physical Activity and Nutrition, Deakin University, Melbourne, Australia; 4The National Institute for Health Innovation, The University of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand; 5Department of Medicine, The University of Otago, Dunedin, New Zealand; 6The Centre for Longitudinal Research - He Ara ki Mua and Growing Up in New Zealand, The University of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand; 7School of Nursing, The University of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand.
Introduction: The 2016 Report Card for New Zealand indicated that physical activity (PA) participation was satisfactory in children but not in adolescents. This report presents an updated synthesis of evidence.
Methods: A panel of eight experts retrieved data from available national, regional and other data sources in 2017-2018. Nationally representative data were used whenever possible. Using predefined criteria, grades A-F and incomplete/insufficient data (INC) were assigned to each indicator to allow international benchmarking. Final grades were determined by consensus.
Results: Overall physical activity (D-) was based on the proportion of children/adolescents meeting PA guidelines (national dataset: 7%, as reported by parents; two regional accelerometer PA datasets: 38-39%). Sedentary behaviour (D) was informed by proportion of children/adolescents meeting screen time guidelines (?2 hrs/day; three national datasets: 9-61%). Sport participation (B) was determined from two national datasets (81% and 54%). Active transport (C-) was based on 24-45% of children using active transport to school (five national datasets). Grades for school (B-), community and environment (B) and government (B+) were informed by multiple national data sources. Grades for active play (C+) and family and peers (C-) were informed by national datasets and agreed on by consensus recognising the lack of specific data for these benchmarking criteria. No current national or regional physical fitness data were available.
Conclusions / Recommendations: New Zealand children and adolescents have low levels of PA and high levels of screen time. Interventions to encourage PA, active transport, active play and family and peer support, and to reduce screen time should be considered.
Table 1. New Zealand PA indicators and grades
|Overall physical activity
|Organized sport participation
|Family and peers
|Community and environment