Fear, Anxiety, Reactivity, and Aggression
What makes a Superhero dog? They can smell from 3 miles away, see in the dark, run 20 to 30 mph, have supersonic hearing, and the list goes on. They are so connected to us that they feel what we feel, and can even smell changes in our bodies. For thousands of years, dogs have had so many jobs that humans, and even computers, can't match. Day after day, they teach their weird sidekick humans what unconditional love really means.
THAT is a Superhero!
We use the word "dog training" on our website only for the sake of search engines! Conventional dog trainers are all about obedience and tricks, or worse, forced compliance. We are human teachers, not dog trainers. Our one-on-one dog training sessions will feel much more like counseling and coaching than dog obedience class. We believe that you and your dog are a powerful team that needs to communicate. Once you learn how to "speak dog," you will understand your Superhero!
The more science studies how animals and humans learn, the more the evidence proves that positive reinforcement works. Whether you are 4 or 40, human or animal, we all want to be told we are doing a good job. We shower our dogs with praise, affection and food to celebrate their successes. We don't use slip leads, choke chains, pinch collars, E-collars, shock collars, alpha rolls or any other pain and intimidation techniques in our dog training program.
Every dog has a unique personality, just like us! They are motivated by different things, respond to their environment in different ways, and learn in different ways. So, we tap into your dog's natural style and teach you both how to work as a team.
Right Dog, Right Tool, Right Handler
Most human language is based on sound. Most dog language is based on facial expressions and body posture. The one place these overlap is sign language! Science has shown that dogs respond much more reliably to hand signals than verbal commands alone. We use American Sign Language in our dog training to help the humans rely less on talking and get more in tune with their nonverbal communication. Puppy training is so much easier when you can speak dog language. Our dog trainer, Libby, also knows a few commands in Spanish, German, French and Yiddish!
Dogs are very simple. It's easy to learn basic concepts of puppy training. It is NOT easy to do this work day in, and day out, especially if you are overcoming dog behavioral issues. We don't train your dog to be "perfect," because there is no such thing in dogs or humans. We teach you how to be a dog trainer. And it's hard work! We only work with clients that are dedicated to putting in time and effort to build a relationship with their dog.
Trust us, Superheroes are worth it!
We want every dog and their human to have a chance to see what a Superhero can really be! We can customize any dog training package to suit your needs and budget. We offer need-based sliding scale because we never want cost to be the only reason you can't help your Superhero dog.
Use our online forms to schedule your free consultation with a professional dog trainer
When I was 21 years old, I adopted a dog from a rural county animal shelter, and named her Bisbee. Bisbee had been surrendered with her dog "brother," who got adopted many, many months before she did. Those many months were spent alone in a chain link and concrete kennel. Bisbee was such a successful escape artist that she managed to climb out of her 8 ft enclosure, so more chain link was added to keep her in. After more than a year, I rescued her from this prison and thought I could help her.
The first time I left her alone, she escaped her crate by bending the wire and squeezing through the bars. I zip-tied the crate together. I returned to find the crate exactly the way I left it, except Bisbee was not inside. To this day, I have no clue how she did it. She easily scaled a solid 6ft fence many times. Houdini became her nickname.
Bisbee didn't do well on walks. She pulled, whined, barked, lunged and even growled and snapped at people, dogs, everything. All those difficult and embarrassing behaviors made me walk her less. And less. And then never.
At home, Bisbee was incredibly sweet and hyper-bonded, but only to "her person." She did not like strangers and tried to nip them from behind. Once, I tried to hire a pet sitter. At the interview, I gave the person detailed instructions on how to win her over with treats, but instead of holding the treats, they set them on the coffee table. When Bisbee came to investigate, they reached over her and put their face directly in her face. She bit them on the cheek. I navigated a hospital bill, animal control, threat of legal action, and a lawyer. I called a behaviorist with a full college degree. Their lasting comment: "Well, you'll never be able to trust her." That was that. Bisbee and I were in solitary confinement together. No one came over, and I never went anywhere.
Her behavior didn't change. One day she scaled the fence, and I caught her right away. She scaled the fence again, I brought her home. One day she scaled the fence and I didn't know it until I heard her frenzied barks. I will spare you the traumatic details, but she nearly killed the neighbor's dog.
I couldn't trust her. I didn't understand how to help her. I didn't want something like this to ever happen again, especially not to a child. My vet didn't counsel me about other options. I did what "experts" said was best.
I euthanized her.
I failed her.
If I had someone to help me understand why she behaved that way, I would have understood that she was just scared. I would have understood how to help her. I would have understood that she could change. I wouldn't have given up hope. If only I knew, I wouldn't have failed her.
I vowed to never fail another dog again.
That was 20 years ago. Since then, I have devoted myself to understanding dogs. My work with dogs comes from the very bottom of my heart, as an honor to Bisbee. I work to honor all my Superhero dogs who have passed over the Rainbow Bridge: Bisbee, Chrissy, Max and Gito. I work in the here and now for my two puppies, Lil and Finn, to give them everything I didn't give to Bisbee (we walk, A LOT!). I work for all the Superhero dogs that are just scared and confused. I work for the humans, so they can experience the joy of Dog Life.
I want to give you hope for your dog. You only fail if you give up.
Don't fail them. Don't give up.
Copyright © 2022 Superhero Dog Academy - All Rights Reserved.
What to look for in a R+ Positive reinforcement professional dog training company in Salt Lake City, UT. Positive reinforcement training should be lots of fun for you and your dog!
Obedience commands can be taught to dogs young and old (yes old dogs can learn new tricks!). Puppy training at 8 weeks can make good obedience skills for the life of your dog. Don't wait to start puppy training. Teach a puppy to stop biting. Don't let puppy biting become a fun game. If your puppy is biting, just walk away from them or place them in a safe area like a dog kennel or puppy playpen. Puppy potty training and crate training go together. Make a potty routine. 8 week old puppies should be taken outside to go potty about every hour. After they go potty, puppies can have free play time! When your puppy is all tired out, give them a meal or some yummy treats or chews. Nap time!
Yes we can help with behavior issues!
Separation anxiety training should use desensitization and counterconditioning. Practice leaving in very small time increments. Give your dog enrichment activities to keep them busy while you are gone. Snuffle mats, silicone lick mats, Kongs, bones, chews, treat dispensing balls, or homemade dog puzzles can all stop dog from chewing or destroying the house.
Many dog owners struggle with dog aggression. Reactivity and aggression can look very similar. How can you tell if a dog is aggressive? Schedule a free consult with Superhero Dog Academy to help tell the difference between an excited dog, a fearful dog, and an aggressive dog.
Resource guarding is when a dog has something valuable, like a bowl of dog food, a bone or favorite toy that they are scared will be taken away. Resource guarding is the fear of losing something. Train resource guarding by offering lots of yummy treats while your dog enjoys their favorite item. Good timing is important for resource guarding so be sure to consult with a professional dog trainer.
Looking for a dog board and train in Salt Lake City Utah? We only use positive reinforcement WITHOUT e-collars! Boot camp sounds like no fun to us. We are Puppy Preschool teachers at Superhero Dog Academy! No Alphas around here, just really awesome Sidekick Humans.
Teach a puppy to fetch. We use fun games like fetch and positive reinforcement dog training to teach obedience like Stay, Come and Drop. Learn American Sign Language hand signs for dog obedience commands. Dogs respond better to visual cues like hand signs.
Free consultation with our Certified Professional Dog Trainer Affordable dog training R+ dog training
Professional Dog Training Salt Lake dog trainer