It is normal for most human beings to feel anxiety at some point in their life. Anxiety is a sense of nervousness or fear and can accompany situations such as the first day at a new school or job, or when going on stage to perform in front of an audience. While feelings of anxiety are perfectly normal every now and again, some people suffer from anxiety more regularly than others and, when the feelings of fear or nervousness do not subside, they can become an anxiety disorder.
When anxiety starts to take over a person's life, it can become an everyday problem that needs to be addressed. It is difficult to tell when anxiety has crossed the line from being a normal reaction to a stressful event to being a mental health disorder. There are many different types of anxiety disorder; below we have listed just a few examples.
The symptoms of anxiety disorder will vary depending on the type of disorder as well as its severity. Below we have listed a few of the more common symptoms of anxiety disorder:
There is no exact cause of anxiety disorder, so it is hard to know why some individuals are affected while others are not. However, there are a number of factors that can affect the risk, including:
It is easier to identify the cause of some anxiety disorders such as PTSD, whereas the cause of GAD may be harder to recognise. Some experts believe that anxiety is a learned behaviour in early childhood while others think that anxiety is inherited.
Everyday lifestyle can affect anxiety and how people feel. For example, those who tend to have stressful jobs and who work long hours may be more likely to experience feelings of anxiety. Money and relationship problems can also cause feelings of anxiety.
Those with poor diets and/or who consume large quantities of sugar or caffeine may also be more likely to experience symptoms similar to those experienced by anxiety sufferers.
Anxiety disorders have long-term consequences and can include depression and problems sleeping. A lower immune system is another side effect of anxiety disorder and this can lead to those affected being more susceptible to illness and disease.
Other long-term consequences include a change in sex drive and addiction to substances such as alcohol or drugs in a bid to cope with the anxiety. Anxiety disorder affects the ability to maintain healthy relationships and jobs. In short, an anxiety disorder can affect every aspect of everyday life.
There are many treatments available for anxiety disorder; here at Recovery Lighthouse, we understand that treatment depends on the type and severity of the disorder. We look at each individual's circumstances and preferences before recommending a specific treatment plan.
We know that anxiety disorder often accompanies other problems such as depression or substance abuse and we understand that these illnesses may need to be treated first. Treatment for anxiety disorder may include cognitive behavioural therapy, applied relaxation therapy, medication, and group therapy.
Recovery Lighthouse has a team of experienced counsellors and advisors ready to assist clients in dealing with their anxiety disorders. Our aim is to ensure that all clients can overcome their problems in a calm and relaxing environment with the support and help they need.
If you are worried about a loved one, or if you are struggling with an anxiety disorder yourself, let Recovery Lighthouse help you. We are here to provide you with the tools you need to learn to live an anxiety-free life.