HHere is a slideshow with a very good representation of the human mind. The model of the mind designed by the Austrian neurologist, Sigmund Freud (1856 – 1939) is still valid currently. Very impressive.
Freud used the analogy of an iceberg to describe the three levels of the mind. Freud (1915) described conscious mind, which consists of all the mental processes of which we are aware, and this is seen as the tip of the iceberg. … It exists just below the level of consciousness, before the unconscious mind.Simply Psychology
There seems to be a magic with the number 21 — “You can rewire your brain to be happy by simply calling 3 things that you are grateful for every day for 21 days”. By Psychology Facts.
What is Ego, Superego, and Id?
Apologizing doesn’t always mean you are wrong and the other person is right. It means you value your relationship more than your Ego.By Psychology Facts.
The Id, Ego and Super-ego are three distinct, yet interacting agents in the psychic apparatus, defined by Sigmund Freud.
The Id (Latin for “It”) is the set of uncoordinated instinctual trends. The Id is the disorganized part of the personality structure that contains a human’s basic instinctual drives. The Id is the only component of personality that is present from birth. It is the source of a person’s bodily needs, wants, desires and impulses, particularly their sexual and aggressive drives. The Id acts according to the “pleasure principle”.Psychological Terms App
The Super-ego plays the critical and moralizing role. The Super-ego is observable in how someone can view themselves as guilty, bad, shameful, weak, and feel compelled to do certain things. The Super-ego reflects the internalization of cultural rules, mainly taught by parents when applying their guidance and influence. The Super-ego also takes on the influence of educators, teachers, people chosen as ideal models. The Super-ego aims for perfection. It forms the organized part of the personality structure, mainly but not entirely unconscious, that includes the individual’s ego deals, spiritual goals, and the conscience that criticizes and prohibits their drives, fantasies, feeling and actions. The Super-ego works in contradiction to the Id. The Super-ego’s demands often oppose the Id’s, so the Ego sometimes has a hard time in reconciling the two.Psychological Terms App
The Ego is the organized, realistic part that mediates between the desires of the Id and the Super-ego. The Ego (Latin for “I”) acts according to the reality principle; it seeks to please the Id’s drive in realistic ways by bringing benefit other than grief. The Ego is the organized part of the personality structure that includes defensive, perceptual, intellectual-cognitive, and executive functions. Conscious awareness resides in the Ego, although not all the operations of the Ego are conscious. The Ego is about judgment, tolerance, reality testing, control, planning, defense, synthesis of information, intellectual functioning and memory. The Ego represents what may be called reason and common sense in contrast to the Id, which contains the passion.Psychological Terms App
Overall, the Id, Ego and Super-ego are purely psychological concepts and does not correspond to somatic structures of the brain.