The Importance of Preparing Your Home and Lifestyle for Winter (Credit: www.cdc.gov)
DISCUSSION: With Winter-time quickly approaching, there is no doubt that many people both across the United States and around the world will be needing to prepare their house, car, and overall lifestyle for the various issues which come along with the Winter season. Whether it is considering putting some financial investment into an external power generator, insulating your doors and windows from outside influences, cleaning your furnace and/or fireplace, or even cleaning out your gutters from rain and snow event run-off, there is a lot of importance in being prepared.
To get into more detail, it is incredibly important to always prepare your home for what may come as the cold days of Winter arrive. One of the many things which should always be done under any and all circumstances is to install smoke detectors and carbon monoxide detectors as shown in the graphic above since this can be a life saving measure for both you and your family. In addition, after installing them, they should be tested for any flaws or imperfections to make sure they are in full operating order in case of a fire or carbon monoxide leak of some kind during the Winter months.
Another issue which cannot be understated is the importance of remembering that health and well-being of family pets. Although many animals such as dogs and cats have thicker furs, much like humans, exposure to colder temperatures for a prolonged time can often lead to various compromised health conditions for the animal(s). Thus, always remember to not leave them outside for a prolonged time in cold weather and even more importantly when it is snowing or icing since when their fur gets wet, it can make them even more vulnerable to the cold temperatures outside.
Of the many other things which are important to prepare for during the coldest days of Winter, it is always important to remember to take care of yourself. More specifically, to remember to dress in layers and dress warmly to ward off various potential cold-weather health conditions such as frostbite, hypothermia, or pneumonia. This can easily be done by always wearing insulating clothing as well as changing your clothes as soon as possible when they do get damp or wet from outside activities of various types.
To learn more about other weather safety and preparedness topics, be sure to click here!
© 2018 Meteorologist Jordan Rabinowitz