EHI online learning platform
EHI online learning platform
Common European Framework of Reference for Languages
Tasks of the Common European Framework of Reference for Languages (CEFR)
The Common European Framework of Reference deals with the assessment of progress in learning outcomes regarding a foreign language. The aim is to make the various European language certificates comparable with one another and to create a standard for acquiring language skills.
The levels of the CEFR
The basic levels are:
A: Elementary language usage
B: Independent use of language
C: Competent use of language
These are again divided into a total of 6 levels of language level :
Can understand and use familiar, everyday expressions and very simple sentences aimed at satisfying specific needs. Can introduce himself and others and ask other people questions about themselves - e.g. B. where they live, what kind of people they know or what things they have - and can answer questions of this kind. Can communicate easily if the other person speaks slowly and clearly and is willing to help.
Can understand sentences and frequently used expressions that are related to areas of very immediate importance (e.g. personal and family information, shopping, work, local area). Can communicate in simple, routine situations involving the simple and direct exchange of information about familiar and familiar things. Can use simple means to describe his or her origin and education, the immediate environment and things related to immediate needs.
Advanced language use
Can understand the main points when using clear standard language and when dealing with familiar things from work, school, leisure, etc. Can cope with most situations encountered while traveling in the language area. Can express themselves simply and coherently about familiar topics and personal areas of interest. Can report on experiences and events, describe dreams, hopes and goals and give brief reasons or explanations for plans and views.
Can understand the main content of complex texts on concrete and abstract topics; also understands specialist discussions in its own specialty. Can communicate so spontaneously and fluently that a normal conversation with native speakers is possible without much effort on both sides. Can express themselves clearly and in detail on a wide range of topics, explain a point of view on a current question and state the advantages and disadvantages of various options.
Expert language skills
Can understand a wide range of demanding, longer texts and also grasp implicit meanings. Can express himself spontaneously and fluently, without having to search for words more clearly. Can use language effectively and flexibly in social and professional life or in training and studies. Can express themselves clearly, structured and in detail on complex issues and use various means of text linking appropriately.
Almost native language skills
Can understand practically everything he / she reads or hears with ease. Can summarize information from various written and oral sources and present justifications and explanations in a coherent representation. Can express himself spontaneously, very fluently and precisely and make finer shades of meaning clear even in more complex situations.