2.8. Check of tightness of hoses
Leaks in cooling system usually find out on white or colours of a rust to a touch in the field of leak.
Carefully check up a radiator and hoses of a cooling liquid on all length. Replace hoses with cracks, ruptures and ageing signs. Cracks are easier for finding out if to press a hose. Will pay special attention on collars of fastening of hoses to elements of system of cooling. Strongly tightened collars can become the reason of rupture or a hose puncture that will lead to leaks in cooling system. Examine all hoses and places of their connection. If leaks are found out, replace them or a lining.
Precisely to define a place of leak of fuel happens difficultly until leak will not increase and does not become appreciable. Fuel starts to evaporate quickly as soon as it contacts with air, especially in a hot motor compartment. Small drops can disappear before you define a leak place. If there is a suspicion that the place of leak of fuel is in area of a motor compartment, allow to cool down to the engine and start up it at an open cowl. As metal details are compressed in a cold condition, and rubber hoses are weakened, any leaks become more appreciable at this time.
If there were signs of leak of any liquid, but you cannot define its type or an exact place of leak, it is necessary to enclose at car storage under it the big piece of a paper or a rag. It will help to find a place of leak and to identify a followed liquid on colour. But keep in mind that some leaks can appear only at the working engine.
At infringement of tightness of a vacuum hose air is sucked in in a hose (instead of leaves a hose) that complicates leak detection. For leak definition it is possible to use an old vacuum hose as a stethoscope. Put one end of a hose to an ear (do not insert into an ear), another – to a place of prospective leak. In a leak place the hissing sound will be clearly audible through a hose. As check carry out at engine work, avoid contact to hot and moving details.