Compounds that are found in plants can not only support digestive processes, calm down or help with skin problems. Plants can also be a source of ingredients that improve memory and concentration. White-collar workers, pupils and students, as well as the elderly, should pay particular attention to them.
It is a plant from China that came to Europe at the beginning of the 18th century and was used for decorative purposes. With the passage of time, the healing properties of the extract obtained from Ginkgo Biloba leaves began to be appreciated. The plant owes its action to the presence of compounds such as:
Ginkgo biloba leaf extract has a positive effect on memory and concentration. Moreover, it has many other valuable properties. They include, for example, reducing the permeability of blood vessel walls, as well as improving their elasticity. The compounds contained in the plant have a beneficial impact on the blood vessels located in the brain. The effect of their action is better transport of oxygen and glucose to the brain.
Recently, products containing mountain rosary are becoming more and more popular. It is a plant of small size, which can be found, for example, in the Carpathians. The most valuable compounds are found in the rhizome and the roots of the plant. That is why these parts are used for healing purposes. Rhodiola Rosea owes its pro-health properties mainly to two compounds: rosavin and rhodioloside. Other compounds also have health properties, including flavonoids, phytosterols, phenolic acids and catechins. They have a positive effect on the functioning of our nervous system. They increase resistance to stress, as well as improve the process of learning and remembering. Therefore, Rhodiola Rosea is recommended in dementia and neurodegenerative diseases. Its valuable properties can also benefit people exposed to long-term stress, white-collar workers, as well as pupils and students.
It is one of the most popular plants used to improve concentration and memory. Ginseng-based products increase reaction speed, improve immunity, improve mental functions, and also have a positive effect on memory. However, keep in mind that not everyone can take advantage of the valuable properties of ginseng. It is not recommended for pregnant women, children and people struggling with diabetes. Its use is associated with the risk of hypoglycemia. Ginseng may also interact with medications – we should remember about it especially when recommending it to the elderly. Ginseng-based products should not be combined, among others with warfarin, a popular anticoagulant drug.
Centella Asiatica is also known as “Gotu kola”, although it also has other names that are less popular. Gotu kola is also known as “Brahmi” and “Saraswati” – names of the goddess of wisdom and knowledge. Their use is highly recommended because Centella Asiatica has a positive impact on the functioning of our nervous system. Thanks to this, it improves memory and concentration. Asiatic Centella extracts strengthen the defense mechanisms of the nerve cells located in the cerebral cortex, protecting them against oxidative stress. It is believed that Gotu kola finds application in the treatment of people with Alzheimer’s disease because it has a beneficial effect on cognitive functions.
Maca, like Rhodiola Rosea, has adaptogenic properties. This means that its use increases our resistance to stress and helps maintain a proper balance in the body. Maca comes from South America, people living high in the mountains use it to improve vitality. Compounds contained in Peruvian Ginseng not only add energy but also show a number of other beneficial properties, including:
• a positive effect on memory and concentration,
• strengthening of immunity,
• increasing the body’s endurance,
• improving libido.
In herbal stores and pharmacies, we can buy the powdered root of the plant. We can add it to a cocktail, smoothie, yogurt, kefir or muesli without any need for concern that maca will negatively affect the taste of our dishes
It is a plant from the nightshade family, which grows mainly in Africa, Asia and southern Europe. Like Rhodiola Rosea and maca, it is classified as adaptogen. For medicinal purposes, mainly fruits and the root are used. Ashwagandha is recommended for people exposed to long-term stress, as well as for those who are struggling with depression. In addition, it supports the regenerative processes of the brain, makes it easier to fall asleep and has a positive effect on memory and concentration.
You liked this article? Share it
Are you thinking about an indoor garden in a healthy and innovative hydroponic cultivation?
Check out 10 reasons why you will love Verdeat
Always fresh, always tasty
your plants are ready to pick and enrich the taste of your dishes
Verdeat looks after your plants by providing them with sufficient light and water
simple to use, it gives you the joy and happiness of growing your own plants
beautiful light and green plants catch the eye
with Verdeat you don't throw away rotten leafy vegetables and herbs!
Verdeat uses only as much water and energy as the plants need
together with Verdeat, you see nature waking up every day and discover its magical world
light similar to the natural one soothes the senses and improves mood
the Verdeat App allows you to determine from anywhere when Verdeat should run
Inspiration for new flavours
with Verdeat, you grow plants that you may not find in your local store!
Choose the best place for your home garden