The Miraculous Effects Water Has On Our Skin, Overall Health & Fitness
Our skin is neither a plant nor a tree, but it needs as much water as plants and trees do. Many people underestimate the power of drinking water and the positive effects it can have on your skin and overall health. Your skin is the largest organ in your body, protecting your internal organs, storing lipids and water, preventing fluid loss, and serving as a thermoregulator. Drinking more water is the most natural way to get that beaming, glowing, healthy skin we all want. Drinking an adequate amount of water daily is important for good overall health as water aids in digestion, circulation, absorption, and even excretion.
Just like every other part of the body, your skin is made up of cells too. And skin cells, like any other cell in the body, are made up of water. Without water, the organs will certainly not function properly or at their best. If your skin is not getting the sufficient amount of water, the lack of hydration will present itself by turning your skin dry, tight, and flaky. Dry skin has less resilience and is more prone to wrinkling.
As the human body loses large quantities of water every day, you need to replace it somehow. Unfortunately, your skin is the last organ that receives its share of the water that you consume, after every other organ in the body. So, it’s important to apply water to our skin and keep it there, as this will not only show a visible difference in hydration, but it can prevent wrinkles, as well.
1. SMOOTH OUT WRINKLES
Rapid loss of water and dehydration may cause the skin to lose its freshness and begin to wrinkle. Drinking lots of water can hydrate the skin, keeping it fresh during everyday activities. By drinking ample amounts of water day-in and day-out, you’ll achieve soft, fresh skin.
2. PREVENT PIMPLES AND ACNE
Certain kinds of bacteria will clog your small pores on your epidermis and can result in issues like acne and pimples. By drinking more water, you ensure that you won’t suffer from severe acne. The more hydrated your skin, the lesser the chances are of the skin developing spots.
3. Natural Moisturizer
Not only should you drink a lot of water, a minimum of 4 glasses a day, but you should also use it on your skin thoroughly. It is great for your skin to cleanse your body with water to clean and unclog pores, keeping your skin moist and healthy. Also, the frequent washing of sweat from the body with water helps to keep the skin fresh and bacteria-free.
4. Rejuvenates Saggy Skin
Rapid shedding of fat or extreme weight loss may cause skin sagging. By drinking ample amounts of water every day, you can slowly tighten your skin and maintain a healthy glow.
5. Improves Overall Health
Forget expensive creams and treatments; drinking water is one of the best things you can do to keep your skin looking young and glowing all year long. Proper hydration makes every organ work better including your skin. Drinking water ensures that nutrients are delivered to cells to keep them hydrated and plump – and plump cells can help your skin look firmer.
The amount of water you should drink in a day depends on metabolism, weight, height and your daily routine. Generally, adults should drink between 4 and 8 glasses of water every day, and more if needed. Always make sure you are drinking at least 4 glasses a day to stay hydrated and healthy. From helping your skin maintain elasticity to reducing wrinkles and fine lines, water can do amazing things for your skin and your overall health.
More in Health & Well-Being
Experts Reveal The Secret to Dealing with and Overcoming Your Anxiety
Most people feel and deal with anxiety at some point in their lives. Maybe they’re bothered about how they perform in...February 10, 2023
You Don’t Need To Go To The Gym If You Adopt This Life Style
Obsessing over youthfulness and eating a whole pizza in one go are two contradicting scenarios. We always dream of living a...February 8, 2023
Why Turmeric Acid Is a Sure Way to Get Paparazzi Snapping Our Smiles
In the age of Instagram models and fashion bloggers, more people want to look their best whenever the camera lens shutter...February 8, 2023
How A Healthy Lifestyle Can Give You More Years To Live
Being healthy entails more than just eating a salad once in a while or going for a hike once every other week....February 8, 2023
Experts Claim This New Therapy May Treat Your Peanut Allergies!
If you have peanut allergies, the best advice you usually get is to strictly avoid eating it as well as other...February 7, 2023
Fulfill Your Bucketlist of Retreating in this Luxurious Private Island!
Want to experience living the life of the most famous agent in the world, James Bond? You can fulfill your dream...February 7, 2023
Signs That You Need To Change Your Gym
Experts have highlighted different signs that could suggest the need to change gyms. These signs vary from a dirty environment to excessive pricing and even unsuitable...February 7, 2023
Best World Beaches You Need To Visit
There is a new trend among the millennials popularly called ‘mermaiding’ and ‘wanderlusting’. Unlike the past generation, millennials are more into experiencing...February 6, 2023
Great Meditation Gifts You Can Give This Holiday Season!
Meditation itself is a great gift you can give not only to yourself but also to another person. You can unwind...February 6, 2023
You must be logged in to post a comment Login