“Sing to the Lord with thanksgiving; make music to our God on the harp.”
Thanksgiving is often brushed aside in all the frantic preparation for Christmas, but it is the very attitude of Thanksgiving which should last all year long for the Christian. We are commanded to be thankfulit is not a suggestion, it is a requirementbut it is one thing to know how to go about developing and cultivating such an attitude. How can we be thankful for everything in our lives? What does it mean to be truly content?
Why Does God Require Thanksgiving of Us? I Thessalonians 5:18
“Give thanks in all circumstances for this is God’s will for you in Christ Jesus.”
Why does God require thanksgiving of us?
Make a list of everything in your life for which you are thankful.
“Enter his gates with thanksgiving and his courts with praise; give thanks to him and praise his name. 5For the Lord is good and his love endures forever; his faithfulness continues through all generations.” Psalm 100:4-5
Why Is God Worthy of Our Thanksgiving? Psalm 95:1-7
“Come, let us sing for joy to the Lord; let us shout aloud to the Rock of our salvation.
2 “Let us come before him with thanksgiving and extol him with music and song.3For the Lord is the great God, the great King above all gods. 4In his hand are the depths of the earth, and the mountain peaks belong to him. 5The sea is his, for he made it, and his hands formed the dry land. 6Come, let us bow down in worship, let us kneel before the Lord our Maker, 7 for he is our God and we are the people of his pasture, the flock under his care.”
How to Express Your Thanks to God This Thanksgiving:
1. By singing to Him. Psalm 147:7
2. By praying to Him. Psalm 105:1
3. By serving Him. Hebrews 12:28
4. By giving to Him. Psalm 50:14
5. By being grateful to Him. I Thessalonians 5:18
What Is the Goal of Our Thanksgiving? Philippians 4:6-7,11
“Do not be anxious about anything, but in everything, by prayer and petition, with thanksgiving, present your requests to God. 7And the peace of God, which transcends all understanding, will guard your hearts and your minds in Christ Jesus. . .11I am not saying this because I am in need, for I have learned to be content whatever the circumstances.”
The goal of thanksgiving is contentment . I Tim. 6:6-7
“But godliness with contentment is great gain. 7For we brought nothing into the world, and we can take nothing out of it.”
What I’m Most Thankful For About the Trinity Family: Philippians 1:3-6
“I thank my God every time I remember you. 4In all my prayers for all of you, I always pray with joy 5because of your partnership in the gospel from the first day until now, 6being confident of this, that he who began a good work in you will carry it on to completion until the day of Christ Jesus.”
1. I thank God for your love . 2 Thessalonians 1:3
2. I thank God for your faith . 1 Thessalonians 1:2-3
3. I thank God for your flexibility . 2 Corinthians 3:17
4. I thank God for your generosity . 2 Cor. 8:2-3
5. I thank God for your vision . 1 Thessalonians 1:3
“For we are God’s fellow workers; you are God’s field, God’s building.” 1 Corinthians 3:9