Happy Hanuman Jayanti 2018! Happy birthday to Shri Hanuman, the monkey God, who is the epitome of service and devotion. Indians worldwide are celebrating this day to honor Lord Rama’s humble servant.
Hanuman was ever vigilant to his master, fearless in all his endeavors, focused, adventurous and ever virtuous. Hanuman is Pavana Kumar or Maruti– the son of the wind God Vayu and Anjani. Pavana and Maruti are both words for wind. He is also known by the appellation Anjenaya, son of Anjani.
WAYS TO CELEBRATE HANUMAN JAYANTI 2018
Indians typically celebrate Hanuman Jayanti at sunrise by visiting a local temple which houses Hanuman. They often leave him sindhoor (an orange powder) flowers, sweets, and mustard oil.
Either publicly, or privately, they chant the Hanuman Chalisa. The word chalisa means 40. This is a devotional hymn to Hanumanji, and consists of 40 stanzas. Each stanza in the text glorifies his greatness by telling a story about his courageous endeavors. It is chanted at least 40 times, or as much as 108. You may also listen to the chant if you are not familiar with it.
Indians also often recite or listen to the Sunderkand.
When Rama’s wife, Sita, was kidnapped by Ravana, Hanumanji crossed an ocean and located her. He set fire to the town of Lanka, where Ravana resided. Then, when Rama needed the life giving Ayurvedic herb, sanjivani. Hanuman lept and brought back an entire mountain which housed the herb.
In Vedic astrology, or Jyotish, chanting the Hanuman Chalisa is considered an astrological remedy, or upaya to those who are experiencing their Sade Sati. This is the time when Saturn transit’s over one’s natal Moon and the two adjacent signs. Proper specifications must be followed for this hymn, or any other mantra.
Given the current world climate and tensions, we can follow Hanuman’s example and stay true to our dharma. Have unswerving devotion to your true teacher. Practice seva or selfless service. Stay focused on your goal. Keep your heart open. Carry God in your heart.
Hanuman Jayanti is celebrated on the full Moon (Purnima) of the Vedic month of Chaitra. This is when the Moon is full in (or adjacent to) the constellation or nakshatra of Chitra. Vedic astrology uses the lunar calendar and utilizes the phases of the Moon to determine when festivals are held. According to myapanchang.com, Hanuman Jayanti 2018 falls on March 30 for those in the Pacific and Mountain time zones in North America. For those in the Central and Eastern time zones, Hanuman Jayanti 2018 is on March 31. In India, Europe, Africa, and Australia, Hanuman Jayanti 2018 falls on March 31. There are other items which you may use to honor Hanuman any day of the year. Hanuman Jayanti is also known as Hanumat Jayanthi.
Hanuman bhaktas (or great devotees) pray to Hanuman today for the courage and fortitude to have his strength, courage, and most importantly, ask for his blessings.
Jai Hanuman Gyan Guna Sagar! Shubh Hanuman Jayanti 2018!