← Honors Biology - Chapter 9 Export Options Alphabetize Word-Def Delimiter Tab Comma Custom Def-Word Delimiter New Line Semicolon Custom Data Copy and paste the text below. It is read-only. Select All metastasis spread of cancer cells beyond their original site cancer disease caused by disruption of the mechanisms that control the cell cycle and results in uncontrolled cell division that can cause death chemotherapy uses drugs to disrupt cell division radiation disrupts cell division so it can destroy cancer cells without destroying too many body cells diploid cell 46 chromosomes (1 pair from mother, 1 pair from father) haploid cell 23 chromosomes (1 from each homologous pair) independent assortment when homologous chromosomes line up in Metaphase I, they line up independently, which can lead to a lot of variation crossing over exchange of genetic information between homologous chromosomes that occurs during Prophase I and creates genetic recombination steps of mitosis interphase (G1, S, G2), prophase, metaphase, anaphase, telophase/cytokinesis G1 phase Cell grows. S phase Genetic material duplicates. G2 phase Cell prepares for mitosis. Prophase Chromosomes appear. Nuclear envelope breaks down. Metaphase Chromosomes line up along the center of the cell. Anaphase Chromatids separate. Telophase/Cytokinesis Nuclear envelope reforms and cells separate. cytokinesis in animal cells a ring of microfilaments in the cytoplasm contracts, like a drawstring bag, pinching the cell in 2 cytokinesis in plant cells a cell plate forms in a plant cell and eventually divides the cell in 2 mitosis produces 2 cells, cells produced are genetically identical, cells produced are diploid, no genes are exchanged meiosis produces 4 cells, cells produces are genetically different, cells produced are haploid, there is genetic exchange between homologous chromosomes malignant tumor masses of cells that result from the reproduction of cancer cells that can spread in your body to create tumors elsewhere benign tumor abnormal mass of normal cells that can sometimes cause health problems and can be completely removed by surgery type of diploid cell almost all the cells in your body type of haploid cell sex cells benefits of crossing over & independent assortment genetic diversity benefits of asexual reproduction -Example of organism easier and faster, don't have to make -Bacteria. benefits of sexual reproduction -Example of organism variations of genes can lead to adaptations -Animals, plants.