Individuals who have cerebral palsy often complain about being tired all the time. They also often complain about pain and other symptoms that come with overall tiredness. This is most probably why many of those who have the cerebral disorder tend to have functional issues at work. The everyday challenges of one with a cerebral disorder are different from those of one who doesn’t. This is mainly because cerebral palsy and fatigue often go hand in hand.
Over 50 percent of adults who have cerebral palsy experience post-impairment syndrome. This is means that you may experience a combination of fatigue, pain and weakness. All these symptoms are likely to be caused by bone deformities, muscle abnormalities and arthritis. People with cerebral palsy use up to 3 to 5 times the amount of energy other people use when moving around. So it is oftentimes very difficult to function properly at work or in school.
There are other symptoms associated with cerebral palsy and fatigue. An individual with cerebral palsy may become depressed or experience mental health issues as he or she grows older. Statistics show that people with disabilities like cerebral palsy are 3 to 4 times more likely to become depressed. Depression can definitely affect a person’s levels of energy during the day. Sometimes an individual with cerebral palsy may even call in sick for work more than is expected to keep a job.
Since cerebral palsy can also affect the bones and muscles, one can experience extreme tiredness or weakness. Osteoarthritis and degenerative arthritis are common among individuals with cerebral palsy. These can lead to limited strength and movement, especially when nerve entrapments occur. Other health conditions are definitely experienced by many of those who have cerebral palsy.
Pain is another common complaint among those who have cerebral palsy and fatigue. However this could be described as a different kind of pain, since some individuals cannot seem to pinpoint the location of their pain. The pain experienced can also be chronic or acute. Typical painful locations are the knees, hips, upper and lower back and ankles. Painful symptoms can eventually cause fatigue. It is said that the best way to combat these symptoms is through preventative treatment. This may mean correcting muscle and skeletal abnormalities early on and avoiding situations where stress and strain can build up.
Drugs can be taken to handle fatigue. This is of course if your doctor prescribes them. A drug called modafinil is known to reduce fatigue in individuals who have cerebral palsy. It can therefore improve endurance. Studies have shown that the drug is also used to treat fatigue associated with sclerosis (also linked to cerebral palsy) and is beneficial to one’s mood and overall quality of life.
Cerebral palsy is not life threatening and isn’t considered a condition that prevents one from having a long and good quality life. Cerebral palsy and fatigue can be treated with the right administration and management.
Cerebral Palsy Therapy Tip #1
Get Help – Taking care of someone with cerebral palsy is a lot of hard work. Occasionally you have to take a break and spend some time alone. Ask family and friends for help and teach them how to do what you do so you can get away for a while.
Cerebral Palsy Therapy Tip #2
Stay Positive – Cerebral palsy is not a disease and will not get progressively worse. Accepting the condition for what it is and keeping a positive outlook will make life easier for you and the person you are caring for.