Series: How do countries adopt multipolarity – The case of Bolivia.
The history of Bolivia is that it is one of the most overthrown countries (perhaps Venezuela as well) in the Latin Americas. The last overthrow happened in three dramatic weeks in October and November 2019 during elections for the 4th term for Evo Morales. There were constitutional problems with a new term for Evo and the country’s far-right used the ensuing crisis to orchestrate a successful coup, with military and police backing, to institute a repressive “transition” government led by Jeanine Áñez. This time she simply self-elected, and took power. The coup did not even need anyone else to select the leader a la Juan Guaidó. The leader selected herself. The Bolivians took to the streets for the ensuing +- 2 years, while the Áñez government took to lethal force, shut down critical media outlets, and targeted members of Morales’ political party, the Movimiento al Socialismo (MAS). Despite postponing elections three times, the Áñez government was eventually forced to call elections in October 2020. The MAS swept back into power, winning elections with 55% of the vote and returning democracy to the country and Luis Arce, Evo’s political candidate was elected President.
This is but a very short history of a recent turbulent time for Bolivia. Áñez and her cohorts are in jail and after being sheltered outside the country, Evo is back but not in government.
In terms of the qualities of multi polarity, Bolivia is an excellent example.
At the time of the coup, I called it a Lithium coup, and some may remember that there was suspicion that Elon Musk was involved. He made a comment and from memory: We will coup whoever we want to coup.
Bolivia is using productive power to develop herself. Besides agricultural production, Lithium is now getting attention but not alone. A consortium is being set up right through the Latin Americas for all countries with Lithium, to develop this raw material together. This is multi-polarity at work.
Bolivia is also economically growing with very low inflation, sustained economic growth, and above all, political stability. Commodity prices is a huge plus as Bolivia produces fertilizer at a state owned plant and can export to Brazil next door at least.
In the political background, countries are withdrawing from Organization of American States (OAS), (also called Latin America’s colonial government) and bringing productive power to The Community of Latin American & Caribbean States (CELAC) “… is an intergovernmental mechanism for dialogue and political agreement, which includes permanently thirty-two countries in Latin America and the Caribbean. It is a regional forum that brings together all of Latin America and the Caribbean countries. CELAC aspires to be a unique voice and structured decision-making policy decisions in the political and cooperation in support of regional integration programs.”
Again, this is a prime example of a multi-polar approach where new integrative mechanisms are created and the old ones are left to die on the vine.
After two years of work, the CELAC has encouraged Latin American and Caribbean vision itself as a community of nations, capable of dialogue and consensus building on issues of common interest. By mandate of the Heads of State and Government, CELAC is the unified voice of the region on issues of consensus. This organization dialogues with the European Union, China,the Russian Federation, the Republic of Korea, the Cooperation Council for the Arab States of the Gulf, Turkey and Japan.
We are all keenly awaiting the promised new financial system and we will post about that soon. If Lula wins in Brazil, he has stated that he will work for a regional currency. CELAC may just be the incubator for that.
After this brief overview, the Lithium plans are more complex and supercharged. These multi-polar folks are working with their productive power.
Bolivia, now that it has reached a certain stability is supporting their neighbors:
Previous: on the issue of multi-polarity
Number one in this series:
New ‘Slow Coup’ attempt in BoliviaNovember 28, 2022
Bolivia: In the Building Conflict stage againNovember 15, 2022
Bolivia: Luis Arce at UNGA – 14-points to transformationOctober 2, 2022
If not mistaken, Bolivia is one of the first countries in Latin America that created the concept of “pluri-national” government. Countries like Mexico should follow the Bolivian example for having a predominantly diverse indigenous population.
Mexico is under pressure at this time. The fact that AMLO has the oil industry almost de-imperialized has put him under pressure. But I agree with you. The one thing that I do see, working through these countries is that they encourage and even more than that, appreciate their indigenous… Read more »
So nice to see that Latin America is embracing multi-polarity in a big way. CELAC seems to be a unifying force in the region providing a mechanism to work together on mutual matters and endeavors in Latin America. In my experience in Latin America, the cultures all value community and… Read more »
[…] will have to see how this puzzles into the lithium consortium by Mexico, Bolivia and others. There will be cooperation as China and now India support Argentina´s inclusion in […]