Sciatic Nerve Pain
WHAT IS SCIATICA?
Sciatica specifically refers to pain, weakness, numbness, or tingling in the leg, along the distribution of the the sciatic nerve down the back of the leg. Most commonly however, people will refer to any condition that causes back pain in association with leg symptoms as sciatica.
True sciatica occurs when there is pressure on, or damage to, the sciatic nerve. This nerve starts in the lower spine and runs down the back of each leg. This nerve controls the muscles of the back of the knee and lower leg and provides senation to the back of the thigh, part of the lower leg and the sole of the foot.
As previously mentioned, the term “sciatica” is often used by patients to describe any condition where there is back pain together with associated leg symptoms. This being the case, there are a number of other conditions that will actually mimic sciatic nerve pain. Sacroiliac joint irritation (sacroiliac joint syndrome), lumbar facet joint irritation (lumbar facet joint syndrome), and piriformis syndrome all frequently produce leg symptoms, and are therefore commonly mistaken for sciatica.
Sciatica pain can vary widely. It may feel like a mild tingling, a dull ache, or even a burning sensation, while in other cases, the pain can be servere enough to make movement practically impossible. Most commonly, sciatica effects only one leg.
Treatment begins with first determining whether a patient is suffering from true sciatic nerve involvement, or if they are actually suffering from one of the other conditions that frequently mimics sciatica. From there treatment is directed towards reducing inflammation, pain, and spasm, while restoring movement and function to the effected spinal levels. Once normal spinal mechanics are restored, patients are given a simple home exercise program in order to help maintain normal function and to help prevent re-occurances.
If you are experiencing symptoms of sciatica call our team at The Chiropractic & Sports Injuries Centre of Georgetown today.
FROM OHM SPACE CORPORATION
What is sciatic nerve pain? Sciatic nerve pain is one of the most tough [ www.youtube.com/watch?v=FUcGA-BvmIQ dolore sciatica] problems for physicians, also those experienced in treating back pain as well as sciatica patients, to determine as well as treat. Sciatica usually presents itself as a prickling and/or numbness, like the sensation one may experience with a pulled hamstring muscle mass, the biceps femoris at the back of the leg. The experience could be plain, almost an ache, with durations of prickling and/or tingling happening throughout specific activities. The prickling and/or numbness experienced, if not dealt with, may develop into a full-on constantly [ www.youtube.com/watch?v=SrFQWAtJtZU click resources] severe phase with discomfort capturing throughout the butts and also radiating down the leg. Sciatic nerve pain might influence one or both legs, typically one, starting as a pain radiating from some point in the lower back, the lumbar spine, after that throughout the gluteal muscle mass (the buttocks), as well as ultimately down the rear of the leg. In innovative instances, sciatic nerve pain gets to right right into the feet as well as toes, triggering discomfort as well as an eventual loss of feeling.
Remarkably, sciatica is not a details condition, it is just a catch-all clinical term put on a constellation of symptoms in order to explain a state the back pain victim remains in. In this instance, sciatic nerve pain is utilized to define a patient’s complaint of pain radiating across the butts, down the leg, and also right into the feet and toes … along with the connected tingling and/or feeling numb. Sciatica could be brought on by a variety of conditions, from stress and anxiety and trauma at a particular area on the spinal column, the reduced back or back curvature, to a much more general condition such as obesity or pregnancy. There are a number of other problems associated with sciatica, all needing varying degrees of clinical intervention and also treatment. A few of the conditions likely to present with sciatica are:
1. Osteomyelitis: An infection of the bone or bone marrow. Osteomyelitis might be debilitating and also in severe cases may also create death. It is tough to identify as well as might go undetected for a long period of time unless appropriate blood examinations are purchased and also the doctor is well trained in contagious diseases influencing the bones.
2. Growths on or near the spine: Lumps, particularly tumors or abnormal growth (e.g., scar tissue) affecting the nerves or nerve roots as they exit the spinal canal and intervertebral foramen, will certainly sciatic nerve pain or sciatic nerve pain.
3. Degenerative Disc Disease: Again, degenerative disc condition is not an illness anymore than sciatic nerve pain, called sciatica, is a specific problem. Degenerative disc condition is a break down of the IVDs, the intervertebral discs, and also is generally an effect old combined with the any or every one of the 5 primary elements influencing the spine as we age.
o Excess weight and/or obesity
o Muscle weakness
o Muscle Imbalance
o Poor nourishment and also diet plan
o Poor hydration or dehydration
4. Herniated (i.e., burst) or protruding disc: This problem might be particularly bothersome if the herniated disc or bulging disc is extending posteriorly (to the back) and right into the spine canal, or impinging on the nerve origin at the intervertebral foramen, hence putting pressure on the spine and/or nerve root; and, sciatica is the result in lots of instances.
Sciatica refers to pain, weakness, numbness, or tingling in the leg, along the sciatic nerve down the back of the leg. For Answers to any questions you may have please call Dr. Jimenez at 915-850-0900
Post Disclaimer *
Professional Scope of Practice *
The information herein on "Sciatic Nerve Pain" is not intended to replace a one-on-one relationship with a qualified health care professional, or licensed physician, and is not medical advice. We encourage you to make your own healthcare decisions based on your research and partnership with a qualified healthcare professional.
Blog Information & Scope Discussions
Our information scope is limited to Chiropractic, musculoskeletal, physical medicines, wellness, contributing etiological viscerosomatic disturbances within clinical presentations, associated somatovisceral reflex clinical dynamics, subluxation complexes, sensitive health issues, and/or functional medicine articles, topics, and discussions.
We provide and present clinical collaboration with specialists from a wide array of disciplines. Each specialist is governed by their professional scope of practice and their jurisdiction of licensure. We use functional health & wellness protocols to treat and support care for the injuries or disorders of the musculoskeletal system.
Our videos, posts, topics, subjects, and insights cover clinical matters, issues, and topics that relate to and support, directly or indirectly, our clinical scope of practice.*
Our office has made a reasonable attempt to provide supportive citations and has identified the relevant research study or studies supporting our posts. We provide copies of supporting research studies available to regulatory boards and the public upon request.
We understand that we cover matters that require an additional explanation of how it may assist in a particular care plan or treatment protocol; therefore, to further discuss the subject matter above, please feel free to ask Dr. Alex Jimenez DC or contact us at 915-850-0900.
We are here to help you and your family.
Dr. Alex Jimenez DC, MSACP, CCST, IFMCP*, CIFM*, ATN*
Licensed in: Texas & New Mexico*
Dr. Alex Jimenez DC, MSACP, CIFM*, IFMCP*, ATN*, CCST
My Digital Business Card