Your eyes perform the important function of giving you the sense of sight. This is why it’s essential to take good care of them. One great way to start is to understand how they work. Let your trusted eye doctor at Guilford Eye Center discuss your visual system in detail.
How You See
Light rays move around in a straight line. They usually bounce off objects within your field of vision, passing through the transparent structure protecting your eyes’s front side, commonly referred to as the cornea. Its smooth, even, and clear features help create sharp images. Afterward, the light rays would enter the pupil.
Your pupil size is controlled by the iris, the colored region surrounding this opening. It causes pupil dilation in low-light settings, allowing maximum light entry. On the other hand, your pupil may constrict when you’re in a bright area to prevent overwhelming your delicate eyes. This is also one of the reflexes we check during an eye exam.
The light rays would then be focused on the retina. It holds various photoreceptors, which help convert received light into nerve impulses. Afterward, the optic nerve will transport them to the brain’s occipital lobe, completing the image interpretation cycle.
Ways to Care for Your Eyes
Since your eyes are delicate and vulnerable structures, they may need special care and attention to maintain your visual health and comfort for a long time. One of the best things you can do for them is to have them checked regularly. Having a comprehensive eye exam at least once every two years is an effective way to safeguard your vision.
Eating a well-balanced diet containing eye-friendly foods is also a good way to keep your eyes in great shape. We advise wearing sunglasses with 100% UV protection or polarized eyeglasses as well for your better visual protection. We suggest quitting smoking and other sight-threatening habits too.
If you have any further questions how your eyes work and how to take care of them, call us at (336) 387-6777. You may also complete our form to request an appointment. We see patients from Greensboro and the surrounding NC communities.