The Secret History Of America Concerning The Blacks and Whites From Africa To MLK
The British Empire Had a vast colony in the North.
Many small revolutions happened such as The Taking Of The Tea before The Frenchies would join in the Real Revolution…
The British Empire Lost the colonies during the Revolutionary War.
The founders seeked to create a nation, not for just Americans but FOR THE PEOPLE.
They knew the secrets of Darkness and created the CONSTITUTION to protect us.
The Bank were a force but the Jackson Layeth the Smackson on them.
The British were angry as they had lost not just the land, the money, but the source of their Lavish Deuce Baguette, THE COTTON.
They created a plan that went against their past but it had to be done.
They went to Africa yet again and offered the blacks a deal they could not refuse.
An indentured servant is a laborer who is bound by a contract to work for a particular employer for a fixed time.
They gathered millions of them and used the very gold to motivate the people they stole from.
It was a nation of the people so we couldn't deny and they settled much like the early settlers in the south as that is where they were "taken" to.
The Plan was working Beautifully.
Some were given the ownership of land but most were given only the choice of labor.
The presence of FREE slaves is the result of them completing the contract.
The was part of the plan as the black must intermingle.
But most importantly The British had gotten the cotton and once again displayed their arrogance.
No one was the wiser but the ones who didn't sleep.
The Yin and The Yang coexisted until the Civil War.
Time for the good old DEPOPULATION
THINK LINCOLN………….THINK HITLER……A QUICK RISE TO POWER WITH THE SAME BRAVADO.
Tell me, Did Lincoln not die in the THEATER?………..LAUGH
A new nation was born that yet again coexisted marked by many white and black scientists in the late 1800s.
Enter War Of the World 1, do note the presence and separation of entire divisions of blacks and whites.
The war served its purpose but now it was time to achieve their true intended goal and as always its the $$$$$
The problem is that the blacks do not spend they hoard, think the Mali Empire and many like it.
The blacks had to be surpressed and the White allowed to succeed
As one must spend the wealth and the other must create the wealth.
The War was used to fool both into turning their friends into enemies.
Time to create a new nation but first you must have
THE BIRTH OF A NATION
First movie that was seen around the US to show the power of film for to this day it is the source of your knowledge on slavaery
Enter KKK, created to incite rage amongst the blacks.
Find the footage of The first Rally and tell me why the crowd displays shock as if its the first time they have seen such a thing if the KKK had been around for more than half a century?
Try finding a picture of KKK in the 1800s……LAUGH
Would the KKK be enough? No
Lets introduce the PROHIBITION followed by THE REEFER MADNESS
Whites were not to partake but blacks were allowed to indulge freely.
What happened to the Jazz Age, did music not progress anymore?
The Yin and Yang no longer Coexist.
The Blacks were perplexed as their enemies treated them better than their supposed friends.
On the return home, it was only natural that they fought to keep the light they had seen beyong the ocea.
ENTER Martin Luther King
What is it that he said that could cost him his life?
I HAVE A DREAM…….TO CREATE A NATION.
A swift death of the Yin
but why only control the Yin
when the Yang can also be had…JFK