Water Filter Guide Water filter systems come in many shapes and sizes, using a variety of filter media. This guide provides a detailed description, pointing out the pros and cons of various water treatments for the kitchen, home, and bath.
Counter Top Water Filters Filter media configurations for portable counter top water filters.
Sense of Thirst Lost With Age As we exhale, with each and every breath, a drop of water evaporates from our lung tissues. Research shows how our bodies adapt to dehydration as we age.
Symptoms of Dehydration
How do we know if we're thirsty, what are the signs? Learn about the effects of exercising during warm weather, and salt imbalance issues of the elderly.
Treating water like a doctor's prescription may provide an affordable way to stay healthy.
Eight Cups of Water Per Day?
We've been told to drink water, but how much is the right amount?
Drinking Fluoride - Toxic Side Effects
Consider the effects of fluoride on brain function and the immune system.
Lead In Our Drinking Water
Old pipes in aging public infrastructure provide toxic point sources.
Well Water Contamination
Rural areas are not immune from groundwater toxic waste plumes.
Testing Our Water
Find out what's in our drinking water.
Hazardous Chlorination By-Products in Drinking Water
Chlorine helps protect against bacterial and viral infection, but what about it's carcinogenic effects on healthy tissues.
Why Filter Chlorine From Your Shower?
Steaming water forces chlorine into the air, then into the lungs during a hot bath. Breathing chlorine is not recommended.
Electrically charged water occurs in nature, and can be measured by a milli-volt meter. But this "charge" can be lost during treatment, storage and delivery of drinking water. Water ionizers work to replace this missing natural charge, that allows water to carry, and deliver alkaline minerals in drinking water.
Prevention of Diseases Dr. Shirahata presents evidence for the use of drinking water in the treatment of a wide range of diseases.
Understanding Reduced Water
Hidemitsu Hayashi, a medical doctor explains the effects of ionized drinking water, reduced by electrolysis.
Water Ionizer Research
Peer review process, uncovers the health effects of electrolyzed "ionized" water.
Continued research attempts to reveal the anti cancer effects of electrolyzed water.
Reducing Lung Cancer Researchers suggest how both free hydrogen electrons and magnesium may contribute to health effects of alkaline ionized water.
Clinical Applications Dr. Hayashi presents a range of health applications for the use of ionized water.
Frequently Asked Questions about ionized water, by Mark Kelly, Heartspring.net
Structured Water Research
Find out how water's flipping coordinates can arrange itself into various basic geometric shapes.
Japan Medical Congress
Addressing ionized water.
Alkaline water affecting food and beverages.
Effects on Stomach Acid
Drinking alkaline water, by Sang Whang.
Aging and Reverse Aging
by Sang Whang.
Passive Filter Media Materials used for "polishing" water's pH without the use of electricity.
Water Ionizers: A 20+ Year Perspective
Former water ionizer distributor, who started working in the industry over 20 years ago, speaks out about the water ionizer issues, and provides five reasons to consider when buying a water ionizer.
Water Ionizer Hazards
Research shows how the consumption of electrolyzed water, under certain circumstances, could fatally effect infant, and elderly health.
Ionizer Issues Interview
Dr. Mercola interviews a corporate executive about ionizer filtration, includes a review by Mark Kelly, Heartspring.net
Ionizer Testing from independant labs
Acidosis / Alkadosis - Disease Research Blood pH can vary widely from pH 6.5 to 7.5. Research shows how mild alkadosis is an optimal state for human health.
Mineral Water Health Effects
Also known as "hard water," contain calcium, and magnesium, two minerals that have been shown to offer positive health effects on bone growth.
Acid-Alkaline Balance health effects.
Growing Clean Air Three common house plant species are used to clean, and produce, enough air to supply a totally enclosed living environment.
Air Purifying Ionizers have been found to produce hazardous levels of ozone inside the home.
Page updated May 8 2013