On Tuesday India’s space agency urged the US to lift sanctions on three of its operations to allow more high-tech imports.
Madhavan Nair, chairman of the Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO), said sanctions were still applied to its Vikram Sarabhai Space Centre and Liquid Propulsion Systems Centre in Kerala state, and the Satish Dhawan Space Center in Andhra Pradesh.
“As an effort between our prime minister and President George Bush, three [other] institutions were removed from the list to enable import of more high-tech imports and services from the US,” Nair said. “I hope this will encourage an improvement in space commerce activity in the coming years.”
Nair made the comments after India and the US signed a pact to put two US payloads on board India’s Chandrayaan-1 unmanned mission to the Moon. “I can see that there is a willingness on both sides to improve this cooperation,” he said.
Space cooperation between the two dates back to 1963 when an Indian atmospheric experiment was carried on a US-made rocket. But the US imposed sanctions on India’s nuclear and space programmes following New Delhi’s nuclear test blasts in 1998. The sanctions froze exchanges in nuclear and other high-tech sectors, such as technologies with both civilian and military uses.
But the US has lifted many of its sanctions as relations have warmed between the two nations in recent years. In March 2006, a landmark civilian nuclear deal was sealed during a visit to India by US President George W. Bush.
India agreed to place most of its civilian atomic reactors under global scrutiny for the first time in more than three decades in return for foreign nuclear technology. The agreement effectively ends India’s status as a nuclear pariah, even though it refused to sign the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty.
During NASA chief Michael Griffin’s visit to India this week, he said the Bush visit “had contributed to future cooperation possibilities”. Griffin is the first NASA official to visit India in 30 years.
Under the pact signed on Tuesday, India will carry two US scientific payloads on its Chandrayaan-1 Moon mission. One is a miniature synthetic aperture radar called Mini-SAR designed to look for ice deposits in the Moon’s polar regions. The other instrument, called the Moon Mineralogy Mapper, will track the mineral and chemical composition of the Moon.
Chandrayaan-1, slated for launch by early 2008, will also carry five Indian instruments along with three developed by the European Space Agency and one from the Bulgarian Space Laboratory.
Griffin said both nations would ensure they do not “duplicate” their efforts and end up spending money on the same projects. “We are also looking at sharing of data for Earth sciences and Earth resources and broader scientific cooperation in exploring beyond the Earth,” he said.
India received 16 proposals from around the world to be a part of the Moon mission.
“Of these, we selected six instruments including two from the US,” Nair said. “Today is an important milestone in the cooperation between NASA and ISRO.”