Sloka Ramo Viraamo Virajo Margo Neyo Nayo-anayaH with meaning
Jun 25 2017 Tags: Rama, sanskrit, Sloka
Sloka Ramo Viraamo Virajo Margo Neyo Nayo-anayaH is mentioned in Shri Vishnu sahasranamam (Sloka 43) . The meaning of the above Sanskrit versions is that Rama is the one who keeps the entire living beings happy, the one in whose memory Yogis always revel (take pleasure) in the bliss of Brahman.
रामो विरामो विरजो मार्गो नेयो नयो-अनयः ।
वीरः शक्तिमतां श्रेष्ठ: धर्मो धर्मविदुत्तमः ।।
Ramo Viraamo Virajo Margo Neyo Nayo-anayaH
Veerah Shaktimataam Shresshtah Dharmo Dharmaviduttamah
The meaning of the above Sanskrit versions is that Rama is the one who keeps the entire living beings happy, the one in whose memory Yogis always revel (take pleasure) in the bliss of Brahman. He is the one who is omniscient and full of bliss. He is the place of final rest for all deserving souls. He is the one before whom, all else becomes pale and insignificant. He is the one who has no desires for enjoyment or any luxuries. He is the lord who creates path to the devotees to reach the zones of liberation and immortality.
He is the one who wishes to do anything for the devotees. He conducts monitors and leads everybody in this world. He is the one who cannot be felled by anybody. He is valiant and is the one who strikes terror into the hearts of the evil doers. He is the greatest, the supreme most and the invincible. He is the foremost among the celestials and is the most valiant among the brave. He is the dharma and his very nature is dharma and his incarnation is for the purpose of dharma.
He is the embodiment of dharma and protector of dharma. He is the foremost and greatest among the knower of dharma. ! Ramo Vigrahavaan Dharmah! It means Rama is an epitome, a personification, a manifestation of Dharma. Rama is the very embodiment of righteousness. It was as if righteousness itself had incarnated on earth. Dharma and Rama are inseparable.
It is said that when sage Valmiki was asked to write Ramayana he asks sage Narada is there any person among the human beings who has all the sixteen virtues and that person was none other than Lord Sri Rama.
Yantras For Money and Prosperity
Every human being in world wants to enjoy prosperous and fulfilling lives. We all need economically, socially prosper...
108 Names of Maa Durga with meaning in Hindi
Maa Durga is the divine form of Shakti, the Supreme Goddess. Shakti is represented as the ultimate power and is worsh...
Various mantras related to Maa Kali
Maa Kali is the Hindu Goddess who removes the ego and liberates the soul from the cycle of birth and death. The Kali ...
Shri Kalabhairava Ashtakam in Kannada ( ಕಾಲ ಭೈರವ ಅಷ್ಟಕಂ ಕನ್ನಡದಲ್ಲಿ )
Shri Kalabhairava Ashtakam in Kannada || ಶ್ರೀ ಕಾಲಭೈರವಾಷ್ಟಕಮ್ || ಕಾಲ ಭೈರವ ಅಷ್ಟಕಂದೇವ ರಾಜ ಸೇವ್ಯ ಮಾನ ಪಾವನಂಗರಿ ಪಂಕಜಂವ್ಯಾಲ...
Share on Whatsapp