Did you know that 73 percent of people think the earth is close to passing climate tipping points? It has never been more important to work on our carbon footprints. While your personal carbon footprint might seem like a drop in the ocean, you can help more than you think!
Solar energy is growing in popularity for exactly this reason. It’s a great way to take your house off the grid and do your part for the environment. And, as an added bonus, you can save tons of money!
In this article, we’ll be going over the benefits of using solar energy. Read on to learn more!
1. Reduce Emissions
The primary benefit of going solar is its effect on the environment. The sun is considered a renewable resource, meaning that it’s always shining and no amount of solar power can ever make it stop. In other words, harnessing the sun’s power doesn’t affect the sun in any way.
On the other hand, the more fossil fuels we use, the fewer there are available. They are, therefore, non-renewable.
Solar energy produces no emissions, does not pollute the water, and doesn’t require much water to harness. This means it has the lowest amount of environmental impact of all other fuel sources.
If we captured only 0.02 percent of the sun’s rays, we could replace all other fuel sources around the globe. While your personal energy use might not seem like much, even the smallest amount can help in this goal.
2. Save Money
Using solar power isn’t just good for the environment, it’s good for your wallet too! Installing solar panels is expensive, but depending on your state they can pay for themselves within a few years!
And, some of the top solar companies also offer solar batteries. These save up excess solar power energy on sunny days so you can use them on rainy days or at night. Some solar batteries can even provide energy back to the grid, so you might be able to enjoy a negative energy bill every month.
Furthermore, some states offer tax incentives and credits for houses that go solar.
3. Reliable Power
Many people think that if they live somewhere cloudy or rainy, solar panels won’t be reliable for them. However, even on cloudy days, your panel will be able to store up some energy. And, with a solar battery, you can save extra energy from sunny days to fill any gaps from cloudy ones.
Because solar removes your dependence on the electric grid, you don’t have to worry about rolling blackouts or storms taking out the power lines.
Using Solar Energy To Go Green And Save Green
The benefits of using solar energy can be boiled down to this: you can save money and the environment in one fell swoop. With all the benefits and next to no drawbacks, there’s no reason not to go solar. Hopefully, you’ll consider it for your home!
If you enjoyed this article, we have tons of similar tips for the eco-conscious homeowner on our blog. Check it out for more!