Table of Contents Hide
- What Is File Management System
- What Are The Types Of File Management?
- What Is the Best File Management System?
- What Is the 3 Importance of File Management?
- What Are the 5 Basic Filing Steps?
- What Are the Main Components of File Management?
- File Management System Examples
- Document File Management System
- File Management System Windows
- File Management Systems FAQs
- Can small-scale companies use a file management system?
- Are file management systems needed with a default file manager?
It is no secret that organizations use various management tools to keep their documents well organized, and one of the tools used in companies for documents is file management systems. Most file management systems come with many benefits that will be helpful to both big and small-scale businesses. This is an important tool that can help manage a company’s general functions. It will also help to organize and arrange data and files uniquely. In this article, we will be providing insight into file management system windows, document file management, and what a file management system entails.
A file management system provides access to users, such as permissions to the files and the ability to set limits on the files. A file management system is essential for all types of business organizations, but what is a file management system? In this article, we will be providing insight into what is a file management system, its definitions, types, examples, and more.
What Is File Management System
A file management system (FMS) can also be called a file manager. It is a device that can help store, organize, and name files in a system. This process will provide users with easy access to documents by making them easy to find. A file management system is a benefit to all. It simply makes it easier to use. Unlike physical file management, a file management system can work from anywhere. It also provides deeper and better security for data and its information.
A file management system is unique for organizing documents digitally. While digitally storing files will make them much easier to locate. With a keyword search, you’d find the files you require and also get to make changes to them or restrict others from accessing them.
File management systems cannot be likened to physical file management because, with file management systems, you and your employees will have access to the data regardless of your location and time. They don’t run higher risks of getting destroyed or missing. Instead, you can encrypt your files and make them accessible to a few people. File management systems help organizations arrange documents and data and make them easier to access at any time.
It functions as a file maintenance device for computer systems (windows). It helps to manage files for organizations and is also suitable for personal use. Most organizations store their data in a well-detailed hierarchical system by using constituted directories (secondary folders) and sub-directories (sub-folders).
Files are usually managed with these directories/folders. Beneath the constituted directories, you can have various sub-directories, and this will keep them well organized.
What Are The Types Of File Management?
There are mainly three types of File management. Each of these types of file management has various ways of managing files for whatever purpose you want to perform.
Here are the types of file management:
#1. Relational File Management:
This is a type of file management that arranges and manages documents/data on the existing relationship between the data saves in each file. It is an easier method of organizing data.
Many organizations use relational file management to manage, retrieve, restore, and search for files saved on a computer system.
#2. Network File Management:
This is a type of file management that works as a client for a remote file access protocol. With network file management, you will have access to files on a server. It is also best for organizing files based on where they are on the computer system.
#3. Hierarchical File Management:
Hierarchical File Management is ideal for managing and organizing files, although it can be used on Macintosh computers. This type of file management arranges files by using constituted directories and their sub-directories. Creating one major folder and having various sub-directories will help organize files in a more searchable way.
What Is the Best File Management System?
Looking for the best file management system can be time-consuming because most of these software provides the best services such as flexible price, easy interface, security, and many more. However, in this overview, we will be discussing some of the best file management systems for you.
#1. Microsoft SharePoint:
Visit microsoft sharepoint
Microsoft SharePoint remains the top best file management system. It has unique features that make it stands out as an application. It comes with collaboration tools that enable two or more users to work corporately on a document at the same time.
Most organizations use Microsoft SharePoint to create custom metadata fields on all files saved in the system. To enjoy all of its features, you may be required to go through some training. However, it has an easy interface.
#2. Rubex by eFileCabinet:
eFileCabinet is one of the best file management systems that are suitable for all users. It is inexpensive and it offers some of the best features that will help you organize your documents without any hassle.
eFileCabinet has an intuitive interface that makes it easy for new users. It is cloud-based software that can be accessed remotely.
This is good because you can easily manage your documents from anywhere.
M-file offers some of the best features for file management. Not only will m-file protect your files, but it also offers security for your documents. It is reliable and helps to digitize multiple physical documents.
M-files has an intuitive and easy-to-use interface that keeps documents well organized. With this platform, you can manage your documents effortlessly. It also comes with features like the retriever process, version control, metadata description, and automated workflows.
What Is the 3 Importance of File Management?
Whether small or large, file management is essential for any business organization. File management does make office works much easier.
Here is the importance of file management:
#1. Well-Structured Files:
File management is mostly about organizing files in a way that can be easily accessed. One of the main importance of using file management is to create well-structured files. File management systematically improves and make document well organized.
With file management systems, you can easily digitalize your documents without much difficulty. And also get to find them faster with keyword search.
Also, you can create files, delete, retrieve, store or edit with file management tools.
Many companies are concerned about the security of their important documents. However, with a file system management system you can protect your electronic files.
You can easily restrict unauthorized access to your files or encrypt your documents. Doing this will protect your documents from getting corrupted or being deleted.
#3. Increased Productivity:
Not only will file management increase productivity in an organization, but it will also increase resources and cut costs. File management systems make working easier and help with time management. With file management, digital file management is easier and faster.
Among the importances file management benefits is the ability to increase our productivity.
What Are the 5 Basic Filing Steps?
It is essential to follow the filing steps. However, here are the 5 basic filing steps:
- Filing by subject or category
- Filling in Alphabetical Order
- Filing in Numerical Order
- Filling by Place/Geographical Order
- Filling by Dates/Chronical
What Are the Main Components of File Management?
File management will help increase the productivity of an organization. However, to achieve well-organized files, it is crucial to understand the component of file management. Here are the main components of file management:
#1. Correct File and Folder Names:
For impressive file management, you have to input the correct files and their folder names in a well-organized way. Providing accurate names will make finding them much easier and faster. File and folder names are crucial when it comes to filing management.
Directories are a crucial component of file management. While it may be important to input folder names correctly, it is also important that you have a clear view of the total number of folders your organization will be needing.
You can also organize the files and directories in a hierarchical format.
Also, you must have more folders that can cover all of your files in constituted directories (secondary folder) and sub-directories (sub-folders). This will certainly make finding them easier.
#3. File storage:
File storage is an important component of file management. You can easily organize your files into several folders, and get to save them on the storage system or with file management systems. You can also restore lost files from the file storage system.
File Management System Examples
Here are examples of file management systems:
- Apple iCloud
- File management with Canto
- Google Drive
- Microsoft OneDrive
- Microsoft SharePoint
- VIENNA Advantage Community
Document File Management System
A document file management system is a cloud-based storage system. It is an automated software solution suitable for digitizing, restoring, approving, tagging, completing, securing, and organizing projects with the file system.
Document file management system works faster, and they can provide total coverage for your documents. Most DMS software will help you save resources, time, costs, and labor, and also assist in organizing your documents in a well-organized manner.
Document file management system offers various ways for file indexing. It is not only ideal for identifying different file formats, but also makes it easier to find, share, and edit documents. It can be used to automate documents and files.
There are so many benefits associated with using a document file management system, which includes secure data such as advanced encryption standards, top-notch security of documents, large backup storage for documents, secure data storage, and more.
File Management System Windows
Windows file management systems are services built into the operating system that facilitate the management of computer files.
File management system software or Windows helps with organizing, finding documents, arranging, browsing, and providing more information on the files. They also work on large groups of files and helps the operating system in several ways to keep them well organized.
Window systems is a default file management device that is always on the system. The file management system is a file manager in windows. This default file manager has limited capacity on files, which is why it is often supported with document management systems tools. Other window file manager tools are double commander, SharePoint, excel, google desktop, directories, and others. However, on mac systems, you will find a device like “finder.”
Nonetheless, advanced document management system tools can help organize your important files in well-structured ways, which will make them faster and easier to access by you and your employees. Because DMS has a larger capacity than the default file manager and also provides more advanced options like maintaining and organizing files in directories.
File management systems are essential toolsets for the smooth organizing of files. It is not restricted to business owners alone as it can be for personal use.
Finding the best file management system will help you arrange and organize your files in a way that can be accessed by anyone you give access to. They are also cost-effective and easy to use. We hope this overview is helpful to your search.
File Management Systems FAQs
Can small-scale companies use a file management system?
Yes, small companies can utilize file management systems for their files.
Are file management systems needed with a default file manager?
Yes, they will help you organize yourself in a well-approachable way and provide more advanced features.