Did you know that the energy that the Sun supplies to the Earth in one hour can meet the energy needs of the world in one year? The sun is undoubtedly a powerful source of energy, and although we can only harvest a fraction of that energy, using that energy by installing solar panels can make a huge difference to the planet.
Although solar energy is widely criticized for being expensive or inefficient, it is now proving to be extremely beneficial not only for the environment but also for the private economy.
Thanks to the available subsidies for solar panels and also the constantly competitive market prices, solar energy has become the main source of energy for many families. The technology has evolved enormously in recent years and has been extended to include solar battery systems, making solar panels Ireland a more efficient source of clean energy.
However, there are always disadvantages, no matter what energy source you choose to analyze. GreenMatch describes the main advantages and disadvantages of solar energy in the following points:
Advantages of solar energy
- Sustainable energy source
Of all the benefits of solar panels, the most important thing is that solar energy is a truly sustainable energy source. It can be used in all parts of the world and used every day. We do not run on solar energy, unlike other energy sources.
Solar energy may be available as long as the sun is still present, so if scientists say the sun will die, sunlight will be available for at least 5 billion years.
- Reduce electricity bills
Because you cover part of your energy needs with electricity produced by a solar system, your energy bills will be reduced. The amount you can save on your account will depend on the size of the solar system and your electricity or heat consumption. For example, if you have a business that uses commercial solar panels, this switch can have many benefits because the size of the system can cover a large portion of your energy bills.
In addition, you will not only save on electricity bills, but you will also be able to obtain compensation for the excess energy you export to the grid through the Smart Export Guarantee (SEG). If you can produce more electricity than you consume (assume that your solar panel system is connected to the grid).
Solar energy can be used for various purposes. It can produce electricity (photovoltaics) or heat (solar thermal). Solar energy can be used to generate electricity in areas without access to the electricity grid, to distill water in regions with a limited supply of clean water and to power space satellites.
Solar energy can also be integrated into materials used for buildings. Sharp recently introduced transparent solar windows.
benefits of solar energy
- Low maintenance costs
Solar systems generally do not require much maintenance. You have to keep it relatively clean to do it twice a year. In case of doubt, you can always rely on specialized cleaning companies that offer this service from almost 25-35 €.
The most reliable manufacturers of solar panels offer a 20-25 year warranty.
Since there are no moving parts, there is no damage. The inverter is usually the only component that needs to be replaced after 5-10 years, as it continues to convert solar energy into electricity and heat (solar PV vs. solar thermal). In addition to the inverter, cabling must be maintained to ensure that your solar system operates at peak efficiency.
So after paying the initial cost of a solar system, you can expect very low maintenance and repair costs.
- Technological progress
The technology of the solar energy industry is constantly evolving and progress will accelerate in the future. Innovations in quantum physics and nanotechnology can increase the efficiency of solar panels and double or even triple the electrical input of the solar energy system.
Disadvantages of solar energy
The initial costs of purchasing a solar system are very high. This includes payment for solar panels, inverters, batteries, wiring and installation. However, solar technologies are constantly evolving, so it can be safely assumed that prices will go down in the future.
How long do solar panels actually last?
Life of solar panels
Solar panels, also known as photovoltaic or PV panels, are built to last more than 25 years. In fact, many solar panels installed since the 1980s still maintain their expected capacity.1 Solar panels are not only very reliable, but the life of solar panels has improved dramatically over the last 20 years. .2 In addition to decades of effective performance, many solar system manufacturers stand behind their products with performance guarantees under their warranties.
Keep in mind that the expected life of solar panels does not mean that your roof panels will stop generating electricity after several decades. It simply means reducing your energy output to what solar panel manufacturers consider best to meet the energy needs of the average American family. Are solar panels damaged over time?
Of course, like most technologies, solar panels do not provide much performance over time. This reduction in output power is called the rate of degradation. The average damage to solar panels is about 0.5%, which means that the energy output of the solar panel will decrease at a rate of 0.5% per year.3 After 20 years, your panels will have to continue working. approximately 90% of their original production. . Three tips to keep solar panels in your home longer
The best thing about solar panels is that they require very little maintenance. Regular cleaning of the solar panel is usually not necessary if your area is not easily hit by dust, dirt, pollen or sand due to the dry climate.
While solar panels usually do not require much maintenance, it is still important to check your solar panels from time to time and check their performance. Here are some tips to help you keep your solar system running at full capacity:
Tip # 1: Keep your panels free of dirt and other harmful materials.
Accumulation of dirt, pollen, leaves and bird droppings can affect the efficiency of your solar panels. While rain is usually enough to clean your panels, you may want to consider professional cleaning if you ever notice that your panels are not performing at their full capacity. You also want to make sure your panels are not under branches, as not only could shade reduce production, but branches could fall in a storm and cause serious damage.
In the event your panels are obstructed or damaged by any of these items and you do not have the proper training or equipment to take further action, please contact your solar provider immediately for assistance.
Tip #2: Make sure your dashboards are regularly monitored and maintained.
Routine maintenance checks will help keep your panel, meters, inverter, and other parts of your solar system performing at peak efficiency.6 It’s also important to take note of any changes in your electricity bills and energy usage . If your solar panels do not work well after rain or water spray, or if you notice an unusual increase in energy consumption, this may be an electrical problem that needs to be resolved.
Tip # 3: Work with a reputable solar provider.
The best thing you can do to ensure the longevity of your solar system is to find a reputable solar plumber. Although solar systems do not require very regular maintenance, some solar energy suppliers offer comprehensive maintenance packages for the life of their products to ensure that they remain clean, inexpensive and reliable for decades to come.
Sunrun has more than 20 years of installation experience and only works with the most trained installers in your area to provide you with carefree energy.