What is Haslam's IMPROVE Act and how would it affect you?
With the House set to vote on Gov. Bill Haslam's signature piece of legislation on Wednesday, here's a quick guide:
What is the IMPROVE Act?
The IMPROVE Act is an acronym for “Improving Manufacturing, Public Roads and Opportunities for a Vibrant Economy Act” – a proposal that Gov. Bill Haslam introduced in January in an effort to help fund the state’s $10 billion backlog in road projects.
Why should I care?
The legislation would impact anyone in Tennessee, at least those who buy food at grocery stores or purchase gasoline or diesel fuel, in addition to some businesses and individuals who pay taxes on interest and dividend income.
While the tax on gas would increase as early as July 1, shoppers would see the price of their grocery bills decline slightly, leading backers of the legislation to say the tax cuts featured in the IMPROVE Act far outweigh the tax increases.
In addition to the various costs associated with the IMPROVE Act, the legislation helps fund 962 projects spread throughout the state’s 95 counties.
Middle Tennesseans, who have seen a rise in traffic congestion and crumbling roads and bridges in recent years due to population increases, would certainly benefit from the legislation’s passage. But Haslam and others have argued every area in the state will see their projects funded through the bill, and the measure will prevent local governments from using alternative means (i.e. increasing property taxes) to pay for needed improvements.
Why are some people opposed to it?
Criticism of the legislation varies. Some, including Democrats, argue there aren’t enough tax cuts for everyday Tennesseans. They say the tax cuts for businesses far outweigh the benefits low and middle-class citizens will see.
Other more conservative opponents, including the state chapter of Americans for Prosperity, say the state should be using the state's budget surplus to pay for transportation needs.
Yet another group of opponents argue lawmakers can pay for transportation by simply taking a portion of the state’s general fund revenue and shift it to road projects instead of raising taxes.
Haslam has dismissed the criticisms for a variety of reasons, suggesting that his plan is a responsible, conservative approach that gives tax cuts to everyone while also providing a long-term solution to a problem that has plagued the state for years.
Reach Joel Ebert at firstname.lastname@example.org or 615-772-1681 and on Twitter @joelebert29.
- As amended, the legislation is estimated to provide $250 million to the state Department of Transportation, $70 million to counties and $35 million to cities, to be used specifically to address transportation needs.
- It takes 51 of the 99 members in the House and 17 of the 33 members in the Senate to approve the IMPROVE Act.
- As of Tuesday, there were 80 amendments to the IMPROVE Act filed in the House that can be considered on the chamber's floor.