Why do we sweat?
Sweating allows the human body to remove some toxic substances through the skin and regulate fluid balance, it helps to avoid overheating.
What is hyperhidrosis?
Hyperhidrosis, or abnormally increased perspiration, occurs mostly in the following areas: palms of the hands, feet and armpits. Local excessive sweating can have an unknown origin. Many of us experienced the feeling of shaking sweaty and wet hands and saw people with wet marks on their shirts caused by excessive sweating in the armpits. Hyperhidrosis affects both professional activities and personal life, this condition causes much embarrassment. Nervousness or emotional distress tends to increase sweating. Hyperhidrosis can cause changes in the skin leading to infection.
Is it possible to stop excessive sweating?
There are many different ways and means available to regulate excessive perspiration: from conventional antiperspirants to surgical procedures by cutting nerves that control sweat glands. Over the last years, simple treatment of excessive sweating with botulinum toxin injections has become common throughout the world.
How is the botulinum toxin treatment of excessive sweating performed? Is it a reliable and trustworthy treatment? What is the effect?
This treatment involves injection of very small amounts of botulinum toxin into the areas where sweating is a problem – palms, soles or armpits. Most patients do not require any anesthesia before injecting Botox into the armits. Local anesthesia is required for the hands and feet treatments. Injections of botulinum toxin are used to block chemical processes in the sweat glands. This, in turn, stops sweat production in the treated area. Sweating can be reduced by 30-50%. The effect usually lasts 6-12 months.
What are the possible side effects of this procedure? Who cannot have these injections?
The injections into the palms and soles may cause temporary muscle weakness. To avoid this side effect botulinum toxin may be injected into several areas and in smaller doses. Botulinum toxin should not be prescribed to pregnant women.