Miscarriage is a common condition faced by many women; here are 7 facts about miscarriage every woman must know.
Pregnancy is a very sensitive stage for any women; there are lot of obstacles and complications that persist with it. It is not always possible to have a healthy pregnancy and in some cases miscarriage does happen. A major problem in the society is that women are often judged and blamed for miscarriage whereas it is not always their fault. There are other factors that could lead to miscarriage and unhealthy pregnancy. This also includes abortion even though it is more spontaneous. There are a lot of misconceptions about miscarriage in women’s mind; hence we would like to explain some vital facts about this condition to ease the stigma around it.
Miscarriage refers to loss of pregnancy before the 20th week. According to Dr. Usha Bhardwaj, Consultant and Gynaecologist in Vozart Healthcare Hospital, Kanpur, miscarriage occurs in almost 10-15% of the total number of pregnancy. This number can be higher as most of the women do not tell about it if it is in the early stage. It can happen because of factors such as blighted ovum, molar or partial molar pregnancy or intrauterine fetes demise. Other factors such as maternal health and nutrition also play a vital role.
First thing we need to do is to kill the stigma around women’s health and miscarriages. It is quite common to have miscarriage due to number of factors mentioned above. The rate of miscarriage is already 10-15% in general and there are many women who do not tell it and have abortion before anyone knowing about it. According to the doctor 20% of women face this problem but do not speak about it because they feel guilty and blamed as their mistake.
It is important to know that if there is bleeding or cramps in early stage of pregnancy, then it could be a symptom of miscarriage. It can happen if either of symptoms occurs or both can occur simultaneously. During pregnancy, physical examination and ultrasound is important to understand the health of the child. Blood tests and hormonal levels are also measured in order to check stage of pregnancy.
Also Read- Do You Know How Weather Affects Skin? Refer To This Article
To avoid the risk of miscarriage, there are some treatments methods available that you can avail according to your need. This are based on effectiveness and approach of the problem women is suffering.
It is not necessary that if you have miscarriage the first time, it could be because of some underlying problems. One miscarriage does not harm your body and it does not mean that there is risk of second miscarriage as well. Hence there is no need of any special tests or treatment just after the first miscarriage. The risk only increases after 2 or more miscarriage when people need to take care of.
It is absolutely normal to feel guilty after a miscarriage because you blame yourself for not taking proper care of yourself, not taking some supplements of time and various other things. This comes with every miscarriage and is felt by every women, on top of this people around you also blame the women for her mistake. The truth is that miscarriage can happen because of hormonal imbalance, chromosome abnormalities in foetus and other factors. According to research by ACOG, working, exercising, having sex, birth control pills does not cause pregnancy loss.
Also Read- Try This Gut Healthy Drink For Lactating Mothers For Better Milk Production
There is a false belief that once there is a miscarriage, the chances of healthy pregnancy or second pregnancy gets depleted. This is a wrong theory; most of the women who have their first miscarriage are able to hold a healthy pregnancy in the second one. There would not be any effect on the health of the child and everything can remain absolutely normal during the second one. But you need to have strong mind and strength to believe that you can achieve a healthy pregnancy and child birth.
According to study, miscarriage makes people grieve especially women because they were holding a life inside them. This is very normal as the bond develops over time even if it is for a few weeks. Hence grieving is normal and healthy, because it releases the stress, anxiety and helps you to separate from that bond in a better way. Women are more likely to grieve more than men as it is a common phenomenon.
Picture Credits- pexels.com
All possible measures have been taken to ensure accuracy, reliability, timeliness and authenticity of the information; however Onlymyhealth.com does not take any liability for the same. Using any information provided by the website is solely at the viewers’ discretion. In case of any medical exigencies/ persistent health issues, we advise you to seek a qualified medical practitioner before putting to use any advice/tips given by our team or any third party in form of answers/comments on the above mentioned website.