Mechanical engineering is the discipline that applies the principles of engineering into the design, analysis, manufacturing, and maintenance of machines and mechanical production techniques. A strong background in mathematics is necessary for anyone interested in studying engineering.
Like most other areas of engineering, you will be taught through lectures, seminars, tutorials and laboratory sessions, with design classes and practical workshops. You will be assessed continuously through reports, computer exercises, lab work and essays, as well as exam-based testing.
Graduate knowledge of mechanical engineering is vital in the solving of challenges faced by industry and society alike. This may be in the research, development, testing or maintenance aspect of the professions and mechanical engineers will be tasked with calculating project costs and timescales, writing manuals and upgrading and progressing new technologies. It is worth pointing out that mechanical engineering is one of the most expansive and lucrative fields – partly due to the growing population and constant demand for housing.
Mechanical engineering offers students various paths to follow where the skill sets of a mechanical engineer come in use, like vehicle design, robotics, nanotechnology or energy. Additionally, many mechanical engineers go on to pursue careers in aeronautics, cranes and cargo shipping, rail travel, automotive industry, or even healthcare.
If you’re considering pursuing a degree in mechanical engineering, then let us help you find the best university for you. U-Multirank’s ‘For students’ track offers personalised university comparisons, so you can find the university that best matches you. U-Multirank’s subject rankings provide the feedback of more than 100,000 current students studying at the respective universities, offering a unique student perspective to the rankings via our Teaching & Learning dimension. Create your own personalised rankings today, and compare universities according to what matters most to you. To start, make sure to select mechanical engineering as your subject of interest and we’ll help guide you through the rest.