Here are some suggested activities for week beginning 1st June. Parents, please feel free to email me and let me know how your children are getting on with their learning. Please also email me if you have any questions.
This week our unsung heroes are the fire service! We will be thinking about fire safety in our own homes and will learn about the Great Fire of London.
Watch the fire station interview below and have a chat to your parents about fire safety in your own home. Can you draw or paint a picture of a Fireman. You might like to include some fire safety top tips.
Colour Mixing - Get creative with Mrs Parry and create a roaring fire background.
An interview with Reynolston Firefighter Mr Cowley.
Fire of London Game
This game is great! It will help you learn about the Fire of London and an important man called Samuel Pepys who wrote a diary about it. Click on the picture below to find out more. Parents and carers - please work through this game with your child as there is a lot of information to discuss.
Shapes Dough Disco.mov
You will need to sign in to play these games.
Parents - there are many suitable games and difficulty levels to choose from on this site. Please support your child to select an appropriate game and to monitor their progress.
RWI - Set one Sounds
m a s d t i n p g o c k u b f e l h r j v y w z x
sh th ch qu ng nk ck
You might like to do 2 or 3 sounds a week
- Play I spy around you home and garden. Can you spot things that start with the sound?
- Practice writing the sounds with a paintbrush and water on your patio/path.
Join in with the RWI phonics lesson each morning
RWI are streaming three, short Speed Sounds lessons for children to watch at home every weekday on their YouTube channel. Each lesson is ten minutes long and available for 24 hours.
Click here for the YouTube Speed Sounds lessons schedule.
Subscribe to the RWI YouTube page for live lessons.
When teaching your child to say the sounds, its important to say the pure sounds. This means we say mmmmm not muh and lllll not luh. (A slight uh cannot be helped when saying the sounds b d g j w y). How to say the sounds follow this link. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TkXcabDUg7Q
Can you build a mini den for your favourite toy.
Watch the video and sing along to days of the week and Sut mae'r tywydd heddiw with Mrs Gosney.
Days of the week.mov
Tedi Twt is going shopping at Mr Jones' shop. I wonder what he is going to buy!
Fire Fit Wake and Shake with Nigel.mp4
Don't forget to send me photos of your children completing their home learning I would love to post them on our Twitter page.
Diolch yn fawr