Programming and coding can be considered as one of the major raw forces of today’s tech-driven digital world. All kinds of software applications or tools are filled with programming languages that programmers code. As technology and innovation are the game-maker now, the demand for coding and programming skills is constantly growing.
Now that you have decided to learn to code or want to know how to easily be a programmer, let’s skip the part on why you should learn programming and coding. Learning to code is a consistent approach. And of course, the academic process of learning anything is the best and biggest path. But still, many of us want to learn coding in a non-institutional way. Thanks to the developers, there are some really good apps and platforms by which you can learn coding in a personalized process. Here we have showcased some of the best programming and coding apps that will help you to learn coding right on your desktop or smartphone.
10 Best Apps for Learning Coding:
SoloLearn has three learning modes on it — Beginner, Intermediate, and Advanced. So whether you have any prior knowledge about coding or not, you can learn from any stage here. In any course, the chapters are divided into lessons with different quizzes each. And, there’s a separate quiz part at the end of each chapter that learners have to pass to go to the next. Moreover, it has an entire section called the code playground with a lot of quizzes and activities to practice coding. SoloLearn also provides monthly and yearly subscription plans for premium features like certification.
Programming Hub was developed together with experts from Google. It has very well-designed courses along with a collection of 5000 programs (code examples). There’s also a strong built-in compiler for practice anytime. Programming Hub provides verifiable and shareable e-certificate after completing any of the courses. Both free and premium versions of Programming Hub are available.
Code Hub is a simple, easy-to-use code learning app with quick and efficient approaches. This free and lightweight coding app is available only for Android devices. The app consists of 50 lessons across 4 chapters and covers Web Fundamentals, HTML, and CSS. Thus, it is a good choice for those who want to learn to code for web development. Moreover, the curriculum of each course here is designed step by step and for all types of learners. So whether you are a beginner, designer, or developer, it will be useful in your coding adventure. The courses of Code Hub also include examples and provide videos for easy understanding. There exists a floating button within the app for asking questions. If you have any doubt while learning, you can leave a message instantly using it.
To learn coding is a matter of passion, practice, and patience. All these apps will be a great help as long as you are motivated about programming and coding.
Websites of the respective apps.
Anaet Ullah Biswas
Student | Business Administration,
Mawlana Bhashani Science & Technology University.
thanks for info