Definition for Salt in Scripture
Salt (in Scripture)
This generally refers to the function (aka expression) of the genes within our molecules of DNA. This interpretation helps us understand the different connotations of salt in Scripture, especially in the New Covenant versus the Old Covenant. The Salt/Dead Sea symbolizes the disordered and sinful function of our genes. In juxtaposition, the resurrected bodies of the just are not referred to as salt or sea. In Revelations, we read, “Then I saw a new heaven and a new earth; for the first heaven and the first earth had passed away, and the sea was no more” (Rev. 21:1) and “and before the throne there is as it were a sea of glass, like crystal” (Rev. 4:6). Recall that DNA is crystalline in structure. The sea of salt is a symbol of fallen man. The sea of glass is man resurrected into eternal Life. The reason v. 6 doesn’t say it is an actual sea of glass is because Scripture is being consistent with Revelation's use of the sea as a symbol of fallen man’s body.
This symbolism can be seen by examining Revelations. The key to understanding the Beasts out of the sea (possessing the spirit of Dragon) described in Revelation 13 is the last passage written in Chapter 12. Note: the labeling of this verse can vary between different Bible translations. “Then the dragon took his stand on the sand of the seashore.” Some identify it as 12:17, some as 13:1, and others as 12:18. It reads, “Then the dragon took his stand [SML] on the sand [SML] of the seashore” (Rev 12:18).
What was meant by Satan’s stand? On October 13, 1884, Pope Leo XIII had a remarkable vision. In it, Satan told God that he could destroy the Church. Satan was granted 100-120 years (consisting of two consecutive 50–60-year periods, as was also the case in the book of Job) of time, together with extra power, during which the followers of Satan would attempt to destroy the Church (the kingdom of God) that Jesus built. I believe this is the stand that Satan is taking. [Emmett O'Regan, “2020: The Silence in Heaven and the Opening of the Seventh Seal,” https://unveilingtheapocalypse.blogspot.com/2020/04/2020-silence-in-heaven-and-opening-of.html, April 11, 2020] This passage conveys Satan’s hatred for man. Furthermore, it conveys his plan to use our enslaved dust of DNA — where he takes his stand, to destroy the Church.
The word sand (Satan is not corporeal, but he will dominate and attempt to rule or destroy the fallen dust of DNA) and the word seashore (Satan will use the fallen and disordered biology of man — the sea — to destroy him) has a direct link to fallen man. The dragon, who took his stand on the sand of the seashore, is a description of Satan’s actions immediately after failing to destroy the woman and her male child (Chapter 12) and just as he sets out to make war with the rest of her offspring.
Unlike in the Old Covenant, salt in the New Covenant is always referred to as a good thing — unless it lacks one thing. The one thing is identified as flavor or taste. Thanks to our more profound understanding of a Covenant of Salt, we can now know what flavor and taste mean. Both terms refer to the indwelling of the Holy Spirit in the heart/spirit of man. His dwelling in us is a direct result of the Covenant of Salt family bond existing between man and the physical risen body of the Son of God. Those born again in both water and the Spirit (the Sacrament of Baptism) are no longer sinners while one body with Christ (cf. Rom 5:7-9).