Design and analysis of the carriage system of a cable drawn farming system.
Committee ChairCoates, Wayne E.
MetadataShow full item record
PublisherThe University of Arizona.
RightsCopyright © is held by the author. Digital access to this material is made possible by the University Libraries, University of Arizona. Further transmission, reproduction or presentation (such as public display or performance) of protected items is prohibited except with permission of the author.
AbstractTractors provide the primary source of power for most farming operations. Their mobility makes them adaptable to different production practices. However, they have two major disadvantages: soil compaction resulting from multiple passes of heavy power units, and inefficiency in transmitting power through tractive means. Cable farming systems were developed to overcome those disadvantages. Most, however, are used only for tillage operations, and employ a limited number of implements. A cable drawn farming system (CDFS) was developed which utilizes a modified linear move irrigation structure as its main frame. The system consists of a mobile truss, carriage, endless cable and controller. A multipurpose carriage system was designed for the CDFS. Finite element analysis was used to determine carrier frame and attachment structural requirements. An implement carrier of the carriage system was designed to be drawn by an endless cable, and to accommodate most three-point hitch implements, including PTO driven implements. An automatic cable gripping device was developed to connect the carriage to the cable. An electrical system was developed to provide power to the carrier through an electric trolley. A rail was designed to guide the carrier and support the electric lines. Potential harvesting scenarios were examined to identify material handling solutions. Evaluation suggested material handling requirements of vegetables could be best met with a conveyor system, while other crops might utilize trailers. A programmable logical controller (PLC) was selected and a control sequence is provided to accommodate the field operations. This research defined design parameters for a CDFS compatible with linear move irrigation system operations. Analytical results provide support for the concept of multipurpose use of a linear move irrigation system.
Degree ProgramAgricultural & Biosystems Engineering