Source: Session 161
The adjective clause is a dependent clause A clause is a group of words having a subject and a verb. A dependent clause must be attached to the independent clause to make sense. It is usually used as some part of speech. A dependent clause can be an adjective, adverb, or noun. It cannot stand alone as a sentence. Source: Lesson 246 that modifies a noun A noun is a word that names a person, place, thing, or idea. Examples: man, city, book, and courage. Source: Lesson 16 or a pronoun A pronoun is a word that replaces a noun or a group of words used as a noun.Source: Lesson 21 . It will begin with a relative pronoun Relative pronouns join dependent clauses to independent clauses. They are who, whose, whom, which, and that. Source: Lesson 26 (who, whose, whom, which, and that) or a subordinate conjunction A conjunction is a word that joins other words, phrases, or clauses. Subordinate conjunctions join dependent clauses to independent clauses. Some common subordinate conjunctions are after, although, as, as if, because, beto havee, if, since, so that, than, unless, until, when, where, and while.Source: Lesson 84 (when and where). Those are the only words that can be used to introduce an adjective clause . A preposition must always have an object. Source: Lesson 176 which will come between the introductory word and the word it renames.
Source: Lesson 191 , or object of your preposition Good preposition is a term that initiate a prepositional phrase and you will reveals the partnership ranging from the object plus one keyword on phrase
An enthusiastic adverb clause try a based upon clause one to modifies a great verb , adjective Adjectives tailor otherwise affect the concept of nouns and pronouns and you may let us know which, whose, the type, and just how of a lot about the nouns otherwise pronouns it customize. They arrive before noun otherwise pronoun it modify. Source: Session 151 , or other adverb Adverbs is terminology one to customize (1) verbs, (2) adjectives, and you may (3) almost every other adverbs. They share with just how (manner), whenever (time), where (place), how much (degree), and why (cause). It usually modifies the latest verb . Adverb clauses are delivered by using conjunction A conjunction are a beneficial word you to touches other conditions, sentences, otherwise clauses. Under conjunctions signup dependent clauses in order to independent clauses. Some typically common subordinate conjunctions are after, even if, due to the fact, since if, once the, ahead of, if the, once the, making sure that, than simply, unless of course, until, whenever, in which, although.Source: Tutorial 84 and once, though, as, as if, ahead of, since the, if, just like the, connexion ne demek in order that, than simply, although, unless of course, up to, when, in which, even though. These are merely some of the more common of them.
A noun clause is a dependent clause that can be used in the same way as a noun A noun is a word that names a person, place, thing, or idea. Examples: man, city, book, and courage. Source: Lesson 16 or pronoun A pronoun is a word that replaces a noun or a group of words used as a noun.Source: Lesson 21 . It can be a subject The subject tells who or what about the verb. Source: Lesson 91 , predicate nominative A predicate nominative or predicate noun completes a linking verb and renames the subject. It is a complement or completer because it completes the verb. Predicate nominatives complete only linking verbs. The verb in a sentence having a predicate nominative can always be replaced by the word equals. Source: Lesson 101 , direct object A direct object receives the action performed by the subject. The verb used with a direct object is always an action verb. Another way of saying it is that the subject does the verb to the direct object. Source: Lesson 106 , appositive An appositive is a word or group of words that identifies or renames the noun or pronoun that it follows. It is set off by commas unless closely tied to the word that it identifies or renames. (“Closely tied” means that it is needed to identify the word.) An appositive can follow any noun or pronoun. Source: Lesson 126 , indirect object An indirect object is really a prepositional phrase in which the preposition to or for is not stated but understood. It tells to whom or for whom something is done. The indirect object always comes between the verb and the direct object. A preposition must always have an object. Source: Lesson 180 . Some of the words that introduce noun clauses are that, whether, who, why, whom, what, how, when, whoever, where, and whomever. To check if the dependent clause is a noun clause , substitute the clause with the pronoun it or the proper form of the pronouns he or she .
Instructions: Find the adjective , adverb , or noun conditions throughout these phrases. If it is an adjective otherwise adverb term , share with and that term they modifies, whenever it is an effective noun condition give how they are put ( subject , predicate nominative , direct object , appositive , secondary target , otherwise object of your preposition ).