Day of the Dead why celebrate this ( According to tradition, the heavens open on the day of the dead, and the departed souls return to earth for a while.)
Every year, Mexicans gather at the cemetery to remember their departed family members, in a celebration that is the most important celebration in the country. According to tradition, heaven opens, and the souls of the dead return to earth.
What is the Day of the Dead?
It is not just a matter of one day. In fact, it is a two-day festival traditionally celebrated on November 1 and 2, where families welcome back the souls of their deceased relatives for a brief reunion that includes food, drink, and even a feast on the altars. That includes toys, which serve to entice all souls on vacation to visit.
It is marked as a celebration rather than a gloomy affair, a time when the living and the dead are believed to connect. “It is a celebration. Sadness happens when our relatives die, but on this day we have to show them that we remember them with joy,
“We dance, we sing – they need to feel that they are welcome.” Festivities can also begin on 28 October depending on the location, and in some places, the day is celebrated on 6 November.
How did the celebration originate?
The celebration is believed to be a pre-Hispanic tradition that came from indigenous communities thousands of years ago. For the Aztecs, death was fleeting, and spirits could return and travel. According to some analysts, after the arrival of the Spanish in the 16th century, those traditions were merged into the Catholic calendar and are now celebrated to coincide with All Souls’ Day.
Who is celebrates
North America. The country of Mexico celebrates from October 31 to November 2. In Mexico, people celebrate their deceased family members with beautiful decorations and festivities, believing that they come back from the dead to enjoy a night with their families before going back. the afterlife.
how is the day of the dead celebrated
Day of the Dead is a pre-Hispanic tradition in which families remember their dead and celebrate the continuity of life. Offerings to the dead are set up which include photographs, food, candles, flowers, personal items, skulls made out of sugar, paper mache skeletons, and sweets.
Families build (altars) at the graves of their loved ones. They also use flowers (marigolds), as they are believed to help bring spirits back from the graveyard to their family homes.
Others write short, satirical poems, also known as “Calaveras” (skulls), symbolizing friends that describe their interesting habits and are full of funny anecdotes.
The skull, which represents the cyclicity of life, is a major symbol of the day. Sugar or chocolate skulls can be given as gifts to both the living and the dead. Also popular is pan de Muerto, a loaf made in various shapes, often decorated with white frosting to represent the image of folded bones.
- FedEx Express jobs warehouse Package Handler jobs 2023 – Apply Now For Warehouse Package Handler (PART-TIME) Position in Reno, Nevada (USA) – Best Opportunity
- FedEx Express jobs 2023 – Apply Now For Delivery Driver (PART-TIME) Position in Appleton, Wisconsin (USA) – Best Opportunity
- TouchPoint patient transporter jobs 2023 – Apply Now For PATIENT TRANSPORTER (FULL-TIME & PART-TIME) Position in Miramar Beach (USA) – Best Opportunity
- amazon DSP job 2023 – Apply Now For Delivery Driver (FULL-TIME & PART-TIME) Position in Morrisville (USA) – Best Opportunity
- Amazon DSP Jobs 2023 – Apply Now For Delivery Driver Amazon (FULL-TIME & PART-TIME) Position inThe Manassas (USA) – Best Opportunity