Museum of Fine Arts hosts Anne Frank exhibit
From Amsterdam to Tallahassee, Anne Frank’s legacy is here to inspire yet another generation with her words of hope and forgiveness. The FSU Museum of Fine Arts is hosting an exhibit, Anne Frank: A History for Today, that allows visitors not only to connect the tragic events of the Holocaust to Frank’s personal experience, but also to connect lessons of acceptance and peace to current issues.
“[The exhibit] is designed to educate young people and communities in North America about the dangers of intolerance, anti-Semitism, racism and discrimination, and to inspire the next generation to build a world based on equal rights and mutual respect,” says Museum Curator Dr. Teri Abstein. “It will [allow students] to make connections between what is going on politically and how Anne experienced it personally.”
Dr. Abstein believes that the understanding of equal rights and mutual respect that comes from visiting the Anne Frank exhibit is necessary in order for students to become effective future leaders.
Frank wrote about her dreams of one day becoming a famous writer, so that she could tell the story of the Secret Annex and how her family maintained hope of a future free of prejudice and discrimination. Now, not only is her diary published for the world to read, but her platform for inspiration has crossed the ocean as an exhibition to further impact such a distant place as Tallahassee, Florida.
For Dr. Abstein, this is the most moving aspect of the exhibit: “It is most inspiring that what a girl of thirteen wrote has been read by so many people.”
A series of informative panels of facts, quotes and photographs cover both the Frank family’s journey into hiding and eventual subjugation as well as the political and historical context of their oppression. Viewers observe the shocking and horrifying history and photographs of the rise and rule of Adolf Hitler juxtaposed with Anne’s growth from a child of freedom into a hopeful woman in captivity.
Although the atrocities of the true nature of war became evident to Frank soon after the start of her diary, she remained adamant to her core belief: “In spite of everything, that people are truly good at heart.” This exhibition provides a unique experience in which the strength of Frank’s core belief becomes evident.
The exhibit connects with curriculum taught in Leon County public schools and allows students to engage with the material outside of the classroom. Dr. Abstein hopes that after visiting the exhibition, students will be more proactive in their interactions with their peers, as to always remember the terrible events of the Holocaust and prevent similar travesties from happening in the future.
Though the exhibit is designed to have students reflect on the past and make connections to the present, she does not miss out on chances to reflect herself.
“After giving tours to middle school and high school students,” she says, “it is very meaningful to hear them make connections to their lives and today’s world with Anne’s story and to take away ideas for how they can inspire, change, and make a difference.”
Anne Frank: A History for Today will be showing at the Museum of Fine Arts until February 7. For more information, visit the museum’s website at mofa.fsu.edu.