Pain is something we all recognize. From the moment we are born, we learn a lot from pain. We learn not to touch things that get really hot; we learn to avoid stepping on certain objects. We learn not to overexert ourselves.
With all this learning, however, pain is difficult to avoid. No matter what type, consistency or how bad it becomes, it’s always there, lurking. And, as we get older, we seem to develop it in places and after activities that never occurred before.
Most of the time, when we experience pain, we take an over the counter pain med like acetaminophen, aspirin, or ibuprofen.
Alternative Pain Relief of Chronic Conditions Can Now be Achieved through Chiropractic Care
Recently more research and study has been given to the idea that chiropractic adjustments can work well, not only as a treatment for existing pain but as a preventative measure of chronic pain issues.
In December 2016 the publication Chiropractic & Manual Therapies, a peer-reviewed journal of medicine on chiropractic and osteopathy fields, released information about a research study. The study was performed to determine what effect spinal manipulation therapy (SMT), a.k.a. Chiropractic treatment had on pain. More specifically, it looked at the ability for SMT to improve the pressure pain threshold a patient exhibits. Pressure pain threshold essentially being how much pain a person can experience before it becomes
For the study, however, the threshold levels were measured at when applied pressure moved from discomfort to pain, not how much pain the subject could withstand.
During the study, 34 subjects between the ages of 18 to 36 were chosen. Among them 20 were male, and 14 were female. Each of the subjects was examined in advance and found to display no pre-existing conditions that could affect the results.
For the study, non-invasive methods were used on four different areas of the body to determine each subjects’ initial threshold of pain. Once determined, each subject was given a high-velocity, low-amplitude SMT, using the hypothenar mammillary push. Each subject was treated with this specific SMT technique while laying on their side versus their back. The push was also specifically aimed between the L5 and S1 vertebrae of the spine.
After the SMT was completed, the pain threshold tests were carried out again at 0, 10, 20 and 30- minute intervals. Upon completion, the pressure pain threshold was collected again, and then again at 10, 20, and 30 minutes after the conclusion of the treatment session.
When the research data was compiled and compared, it was discovered that subjects reported an increase in tolerance to pain in 2 of the four areas tested. These areas where the calf and lumbar spinal region.
The areas no discernable change was experienced were the scapula and forehead regions. While this study involved only one treatment before result were gathered, it did warrant the need for further testing with the idea that patients coping with chronic pain
issues, especially in the lower back area, can expect to receive relief from standard chiropractic treatments.