Invaders from outer space 外星怪客入侵記
Mark and Kathleen had taken a trip to the countryside for a relaxing picnic. As usual, Mark had prepared banana and lettuce sandwiches, which Kathleen hated. “I can’t believe you can eat those things. They taste disgusting,” she said. Mark was just about to tell her how great they were, when he heard a loud noise in the sky above.
When he looked up he couldn’t believe his eyes. An alien spaceship, with flashing lights was making strange noises and hovering about 100m above them. “Quick, run behind that tree,” yelled Mark. They got behind the tree but it was too late — the aliens had already seen them. The door of the spaceship slid open and a transporter carrying four aliens, all armed with ray guns, started to fly towards them at high speed.
“Let’s get out of here!” Kathleen shouted, and they began to weave in and out of the bushes as gun shots exploded behind them. Mark turned his head just in time to see his banana and lettuce sandwiches explode into a ball of flames. He didn’t have time to worry about that though, because by now the transporter was right behind them.
“Put your hands in the air. We have you surrounded. Resistance is futile,” an alien voice said from the transporter. Mark and Kathleen put their hands up, and the aliens got out of their craft. The first alien looked like a giant slug and had mean green eyes. “We have come to conquer the earth,” said the alien. “You can’t do that. This is our home!” Kathleen shouted, just as a laser beam descended from the ship and began transporting them up to the mother ship…
(JOHN PHILLIPS, STAFF WRITER)
Write your own ending to the story! 寫下你的故事結局:
Idea 1: The aliens take Mark and Kathleen up to the mother ship where they meet the leader. What do they say to him? What does he look like?
Idea 2: When they get to the mother ship they find it’s empty. What do they do? Do they fly away in it? Where are the aliens?
Idea 3: The aliens want to take Mark and Kathleen back to their planet to conduct experiments on them! Do they escape? What else happens?