Population: 4 369.356 thousand people (2010)
Area: 104659.0 sq. km
According to citypopulationreview.com, the state of Kentucky is located in the eastern United States. Its capital is Frankfort. On the territory of Kentucky there are such large cities as Louisville, Owensboro, Bowling Green, Lexington Fayette, Hopkinsville.
Most of the territory of Kentucky is occupied by the Appalachian mountain ranges. The lands of the state in the north come to the territories of Ohio, Indiana, Illinois, in the west – to Missouri, in the south – to Tennessee, in the east – to Virginia and West Virginia. The main waterways of the state are the Tennessee and Ohio rivers.
Here are the caves, which are the longest in the world. The territory is dominated by a subtropical continental climate with an average summer temperature of +31 degrees Celsius and zero winter temperature.
The Kentucky lands are home to natural gas, oil, and hard coal deposits, which are the state’s most important minerals. Enterprises of the tobacco, textile, and food industries are successfully operating and producing products; developed mechanical engineering; produce metal products and vehicles; produces shoes, furniture and alcoholic beverages.
Kentucky is the second largest tobacco producer after Virginia. In addition, soybeans, corn, forage grasses are grown here, race horses and cattle are bred. The state is the birthplace of American corn whiskey – bourbon. Large enterprises for the production of the famous alcoholic beverage are located in Kentucky.
The name of the state comes from the river of the same name. The development of the state by Europeans began in the 18th century. Daniel Boone’s expedition explored the Appalachian Mountains from 1767 to 1771. During the Civil War, the inhabitants of the state were adherents of different armies – Unionists and Confederates. The fighting took place here only at the beginning of the war, then the territory of the state was under the rule of the northerners. In 1891, the New Constitution was adopted in Kentucky. On the territory of the modern state is one of the largest factories for the manufacture of playing cards.
Population: 279.044 thousand people (2007)
Area: 739.5 sq. km
Time zone: UTC-5, summer UTC-4
Altitude: 298 m
The city of Lexington is part of the state called Kentucky. Lexington belongs to the US county of Fayette. This city is located in the central part of the state. The city itself was formed in 1775. Four years later, the first university was founded here. In 1818, Mary Todd Lane was born in what is now Lexington, and twenty-four years later she became the wife of President Lincoln. The city has left its mark on history. It was the battles near Lexington and ConcordIn the spring of 1775, the American War of Independence began. In the modern history of the city, the fact that in the fall of 2010 the city’s residents elected Democrat Jim Gray as the next mayor was significant. He does not hide his own non-traditional sexual orientation and, in fact, he became the first homosexual in the history of the city, who was elected to such a high post. See Kentucky counties.
Lexington is quite popular outside the state for a well-developed tobacco industry and horse breeding. Also in this American city, the food, engineering and printing industries are well developed. On the territory of Lexington there are the most beautiful hippodromes, horse shows are held here annually, and the famous races gather a huge number of spectators from all over the city. Forbes magazine named Lexington one of the seventeen cleanest cities in the world.
Lexington has a number of attractions that will be of interest to travelers. Among the main attractions of the city, it is worth highlighting: Southland Christian Church, Christ Church Cathedral, Commonwealth Stadium and many others. In addition, there are more than a hundred parks on the territory of this American city. Also a beautiful place is the arboretum, located next to the University of Kentucky. It is home to eighteen native Kentucky tree species and over fifty native grasses. Also, this arboretum has one and a half thousand different varieties of roses.
The city’s sister cities include: French Deauville, Irish County Kildare, English Newmarket, and Japanese Shizunai.
Population: 701,500 thousand people (2006)
Area: 1032.0 sq. km
Time zone: UTC
Zip code: 40201
Louisville is a large and beautiful city that belongs to the state of Kentucky.USA, located in a picturesque place with waterfalls and the beautiful Ohio River. The city belongs to the so-called “southern” cities of the United States. The city is named after King Louis XVI of France by Colonel Clarke in 1778. The history of development and the reasons for the emergence of this unique city are interesting. Due to the fact that cargo ships were constantly moving along the river, which had to be reloaded due to seething waterfalls, during the period of these manipulations there was a crowd of about 7 thousand people. It was these circumstances that led to the fact that in 1828 Louisville was officially registered. This city has played a significant role in the history of its country. So, during the years of the Civil War, this small town was a persistent and reliable stronghold for the entire state of Kentucky., as it was the center of important combat maneuvers, transportation and providing its army with everything necessary.
Since the 1980s, the city has undergone dramatic changes, which resulted in the emergence of several luxurious districts, which are inhabited exclusively by the elite of society. The extraordinary architecture of the city attracts attention – a mix of past and present traditions. The so-called “Old Louisville” is a historical district built in the Victorian style. The city center is built up with skyscrapers. On a street called West Main Street is a collection of cast-iron facades. In general, architectural splendor for every taste. In the “bohemian” areas there is a huge number of nightclubs, shops and first-class restaurants.
The city is famous for a large number of museums with a collection of weapons, and interesting historical finds for a thousand years. The city is also famous for its magnificent and famous throughout America Museum of Art, founded in 1927. The museum has a huge number of exhibits and regularly holds exhibitions. Also in the city is the famous “Fort Knox”, which houses the US gold reserves.