Assignment #3: Self-Portrait
- An artwork created by you that is a self-portrait
- A two-page, double-spaced (500 words) minimum typed artist’s statement that discusses the self-portrait
You will need to upload your Word doc and image of your self-portrait into Canvas by midnight on the due date. Be sure to use a strong internet connection when doing so. I will accept late assignments, but they are deducted 10 points per day late.
Because this assignment will serve as our final culminating project and activity (instead of a final exam), you are also required to upload an image of your self-portrait and a one-paragraph description of the artwork under “Discussions” by deadline. Then, look through your classmates’ self-portraits and choose two for reposts. In each repost, make at least two critical comments (one should be a compliment and one should be a suggestion for improvement).
The roles of identity, the body, and self have all been part of the artistic experience, but the 20th and 21st centuries, in particular, focused on these concepts and the ambiguities of such identification. Make a self-portrait. This self-portrait should be a personal expression and it can be made in any medium or technique—drawing, painting, sculpture, photograph, film, mixed media; any medium is acceptable, but some thought into why you are using a particular medium must be demonstrated and explained. If you use a photograph, it must be taken by you or manipulated in such a way that shows creative expression. Try to think of several things that are very important to you and use them to inform your self-portrait. You might consider using artistic styles that we looked at in class or think about how your self-portrait relates to one or more styles or movements, either those you liked or you felt were relevant to your sense of self. Consider aspects such as choice of medium, size, composition, elements, and principles of art. Write a two-page description/explanation that conveys the meaning of your self-portrait.
Do you have an upcoming essay or assignment due?
If you are looking for a similar or different assignment contact us for help by placing an order anonymously and it will be delivered in time.Get Started & Get it within 6 Hours Order & Get it within 12 Hours
You can trust us for this and even for your future projects