Bird is the ultimate illustrated guide to every species that regularly breeds in or visits Europe. Each species is covered in great detail. Up to 20 illustrations are provided of each species; males, females, juveniles; season by season; at rest and in flight. A colour photograph is provided of each bird in its natural habitat or exhibiting an aspect of its behaviour; a scale diagram shows how the bird compares to another commonly known species; a distribution map shows at a glance where the bird can be seen; similar species are compared to prevent common identification mistakes; and, fascinating facts provide a wider and richer portrait of the bird. No other book manages to do all this with such depth of research or such exquisitely beautiful illustrations.
The book includes a CD with files for iPod, Mac or PC: Notes, images and songs for 250 European birds.
Introduction, How to use this book, The parts of a bird, How this book was created, How to identify birds, The living bird, The families of birds, Bird habitats of Europe, What you need to watch birds, Useful contacts, Wildfowl; Grouse, Pheasants, and Partridges; Divers and Grebes; Shearwaters, Cormorants, and Gannets; Herons and Pelicans; Birds of Prey; Crakes and Rails; Waders; Gulls, Terns, and Auks; Sandgrouse, Pigeons, and Cuckoos; Owls; Swifts, Woodpeckers, and allies; Larks, Swallows, and Pipits; Wrens and allies; Thrushes and Chats; Warblers and Flycatchers; Tits, Treecreepers, and Nuthatches; Shrikes, Starlings, and Crows; Sparrows, Finches, and Buntings; Glossary, Index,
There are currently no reviews for this product. Be the first to review this product!
Peter Hayman is one of the best-known and most authoritative ornithologists and bird artists in Europe, widely acclaimed for his uniquely meticulous approach to bird illustration. His previous books include the best-selling Birdwatcher's Pocket Guide, and Shorebirds of the World, and he has contributed to The Illustrated Guide to the Birds of Southern Africa, among many other books. Rob Hume has been Editor of the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds' award-winning Birds magazine since 1989. He has written several ornithological books, including Discovering Birds, Observer's Birds, Focus on Birdwatching, and Birds by Character. For 10 years he was a member and Chairman of the national British Birds Rarities Committee that scrutinizes reports of rare birds in Britain, and in 1973 he discovered a new species for Britain, the American Ring-billed Gull. He lives in Bedfordshire.