Fruits, like vegetables, are of great value for a healthy and long life. Based on their specific nutritional content. Just look at nectarines as one example. Scientifically validated. Read on to learn about details.
THE PHILOSOPHY BEHIND
As you have learned, inter alia, from my previous publications, our health depends, besides physical exercise, on natural diet with special reference to fruits and vegetables.
For better understanding, let’s focus on one specific fruit – nectarines.
NATURAL MEDICAL BENEFITS – SCIENTIFICALLY VALIDATED
The nutritional background of this favorite fruit comes with a range of health benefits. Just to pick some of those, according to the U.S. Department of Agriculture.
Cutting down high blood pressure
Potassium as one of the basic constituents in nectarines, it is tois an excellent support to keep blood pressure under control, since hypertension hurts prime organs like our heart. With special reference to heart attack, coronary heart disease and stroke. According to the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC).
As based also on research at, inter alia, the Hypertension Institute in Nashville, TN.
Strengthen immune system
Based on the fact that there is infection behind any disease, vitamin C (as we find it, inter alia, in nectarines) tackles this risk considerably.
According to research at, inter alia, the University of Otago in Christchurch, New Zealand.
Therefore, the scientists recommend an increased intake of vitamin C rich food. Especially in Western countries where populations are lacking appropriate amount of this vital vitamin.
Saving skin health
Also vitamin A is important, as we find it in nectarines, supporting our skin health by saving it from UV radiation.
The mineral copper on the other hand, also to be found in nectarines, supports the elasticity of our skin.
According to research at, inter alia, Jan Kochanowski University in Kielce, Poland.
The benefit of nectarines for weight control lies, inter alia, on the fact that they are sweet but low in fat and calories. Also helpful is their content of fiber which offers quick saturation without overeating.
According to, inter alia, the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC).
One of the powerful phytonutrients in nectarines are anthocyanins which are known for their anti-tumor properties of being
That’s why, according to the Tongji University School of Medicine in Shanghai, China, these anthocyanins may well represent an anti-cancer power.
This is also in line with the results of research at the Kyoto Prefectural University of Medicine in Kyoto, Japan, according to which cancer has an inverse relation to the consumption of green and yellow fruits and vegetables.
Even more than that:
Built on research at the U.S. National Institute of Aging in Baltimore, MD,
- Harvard School of Public Health in Boston, MA,
- Huazhong University of Science and Technology in Wuhan,
- Shandong University in Jinan
came to the scientific conclusion that
higher consumption of fruits and vegetables may well lower the risk of mortality from all causes.
IN A NUTSHELL
Fruits, like vegetables, are of great value for a healthy and long life. Based on their specific nutritional content. Just look at nectarines as one example. Scientifically validated.
HAVE ANOTHER UNSOLVED HEALTH PROBLEM?
For more blogs go to
As a leading documentation and information center New Medical Frontiers, Inc. receives a lot of questions daily. Learn about the answers in this blog "Ask The Natural Online Doctor".
Dr. Mark Fritz, NMD, PhD