Industrial standards for manufacturing operations, equipment, facilities, worker safety, materials used, and all other aspects of large-scale production work have developed over time since the turn of the 19th century. Today, industrial standards are highly regulated with hundreds of different certifications, licenses, and requirements that manufacturers and processors can meet to exhibit the quality of their products and the reliability of their practices. In the stud welding industry, many resources help companies receive certifications and follow the best standards available internationally. As a comprehensive supplier of stud welding supplies, Northland Fastening Systems (NFS) follows international standards, including the ISO 9001:2015 certification for quality management systems.
ISO 9001:2015 standards require an industrial facility to demonstrate its ability to consistently offer services and products that meet its customers’ needs and improve customer satisfaction while adhering to applicable regulations and requirements. This is a generic ISO standard, but there are thousands of other ISO certifications, including ones that apply to the welding industry and stud welding supplies.
For stud welding, including drawn arc, capacitor discharge (CD), and short cycle operations, one international standard that gets into specifics is ISO 13918:2017.
This ISO standard applies to the use of studs and ceramic ferrules in drawn arc welding. It can be used to cover standards for other metalworking industries, but it’s most useful for arc stud welding processes. ISO 13918 covers requirements for using stud types and ferrules, including dimensions, mechanical properties, and materials used.
Details apply to fully-threaded, partially-threaded, and virtually-threaded studs as well as threaded studs with flanges, studs with internal threads, and threaded studs with reduced shafts. Regulations also cover shear connectors and insulation pins.
In addition, these standards cover the use of ceramic ferrules that contain molten metal at the connection point. Because ferrules need to be removed easily after the weld is performed, they need to follow strict rules for size, materials, and fabrication process.
ISO standards like 9001 and 13918 provide important guidelines for everyone in the stud welding industry. By following internationally accepted industry standards, companies are able to provide better services and products to their customers; operators can perform safer, long-lasting welds; and parts manufacturers can fabricate tools, studs, and welding accessories in universal formats.
To learn more about our services and full selection of stud welding supplies for drawn arc, CD, and short cycle operations, contact NFS at (651) 730-7770. You can also request a quote online to get started with us today.