There are basic body needs that maximize the function and efficiency of our immune system. According to Dictionary.com, the immune system is “a diffuse, complex network of interacting cells, cell products, and other cell forming tissues that protect the body from pathogens and other foreign substances, destroys infected and malignant cells, and removes cellular debris.” As human beings, we need fresh air, pure water, energizing food, rejuvenating sleep, beneficial exercise, and a stress-free healthy thought process to keep our immune system functioning at its best.
We all know that air is necessary for life and research shows that spending time in nature surrounded by fresh air can increase energy. “Nature is food for the soul” says Richard Ryan, researcher and professor of psychology at the University of Rochester.
Henry David Thoreau said, “I believe that water is the only drink for a wise man.” Audrey Hepburn commented that “Water is life, and clean water means health.” Our body is made up of 75% water and it helps to regulate all of our bodily functions. Water is the main source of electrical and magnetic energy transport that supplies the power of life to every cell in the body. This explains why water is often referred to as “life”.
It’s possible to eat 3 meals a day (plus snacks) and still have a body that is starving for food. When we feed our bodies highly processed foods, there are no nutrients that the body can utilize as energy. This leads to the body asking for more and more energizing food until it finally ingests something that can be absorbed and used as fuel.
Many feel that sleep is a waste of time and those hours could be better spent increasing productivity. However, obtaining proper quality and quantity of sleep plays a major role in our physical and mental health. Among other things, the body heals and repairs itself as it sleeps and works on maintaining healthy hormone balances and insulin levels.
When it comes to exercise, we are all aware of the many benefits it provides. According to Henry David Thoreau, “An early-morning walk is a blessing for the whole day.” One of the main benefits is that exercise helps to reduce stress and clears the mind leading to a healthier perspective on life. The main motivator is to find the type of movement that works best for you.
A healthy mind leads to a healthy body. Positive thoughts and drowning out the negative chatter in our brains are good places to start in reducing stress. By tuning into our bodies and slowing down, we can begin to understand how stress affects us. Deep breathing, daily meditation, and being present in the moment are all very effective ways to reduce stress in our busy demanding lives.
As an early risk assessment tool, adding thermography to a yearly health routine can provide peace of mind. We all have physical, mental, emotional, and spiritual needs that must be met in order to lead a happy, healthy, and fulfilled life. By taking one step at a time, it is doable without making us feel like we’re on overload.