Please select State, Grade and subject before Search
MGSE1.NBT.6 Subtract multiples of 10 in the range 10-90 from multiples of 10 in the range of 10-90 (positive or zero differences), using concrete models or drawings and strategies based on place value, properties of operations and/or the relationship between addition and subtraction; relate the strategy to a written method and explain the reasoning used. (e.g.,70 – 30, 30 – 10, 60 – 60) MGSE1.NBT.7 Identify dimes, and understand ten pennies can be thought of as a dime. (Use dimes as manipulatives in multiple mathematical contexts.)
MGSE1.OA.1 Use addition and subtraction within 20 to solve word problems involving situations of adding to, taking from, putting together, taking apart, and comparing, with unknowns in all positions, e.g., by using objects, drawings, and equations with a symbol for the unknown number to represent the problem.
MGSE1.G.2 Compose two-dimensional shapes (rectangles, squares, trapezoids, triangles, half-circles, and quarter-circles) or three-dimensional shapes (cubes, right rectangular prisms, right circular cones, and right circular cylinders) to create a composite shape, and compose new shapes from the composite shape.6 This is important for the future development of spatial relations which later connects to developing understanding of area, volume, and fractions.
MGSE1.OA.7 Understand the meaning of the equal sign, and determine if equations involving addition and subtraction are true or false. For example, which of the following equations are true and which are false? 6 = 6, 7 = 8 – 1, 5 + 2 = 2 + 5, 4 + 1 = 5 + 2.
MGSE1.OA.8 Determine the unknown whole number in an addition or subtraction equation relating three whole numbers. For example, determine the unknown number that makes the equation true in each of the equations 8 + ? = 11, 5 = _ – 3, 6 + 6 = _.
MGSE1.OA.2 Solve word problems that call for addition of three whole numbers whose sum is less than or equal to 20, e.g., by using objects, drawings, and equations with a symbol for the unknown number to represent the problem.
MGSE1.NBT.1 Count to 120, starting at any number less than 120. In this range, read and write numerals and represent a number of objects with a written numeral.
Education Galaxy provides online GMAS (Georgia Milestones Assessment System) preparation for students in grades K-6 to help build mastery towards the Georgia Standards of Excellence (GSE) and improve EOG scores. Our unique online program is easy to use, available in English and Spanish, and enjoyable for both teachers and students. Students work on their Study Plans practicing important concepts while teachers pull formative assessment reports to identify the strengths and weaknesses of their classroom and individual students.