Some experts believe Bitcoin is set to break yet another record and reach $100,000 in value in the near future. This means that all holders of the cryptocurrency have more reason to keep funds in their blockchain wallets. With all the excitement revolving around blockchain technology, though, it might be smart to point a few things out.
First of all, what is the difference between a token vs cryptocurrency? As you might expect, making this distinction is quite complicated. It’s taken years for a wider audience to start grasping the basics about crypto. Some compare it to the start of the internet, also referred to as Web 1.0.
Bitcoin is, in simple terms, both a cryptocurrency and a token. However, if you observe its market activity, holders treat it more like a currency than anything else. There are plenty of altcoins that behave differently, though. If you’re curious as to how this all works, consider reading ahead!
Token vs Cryptocurrency: The Basics
Cryptocurrencies are a virtual or digital representation of value, or currency, secured and controlled by cryptography. Essentially, they work on decentralized networks with blockchain technology. Nodes, or various individuals that mine or dedicate hardware to solve blockchain equations, run the distributed ledger.
While it’s possible, and already exists, to run a centralized cryptocurrency, most are completely decentralized and not owned by a central authority. This means that every participant plays a role in determining a cryptocurrency’s value, distribution, utility, and other factors. To sum things up, cryptocurrencies are basically virtual money; bytefederal.com mentions Bitcoin ATMs that are popping up in major cities already!
Tokens, on the other hand, represent tradable assets on a blockchain. These can provide unique utility for all participants. One fantastic example involves Ethereum. Yes, ETH is a blockchain. However, it allows for trading digital assets, like NFTs, in exchange for a cryptocurrency, like Ethereum itself!
You can use tokens to make investments, raise funds, make unique purchases, or store value.
Once you’ve dived into the world of tokens, you’ll want to build a token guide with information you grab from various sources. Tokens are assets and often lack liquidity. Many compare it to holding real estate; its value can vary greatly over time. With the growing popularity of metaverses, and as long as offer rests below demand, many tokens should see growth.
Cryptocurrencies, as liquid assets, have been around for quite some time. They’re well known, however, for their volatility. Finding a cryptocurrency guide that works is quite difficult. So, in similar fashion to working with tokens, you’ll want to compile information that you trust.
Be wary of new coins, and think carefully when considering selling a dip.
Entering Web 3.0
Cryptocurrencies and tokens have at least one thing in common. That is, they’re huge players in the world of Web 3.0. As the digital age takes a step in the direction of decentralization, you’ll want to keep tabs on both of them. Looking at the comparison of token vs cryptocurrency, you should draw one conclusion. Do plenty of research and find dependable sources before investing in either.
Hopefully this article gave you some helpful information regarding tokens and cryptocurrency. If it did, make sure to check out other articles on the site!