Taking off and landing can best be described as processes that occur in opposite proportions. But there are slight differences in take-offs and landings. In all orthodox planes, we see how they accelerate along the ground until they gain and generate momentum with sufficient lift for takeoff, while reverse is the process for landing in conventional flights. Also, some airplanes can take off at low speed, this being a short takeoff. In cases of helicopters and Harrier Jump Jets, they can take off and land vertically while rockets also usually take off vertically, but some designs can land horizontally.
The least takeoff distance is of primary interest in the operation of any aircraft because it defines the runway requirements. The distance is obtained by taking off at some minimum safe speed that allows sufficient margin above stall and provides satisfactory control. Plane’s engines are designed to move it forward at high speed, which makes air flow rapidly over the wings, which throw the air down toward the ground, generating an upward force called lift that overcomes the plane’s weight and holds it in the sky. The wings force the air downward and that pushes the plane upward.
To obtain minimum takeoff distance at the specific lift-off speed, the forces that act on the aircraft must provide the maximum acceleration during the takeoff roll. The various forces acting on the aircraft may or may not be under the control of the pilot, and various procedures may be necessary in certain aircraft to maintain takeoff acceleration at the highest value.
What happens when you experience short field take-off and landing? Most accidents occur in situations where a pilot experiences a short or minimal field during taking-off or landing. It happens actually whereby the runway length is shorter than that normally available for the conditions.
Pilots try as much as possible to avoid what is known as LOC-I (loss of control at take-off). The LOC-I occurs as a result of any of the following factors: insufficient control of the aircraft while still on the ground, incorrect rotation airspeed, wrong aerodynamic configuration, wrong loading of the aircraft (or incorrect securing of cargo), crosswind exceeding pilot or aircraft capability or wrong aircraft attitude at rotation and during the initial climb phase.
Our experience can be our best bet! We all know that travelling by plane can be a creepy, terrifying and chilling experience for people of all ages and backgrounds, particularly if they’ve not flown before or have experienced a traumatic event. It is not something to be ashamed of: it is no different from the personal fears and dislikes of other things that very many people have. For some, understanding something about how aircraft work and what happens during a flight may help to overcome a fear which is based on the unknown or on not being in control.
It is however completely normal to be scared of flying, but not as bad as what others think. The best thing to do while on board or airborne is stay safe and enjoy your flight. How can one achieve that? Simple! Rediscover yourself and behave normal, do not be prone to any form of turbulence because the Plane isn’t going to crash just because of one turbulence or the other. You should also know that planes are built to withstand most turbulence. And in the case of more extreme turbulence, which would ideally be navigated around, your pilot is able to bring down the plane’s speed to a safe velocity, so your plane won’t be damaged if it passes through the disturbances.
Once you are aboard, make sure you are focused, it can be well worth having some form of distraction with you to avoid flying phobia. Entertain yourself as much as you can do, read books, magazines, sleep or watch movies. Do something! Plan to take your mind off things.