Website Detail Page
written by Larry Dukerich and Jane Jackson
This item is an educator's guide for teaching a unit on the topic of Newton's First and Third Laws. It is intended to give high school teachers support for developing a research-based module on inertia and interactions. It contains notes and procedures for two classroom demonstrations, one lab, and four work activities. The authors focus on how to help students transition from a descriptive model using kinematics to a causal model using dynamical laws of motion. The materials are aligned with teaching methodologies guided by Modeling Theory of Physics Instruction.
This item is part of a larger collection of resources and pedagogic materials developed by the Modeling Instruction project at Arizona State University.
SEE RELATED ITEMS BELOW for a link to the full collection and links to additional resources on this topic by the same authors.
This resource is part of a Physics Front Topical Unit.
Topic: Dynamics: Forces and Motion
Unit Title: Newton's First Law & Inertia
Beginning students can usually quote Newton's First and Third Laws, but struggle to understand what they really mean. This educator's guide, created by the respected Modeling Instruction project at Arizona State University, gives teachers in-depth support for developing a research-based unit on inertia and interactions. For more on the Modeling Instruction pedagogy, see the resource below.Link to Unit:
ComPADRE is beta testing Citation Styles!
Disclaimer: ComPADRE offers citation styles as a guide only. We cannot offer interpretations about citations as this is an automated procedure. Please refer to the style manuals in the Citation Source Information area for clarifications.
Citation Source Information
The APA Style presented is based on information from APA Style.org: Electronic References.
The Chicago Style presented is based on information from Examples of Chicago-Style Documentation.
The MLA Style presented is based on information from the MLA FAQ.
Modeling Instruction Program: Inertia and Interactions:
Is Part Of Modeling Instruction Program: Curriculum Resources
this is a link to the full collection of curriculum materials developed by the Modeling Instruction project.relation by Caroline Hall
Accompanies Modeling Instruction Program: Inertia Worksheet 1-Sketching Forces
This worksheet by the same authors was developed to be used after a brief introduction of Newton's First Law.relation by Caroline Hall
Accompanies Modeling Instruction Program: Inertia Worksheet 3-Forces and Interactions
This is a comprehensive set of homework questions designed for use after completion of a unit on inertia and Newton's Laws. It could also serve as a unit test.relation by Caroline Hall
Know of another related resource? Login to relate this resource to it.
Is Part Of