While the leaders, both political and military, are fighting for their turf in the streets and on social media, Pakistan and its people face the looming threat of water shortage and food scarcity in the days ahead.
These are indicated in the climate summaries released by Pakistan Meteorological Department (PMD) over the past two months. The summaries show a dangerous trend that may lead to severe crises in water supply and foodgrain production and supplies.
According to the 2020 report of the Global Climate Risk Index, Pakistan is the fifth country most highly vulnerable to global warming and climate change. Many studies in the past have warned that rapid changes in temperature would force dramatic changes in cropping seasons and could “potentially permanently eliminate” the viability of growing some crops. Experts have cautioned that extreme weather events could lead to poverty and malnutrition, food insecurity, stress on water resources, lower nutritional quality of major cereals and livestock productivity, force migration and boost viral outbreaks in both human and animal population. Vulnerability of crops to pest attacks has also increased.
The warning of the crisis has become reality all too soon. On May 6,2022, the new Prime Minister Shehbaz Sharif was informed that Pakistan, normally self-sufficient in wheat, would be forced to import 4.62 million metric tonnes of wheat in the current year to meet the shortfall in production. The reasons cited by his officials were “reduced wheat cultivation, water shortage, and fertiliser crisis due to the mismanagement by the previous government and delayed announcement of wheat support price”.
The meteorological warning early May this year warns of a more serious crisis for the country. The two months of March and April were the warmest in six decades with 62 to 74 per cent less rainfall than normal. Possible intense heat waves in the summer are expected to put great strain on water use and supply and food availability. Senior ecologist Rafiul Haq was quoted in a newspaper as cautioning that the country was not administratively prepared to handle acute water stress and growing food insecurity created as a result of such major shifts in weather patterns.
Various research studies over the years have clearly shown how climate change was threatening production of major crops like wheat, maize, cotton, rice and sugarcane. It is estimated that there could be a 3°C temperature rise by 2040 in Asian countries and by the end of the century temperatures were likely to shoot up by 5-6°C. Such extreme heat will cause the loss of almost 50% wheat productivity (Ghanem, 2010) in Asian countries. This loss will be greater for Pakistan due to its geographical position. A study conducted by Pakistani scholars in 2017 estimated significant changes in crop production in Pakistan. Another study in 2021 estimated a decrease of 14.7 and 20.5 percent of wheat and rice crop due to climate change in the past few years. .
The warning for the new government, and the Generals, is clear on the wall–unless they work to reduce the impact of climate change on major crops like wheat, Pakistan could perhaps be forced to import wheat from India in the near future.
Photo Credit : https://get-green-now.com/rubbish-removal-climate-change/