His Holiness the Dalai Lama offers wisdom on solving the world’s most pressing problems
“We must recognize that the suffering of one person or one nation is the suffering of humanity. That the happiness of one person or nation is the happiness of humanity.” – His Holiness the 14th Dalai Lama, Tenzin Gyatso.
TeachAids is humbled to have received guidance on pursuing social causes and service from His Holiness the 14th Dalai Lama, Tenzin Gyatso. In an interview with TeachAids Founder, Dr. Piya Sorcar, His Holiness emphasized the importance of compassion, determination, research and transparency in efforts to serve humanity.
His Holiness is a highly respected scholar, diplomat and political advocate. He is internationally renowned for his unwavering commitment to peace, harmony and compassion and for his enduring efforts to implement a peaceful resolution to the Chinese occupation of Tibet. His Holiness has received more than 150 awards and honors, including the 1989 Nobel Peace Prize.
According to Tibetan Buddhist tradition, the Dalai Lama is a manifestation of Avalokiteshvara, the Buddha of Compassion, and is reincarnated upon each passing. The High Lamas and Tibetan Government recognized His Holiness the 14th Dalai Lama as the reincarnation the 13th Dalai Lama in 1937, two years after his birth in the small village of Taktser in northeastern Tibet.
At age 15, His Holiness assumed political leadership of Tibet and immediately began his abiding work to spread goodwill and harmony throughout Tibet and around the world. A firm believer that “ basic human nature is compassionate,” His Holiness inspires Buddhists and non-Buddhists alike to treat others with love, dignity and kindness.
In 1959, he was forced into exile. Along with almost 80,000 dedicated followers, he relocated to Dharamsala, India, where he established the Tibetan Government-in-Exile and initiated the democratization of Tibet. In 2011, he formally abdicated the role of political leadership to the democratically elected Sikyong (Prime Minister) Dr. Lobsang Sangay.
His Holiness’s words stand as an enduring reminder that compassion and a motivation of kindness should underscore all human actions. He draws on his own experience of practicing compassion and notes that in addition to elevating humanity, compassion brings “not only peace of mind, but also individually good health.”
A fearless and highly moral leader, the Dalai Lama’s influence as a selfless spiritual authority and beloved figure of inspiration for millions of people around the world is unparalleled. His tireless dedication to nurturing compassion and goodwill worldwide has elevated humanity. TeachAids is tremendously honored by his support.