Lets Talk About Antivirus Software!
Nowadays more and more people are using a computer. A lot of them use it at their work place, but an increasing number of computer users have also discovered the need to have a computer at home. At the same time the number of Internet surfers increased. This is a good thing because people are realizing the advantages offered by the world of technology. As soon as they discover this, they start using computers and the Internet more and more, but at the same time not considering the threats that are coming in from all sides. They should know that if you don't protect yourself, nobody will. These threats are now coming from everywhere and they are growing in number and complexity. First threats of this kind were the viruses. At first, viruses were not that harmful. They were designed to perform a simple task, like flashing a single message onto the user's computer screen. Also the spread rate was slow, because not many people were connected to the Internet. But now the majority of viruses are programs intentionally written to obstruct with, or harm other programs or computer systems. And they are spreading very fast.
Many companies and people have had a lot of troubles because of these viruses. And so the need for antivirus software was born. At first one very simple antivirus appeared and this was enough. Now, as the threat is growing antivirus software are becoming a lot more complex. Some of them have also included a firewall so to better protect the users. In order to increase the competition, other antivirus software producers have also come up with a wonderful idea: to offer free scan online. This was a big help for people that are frequently using a computer mostly for their personal use, meaning it is not attached to a network and uses the Internet only from time to time. Now, they don't have to spend a lot of money to buy antivirus software that will be used very rarely.
Most of these antivirus programs have to be bought in order for you to use them at their full capacity. Also you have the option to test a so called "free trial version". These trial versions include all or most of the software's features, and are available to be checked out by the user for a short period of time, usually 30 days. After these 30 days, the program can no longer be used. Other antivirus software producers use another method; they offer a free trial version that you can keep forever. But it is not fully operational, meaning some of the options of the program cannot be used as they are not activated. After you have tried a program and you consider it is fit for your need, then you'll have to buy it to protect your computer at its full capacity.
Lately, viruses are mostly spread through e-mails because this is the most common use of the Internet. Also, e-mail viruses are easier to develop. E-mail viruses make use of the ability of having macros or scripts implanted in word documents, spreadsheets, HTML pages, and are programmed to run when the document is opened. But how does an e-mail virus works? When an e-mail with an infected document or program is received, the user unknowingly opens a document/program, which in turn executes a code to open the e-mail directory and to send a copy of itself as an e-mail attachment to a certain number of addresses. Some of the recipients of the e-mail open its attachment and the process repeats itself.
This is where the antivirus program comes in. This program is set to check all incoming and outgoing messages and their attachments. If an e-mail is detected to have a document or program infected with a virus the program offers several possibilities to deal with the threat: delete the e-mail, put it in quarantine or try to disinfect it. Most of the times, these choices are left to the user's decision. It is up to the user to set the program in such manner to best fit his needs. But not all viruses are coming by e-mail. A few of them use security errors in the operating system or your Internet browser to be launched automatically. But if you keep your antivirus and all the other programs updated, there will be a small chance of being infected via this route.
Nowadays, most viruses are spread in the form of e-mail attachments. This is because some of the worst recent viruses relay on recipients that throw away common sense and launch a deadly e-mail attachment. Commonly the attachments are with extensions that include .bat, .com, .exe, .pif, .scr, and .vbs. Sometimes to avoid the filters of antivirus software, virus creators enclose their malicious code in a .zip or .rar archive file. The file might even have a password to full antivirus programs that scan inside archives. And obviously, the password is included in the message as an image for the convenience of the naive user. As a simple but reliable rule, you should never open an attachment that you didn't expect to receive, even if it came from someone you know. Also, make sure your e-mail software is configured so it will not automatically open attachments.
Another common way of spreading viruses is file sharing. Many viruses spread themselves throughout open network shares. You can protect your computer not sharing files or directories over the network. But if you don't have a choice and you have to share your files, you are still able to reduce the risk of being infected by installing antivirus software and keeping it updated. Other ways to become infected with viruses are downloading files or software from the Internet, instant messaging or even web pages.
If the file you are downloading or the computer you are downloading it from is infected with a virus, there is a big chance that your computer will also become infected with the virus. As for the instant messaging, the major risk comes from accepting files from other users on the network. This risk can be minimized by configuring your antivirus software to scan all incoming files and also configure your other programs not to automatically accept files, and not to automatically execute the files you accept. Certain viruses are known to infect web servers. If you visit a website from an infected server, your computer could be infected with the same virus, but this is a very rare method of infection.
There are many different threats that are targeting the computers. Although they are very different, all of them are popularly called viruses. A virus by definition is a self-replicating file, not considering whether it is malicious or not. Another type of the so called viruses are worms; they circulate mainly through e-mail but also spread through a network. A worm is aware he is located in a network and uses it for replicating itself. Trojan horses (or trojans) are mostly used to insert some remote tools into a system in order to give the attacker free access to that system, without the user's knowledge. Most Trojan horses cannot replicate automatically.
With the increased number of Internet users, the existing threats are also raising as now there are many more computers to attack and more people that don't know to stay away from these threats. But the antivirus software producers are making it easier for us. There is a lot of antivirus software which cover a lot of threats. All we have to do is install one.
Mike Ber is the owner of the Canadian Domain Name Portal called http://www.Every.caHe is also a contributing author to Canadian Computer Magazine and http://www.Developer.ca website.
Rising Rate of Drug Shortages Is Framed as a National Security Threat The New York Times
National security is teaching the US to love tech controls Financial Times
Dope Security nabs $16M led by GV to build out secure web gateways designed to work on endpoints, not in the cloud - TechCrunch
Dope Security nabs $16M led by GV to build out secure web gateways designed to work on endpoints, not in the cloud TechCrunch
Security Researchers Spot $36m BEC Attack Infosecurity Magazine
Amid border security tensions, AMLO hosts US lawmakers Mexico News Daily
How TikTok Became a Matter of National Security The New York Times
Commerce Department Outlines Proposed National Security ... US Department of Commerce
FTC Seeks Comment on Business Practices of Cloud Computing ... Federal Trade Commission News
GNOME 44 features improved settings panels for Device Security Help Net Security
Ukraine Symposium – A Path Forward for Food Security in Armed ... Lieber Institute West Point
Indianapolis shopping center hosts security operations for Simon malls across America - FOX 59 Indianapolis
Indianapolis shopping center hosts security operations for Simon malls across America FOX 59 Indianapolis
80% of security leaders predict increase in cybersecurity automation Security Magazine
Thune Discusses Bill to Combat National Security Risks From ... Senator John Thune
IT in 2023: Security, cloud and more BetaNews
The Global Cloud Data Security Market size is expected to reach $10.5 billion by 2028, rising at a market growth of 15.1% CAGR during the forecast period - Yahoo Finance
The Global Cloud Data Security Market size is expected to reach $10.5 billion by 2028, rising at a market growth of 15.1% CAGR during the forecast period Yahoo Finance
CISA and NSA Enhance Security Framework With New IAM Guide Infosecurity Magazine
Google Halts Download of Chinese App Pinduoduo Over Security ... The Wall Street Journal
Feds will take over Jackson Hole Airport security Jackson Hole News&Guide
Virginia Beach police detail security plans for big crowds during Something in the Water weekend - 13newsnow.com WVEC
Virginia Beach police detail security plans for big crowds during Something in the Water weekend 13newsnow.com WVEC
Symposium will explore human security challenges News at UNG
Newport News School Board approves more funding for school security 13newsnow.com WVEC
Campus Safety and Security issue aggravated assault notice The Auburn Plainsman
Aviation security does not end at airports The Dallas Morning News
Ex-Homeland chief details Supreme Court security work after previously not disclosing financial relationship - CNN
Ex-Homeland chief details Supreme Court security work after previously not disclosing financial relationship CNN
Dexter Community Schools: One-time payments to teachers and ... thesuntimesnews.com
Amazon’s Practically Giving Away One of Our Favorite Home Security Cameras That Respects Your Privacy - Yahoo Life
Amazon’s Practically Giving Away One of Our Favorite Home Security Cameras That Respects Your Privacy Yahoo Life
OpenAI CEO warns of temporary security flaw MarketWatch
Topeka senator calls for security as frustrations flare at Kansas anti ... - The Topeka Capital-Journal
Topeka senator calls for security as frustrations flare at Kansas anti ... The Topeka Capital-Journal
JBRE: security exercise 15wing.af.mil
EBRD supports energy security in Romania European Bank for Reconstruction and Development
New Bedford school board wants more info before voting on security ... SouthCoastToday.com
Overall crime at Destiny USA down as SPD explores new security options with mall owners - CNYcentral.com
Overall crime at Destiny USA down as SPD explores new security options with mall owners CNYcentral.com
The Dominant Global Security Issue Is Still Fossil Fuels The National Interest Online
Senators Introduce Bipartisan Bill to Tackle National Security ... Senator Mark Warner
FACT SHEET: President Biden’s Budget Strengthens Border ... The White House
Fells Point security guard shoots man, proposed bill could require all guards to be licensed - CBS News
Fells Point security guard shoots man, proposed bill could require all guards to be licensed CBS News
Fact Sheet: Biden Administration's National Security Memorandum ... Homeland Security
TSA issues new cybersecurity requirements for airport and aircraft ... - Transportation Security Administration
TSA issues new cybersecurity requirements for airport and aircraft ... Transportation Security Administration
A New Security Category Addresses Web-borne Threats The Hacker News
Biden Administration Announces Additional Security Assistance for ... Department of Defense
FACT SHEET: Biden-Harris Administration Announces National ... The White House
Energy Security is National Security - Committee on Foreign Affairs - House Foreign Affairs Committee
Energy Security is National Security - Committee on Foreign Affairs House Foreign Affairs Committee
Microsoft Patch Tuesday, March 2023 Edition – Krebs on Security Krebs on Security
Infinity Global Cyber Security Services Check Point Software
Is Ether a Security? CoinDesk
Law enforcement or ‘security guards?’ USPS spars with union over ... Federal News Network
Feds Charge NY Man as BreachForums Boss “Pompompurin ... Krebs on Security
How To Clean the Spies In Your Computer?
Manual Spy Bot Removal > BookedSpaceBookedSpace is an Internet Explorer Browser Helper Object used to show advertising.Free PC Health Check - find bad files fast! How many corrupt and redundant files are lurking inside your PC ready to cause harmful errors? Find these harmful "time-bomb" files instantly and keep your computer ERROR FREE 24 hours a day!VariantsBookedSpace/Remanent : early variant (around July 2003) with filename rem00001.
An Open Letter From a So-called Stupid
Someone recently told me, "You would have to be a stupid to lose your personal information." While I respectfully responded to this person in the moment, the comment has stuck with me.
Click Here To Defeat Evil
Microsoft routinely releases new security updates, many of which are given it's highest severity rating "critical". Here's a typical announcement:"A security issue has been identified that could allow an attacker tocompromise a computer running Internet Explorer and gain control over it.
Computer Viruses and Other Nasties: How to Protect Your Computer from These Invaders
Can you protect your computer from all possible viruses and other invasions?The quickest answer to this is "no." It's just flat impossible to protect your computer from all viruses, registry attacks, worms, spyware, malware, popups, and other such nasties.
Phishing-Based Scams: A Couple of New Ones
Phishing in its "classic" variant is relatively well-known. Actually, 43.
Phishing: An Interesting Twist On A Common Scam
After Two Security Assessments I Must Be Secure, Right?---------------------------------------Imagine you are the CIO of a national financial institution and you've recently deployed a state of the art online transaction service for your customers. To make sure your company's network perimeter is secure, you executed two external security assessments and penetration tests.
Firewalls: What They Are And Why You MUST Have One!
A firewall is a system or gateway that prevents unauthorized access to your computer or private network. It is usually the first line of defense in protecting your private information or data.
Passwords or Pass Phrase? Protecting your Intellectual Property
Much has been said on the theory of password protection for files, computer login, and other network access. In the past we used a combination of letters, special characters, and other techniques to try and prevent unwanted or unauthorized access to our computers, resources, and networks.
Free Ways to Tackle Threats to Your Computer
Protect Your PCHaving problems with your pc?Do your kids, family or friends fill it with all the stuff they find on the internet?Your computer, just like your car, needs to be serviced regularly to keep it running efficiently. You wouldn't fill your car up with petrol from an old rusty can with a layer of dirty water on the bottom, so you shouldn't allow your pc to be treated that way either.
AbstractHomogeneous symmetries and congestion control have garnered limited interest from both cryptographers and computational biologists in the last several years . In fact, few steganographers would disagree with the investigation of spreadsheets.
New Mass Mailing Spamming Internet Trojan for the Windows Platform
May. 16th 2005 - MicroWorld has reported the discovery of Troj/Sober-Q, which is a mass mailing spamming internet Trojan for the Windows platform.
Spy Scanners - Don't Compromise your Privacy
Spies, spyware, internet parasites are among what they are usually called. These are scouts that monitor your web activities.
Top Ten Spyware and Adware Threats Identified
On December 8, 2004 Webroot, an award winning anti-spyware solution provider, released a press release identifying the ten most significant emerging spyware and adware threats. Most of these you probably haven't heard of and a few may surprise you.
Dont be a Dork - Protect Yourself
There are folks out there who use their powers for evil, not good. Let's not give them the opportunity to sneak into our lives and wreak havoc.
Don't Become An Identity Fraud Statistic!
"You've just won a fabulous vacation or prize package! Now, if you'll kindly give me your credit card information and social security number for verification purposes, you will receive this awesome gift!"Now why would they need my credit card or social security number to send me a freebie? Can you say, "identity theft?"Although there are legitimate reasons for people to need that information, such as a purchase or job application, thieves need it to steal your life and money from you!Crime officials are reporting that this kind of theft is becoming quite common. Don't be a victim! Follow a few common-sense suggestions to avoid finding out someone else has taken over your life-along with your bank account!-Do not allow anyone to borrow your credit cards! Your best friend may be trustworthy, but her boyfriend may not be!-Don't provide personal information such as date of birth, credit card numbers, your pin number, mom's maiden name, or social security number over the telephone unless you initiate the call.
How to Fight Spyware
If you are wondering how to fight spyware for safe web surfing, this Internet privacy article will answer some of your questions. By now you have probably heard about the dangers of spyware.
3 Simple Steps to Stay Safe from Spyware
There are several basic concepts to keep in mind when deciding to stay spyware free for good. This article will outline a spyware checklist for you to keep in mind when getting tough on spyware and taking back control of your computer using two popular free applications, Ad-Aware,and Spybot - S&D.
8 Surefire Ways to Spot an EBAY Scam E-Mail and Protect Yourself from Identity Theft
Ebay is a great site and is used by many to buy and sell new and used Items. It truly is the worlds Largest Garage Sale Unfortunately when an online site becomes as big and popular as E-Bay the scam artists seem to just naturally follow.
Viruses, Trojans, and Spyware - Oh My!
Have you ever had to call Symantec or McAfee to ask them how to remove a virus? Or have you spent hours online trying to figure out how to remove spyware, only to find out that you did something wrong and now your computer won't boot? I know your pain and frustration with just trying to use your computer without worry. As a computer technician at ARCH Computing Services, I know how hard it can be to pay someone to remove viruses and spyware.
40 Million People Hacked - YOU as Identity Theft Victim
Saturday, MasterCard blamed a vendor of ALL credit cardproviders called CardSystems Solutions, Inc., a third-partyprocessor of payment card data, as the source of loss of 40million consumers credit card information.
|home | site map|