Last updated: 27 August 2020
FSANZ and other Australian and New Zealand government agencies continuously monitor the food supply to ensure it is safe, and that foods comply with standards for microbiological contaminants, pesticide residue limits and chemical contamination. FSANZ also
monitors nutrients in the Australian food supply, compiling the results in databases available to the public.
One way we monitor the safety of the food supply is through the
Implementation Subcommittee for Food Regulation (ISFR). ISFR comprises representatives from food regulation agencies and departments in Australia and New Zealand. View the
completed ISFR surveys.
We also collect food surveillance data, including the results of general compliance testing and targeted surveys conducted in jurisdictions from public health units across Australia and New Zealand. Surveys are also published through Food Surveillance News email alerts.
Subscribe to alerts when new surveys are published.
You can read our
We monitor potential emerging food safety risks, described as emerging issues, as well as ongoing food safety issues.
View the latest report on emerging and ongoing issues.
Total diet studies
Another way FSANZ monitors Australia’s food supply is through the Australian Total Diet Study (ATDS).
The ATDS, formerly known as the Australian Market Basket Survey (AMBS), looks at consumers’ dietary exposure to a range of pesticide residues, contaminants and other substances found in food. View
completed ATDS surveys. New Zealand undertakes a similar survey known as the
New Zealand Total Diet Study.
Other FSANZ surveys
FSANZ may also undertake surveys as part of our work on the Code, for example when we develop food additive standards or in response to emerging issues and national food incidents.
These might be food or consumer behaviour surveys. They are undertaken as required and as resources permit.
Surveillance and monitoring undertaken by other Australian government agencies
Other Australian food regulatory agencies undertake regular monitoring activities that may inform FSANZ’s standards setting process.
For example, the Department of Agriculture conducts the
National Residue Survey (NRS). In this survey, food for export is tested for residues of agriculture and veterinary chemicals and environmental contaminants.
The Department also administers the Imported Food Inspection Scheme (IFIS). The IFIS monitors food imported into Australia to ensure it meets Australian requirements for public health and safety and is compliant with the Code. Read more about the
Imported Food Inspection Scheme on the Department of Agriculture, Water and the Environment website.
state and territory governments undertake targeted surveys of food to ensure it is safe and complies with food standards.