Reduce Food Waste
How Do i get started?
Reducing your food waste is something you can start with a few small changes.
The main principles are:
- Make the most of what you already have,
- Store your food in ideal conditions,
- Make it easy for everyone in your home, and
- Buy only what you're going to use.
How do I make it work?
Check out these 3 differet categories. Start with a whole category, or pick a tip and make it a habit then pick another.
Find new ways to use your favourite fruits and vegetables or the best way to store them with these links.
5 - Ways - creative solutions for getting the most out of common foods.
Food Storage A to Z - a list of foods and the best way to store them.
I'VE DONE IT ALL, WHAT'S NEXT?
As you work through making food waste reduction a part of your household, you might have food waste that you can't make use of. For all your food peels, plate scrapings, chicken bones and other items, keep it out of the landfill by composting at home or using your curbside bin.
Want to try home composting? Click here.
Need to know more about your curbside collection of food waste? Find info on your Green Bin here.
Don't live in the SCRD? Check your municipality's website more info.
DID YOU KNOW?
Wasted food also means wasted resources (water, land fuel). The greatest way to lessen our impact on the environment is to reduce how much food we waste.
63% of the food households throw away is avoidable (see image for most common by weight).
It’s easy to think that food waste is someone else’s problem, but by weight, 21% of food waste in Canada comes from our homes. This means households are wasting approximately 140 kg or $1,100 worth of food each year. The other 53% of food waste occurs along the food value chain, where food is produced, processed, transported or sold.
Wondering if there's more?
Keep your community in mind and donate or share food. Check with local charities before donating to ensure they can make the most of what you have.
- Donate food items to the Sunshine Coast Food Bank or the Salvation Army on the Sunshine Coast.
- Share extra food with friends, neighbours, co-workers and community members in need.
- Connect with a local farmer – do they want food scraps to feed their animals?
Tips for Parents
Waste Less with Kids
Storage Tips and Best Practices
A to Z Food Storage Guide
5 Ways With
Best Before Dates and Shelf Life Guide
Dehydrate to save produce and make a great snack
Still want more info?
SCRD Organic Waste Diversion Strategy
Canadian National Food Waste Reduction Strategy
Love Food Hate Waste
Just Eat It Film