1. Do goldfish have brains?  Surprisingly enough, goldfish have brains. If you thought they were aimlessly moving around, goldfish are smarter than you think. They spend most of their time finding the best spot to relax, interact and engage with the other tank mates.

2. What colors do goldfish see?  Goldfish eyes can detect ultraviolet and infrared rays. In addition, instead of seeing a combination of three different colors like humans, goldfish eyes can see a blend of four different colors. The primary reason behind this additional feature is to help them hunt for food in their surroundings. However, their eyes are on either side of their face, creating a blind spot in the middle of their face.

3. Do goldfish have very good vision?  When it comes to their vision, they cannot see very far ahead in the water. Also, they don’t have eyelids, which prevents them from closing their eyes. So, even when they are sleeping, their eyes remain open. So, if you have a pet goldfish, we’d recommend switching off the light in the water body to ensure they get good sleep.

4. How many different types of goldfish are there?  Due to consistent cross-breeding, goldfish have mutated and evolved in terms of their genetic structure, color, and appearance. As a result, over 200 different types of goldfish species are available.

5. Are goldfish able to taste things like humans do?  Like humans, goldfish taste their food before they gobble things down. So, when you offer them food inside the aquarium, you will often find them nibbling on the food before they wipe it out. And a unique fact about goldfish is that they taste with their lips and not their tongue. The majority of their taste buds are on their lips. Goldfish don’t have a tongue.

6. Do goldfish die very easily?  Although goldfish look very delicate, they are adamant and hardy. Even with a change in the water parameters, they can easily sustain the rough conditions. They can quickly acclimatize themselves to the change in water pH, temperature, and living conditions.

7. Do goldfish have teeth?  They have their teeth in the back of their throat. Also known as pharyngeal teeth, goldfish are the only species on Earth with their teeth at the back of their throat. Like the standard functionality of the teeth, they help in grinding down the food for easier digestion.

8. What is the average size of a goldfish?  Surprisingly, there is no “average” size to a goldfish because they can dramatically vary in size. Most of the time, a goldfish grows depending on the tank size. If kept in a smaller tank, they will have lesser growth, but when kept in larger aquariums. In the wild, a goldfish can grow up to the size of an adult carp.

9. Do goldfish have a stomach?  Goldfish don’t have a stomach. Instead, they typically digest their food through different parts of the intestine. So, the duration of the digestion is relatively more minor, leaving them hungry quite frequently than most of the other fish species.

10. Do goldfish reproduce often?  As adorable and innocent as they look, goldfish are invaders. This means they will quickly take over the native species when you leave them in the wild. So even in captivity, it is essential to choose suitable tank mates for them. They are very prolific cross-breeders too, which results in drastic genetic mutations where they live.
