Cerebral Palsy is not a common health condition; however, it is not easy to deal with a child affected by cerebral palsy. Spastic cerebral palsy is the most common type of cerebral palsy with 70% of affected children out of all CP cases.
A person cannot get this disease as an adult. This disorder affects an unborn child or within a month post-birth. It doesn’t directly affect the cognitive function but affects the motor function, also it is not Hereditary.
There is no cure, but with the help of proper Cerebral palsy exercises condition can be improved. VR games for cerebral palsy rehabilitation also had shown a good effect on improving motor skills and mobility of the person.
Spastic Cerebral Palsy
There are different types of cerebral Palsy; Spastic CP is one of them that cause stiffness in muscles. The stiffness in muscles results in awkward movement because a person with Spastic CP cannot control the body functions.
Spastic CP can range from mild to severe, depending on how much of the brain is impacted. As an illustration, consider a child with mild Spastic CP. Children with CP of any kind may have trouble hearing, seeing, speaking, eating, and picking up new skills. Some of the kids may also experience seizures.
The main reason behind Spastic Cerebral palsy can be:
- Any complication or infection occurs during pregnancy.
- The child may experience a stroke in the womb or after birth
- Untreated jaundice
- Any genetic disorders
- A problem during birth
- Being shaken as a baby also known as shaken baby syndrome
- Any accident or injury during infancy
Diagnosis of Spastic Cerebral Palsy
The majority of spastic cerebral palsy cases in children are identified in the first two years of life. When a baby is prematurely born or has another condition that is linked to CP, medical professionals look for signs of CP.
In addition, the doctor might request blood and urine tests, brain MRIs, CT scans, or ultrasounds to look for any additional medical conditions. Genetic conditions might also be a part of it.
Additionally, electromyography (EMG) and electroencephalography (EEG) aid in identifying the electrical activity of the brain and in understanding muscle weakness. The next thing the doctor notices is any difference in the child’s speech, hearing, or vision, along with how the child moves and walks.
Managing a Child with Spastic Cerebral Palsy
Family education is important
The first and most crucial step is this one. You cannot fully assist your child unless you are ignorant of the illness. Additionally, ensure that everyone in the family is aware of the circumstances and educates them on what should be anticipated in such a situation. Family support could be very helpful to you during this difficult time.
Sometimes it’s difficult for family members to relate to someone who has CP. You might have a lot of unattainable dreams for your child. However, if you take the time to conduct adequate research, you can assist your child in overcoming daily challenges and enhancing their mobility. Numerous famous people were born with this defect and are currently leading fulfilling lives.
Motivate them to do better
The purpose of therapies is to benefit the child, so you should motivate them to improve. They don’t compete with others; instead, they try to inspire people to be their best selves. You must comprehend their needs as well because doing so will improve their performance.
Additionally, avoid giving your child special treatment and instead encourage them to bond with their siblings and other children. You can also ask your child to assist you with various tasks. This will boost their self-esteem and make them feel important to the family.
Allow them to help out around the house on special occasions, and involve them in family outings or activities. This will lay the foundation for your child to set goals throughout their entire life and achieve them.
Communication is key
Caregiving for a person with cerebral palsy is challenging. This could, among other things, harm a marriage or a household as a whole. You should need answers to even the smallest of your concerns. If your child is not benefiting from the ongoing therapy as you had hoped, speak with your doctor or therapist.
Communication with your child is also crucial, in addition to everything else. They shouldn’t believe that makes them unique from other children. They may find it difficult to express their emotions, which is why they may do so repeatedly by getting irritable or acting out. It requires a lot of communication and patience on your part to handle. As you converse with them more, they become more at ease expressing their feelings and issues.
Focus on therapy as soon as possible
Therapy is crucial to a child with CP being somewhat independent and able to carry out daily tasks. Physical, occupational, speech and alternative therapies come in many varieties; parents must decide which ones to prioritize based on their child’s condition.
A child with cerebral palsy will begin to have patterns in their muscles that may be good or bad. Children who begin therapy early on will have the opportunity to learn healthy muscle patterns and increase their mobility. Cerebral palsy exercises are meant to improve the condition of the child.
The therapist’s office may be used for therapy, or they may recommend exercises that can be completed at home. In addition, you might think about giving your child a VR headset. VR games for cerebral palsy rehabilitation can be helpful for kids with cerebral palsy, according to studies.
Children who receive VR therapy and treatment have reported gains in their motor, cognitive, perceptual, social, and even pain-relieving abilities. Make your child want to repeat the complex movements that children with cerebral palsy can perform in a secure environment.
Dealing with a special child cannot be easy. In addition to that Spastic Cerebral Palsy cannot be revoked. As a result, it’s a good idea to educate yourself and those around you. Additionally, you can use technology like virtual reality.
Because Virtual Reality Cerebral Palsy suites offer such a high level of immersion, patients are more drawn into the game. More repetitions and better results come from using healthier and more appropriate body movements and liked by kids as well, making it a healthy therapy option.