How to Use TENS for Pain Relief?
TENS stands for Transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation. The TENS therapy is one of the most widely used forms of pain relief. By using this small, battery-operated device, a TENS Unit can block pain signals from reaching the brain and potentially reduce the need for pain medication. Because TENS are inexpensive, non-invasive, safe -- with no major side effects and no potential for toxicity -- TENS can be self-administered following simple training
How Does a TENS Unit Works?
The TENS machine sends electrical current that travels through electrodes and into the skin, stimulating specific nerve pathways . This blocks or masks the transmission of pain signals to the brain and also stimulates the releases of endorphins the body’s natural painkiller chemicals -- which helps promote a feeling of well-being.
Using TENS for Pain Management
TENS units are used by hundreds and thousands of people all over the world for the relief of physical pain. Therefore, doctors, nurses, and medical technicians often recommend that their patients use a TENS unit for minor and chronic pain relief.
Easy@Home Portable TENS unit is widely used for at-home use. It may be used to help with many types of chronic pain, such as:
- Arthritis or other joint pain
- Back and neck pain
- Muscle pain
- Neuropathic pain
To achieve the best results with TENS therapy, it is important to remember not to place the TENS electrodes directly over or near the painful area. You can place TENS pads on many areas of the body to relieve muscle and nerve pain such as shoulders, back, waist, legs, feet, and hips.
Tens Therapy Timing for Best Use
If you address your pain early on, it may prevent the pain from becoming worse, or even chronic. Start with 20 minutes session with your TENS device. Stop therapy session if the pain has subsided. It is better for you to get it under control sooner so that you do not reach a high pain threshold where it limits your daily activities.
If you have chronic or acute pain, are considering TENS Units for pain relief, you can find more information on https://healthcare-manager.com
Pain relief is easy at home. Join our group to get more pain management information.