How is Venezuelan equine encephalitis transmitted?
Venezuelan equine encephalitis is an arthropod-borne virus, with the mosquito serving as the most common vector. The virus incubates in the mosquito for 1 week after the mosquito bites an infected equine or rodent host. The virus is then transmitted when the mosquito feeds on an uninfected host.
How is equine encephalitis transmitted?
Eastern equine encephalitis (EEE) virus is spread to people by the bite of an infected mosquito. Only a few cases are reported in the United States each year. Most cases occur in eastern or Gulf Coast states.
Where is Venezuelan equine encephalitis found?
Venezuelan equine encephalitis (VEE) is a mosquito-borne disease endemic in regions of Central and South America that causes sporadic outbreaks of equine and human encephalitis.
Is Western equine encephalitis contagious?
Survivors can have permanent neurological impairment. The virus circulates naturally in birds and is transmitted to horses and people primarily by the mosquito vector Culex tarsalis. Horses and humans infected with WEE are not contagious to other animals or people.
What causes equine encephalitis?
Eastern equine encephalitis (EEE) is an extremely rare but serious and often fatal infection that causes encephalitis or inflammation of the brain. It is spread by the bite of a mosquito infected with EEE virus (EEEV). EEEV can also infect a wide range of animals including mammals, birds, reptiles, and amphibians.
How do you get triple E?
Eastern equine encephalitis virus (EEEV) is an arbovirus in the genus Alphavirus. It causes eastern equine encephalitis and is transmitted to humans through the bite of infected mosquitoes, which often acquire the virus from an infected bird or reptile.
Can humans get Western equine encephalitis?
A small percentage of people, especially infants and elderly persons, may develop encephalitis (inflammation of the brain). Most severe human cases begin with a sudden onset of fever, headache, stiff neck, vomiting, or weakness. The illness may progress to disorientation, irritability, seizures and coma.
What virus causes equine encephalitis?
Is Western equine encephalitis zoonotic?
Birds and rodents are the primary reservoirs, but unvaccinated horses are particularly susceptible and often serve as sentinels. These diseases are zoonotic, infecting humans, and are a public health concern.