The health and nutritional problem of the vast population of India are as varied as the tribal groups themselves who present a bewildering diversity and variety in their socio-economic, socio-cultural and ecological setting. The age of women between 10-19 years is considered as adolescence age or period. Adolescent girls are not physically prepared for child birth, since linear growth is not complete until age 18 and the birth canal does not reach mature until two to three year later. Objectives of the present study are;t o explore the menarcheal age of the tribal and other reproductive women of the Gidhpuri village and to access nutritional status of the tribal and other reproductive women of the Gidhpuri village. 50 pregnant and lactating women of different groups residing in Gidhpuri village- Savara, Binjhwar, Gond and other were randomly selected for collecting information. Anthropometry and interview schedule were used for collection of data. Mean age at menarche are 12.08 ±1.3 years in Savara women, followed by 13.2 ±1.5 years in Binjhwar women, 13.5 ±0.5 years in Gond women and 12.3 ±0.94 years in other women. Most of the women (82%) have good health because BMI rank is normal followed by 4% have over weight. weight and height of the respondents were increasing with their age but nutritional condition (BMI) showing odd pattern. In the light of above finding it is concluded that menarcheal age of the Savara, Bjinjhwar and Gond ethnic group are normal as compared other study , their nutritional status is found pleasing which is not regulated by biological factor like age, weight and height but by their socio-economic conditions.
Cite this article:
Jitendra Kumar Premi. Menarcheal Age and Nutritional Status of Reproductive Mother of Gidhpuri Village of Chhattisgarh. Int. J. Rev. & Res. Social Sci. 3(2): April- June. 2015; Page 75-78.
Jitendra Kumar Premi. Menarcheal Age and Nutritional Status of Reproductive Mother of Gidhpuri Village of Chhattisgarh. Int. J. Rev. & Res. Social Sci. 3(2): April- June. 2015; Page 75-78. Available on: https://ijrrssonline.in/AbstractView.aspx?PID=2015-3-2-6