Forecasting Methods for Production
How well production levels match actual demand is an important factor in company performance. If production is too low, the company can't meet demand, has dissatisfied customers and loses sales. If production is too high, the company must store surplus production in inventory, delaying payment and adding storage costs. In both cases, company profitability is less than if production forecasts had been accurate.
You can forecast production based on a steady trend. If you see production levels have increased 1 percent per month for the past two years, you can forecast a 1 percent increase for next month. Forecasting on the basis of trends is only accurate if the trend is stable. Sometimes increases vary, but you can still find an underlying trend. If, over the past two years, monthly changes ranged from minus 1 percent to plus 3 percent without any pattern, calculate an average of the increases to find the trend.
If you can find a pattern to the monthly changes, you can make a more accurate forecast. Patterns are often seasonal or related to other forces, such as the weather. For example, you may have to increase production levels by 25 percent per month for October and November each year to prepare for the holiday season. A cold winter may influence your production levels in the northeastern United States. When you see a pattern in the production levels over the past several years, you can forecast that the pattern will repeat in the coming year.
Cycles are longer-term variations based on the economy. If you are at the beginning of a cycle of economic expansion, and such cycles have resulted in a doubling of the demand over two years in the past, you can forecast a similar increase for this cycle. Because the influences of economic cycles are usually superimposed on shorter-term variations, for monthly forecasts, you have to add these influences to the factors related to trends and patterns to get an accurate estimate for demand and the required production levels.
Your production forecast methods have to include the influence of inventory. A minimum level of inventory is required to meet short-term demand variations, but if inventory is too high, your production must be lower until inventory has decreased to the desired level. With high inventory, you have to include a planned drawdown of inventory and a correspondingly lower level of production. Ideally, you use excess inventory to reduce production to a steady level that represents an efficient use of your facilities.
Bert Markgraf is a freelance writer with a strong science and engineering background. He started writing technical papers while working as an engineer in the 1980s. More recently, after starting his own business in IT, he helped organize an online community for which he wrote and edited articles as managing editor, business and economics. He holds a Bachelor of Science degree from McGill University.