Barry the seagull loped around the beach one grey morning day. The skies were a bit overcast and the water was a bit cold and so there weren't very many visitors to the shore on this particular day. Barry wasn't a huge fan of people, but he was a huge fan of all the snacks they came with and left behind.

First Barry came across a bag of chips but after poking his head in he could only find crumbs. It was a barbecue, anyway, his least favorite flavor. Waddling around a bit farther he explored closer to the picnic benches that usually bustled with families but nothing too tasty jumped out at him. There was part of a hot dog bun with a little ketchup left on it, but that's hardly a meal for a bird, especially not one as discerning as Barry.

Oh well, Barry thought to himself, "Sometimes the bird gets the worm, and sometimes the worm gets away." 

Hopping around a bit more he saw some Seagull friends in the sky circling something. With his curiosity piqued he took a few hesitant steps and blasted himself into the air. Well, he almost made it. His right wing was bruised from a run-in with a light pole and still didn't work quite right. After a few false starts and a few less-than-graceful squawks, he was airborne.

Joining his friends, he tried to see what they were looking at but couldn't make anything out. "Hey guys, what's going on up here?" Barry asked.

All the seagulls ignored him but Jeff. Jeff was always a solid guy. "Oh hey Barry, don't mind the guys, you know how they get. There was an ice cream truck down there and a bit of a spill. We've been trying to wait for the all-clear to dive in but it looks like the humans got to it first and cleaned it up."

"Yeah, I haven't had any luck out there either," Barry said to Jeff, "Hey, why don't you and I go check out the french fry stand at the end of the boardwalk? People always go there when it rains. There has to be something good."

"Now that's the best idea I've heard all day; you sure your wing can make it?"

"Let's go!"
