Register your product to gain access to bonus material or receive a coupon.
&>A clear, easy-to-understand tutorial for developers who want to write software for today's hottest market: iPhone, iTouch, and App Store!
iPhone is the world's hottest application market: more than 500,000 developers have downloaded Apple's iPhone software development kit in just one year. Now there's a friendly, accessible guide to iPhone development for every programmer, regardless of experience. In just 24 lessons of one hour or less, Sams Teach Yourself iPhone Application Development in 24 Hours will help beginning iPhone and mobile developers gain true mastery, so you can construct virtually any iPhone application. Each lesson builds on everything that's come before, helping you learn all they need to know without ever becoming overwhelmed. Coverage includes: preparing for iPhone development; navigating the development environment; mastering Objective-C and the MVC paradigm; using widgets and webviews; implementing multiple views; reading and writing data; building user interfaces; generating graphics; playing media; using maps; networking; using the touch interface; sensing motion; pushing application updates; debugging; optimization; distributing software via the App Store; and more. By the time you are finished you'll be comfortable enough to write real-world apps that sell.
Download Appendix A, Xcode 4 Reference, here
Visit the author's web site for additional book information.
Using Model-View-Controller Application Design for iPhone Development
Download the sample pages (includes Chapter 6 and Index)
1. Preparing Your System and iPhone for Development
2. Exploring the Development Environment
3. Discovering Objective-C: The Language of Apple Platforms
4. Inside Objective-C and Cocoa Touch - Where the Rubber Meets the Road
5. Understanding Model-View-Controller
6. Creating a Simple Application Input and Views
7. Extending the Application Interface with Widgets and WebViews
8. Getting the User's Attention
9. Implementing Multiple Views with Tab Bars
10. Navigating Data Using Table Views
11. Reading and Writing Data
12. Building Rotatable and Resizable User Interfaces
13. Generating Graphics
14. Using Media Playback Features
15. Adding Media Recording
16. Interacting with Other Applications
17. Implementing Map and Location Services
18. Exploring iPhone Networking Services
19. Using OpenGL Graphics
20. Extending the Touch Interface
21. Sensing Movement with Accelerometer Input
22. Staying Up-to-Date with Push Notifications
23. Distributing Applications Through the App Store
24. iPhone Debugging and Optimization
Download the errata for page 341