Myoung Hee Han PHY 114Prof. Klappert 7 Insane effect of Climate Change in lifetime Introduction I want to explain climate before I start to introduce the effect of Climate Change. The climate change is the long-term weather patterns are changed for the time, especially decades or much longer period time.
This phenomenon is caused by altered by energy within the earth’s atmosphere. And more detailed, natural process. For instance, Volcanic, earth’s orbit change, and many other factors are causes of climate change. However, people can also cause “Climate Change” such as making greenhouse gases, destroying a forest. Especially, by creating greenhouse gases is most causes the change of Climate, however; for many people, just hearing the words “climate change” causes an immediate trigger response, with random jabbering phrases spewing out of their face, such as “its natural” “each a liberal conspiracy” and “my fridge cold how global warming do… a thing now?” but, what both sides tend to agree on is that the planet is currently getting warmer. It will continue to do that during our lifetime. So whether you believe, this is caused by man the Sun or a secret Jesus who lives beneath the ocean.
The important question is what will happen if it doesn’t stop. Let’s me introduce the seven effects of climate change in lifetime.Body The first, it gets cold. When people think of climate change, they imagine the whole world getting hotter evenly all over. But this simply isn’t the case. While some areas will experience a huge increase in temperatures. Others are going to see the exact opposite take place. People have experienced extremely harsh winters over the past five years.
It is believed that this has been caused by the effects of melting sea ice on the Earth’s jet streams. Jet streams are fast flowing air currents found in the upper atmosphere. for u’s, the jet stream acts as a barrier between the freezing northern air and warmer air from the south, changes to these streams were to blame for the unusually harsh winter North America suffered last year and may suffer again this year. A mini ice age changes in the Gulf Stream, coupled with forthcoming reductions in solar activity are predicted to create an 11-year temperature drop. Sometime between 2030 and 2040 lowering temperatures in Europe to levels not seen since the 17th century. Moreover, current sea levels have continued to rise. It is thankful for the continued melting of Earth’s giant icy Fedora Antarctica. But, we cannot pass to next generation, because scientists believe the collapse of the Western Antarctic Ice Sheet is pretty much unstoppable, also by the end of the current century, sea levels will have risen by 0.
4 to 1.2 meters. Now obviously this is a gradual rise and isn’t going to just suddenly kick in when the calendar hits 2100. So throughout our lifetimes, we’re going to see the devastating effects of higher seas all over the world.
This means many of Earth’s coastal regions will become uninhabitable. Islands such as Keira bass, the Maldives could disappear. Between 147 and 216 million people will see their homes submerged or put at risk with populations in China, Vietnam Japan, and India. Western nations will become exposed too, as the US and UK are predicted to see millions of coastal inhabitants forced to move. Those not only are we going to have to resettle a whole bunch of folks, we’re also going to need to redraw basically every map we’ve got. The third one is the mass migration. With hundreds of millions of people fleeing their homes to escape the encroaching ocean.
Future mass migration is inevitable, but this won’t only take the form of populations moving inwards, as will also see mass migration involving noncoastal countries. This is because, as I said earlier. The predicted increase in global temperatures isn’t something that hits the whole world evenly. It will affect some areas more than others, also these areas are often poor and vulnerable already. For instance, I’ve put sunscreen all over my body, but missed a huge spot on the small of my back, that spot was already home to a nasty rash an open wound or two and several odd-looking moles. I don’t want to exacerbate the problem by exposing that area to more trouble. But that’s exactly what we’re doing right now.
The Philippines, Nigeria Vietnam, Haiti, Bangladesh, and Malawi are just some of the at-risk nations who will see an increase in hot days and tropical storms. Moreover, as their ability to create food drops, their economies start to flounder. The world will see hundreds of millions of people flee their home countries to settle elsewhere. I am debating whether to take in those who are fleeing from the horrors of war, but over the next few decades.
It might be that I will be introduced to a new phenomenon the climate refugee. The forth is more charity adverts on TV. Actually, this is the worst one in what I think. Because of populations which don’t migrate will be forced to endure a food crisis like never before. By 2050 the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, says rising temperatures will be responsible for a mass global decrease in food production. Causing the number of undernourished children under the age of five to increase from 20 to 25 million. Once more those who had the least to do with the cause of global warming are those who will suffer its worst effects. Not only that, The World Bank estimates that the Earth’s poorest countries will need around 100 billion dollars a year to help offset the impacts of climate change, but what if, your country elects a delightful far-right leader who says “screw them, we’ll look after our own” and refuses to pay out.
You might say “well that’s fine, I guess Johnny no conscience, but don’t get too smug” because it’s still going to cost you all the same. According to a recent study by next-gen climate and demos, climate change will cost the millennial generation a staggering eight point eight trillion dollars over their lifetimes. It is thankful for the environmental and health impacts of a much warmer earth. That means we can stay at home and get a sweet tan instead of going on that vacation we can no longer afford. Our parent’s generation so considerate, the paper called “the price tag of being young” climate change and Millennials economic future was based on historical data taken from 166 countries over the past 50 years. The study took into account the correlation between rising temperatures, the impact of this country’s GDP.
Accounting for an increased number of natural disasters rising sea levels and the desertification of certain parts of the world. All of these factors greatly affect wheat and corn yields at home, abroad. By 2050, we could be dealing with an 83 percent increase in food prices. Finally, there is more sickness. An increase in temperature brings many unwanted side effects for the everyday person. We will enjoy sweaty earth eyes, hotter car dashboards, and a 200% increase, in the melting us of ice cream cones.
But in addition to these horrific symptoms, global populations will also enjoy increased levels of allergies. Lyme, disease, kidney stones and diarrhea. many pollen growing weeds enjoy the conditions created by climate change, so-called “mega weeds” which have already been seen growing in some nations, will become ubiquitous the globe with pollen levels more than doubling by 2040, but at least, if you sneeze you might accidentally pee out a kidney stone at the same time, because with increased heat comes dehydration. One of the major causes of kidney stones, research by the American Neurological Association suggests climate change is going to make taking a hot way is a lot more painful for millions of more people every year. With regards to Lyme, the disease the tick responsible for spreading this debilitating condition gets super horny in hot conditions. Reproduction levels have already increased by two to five times in Canada, the US. Because of the recent increase in temperatures. E-coli bacteria is another organism which loves the hot weather.
A study from the Journal of infectious, diseases found that in some countries, e-coli cause diarrhea increased by 8 percent for every one degree Celsius rise. Conclusion To sum up things up, if the future of a much hotter, it involves having extremely harsh winters, rising current sea levels, and many others. Especially, the result of rising current sea levels effects mass migration, more charity, and even economic problem. There are a lot of problems what I could not expect. Also, increasing sickness makes me feel scared. As I said that, there are many causes of climate change.
We can control our natural processes such as, earth’s orbit, Volcanic, and many natural phenomena. Because we cannot expect those phenomena. But, we can realize and control how we can act for our earth. Such as reducing greenhouse gases, burning fuels and developing eco-system. We can live now, but our next generation can’t live with the insane effect of Climate Change.