A number of problems that affect our health can cause white bits in the stool. White bits are sometimes in the form of white spots but sometimes they also look like whitish substances that cause your stool to change color. Seeing white spots in the stool once or twice maybe normal and not worrying. But if you routinely see the white bits in the stool, this needs to be noticed and watched out. If this is the case, you should immediately consult an internal specialist.
Why are white bits in your stool? There are many reasons why these white particles fill your stool. It could be, this is a sign that you have a fungal infection in the body, or caused by a parasite in your intestine. If digestive problems occur, then you can experience white mucus that appears with your feces.
However, white specks in stool can also occur due to more serious health problems. Possibly in this case you don’t see white bits in stool but overall your stool is whitish or pale gray.
Also read: 9 Ways To Improve Mental Health
In this article, we will look at the causes of the white specks in stool and find out why your stool is white or white spots.
Causes of White Specks in Stool
Stool color is one way to indicate your health. We can know more about the health of the color of dirt. So, when you see the white in the stool, immediately find out or ask your doctor for advice. This is not something that can be ignored.
See Update for White Specks In Stool
1. Mucous in stool
The white substance in the stool can be mucus. In feces, there is often white particle which is sometimes not visible. In general, white substances that appear in stool are a result of problems with your digestive system.
Doctors from the Mayo Clinic say that if you find a lot of mucus in the stool, it is a result of intestinal infection. This is usually in lemongrass by pain in the abdomen. So, this is without you experiencing Crohn, ulcerative colitis can even be a sign of cancer.
The National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, states that leucorrhoea that occurs in feces is one sign of irritable bowel syndrome. This irritation can cause bloating and discomfort. This is also marked by the change in defecation schedule. Irritable bowel syndrome or IBS is a digestive health problem that is difficult to treat and maintain.
Second, the cause of the white bits in stool is parasites. This parasite is in the intestine so that it has an effect on the color of the stool. Noting white bumps and specks in the dirt, the University of Maryland states that these parasites not only change the color of stool but can also cause diarrhea, vomiting, itching around the anus, weight loss and loose stools.
More: Best Healthy Overnight Oats Recipes for Your Weight Loss
Are the white specks in stool caused by parasites? The University of Maryland says that if you experience a parasite in the intestine when removing feces, you might be able to see a worm. While the Saudi Journal of Gastroenterology says that white spots in feces are parasitic eggs.
If you are suspicious of parasites that reside in the intestine, there are many foods that you can eat to help remove parasites in the intestine. One of these foods is garlic. Garlic is a natural antibiotic that is very good for removing parasites, fungi, and bacteria in the body. Besides garlic, you can also consume food grade diatomaceous earth (DE). This is also a natural way of removing parasites from the intestine.
3. Fungal infection
The appearance of white bits in stool can also be caused by fungal infections. The occurrence of fungal infections is a result of excessive growth of yeast Candida Albicans. Excessive yeast growth occurs when your immune system is very weak, you can often take antibiotics. So, this mushroom candida Albicans can come out along with your stool so that white spots appear.
In the journal Clinical Infectious Diseases, it is mentioned that there is a connection between mushroom candida and bowel movements. Severe experts say that fungal infections can cause candida to appear in feces.
4. Fatty stool (steatorrhea)
Fatty stools can also cause stool color to turn white or appear white. The fatty dirt is a condition called steatorrhea and this is caused by the inability of the digestion to absorb nutrients including fat, protein, sugar, and various vitamins.
So, why are some or all stools white? This is because the bile produced by the liver is not enough to destroy fat. If the gall is sufficient, your stool will be normal in color. But if the production of bile is not enough to break fat, this can cause your stool to become white.
Dr. Stephan Goebei on the Medscape.com website says that a health problem called “steatorrhea” can trigger the color of your pale stool accompanied by a foul odor. Another indication is the color of the appearance of oil above the surface of the water when you defecate.
5. Certain medications
Taking certain drugs can also cause white bits in stool. According to MedlinePlus, the drug interferes with bile production which causes pale stools. drugs that can cause gray stool are antibiotics, heartburn drugs or medications for gout.
Also see: The Right and Legal Way to Travel With Medication
If the cause is medication, usually after you stop taking the drug, your stool will return to normal color.
6. Liver problems
Another factor that causes white specks in stool is liver disease. If someone suffers from liver disease, there will be a disruption in the production of bile which in turn can affect the color of feces.
Brown Poop with White Spots
Usually, the poop is brown, but in some cases it is found that a person’s poop is brown but has white spots or what is known as “brown poop with white spots”.
This is a sign that your health is in trouble. So, we can see or study many signs from the skin, oral cavity, eyes, and poop and they all tell us about our health. If you find white spots on the poop, of course you are wondering about it. Whether it’s worms, undigested food pieces, etc., let’s pay attention to the following reviews.
If you find your poop is brown and accompanied by white spots, then one possibility is pinworms and tapeworms. Some of them are sometimes invisible to the eye.
Worm infections can cause many obvious symptoms, let’s take a closer look below.
How to detect worms in Poop
Intestinal worms are also often called parasites, they are structures that live in humans or use humans as a place to live, sometimes when you defecate, you find white spots in your poop. Most of those white spots are worms that we call parasites. These organisms feed on the bodies of their hosts, and this can cause a lot of problems for humans as hosts.
The way worms are transmitted is by drinking water that is not healthy or contains worm seeds. It can also be by consuming dirty food, food that has been bitten by insects or food that has been contaminated with dirt.
Parasitic infections in the body can also occur due to poor sanitation, so it is natural to find white patches or spots in your stool. So, one of the causes of Brown poop with white spots is the presence of worm infections such as pinworms and tapeworms.
Symptoms of worm infection
Then, how to identify if your body has worms? Here are some common symptoms of worm infection.
- Itching in the anal area
- Brown poop with white spots
- Watery diarrhea
- Nausea or vomiting
- Irritable bowel syndrome
- Stomach ache or pain
- Weight loss
- Constant headaches
In addition to the symptoms of worms as above, if you suffer from a tapeworm infection, chances are you have other symptoms such as allergies. Among the forms of allergies are bumps on the skin, neurological problems (rare), fever. But you should also know that the possibility of having parasites in the intestines is sometimes not marked by the presence of such symptoms.
Other Causes of White Specks in Poop
We’ve already talked about brown poop with white spots due to worms. In fact, apart from being caused by worms, white spots in poop are sometimes also caused by other things such as:
1. Undigested Food
The white stuff you see in your poop is sometimes also caused by undigested food. So, everything is caused by a worm infection. Foods that are difficult to digest include vegetables with high fiber, nuts or guava seeds.
During metabolism, your body fails to digest food properly, so it becomes waste with white spots.
2. Inadequate Absorption
Apart from digestion, white spots in poop can also occur due to problems with food absorption. Absorption is impaired if digestion is not good at digesting food. So, points one and two are related.
3. Celiac Disease
Another cause of white spots in poop is celiac disease. It is an autoimmune disease, meaning that the body shows an abnormal response to the gluten protein.
A person with this kind of problem, if he consumes gluten it can cause serious health problems, it can cause severe inflammation, this causes digestion to stop and white spots appear in the stool.
4. Fungal infections
The cause of brown poop with white spots is also due to fungal infections, such as candida yeast infections. If you have a chronic candida infection, you often experience this when removing waste, it could also be that candida infection occurs because you are undergoing treatment that can weaken your immune system, such as AIDS and chemotherapy.
How to Recognize Candida in Stool
Candida is a type of yeast that grows and appears in several parts of the human body such as the mouth, intestines, vagina. If it’s still in normal amounts, it’s not dangerous. However, when a person experiences excessive candida growth or candida overgrowth, such as in the intestines, it can cause white speckled stools.
Experiencing changes in the environment or temperature in the body, certain health problems, the use of antibiotics can encourage candida overgrowth. So, it eventually causes a candida infection called “candidiasis”.
Here we will look at how candida symptoms are in the stool, as well as in other parts of the body.
Candida Overgrowth Signs And Symptoms
The candida overgrowth often appears in the stool. But it’s not all like that.
Research has found that candida is present in 65% of the stool of healthy adults. Most people do not know the presence of this candida during bowel movements. Until in the end he experienced problems such as white, yellow or brown mucus. Notice the presence of a white, brown, or yellow string-like substance. Other signs of candida can also be the appearance of foam or foam, diarrhea and loose stools can also occur.
When candida overgrowth, then a person can experience symptoms such as:
- Fatigue and weakness
- Itchy skin
- Craving for sweets
Other symptoms of Candida overgrowth depend on where the yeast is growing in your body. Below are some of the symptoms of candida overgrowth according to specific places in the body.
If candida is in the mouth, then some of the symptoms are:
- White area in mouth
- Inflamed red tissue, white patches
- Chapped lips
If candida is in the esophagus, then some of the symptoms are:
- Pain when swallowing
- Chest and sternum pain
If the candida fungus is in the vagina, then the symptoms are:
- Feel itchy in that part
- thick and white vaginal discharge
- Pain when urinating and having s3x
- Burning sensation
In addition to being in certain organs, sometimes the candida fungus can also spread in the blood. This condition, known as deep or invasive candidiasis, is dangerous and can even be life-threatening.
Invasive candidiasis can cause shock, and can lead to organ failure. So, if you have a candida infection, and have treated it but do not heal, then seek medical attention immediately, this is important so that it does not spread into the bloodstream.
Those are some of the causes of white spots on your poop. By knowing this condition or known as Brown poop with white spots, we can easily find a solution.