How Steep It Is!!! Solving for Slope and Systems of Equations.
Students will be able to solve and graph inequalities with a negative coefficient for x.
BIlly Edward Bush B.A, M.Ed
432 total reviews for this teacher
2 reviews for this class
Completed by 7 learners
There are no upcoming classes.
learners per class
Meets 3x per week
Over 2 weeks
60 minutes per class
There are no open spots for this class.
You can request another time or scroll down to find more classes like this.
How will students learn? There will be several ways to interact with me in an online class: through synchronous interaction and asynchronous interactions. Here are some examples of ways I will engage in synchronous interactions: Live course orientation. Synchronous online meeting. How will they interact with myself and each other? I will use the gradual release method of teaching: " I do, we do, you do" - First, I demonstrate how to do it (using several examples). - Next, the...
This class is taught in English.
Students are able to substitute values in for variables Students are able to graph linear equations. Students are able to solve equations for a specific variable. Students are able to add and subtract equations by combining like terms.
Algebra is critically important because it is often viewed as a gatekeeper to higher-level mathematics and it's a required course for virtually every postsecondary school program. I have 6 basic reasons why I think offering this class is so important. 1)Algebra is Faster And Better Than “Basic” Math Just as multiplying two by twelve is faster than counting to 24 or adding 2 twelve times, algebra helps us solve problems more quickly and easily than we could otherwise. Algebra also opens up whole new areas of life problems, such as graphing curves that cannot be solved with only foundational math skills. 2) Algebra is Necessary to Master Statistics and Calculus While learning one kind of math to learn more kinds of math may not be an immediately satisfying concept, statistics and calculus are used by many people in their jobs. For example, on my other side job as a research person for a local non-profit organization, I use statistics every day. I help departments identify ways to measure their success. In general, statistics are used in certain jobs within businesses, the media, health and wellness, politics, social sciences, and many other fields. Understanding statistics makes us wiser consumers of information and better employees and citizens. Calculus helps us describe many complex processes, such as how the speed of an object changes over time. Scientists and engineers use calculus in research and in designing new technology, medical treatments, and consumer products. Learning calculus is a must for anyone interested in pursuing a career in science, medicine, computer modeling, or engineering. 3) Algebra May Be a Job Skill Later A student may be confident they are not going into any career needing statistics or calculus, but many people change jobs and entire careers multiple times in their working life. Possessing a firm knowledge and understanding of algebra will make career-related changes smoother. 4) Algebra Can Be Useful in Life Outside of the Workplace I have found algebra helpful in making financial decisions. For example, I use algebra every year to pick a health care plan for my family using two-variable equations to find the break-even point for each option. I have used it in choosing cell phone plans. I even used it when custom-ordering bookshelves for our home. 5) Algebra Reinforces Logical Thinking I would not use algebra as the only means of teaching logic. There are more direct and effective means of doing so, but it is a nice side-benefit that the two subject areas reinforce one another. 6) Algebra is Beautiful The beauty of algebra is an optional benefit because one has to truly choose to enjoy it, but algebra provides us with a basic language to describe so many types of real-world phenomena from gravity to the population growth of rabbits. That five letters can be used to describe how an entire category of matter, namely ideal gases, behaves is amazing and beautiful in its simplicity. There is also a beauty when we start with a complex-looking problem and combine and simplify over and over until we have one value for each variable. The process can be enjoyable and the result immensely satisfying. Algebra is an important life skill worth understanding well. It moves us beyond basic math and prepares us for statistics and calculus. It is useful for many jobs some of which a student may enter as a second career. Algebra is useful around the house and in analyzing information in the news. It also reinforces logical thinking and is beautiful. So, keep an open mind about why we learn algebra and look for ways to share its applications with students. Dispel the stigma that it is a boring list of rules and procedures to memorize. Instead, consider algebra as a gateway to exploring the world around us. Those are our top reasons why we learn algebra, and there are plenty more.
Worksheets will be provided ( pending on students skill sets during the lessons)
Via an exciting online program that will introduce a topic, review and reinforce knowledge, and run a formative assessment.
3 hours per week in class, and an estimated 1 - 2 hours per week outside of class.
BIlly Edward Bush B.A, M.Ed
A+ Plus Teacher Brings Positive Energy To The Classroom
🇺🇸Lives in the United States
432 total reviews
1640 completed classes
I am currently a 7th and 8th grade Math and Science Middle School Teacher and truly love what I am doing. When it comes to teaching, I believe it is about developing strong relationships that tap into students' passions and provide relevancy to...