What diseases are cocker spaniels prone to?
Cocker Spaniels are susceptible to bacterial and viral infections — the same ones that all dogs can get — such as parvo, rabies, and distemper. Many of these infections are preventable through vaccination, which we will recommend based on her age, the diseases we see in our area, and other factors.
Why is my dog coughing up mucus?
Is he coughing up phlegm? Mild symptoms may point toward dog flu (canine influenza) and a more severe presentation of these symptoms could mean pneumonia. While it’s possible to resolve kennel cough without medication, pneumonia may require immediate treatment including fluids and antibiotics.
Are there any health issues with Cocker Spaniels?
Common Health Issues In Cocker Spaniels: 1 Cataracts – Cocker Spaniels have the most adorable brown eyes. 2 Allergies – While allergies can be found in all dog breeds, Cocker Spaniels may have a tendency to have certain food allergies. 3 Skin Disease – Seborrhea is a skin disease that is commonly found in Cocker Spaniels.
What kind of ear infection does a cocker spaniel have?
An ear infected with the bacteria Pseudomonas will have a swamp/pond water smell. Look inside your cocker spaniel’s ears. If your cocker spaniel will let you, look inside his ears.
What kind of discharge does a cocker spaniel have?
The discharge will be one of a few colors, such as yellow or brown, and have a certain consistency. For example, discharge will be brown and crumbly with ear mites; Pseudomonas will produce a yellow/green pus.
What kind of degree does a cocker spaniel have?
She graduated from the University of Glasgow in 1987 with a degree in veterinary medicine and surgery. She has worked at the same animal clinic in her hometown for over 20 years. There are 28 references cited in this article, which can be found at the bottom of the page. A cocker spaniel’s ears are long and covered with soft and silky fur.
What kind of skin problems does a cocker spaniel have?
Primary Seborrhea: Cockers are also susceptible to primary seborrhea, which is a heredictary skin problem. Signs include greasy hair, red, itchy inflamed skin, and sometimes ear infections.
Can a cocker spaniel have a food allergy?
Food Allergies: Quite a few cocker spaniels have food allergies. They show allergy symptoms all year, with itchy skin, ear infections, and digestive issues. To find out which food item (s) your dog is allergic to, you need to do something called an “elimination diet”.
Why does my Cocker Spaniel keep getting ear infections?
These infections improve with treatment but keep coming back. Both ears are usually affected. These are most common in dogs with pendulous ears like cocker spaniels and basset hounds. When there are repeat dog ear infections, it’s often due to allergies.
What are the symptoms of AIHA in Cocker Spaniels?
The condition of AIHA may be mild and hardly noticeable, or it may be sudden in onset and severe. Symptoms of AIHA are usually vague and indistinct, such as poor appetite, weakness, listlessness, and lethargy. The dog may have a rapid heartbeat and rapid breathing.