John Howard publishes 'The State of Prisons' as the start of the Prison Reform.
An Act is granted to build three penal institutions in Bodmin: A County Jail for serious felons; A Debtor’s Prison; and a House of Corrections for minor offenders.
Cornwall County Jail opens, built by Sir John Call and based on the ideals of prison reformer John Howard.
National crime wave due to Napoleonic Wars. The new jail is overcrowded and the buildings are gradually extended to house more prisoners throughout the 1840s.
Bodmin Jail is declared unfit for purpose and a new 220 cell jail is built on the same site; started in 1856 it was completed in 1861.
The new heating and ventilation system is introduced, with Haden hot air stoves in the same year Isambard Kingdom Brunel's 'Royal Albert Bridge' spanned the Tamar River.
Last public execution takes place. After this date, all executions took place within the prison walls and out of the public gaze.
William Marwood develops the Long Drop method of hanging, where the height, weight and muscular strength of the person is taken into account, causing instant death.
Cornwall County Jail is changed to H.M Prison, Bodmin. Part of the jail is also transferred to HM Royal Navy and the Naval Wing is established as HM Naval Prison Bodmin.
The first Execution Shed is built at Bodmin. This was rediscovered during renovations in 2005 and can still be seen at the jail today.
The last person to be hanged at Bodmin Jail is William Hampton, aged 24. He is also the last to be hanged in Cornwall, as subsequent hangings takes place in Exeter.
The female wing of the jail is closed.
The male civil prison is closed as prisoners and staff go to fight in World War One.
1918 - 1919
Storage of the Doomsday Book, State Papers and Crown Jewels.
The Naval Prison ceases.
The jail is formally closed.
The jail is sold at auction to the demolition men.
The jail is used as a cabaret venue and a nightclub.
The jail is open as a run-down attraction and pub.
The jail is open as an informative exhibition and a restaurant.
The redevelopment plan starts.
With thanks to The Frank Stone Collection, Bodmin Town Museum, Dudley Prout Collection and The Johnson Collection.