Transforming Agriculture With a Life Focused Approach
There are many challenges to farm productivity and profitability.
Earthfort helps farmers rebuild and protect the life in their soils to yield a healthy and productive farm for today and future generations through soil testing, soil amendment products, and our online soil education course.
Better understand the role that soil microbiology plays in overall plant health through our online soil certification.
Provide insight into key management and biologically friendly decisions on your farm. Send your sample to us, worldwide.
Practices and products to help regenerate your soils: compost tea, organic compost, and other soil amendments.
Bringing Your Soil to Life
A life focused approach reverses the soil degradation caused by agricultural practices. Products like our Soil ReVive®, or Soil ProVide® introduces living components back into the soil and help maintain and optimize soil health, improving farmers’ livelihoods and the overall ecosystem of the farm.
Common Soil Problems
The inability of soil to maintain integral structure because of low or imbalanced soil life, leading to movement of the topsoil in water.
Soil structure collapsed upon itself, limiting air and water movement into the root zone, often caused by lack of soil microbiology.
Low H2O Holding Capacity
Low organic matter and poor microbial activity leading to inability of the soil to maintain moisture levels necessary for plant support.
Specifically as related to microbiology, the natural nutrient cycle is ineffective at feeding plants due to low or imbalance microbial activity.
Weeds, Insects, & Diseases
Stressed plants attract high levels of insect pests and disease while weeds thrive due to an imbalanced nutrient cycle and soil compaction.
Solve these common problems with Soil ReVive®!
Benefits of Healthy Soil
Improved Water Use
Living soils increase drainage and water holding capacity by building better soil structure. This reduces runoff and soil erosion, and improves drought resistance.
Efficient Nutrient Cycling
Living soils cycle nutrients through biological processes. As bacteria and fungi break down minerals into forms that the plant can use, fertilizer needs are reduced.
The need for chemicals is decreased, and nutrient availability is increased. There is less disease and water consumption, which means less time spent in the fields.
Reduced Management Costs
As the soil becomes healthier, the microbiology begins to thrive, and the whole system improves. All these factors translate into savings for the farm, and more time with your family.
Let's Stay in Touch!
Watch past events and webinars on Earthfort's YouTube Channel
Visit Us in Corvallis
635 SW Western Blvd.
Corvallis, Oregon, USA
We are open to the public. Please practice social distancing with us.