What is Addiction?
Addiction is a condition when a person tries to seek pleasure and joy from addictive substances like tobacco, marijuana, alcohol, or something else, and then, unless a certain level of the addictive substance is present in the blood, the person’s brain doesn’t work properly. The person addicted to something has become chemically dependent on those addictive substances. This may be the cause of their dissatisfied and stressed life for which they try to escape from the reality of their circumstances.
What are the Symptoms of Addiction
Typical: The symptom of addiction varies from person to person. But most commonly an addictive person experiences symptoms like undernourishment which makes them look pale and they tend to miss daily activities like going to school or work. Also, it is seen that the person who is addicted has a repetitive speech pattern. Overactive and underactive are also very common symptoms of addiction. Additionally, an addictive individual becomes argumentative, defensive, and cannot deal with stress.
Might Experience: Might experience physical symptoms depending upon the substance.
What are the Causes of Addiction
- Easy access
- Peer addiction
- Low self esteem
- Media and advertising
When to see a Doctor?
There can be two situations of addicted individuals. Firstly, when they start taking addictive substances beyond a limit. This is when they start experiencing major physical issues and again when they completely stop taking the addictive substances. In both cases, they need to see doctors if they experience severe symptoms like headaches, tremors, drowsiness, depression.
Lifestyle Changes to Prevent Addiction
When it comes to lifestyle changes to prevent addiction it is important for the addict to change behaviors and things that trigger their addiction. With the help of loved ones like parents or spouses, an addictive person can come out of this situation with support. Some important preventive measures can be taken like detoxification, for which ayurvedic panchakarma plays an important role. It is a very effective ayurvedic program for preventing and curing addiction. Also, there is some nasal ayurvedic treatment like doing nasya with Brahmi ghee to lessen the toxicity of nicotine. In addition to that, a person should also follow a physical workout routine like going out for a walk or doing cardio and yoga. However, most importantly, gradually reducing the dose of addictive substances to reduce withdraws. Suddenly stopping addiction may cause several issues and it may be life-threatening.
Common Ayurvedic Remedies for Addiction
1 quart water
⅛ pinch cayenne pepper
½ handful minced ginger root
2 tablespoons Sucanat or other sweetener
⅛ to ½ teaspoon rock salt
Put all the above ingredients in a pot and boil for 20 minutes. Take the pot off the burner, cool for a few minutes, then add the juice of half a lime. Do not boil the lime juice.
Do you want to learn more? Ask us! OR Do you know more about this topic? Educate us.