Presented by the National Geographic Society, and made possible by Lucasfilm Ltd.,
Indiana Jones and the Adventure of Archaeology is an innovative exhibition
that immerses visitors in the science behind field archaeology.
As it leads viewers on a museum adventure inspired by their beloved film hero, Indiana
Jones, the exhibition connects his fictional world to facts that are
true to the science of archaeology – whether in the search for treasure, the
discovery of artefacts, or their analysis and interpretation.
The Indiana Jones brand humour and adventurous spirit is infused throughout the
exhibit to help engage viewers and stimulate their imaginations. Consequently, the
exhibition holds broad appeal for all audiences: neophytes and experts, families,
film fans, tourists and the general public alike.
Included in the exhibition is a vast and exclusive collection of Indy film props,
models, concept art and set designs on loan from the Lucasfilm Archives.
As viewers learn the factual and historical inspiration behind Indy’s adventures,
they will also be exposed to some of the world’s most impressive material remains
and cultural artefacts from ancient societies. Genuine archaeological artefacts
and educational material will be provided by the University of Pennsylvania Museum
of Archaeology and Anthropology (commonly known as the Penn Museum). The National
Geographic Society, the exhibition’s global presenting partner, will also share
some of its revered artefacts, photos, videos and articles.
In an environment spanning over 1,000 square metres and featuring state-of-the-art
technology, this first-of-its-kind touring museum exhibition transforms the museum
experience into an interactive, multimedia adventure.
Equipped with an intelligent hand-held video guidebook, visitors are immersed into
the legendary world of Indiana Jones TM, as they embark on a quest to
uncover the true origins of archaeological mysteries. Loaded with comprehensive
educational content, photos and videos, the multimedia companion guides visitors
along the Indy Trail (where they’ll learn about the facts behind
the content in the Indy movies) and the various Archaeological Zones
of the exhibition (which establishes links between the films and the interpretation
Lucasfilm Ltd. is one of the world's leading film and entertainment companies. Founded
by George Lucas in 1971, it is a privately held, fully integrated entertainment
company. In addition to motion picture and television production, the company’s
global businesses include visual effects, sound, video games, licensing and online
activity. For more information, visit
National Geographic Society
The National Geographic Society is one of the world’s largest non-profit scientific
and educational organizations. Since 1888, National Geographic has shared unforgettable
stories and groundbreaking discoveries with each new generation. National Geographic
supports critical expeditions and scientific fieldwork, advances geography education,
promotes natural and cultural conservation, and inspires audiences through vibrant
exhibits and live events. For more information, visit nationalgeographic.com.
The University of Pennsylvania Museum of Archaeology and Anthropology, through its
research, collections, exhibitions and educational programming, advances understanding
of the world's cultural heritage. Founded in 1887, Penn Museum has conducted more
than 400 archaeological and anthropological expeditions around the world. For more
information, visit penn.museum.
The archaeology program at Laval University, unique for its type in Canada, distinguishes
itself by its placement with the History Department and for its constitutive principle
of interdisciplinarity. The university offers a program involving earth sciences,
biological sciences, and theoretical sciences, as well as the social and human sciences,
all of which constitute the kernel of the interdisciplinarity we aim for. For more
information, visit www.laboarcheologie.ulaval.ca.
A TEAM OF EXPERTS
X3 Productions has gathered a team of world-renowned specialists to ensure the exhibition
presents a factual interpretation of the principles and methodologies of field archaeology.
With their recognized expertise in academic and applied archaeology, Dr. Michel
Fortin and Dr. Fredrik Hiebert have helped to create and develop the exhibition’s
With a specialty in Near Eastern archaeology, Dr. Michel Fortin is a Full Professor
of Archaeology who has been teaching in the Department of History at Université
Laval in Quebec City for nearly three decades. He has led numerous excavation teams
in the Middle East and is a true ambassador to his profession.
Archaeologist and National Geographic fellow Dr. Fredrik Hiebert is a veritable
field expert who has searched for human history in some of the world’s most remote
and exotic places. An expert on the ancient Silk Road, his discoveries have made
Additionally, X3 Productions is pleased to have on its team Shirley Reiff Howarth,
an expert in travelling exhibitions and exhibition curation, and the director of
the Humanities Exchange in Montreal.
Lucasfilm Ltd., Indiana Jones and all related indicia are trademarks of & ©2010
Lucasfilm Ltd. All Rights Reserved. Used Under Authorization.