Giant camel found, according to an article in ABC News in Science 9 October 2006. Researchers from the University of Basel have found the bones of a giant camel in the Syrian desert. The bones indicate the camel would have stood three metres (10ft) high at the shoulders and had an overall height similar to a giraffe. This makes it twice as tall as present day camels. The researchers have also found human remains at the same site – a bone and a tooth. Jean-Marie le Tensorer, one of the scientists who have been excavating the site commented: “The bone is that of a Homo sapiens, or modern man, but the tooth is extremely archaic, similar to that of a Neanderthal. We don’t know yet what it is exactly. Do we have a very old Homo sapiens, or a Neanderthal?” The site of the find is a 20 km (12.5 mile) wide gap between two mountains ranges with a numbers of springs. The researchers suggest it was a savannah at the time and attracted migrating herds. The fossils are believed to be 100,000 years old.
Editorial Comment: Here we have another example of a giant animal that has since shrunk. This is change, but it is not evolution. Like the giant animals found all over the world, it indicates the world was once a better place, able to sustain many large animals. The region where it was found is now a desert, not a lush savannah that could support migrating herds. If the human bone and tooth belonged to the same individual they are further evidence that Neanderthals were fully human but suffered from bone and teeth deforming diseases, and if the Dentist Jack Cuozzo is right in his book Buried Alive, both are evidence the Neanderthals and the camels lived at a time when the environment enabled a much longer life span. Both the camel and the human bones fit into Biblical history (Genesis 1-12), which tells us the world started out very good but has degenerated through time as a result of man’s rebellion against the Creator. (Ref. dromedary, mammals, degeneration)
Evidence News 11 October 2006