Mapping tool links health, technology
With help from Darius Tahir (@DariusTahir) and Arthur Allen (@ArthurAllen202)
THE LINK BETWEEN HEALTH AND BROADBAND: Studying the connection between health outcomes (like rates of diabetes, obesity and preventable hospitalizations) and internet adoption and broadband availability became easier Tuesday after the FCC released its Mapping Broadband Health in America tool. It’s an epidemiology instrument at its core, since improving health is dependent on tools like remote monitoring and telemedicine. The map can help policymakers, tech companies and health care providers hone in on areas that lack broadband or have poor health, or both — as is often the case. “The map can help focus on areas that need help. The map can direct resources,” FCC Chair Tom Wheeler said at a launch event. “Opportunities that are enabled by broadband can’t exist if broadband doesn’t exist.” More for Pros: http://politico.pro/2agc0LW The FCC release: http://bit.ly/2asuIef The tool itself: http://fcc.us/2asjXic
Examples of the connection between bad health and poor tech:
- Of the 82 Mississippi counties, 71 had internet adoption rates of less than 60 percent and diabetes rates greater than the national average of 9.7 percent.
- Nearly half of Alabama’s 67 counties had broadband rates less than 60 percent and more than 30 percent of residents with obesity. (The national average is 27.4 percent)
- 67 of Oklahoma’s 77 counties had fewer than 80 primary care doctors per 100,000 residents and more than 60 percent of residents with fixed broadband speeds slower than average. (The national average is 73.3 doctors per 100,000 people.)
— The health data comes from the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation’s County Health Rankings, which pools data from a variety of sources, updated annually. The tech portion comes from FCC’s in-house data.
Tweet du jour: The FCC @FCC: #Rural counties are 10x as likely as urban areas to be in low #broadband access, high #diabetes areas. Learn more: http://www.fcc.gov/health/maps
Next steps: Chris Gibbons, scholar in residence for the FCC’s Connect2Health Task Force, said a report outlining the task force’s recommendations on how to improve health care is on its way, but he didn’t give a timeframe to Morning eHealth. The task force has been at work for nearly two years.
eHealth tweet of the day (1 of 2): Kolton Ray @TheTechPolicist:Broadband is a social determinant of health, just like housing, transportation, access to food. - Dr. Georges C. Benjamin #C2HFCC
tweet #2: Kolton Ray @TheTechPolicist:“Broadband drives health and opportunity. If you don’t have it, you won’t get it.” - @MClyburnFCC #C2HFCC
Welcome to Wednesday Morning eHealth where we learned FCC Commissioner Mignon Clyburn is a POLITICO reader after asking her a question at Tuesday’s event. Good to know. Send your love letters and news tips to [email protected] and connect with us on Twitter @ David_Pittman, @ arthurallen202, @ DariusTahir @ POLITICOPro, @ Morning_eHealth.
MORE BAD NEWS IN THERANOS LAND: Fortune is reporting that Elizabeth Holmes, CEO of the tiny blood-sample testing company Theranos, has stepped down as one of the Obama Administration’s Presidential Ambassadors for Global Entrepreneurship. The panel is described as an honorary team of entrepreneur evangelists. Holmes and the company are in a world of trouble with health and financial regulators. The story: http://for.tn/2asJRfN
NEWS FROM BALTIMORE: Under a final rule issued late Tuesday, Hospitals that are meaningful users and successfully participate in the Hospital Inpatient Quality Reporting Program will see a 0.95 percent bump in their Medicare payments next year. The rule better aligns meaningful use program reporting with clinical quality measure reporting. Starting next year, CMS will require hospitals submit four quarters of data on eight of 15 eCQMs available.
— CMS had proposed to expand its “extraordinary circumstances exemption” for reporting to its hospital quality program. Some asked if an exemption would be granted to hospitals switching EMRs. But in the final rule published Tuesday, CMS said it would handle all requests on a case-by-case basis and would be based on specific circumstances of the hospital.
— Read the 2,400-page rule in all its glory: http://bit.ly/2at7eMc
ONE IN SIX DOCS LOOKING TO CHANGE EHRs: Ninety-two percent of physician practices owned by hospitals use an EHR, a number that drops to 78 percent with free-standing medical practices, according to data released Tuesday by HIMSS Analytics. And while that was enough for the group to declare “near universal adoption” of EHRs by physicians, it also noted that 15 percent of practices plan to switch EHR vendors. More info here and here.
CERNER FIRES SHOTS IN EARNINGS CALL: The Kansas City-based company spent Tuesday recounting its latest financial exploits. We’ll save the detailed analysis for the money men and focus on some of the interesting shots taken by Cerner’s Zane Burke at his (unnamed but totally contextually-obvious) competitors.
— Burke said Cerner products “compare well to their primary competitor” — who we presume are up in Wisconsin — which is reflected in the company’s recent “win rate” among select clients. Cerner is particularly pleased with the success of its population health software.
— Burke also had a dig for a certain Boston-area EHR company, which he said was not doing so well with its initiative to supply cloud-based software to small hospitals. This competitor, he said, is spending three times the funds on marketing as it is on R&D, which “may not be an effective approach.”
RESEARCH IN HEALTH DISPARITIES: If health technology such as mobile apps are to help the elderly and other vulnerable populations with chronic medical conditions, they need some help, according to two recent studies.
— Little use by seniors: Researchers at Partners Healthcare in Boston used a national study to track the technology use of 7,600 Medicare patients between 2011 and 2014. Few seniors in 2011 used digital health tools like obtaining information online (16 percent), filling prescriptions (8 percent), contacting clinicians (7 percent) or handling insurance (5 percent). Those figures increased only slightly in 2014; seniors who used any digital health tool increased from 21 percent to 25 percent. The number who used all four modalities went from 1.1 percent to 1.8 percent. Digital health is not reaching most seniors, the authors conclude. The findings, published in a JAMA letter: http://bit.ly/2aNu68t
— Not-so-easy-to-use mobile apps: Mobile medical apps are too complicated for those with chronic medical conditions, according to an observational study from the Commonwealth Fund. The group looked at 11 popular medical apps that manage diabetes, depression and caregiving and found some common themes among users: frustration with design and navigation and lack of confidence in technology despite interest in having it support their care. Other findings: Patients struggled to enter and retrieve data. None of the apps had simple interfaces with large buttons and easy-to-follow navigation. “To reduce health disparities, app developers must ensure their products are tailored to the needs of the populations that are likely to benefit the most from their use,” the authors concluded. The report: http://bit.ly/2asgMY1
INFORMATICS TO STUDY CANCER CARE: The NIH’s National Cancer Institute is giving away nearly $2 million to study and develop multiple cancer-relevant care coordination measures that can be pulled from EHRs. The goal is the measure cancer care and better help clinicians improve care. More from NCI: http://bit.ly/2aNv30A
OTHER NIH NEWS: The agency’s Clinical Trial Registration rule, intended to facilitate data sharing in medical research, moved to OMB yesterday, which suggests it will be released very soon. As our colleague Sarah Karlin-Smith helpfully notes, the rule’s significance is explained well in this New England Journal article.
STRANGE CYBER-HACKING NEWS: An Ohio medical network had nearly 105,000 documents stolen and posted online by an ultranationalist Ukrainian group that was protesting an alleged Pentagon medical experiment, according to news reports. The Central Ohio Urology Group, the second-largest health system in Ohio, said it was investigating the theft. Screenshots posted online included names, addresses, dates of birth and diagnoses stolen from the medical group. The hackers reportedly told DataBreaches.net that the attack was a warning so that “no one thought to poison our people with the virus from secret laboratories[sic].” More for Pros: http://politico.pro/2ajI1hE
Related: A Georgia orthopedic clinic had nearly 400,000 patient records stolen by hackers known as “Dark Overlords”. http://bit.ly/2aLRbra
WHAT WE’RE CLICKING:
Medicines and blood delivered via drones are headed to the U.S.: http://bit.ly/2awpsY0
Medcity talks to the CTO of the Google venture teaming up with GlaxoSmithKline to develop a miniature implantable: http://bit.ly/2aszNcA
23andMe data finds genes possibly linked to depression: http://wapo.st/2aQv7da
Fitbit to release two new products this year: http://bit.ly/2aLBIHX
Study: Technology can reduce errors in hospital shift changes: http://bit.ly/2asHMUS
Think thanks shrill for telemedicine in Medicare overhaul: http://bit.ly/2aOhTkj
Tips, comments, suggestions? Send them along via email to our team: Arthur Allen ([email protected], @ArthurAllen202), David Pittman ([email protected], @David_Pittman) and Darius Tahir ([email protected], (@DariusTahir).