Latin American and Caribbean Studies Courses
(Also SPA 110) Introductory course to Spanish Language and Culture. Basic language skills for the student who has no previous knowledge of the language. Course will cover different language functions, basic vocabulary, simple grammatical structure, oral recitation and written composition. In addition to language studies, the course will compare and contrast American, Latin American, Latino and Spanish cultures.
(Also APG 111) An analysis of the theory and universality of culture from the historical, functional and structural approaches. Emphasis on cross-cultural comparisons as a basis for understanding contemporary society.
(Also FRN 115) Introductory course to French Language and Culture. Basic language skills for the student who has no previous knowledge of the language. Course will cover different language function, basic vocabulary, simple grammatical structures, oral recitation and written composition. In addition to language studies, the course will compare French and French diasporic cultures in the Caribbean, Africa and elsewhere.
(Also HIS 116) This course will offer a broad overview of historical and contemporary issues in Latin American and Caribbean Studies. Special attention will be paid to the experiences of Latin American and Caribbean peoples; national, ethnic, and racial identities; waves of migration within the region and beyond; and US-Latin American and Caribbean relations. The course will draw on interdisciplinary materials, including scholarly articles, and fiction.
(Also SPA 120) Further development of language skills to broaden awareness and increase appreciation of the culture
(Also FRN 125) Further development of language skills to broaden awareness and increase appreciation of the culture.
(Also GIS 203) General problems of comparative analysis. Political communication, political culture, modernization and nation-building, conflict and revolution.
(Also APG 210) Cultural traditions of the Anglo and French Caribbean will be explored. Each cultural area will be examined in terms of its history of slavery and planation life, race and ethnic relations, socio-economic and political change, and family and community organization.
(Also HIS 216) This course explores the history of Latin America and the Caribbean from Conquest to Independence. Special attention will be paid to encounters between various peoples; the economic, political, and cultural institutions of the colonial period; and the wars for independence that ended colonialism. This is the first course offered in the Latin American-Caribbean survey.
(Also GIS 224) American foreign policy today. American relations with major allies, the Communist countries and the Third World. Current problems in American foreign policy such as d’etente, national security, disarmament, the global allocation of resources.
(Also HIS 226) This course explores the history of Latin America and the Caribbean since Independence. It will pay particular attention to the colonial legacy; the abolition of slavery; economic development; twentieth-century social movements and revolutions; and relations with the United States. This is the second course offered in the Latin American-Caribbean survey.
(Also ENG 232) Survey of Latin American literatures from the sixteenth century to the present. Emphasis is upon literary discourses the reflect and shape the diverse array of Latin American cultural identities throughout the region.
(Also HIS 233) This course provides for the in-depth study of the people, society, culture, or movements during a particular historical period or for comparative analysis of societies, cultures or movements of people or ideas during particular periods, or other historical moments. This course also allows for the in-depth study of particular historical events. The topic and methods of evaluation will be defined by the instructor of the course. Offered most Spring and Fall semesters.
Please contact your instructor for specific topic.
(Also AFS/SOC/WMS 241) This course examines race, ethnicity, racism, prejudice, discrimination, majority-minority relations, and other intergroup relations from a sociological perspective, paying close attention to the experiences of the major racial/ethnic groups in the United States, namely, American Indians, European Americans, African-Americans, Latinos, and Asian Americans.
(Also ENG 264) Study of Caribbean literature with emphasis upon the oral and literary traditions of the English-speaking Caribbean. Consideration is also given to creole Caribbean languages and the ways in which they have shaped the development of Caribbean literatures and cultures.
(Also AFS/ENG 268) Haitian literature explores the literary contributions of prominent writers, artists, and filmmakers from Haiti and the Haitian Diaspora. All course texts are in translated to English. Using the literature as a lens, the course investigates Haitian history and Haitian cultural discourses. Haiti’s historic and cultural impact in the Caribbean region and throughout the Americas is also considered.
(Also SOC 305) Latinos, or Hispanic Americans, constitute the largest minority in the United States today. Yet, in a society that continues to focus on the BlackWhite racial divide, Latinos are often ignored. This course explores the experiences of Latinos from a sociological perspective. Topics include immigration trends, the meaning of race in the construction of Hispanic ethnicity, educational attainment, work, health, media representations, and family life.
Selected topics with Latin American and Caribbean focus.
Please contact your instructor for specific topic.
(Also ENG 356) Major figures in the literature of Latin America and the Caribbean in translation. Writers will include: Allende, Borges, Vargas, Llosa, Fuentes, Hijuelos, Wolcott, Marquez, and Paz.
(Also HIS 361) This course will examine the “democratic” Revolutions in the United States, France, and Haiti. Precipitating events, choices, and outcomes will be analyzed through the process of comparing and contrasting the revolutions in each location. The treatment of racial, ethnic, and religious minorities will be given special consideration when considering ideas of citizenship and nationhood. Each student will write a major (20 page) research paper for this course.