Historic Signifance of French Language
Paris is eminent for fashion, art, cuisine, architecture but the stomach of the city swallows something else, very different and varies by region.
Let’s explore French a bit more;
French or langue francais is a romance language of the Indo–European Family. In a world of language, French is an official language in 29 countries across multiple continents, moreover, the community of 84 countries which share the official use or learning in schools of French. French language is also one of six official languages verbalized in the USA. It is articulated as the first language in France, Canada, Belgium, Switzerland, Monaco, and North – Western Italy, some parts of Luxembourg, and various communities elsewhere as well.
In 2015, approximately 40% of the francophone population lived in Europe, 35% in Sub-Saharan Africa, 15% in North America & Middle East, 8% in the Americas, and 1% in Asia & Oceania. French is the second most widely enunciation mother-tongue in the European countries. Merely all institutions of the EU use French as a working language along with English and German; in certain institutions, it is the sole working language, sometimes. In addition to that, French is also the 18th most natively spoken language in the world, 6th most spoken language by the total number of speakers and the 2nd most studied language throughout the globe.
Studies describe that French to have about 76 million native speakers; about 235 million daily, fluent speakers, and another 77–110 million secondary speakers who speak it as a second language varying degree of proficiency, mainly in Africa.
The beginning of France in Gaul was greatly influenced by Germanic invasions into the country. These invasions had the greatest impact on the northern part of the country and on the language there. A language divide began to grow across the country. The period of old French spanned between the 8th and 14th centuries. Within old French many dialects emerged but the Francian dialect is one that not only continued but also thrived during the Middle French Period (14th – 17th Century). During the 17th century, French later replaced Latin as the most important language of diplomacy and intermediate relations.
French is an official language and the first of 88 percent of the population, according to the BBC. It is the dominant language of the country’s 70 million residents, but there are a plenty of variants based on region. French is the second most widely learned foreign language in the world, with almost 120 million students, according to the French Ministry of Foreign Affairs and international department.