Source: Black, S. (2020).
|Don't forget to cite and reference your sources. For help see the Junior School or Senior School referencing guides, and / or CiteMaker.|
When accessing content use the numbers below to guide you:
Brief, basic information laid out in an easy-to-read format. May use informal language. (Includes most news articles)
Provides additional background information and further reading. Introduces some subject-specific language.
Lengthy, detailed information. Frequently uses technical/subject-specific language. (Includes most analytical articles)
Students will understand that food is an essential part of everyone's life and encompasses the how, what and why we eat. Students will learn the origins of food, how food is produced, manufactured and distributed throughout the local, national and global environment; and through activities, students will propose design and test sustainable and ethical ideas and solutions.
Each country has different strengths, and each faces different challenges. When considering a sustainable culinary tourism proposal, first take into account the unique opportunities and risks this country faces. How does this influence your culinary tourism proposal? See the following UN Sustainable Development Goal Dashboard for details.
The SDG Index and Dashboard tracks the how countries are progressing to meet their Sustainable Development Goals. The SDG Index and Dashboard is a co-production of the Bertelsmann Stiftung and the Sustainable Development Solutions Network (SDSN).
How to use this dashboard: Point to a country, or one of the sustainable global goals, to see how the world or specific country is progressing. See also the following SDG Dashboard FAQs: Country coverage and indicator selection | Methodology | Interpreting the results and limitations.
How to cite and reference this information: see the bottom of this page for help on how you would citing and reference the data in this dashboard.
When using these figures don't forget to cite and reference your sources. For more information and help see the Kerferd Library referencing guide and / or CiteMaker.
In text citation: (The Sustainable Development Solutions Network, 2018) or The Sustainable Development Solutions Network (2018)
Bibliography / Reference list: The Sustainable Development Solutions Network. (insert year of report). Sustainable Development Goal [add the goal number]: [add the goal indicator], [add the country name if required]. Retrieved from https://dashboards.sdgindex.org/
For example, the bibliography / reference entry for the following indicators would be:
The Sustainable Development Solutions Network. (2018). Sustainable Development Goal 14: Life below water indicators, Australia. Bertelsmann Stiftung and the Sustainable Development Solutions Network. Retrieved from https://dashboards.sdgindex.org/