It may not be news that regular exercise keeps you fit and healthy – physically as well as psychologically. But, to surprise you, exercise is an important step towards healthy skin. Many of us generally focus on the cardiovascular advantages of exercise. But, anything working towards good circulation makes your skin look and feel healthy. The increased blood flow through exercise is helpful in nourishing the cells and maintaining their vitality. Blood is the primary carrier of oxygen to the cells. Besides supplying oxygen, blood flow is also performs the function of doing away with waste products, like free radicals, from the cells. This indicates that your skin is undergoing internal cleansing process while exercising.
Adding further, regular work-out also provides an anti-wrinkle advantage by creating the conditions essential for production of elastin and collagen. Therefore, when these proteins are present in your skin in optimum amounts, the skin is capable of retaining the moisture in a better way thus getting smoother and firmer.
Furthermore, exercise is also helpful in treating dark circles. The basic reason for dark circles is that the skin beneath your is quite thin and gets thinner with growing age as the supply of elastin and collagen gets depleted. The blood vessels become more prominent as the skin gets thinner. These blood vessels appear as what are known as dark shadows under the eyes. Going further, with growing age and poor blood circulation, these blood vessels may tend to leak thus forming purplish-black spots that are commonly referred as “raccoon eyes” or dark circles.
With regular exercise, you can treat and prevent the dark circles with improved blood circulation. Moreover, exercise makes the skin below the eyes less translucent and firmer due to increased production of essential proteins required for a healthy skin.
How does exercise benefit your skin?
In addition to being great for physical and emotional health, regular exercise also enhances the appearance of your skin. Being regular with your work outs to sweat out the venoms helps enhance the skin health and add glow to it. Exercise provides numerous benefits for the skin. Therefore, it should be counted as an important part of any skin care regime. These benefits have been illustrated below to add to your knowledge:
Exercise helps in sweating
Sweat flushes out the toxins from your body which are responsible for clogging of pores leading to blemishes and pimples. Exercise improves the blood circulation in addition to increasing neuronal stimulation and enabling the sweat glands to improve their functions thus doing away with toxins.
Exercise helps in muscle toning
Your skin would appear and feel fresh and healthier if toning is better under the skin. as per studies, firmer and stronger muscles provide a better support to the skin thus making it appear firmer and more elastic. This toning of muscles is possible only through the way of exercise. Adding more to the point, muscle toning also helps in curtailing the appearance of cellulite. However, cellulite can’t be removed with exercise but can be made to look better.
Exercise increases blood circulation and oxygen supply to the skin
It has been proved through studies that regular workout enhances the blood flow required by diabetics to mitigate the possibility of skin problems leading to amputation. Physical exercise makes the blood flow and this improved blood circulation supplies the required amount of oxygen to the skin. this improvement in circulation of blood and oxygen to the cells also contains nutrients that boost skin health.
Exercise relieves stress
For a long time, exercise has been known to feature stress relieving qualities. These mind-body advantages may reflect on your complexion. According to some studies, stress is considered to be responsible for acne and psoriasis. Actually, stress influences hormone production in addition to repressing the healing ability of the body. However, with regular exercise, it is possible to control stress as well as skin conditions that are hard to manage.
Exercise adds a natural glow to your complexion
While exercising, the skin produces its natural oils in a higher quantity. These natural oils are responsible for healthy and supple appearance of the skin. Even as these moisturize the skin naturally, it is important to gently cleanse the face as a part of the skin care regime to avoid any breakouts.
So, for a younger, healthier, and smooth glowing complexion, include exercise as a secret ingredient in your daily skin care regime. Here are some exercises that can help you get a healthy skin:
Natural Skin Tightening Exercises
Sagging face makes you look old and depressed even though you are not. To treat this sagging skin, many people choose for various anti-aging treatments including crèmes and lotions and even cosmetic surgery, laser treatments, and Botox injections. Alas, maximum of these solutions show up as a waste of money and time.
Well, just like exercise shows its effect on the complete body, these skin tightening exercises for face can boost the toning of muscles thus providing you with a sleeker look. There are numerous exercises designed especially for the toning of facial muscles to make them firmer and tighter. These specially projected exercises can show wonders on the facial muscles. Below are some of the most effective exercises to tauten the facial skin naturally:
- Position the index fingers onto the external edges of the eyes. Close them and the pull your skin gently by pushing the fingers away from the eyes going towards the hairline. Then, open your eyes wide as much as possible. Hold this position for some seconds and relax.
- Position two fingers onto the external ends of your lips. At a snail’s pace, slide the fingers outwards in opposite directions (only for an inch). Hold this position for some seconds. Next, release and then relax.
- Give a wide smile without showing your teeth. Make it wide to its maximum to give a stretch to the muscles on your cheeks. Maintain this position for a few seconds and relax.
- Gently, lean your head backwards. Feel the stretch in the muscles of the neck and maintain the position for some seconds. Then, relax.
Reiterate these exercises for as many numbers during a single session as is comfortable for you. Start slow followed by building up repetitions. Doing these exercises regularly for some time can show noticeable results in the form of a firmer and younger looking face.
Yoga exercises for a healthy skin
For ages, yoga has been considered as one of the best ways towards physical fitness. Yoga, in addition to keeping your body in shape, also shows effective results on your overall health.
Yoga can work wonders to give you healthy and naturally glowing skin. Due to busy schedules and work routines, the skin usually gets ignored. Additionally, the skin is also taken over a toll by insufficient and improper diet. Yoga done for skin, actually, focuses on improvement of body’s digestion capability as well as blood circulation. Exercises aimed at boosting the metabolism of body are considered to be best for the skin. Other yoga exercises helpful for a healthy skin consist of stretching poses plus postures aimed at toning and relaxing of muscles. Yoga also reduces stress thus improving the skin health.
Furthermore, yoga helps in maintaining the collagen (substance responsible for elasticity of skin) health. However, there are numerous yoga poses to help you rejuvenate your body with time. Try and begin with basic yoga postures such as dead corpse posture and move on to lotus pose followed by pranayama and then proceeding to the various inverted poses.
Well, some useful yoga exercises that can be performed to get a healthy skin include:
- The muscles and the mind can be relaxed by performing the simplest pose of yoga – dead corpse pose. This pose involves you lying down straight on the ground and relaxing completely. Follow the breathing procedure involving deep inhale and slow exhale. The hands should be positioned beside the trunk. Practicing this pose before jgh9and after this yoga session relieves anxiety and stress.
- The dead corpse pose should be followed by the lotus pose. This pose involves sitting with legs folded and locked. The hands should be placed over the knees. Concentrate deeply with closed eyes and relax. Go for deep breathing by inhaling deeply and exhaling swiftly. This yoga pose is helpful in relaxation and rejuvenation of the energy. The deep breathe procedure involved in the exercise are helpful in supplying ample oxygen to your facial muscles.
- Pranayama, the breathing exercise, increases the capability of lungs the increasing the amount of oxygen supplied to your skin. Besides, pranayama also improves blood circulation.
- Blood circulation can also be improved through inverted poses like wheel pose, hand stand, lion pose, fish pose, and headstands. All these poses can work wonders for the skin by preventing the occurrence of wrinkles. These poses can be performed quite easily once you have obtained perfection in the aforesaid postures.
For fish pose, extend the lotus pose by lying down with folded legs and try to touch the ground with your head. This pose facilitates better oxygen supply to the facial skin muscles. Release the posture slowly.
Wheel pose, a little different from the above poses, involves lying flat on the ground. Gradually, lift the trunk upwards with support of your legs as well as hands. Hold this pose for a while and then release gradually.
If followed in proper sequence, these yoga exercises can show noticeable results in improving the skin health in addition to making it smooth and soft.
Yoga postures facilitate oxygen supply to all body organs thus vitalizing your skin and making it glow naturally. These yoga exercises, combined with a nutritious yogic diet, help in flushing out the toxins from the body thus allowing your skin to breathe mere conveniently and look younger, brighter, and smoother.