View our selection of free online learning materials for English, from the British Council.
Learn English with activities
You can learn English online with the British Council’s free website for adult learners. The site contains hundreds of pages of audio, text and video content and over 2,000 interactive exercises. You can become a member and contribute to the site, interact with other users and download free resources.
Learn English with games
You can learn English while having fun with games and jokes. You can find games for all tastes to help you practise your English or just to have fun. There are also hundreds of illustrated jokes to help you play, enjoy and learn.
LearnEnglish website: Fun & Games
Learn English with audio and video
We have lots of audio and video materials for language practice. The materials include podcast stories, an audio soap opera, a series of English language teaching TV programmes produced with the BBC and videos that show how to say things correctly in very different situations.
LearnEnglish website: Listen & Watch
Learn English for Parents
For parents, we have articles on supporting children in learning English, videos on using English at home and information about face-to-face courses around the world.
We also have the LearnEnglish Parents Facebook page, brought to you by the British Council, the world's English teaching experts. It is aimed at parents and carers of children who are learning English as a second or foreign language. Here, you will find advice about helping your children with English and supporting them as learners, as well as tips on using English at home, links to a wide selection of free online resources, and information about face-to-face courses around the world.
Learn English for teens
Are you a teenager learning English or are your teenage children studying English? The LearnEnglish Teens website is designed especially for 13-to-17-year-olds. On the site they can find language practice, tips for exams and help with grammar and vocabulary, as well as fun activities, videos, games and puzzles.
LearnEnglish Teens Facebook page
Learn English for kids
LearnEnglish Kids is a fun, educational website for children aged 5–12 years who are learning English. There are online vocabulary and grammar games, songs, stories, videos and a range of activities which focus on developing literacy skills. LearnEnglish Kids is also for teachers and parents with hundreds of free printable resources and a support section for parents who want to help their children learn English outside of the classroom.
Do you already speak English but would like to improve your business English? Do you wonder if your business English is up to standard? Would you like to apply for international jobs where English is the language of work? We have the right resources to help you improve your business English.
LearnEnglish website: Business & Work
Learn English with football
If you are learning English and are interested in football, Premier Skills English can help you improve your English while you learn about the Premier League clubs and players. You can also find out about the matches and the Premier League rules and play games and do quizzes.
Premier Skills English website
TeachingEnglish is brought to you by the British Council, the world's English teaching experts. If you want help planning your lessons or to find out more about our online training courses, you've come to the right place! We have hundreds of high-quality resources to help you in the classroom as well as articles, videos, publications and courses to help you with your continuing professional development.