Climate of the Amur River
The Amur basin’s climate is affected by its northern location—between latitudes 45° and 55° N—and by the monsoon (seasonally alternating) winds that shape the climate of all East Asia. In winter polar, continental air masses dominate, bringing dry, frigid weather. Mean January temperatures range from −4 °F (−20 °C) at Harbin on the Sungari River in China to −27 °F (−33 °C) in the northern interior parts of the basin. In summer the predominant subtropical maritime air masses provide mean July temperatures of between 72 °F (22 °C) and 64 °F (18 °C) over the area. The frost-free period ranges from 130 days at Harbin to 90 days farther north and inland. Precipitation in the Amur basin is uneven. It is heaviest in the maritime and southern sections, where it ranges between 24 and 36 inches (600 and 900 mm) annually. In the middle regions the annual rate does not exceed 24 inches (600 mm), and in the western, continental regions it averages 12 to 16 inches (300 to 400 mm). The peak comes in the summer months, when more than half the annual total typically falls.
The river is fed principally by the monsoon rains that fall in summer and autumn. The rainwater finds its way quickly into the river, resulting in a period of flooding that extends from May to October. During that period there typically are several periods of high water when the upper Amur is from 16 to 26 feet (5 to 8 metres) above its usual level. In particularly rainy years the high-water level may be as much as 45 feet (14 metres) above the usual level in the narrow upstream channels of the river. Farther downstream, where broad marshlands capture floodwaters, the variations are less; near the mouth the maximum rise is only about 8 feet (2.5 metres). After September the floodwaters begin to abate. The river reaches its lowest level in March and April, before the spring flood, which is fed mainly by the runoff of melted snow and which is much smaller than the monsoon floods that occur in summer and autumn. Those floods often cause serious economic loss.
The mean discharge of the Amur at its mouth is about 385,000 cubic feet (10,900 cubic metres) per second. The rate of flow near Komsomolsk-na-Amure is about 350,000 cubic feet (9,900 cubic metres) per second. The rate varies from as low as 5,300 cubic feet to 7,000 cubic feet (150 to 200 cubic metres) per second in winter near Khabarovsk; the highest rate ever recorded was in excess of 1,400,000 cubic feet (40,000 cubic metres) per second in 1897. The mean annual discharge of the Amur is about 95 cubic miles (394 cubic km). Above the confluence with the Sungari, the water in the Amur is relatively clear, but below that point it becomes muddy; the annual sediment discharge averages 57 million tons.
Ice forms in the Amur in the second half of October. The upper reaches become icebound at the beginning of November, the lower reaches in the second half of the month. The lower sections open at the end of April and the upper sections in May. Ice jams often occur in the sharp bends of the river, temporarily raising the water level by as much as 50 feet (15 metres). These temporary dams may burst abruptly to cause catastrophic flooding.
Much of the Amur basin lies in the taiga vegetation zone. Larch is the predominant species, particularly in boggy areas, with some pine, spruce, and fir on drier land. In the east are found the Korean pine (Pinus koraiensis) and the Amur cork tree (Phellodendron amurense). In the west the Argun River traverses a region of steppe grassland. In the Da and Xiao Hinggan ranges south of the Amur are found broad-leaved and mixed broad-leaved and conifer forests dominated by Mongolian oak (Quercus mongolica), pine, and daurian larch.
The Amur is rich in fish. The lower river has about 100 species of fish and the upper river 60, surpassing even large European rivers such as the Volga and the Danube. About 25 or 30 species are of commercial value. Northern species include the Siberian salmon, the sig, and the burbot; southern forms include the Chinese perch and the white amur. There are about 20 indigenous species of carp and broadhead. A peculiarity of the Amur is the large number of fish species, such as the Siberian salmon, that develop in the sea and therefore escape exposure to the sharp changes in water level that occur in the river during the summer.
Fishing remains the chief economic activity on the Amur. The river and its large tributaries are navigable throughout their course when they are ice-free. Some of the lakes also are navigable. The main river ports include Pokrovka, Blagoveshchensk, Leninskoye, Khabarovsk, Komsomolsk-na-Amure, and Nikolayevsk-na-Amure in Siberia and Aihui in China. Chinese ports on tributaries of the Amur include Jilemutu on the Argun and Harbin and Jiamusi on the Sungari. The Amur’s importance as a waterway diminished during the period of Sino-Soviet tensions (late 1960s–early 1990s) but increased again as the Chinese and Russians began cooperating on projects involving navigation, agricultural reclamation of marshlands, and the development of the basin’s considerable hydroelectric potential.
The Amur River basin originally was populated by hunting and cattle-breeding nomadic people. North of the river these peoples included the Buryat, Sakha (Yakut), Nanai, Nivkh (Gilyak), Udegey, and Orok, with various Mongol and Manchu groups south of the river. From this homeland, certain Manchu tribes conquered China and established the Qing (Manchu) dynasty in China (1644–1911/12), which ruled the entire Amur basin. Although Russian explorers and traders began entering the area north of the Amur during the 17th century, the Treaty of Nerchinsk (1689), confirmed Chinese sovereignty over the entire basin. Despite the treaty, Russians and others from the west settled north of the Amur. Further Russian encroachment into the region occurred after 1850, and China ceded the lands north of the Amur (1858) and east of the Ussuri (1860) to Russia.
Early Russian exploration of the Amur basin was by the adventurers Vasily Poyarkov, who visited much of the basin and estuary between 1644 and 1646, and Yerofey P. Khabarov (1649–51), for whom Khabarovsk is named. In 1849–55 an expedition led by the Russian naval officer Gennady I. Nevelskoy proved that Sakhalin is an island and that, therefore, the Amur is accessible from the south and not from the north alone, as the Russians previously had supposed. Systematic study of the river system followed this discovery, as the Russians sought to establish transport links with a year-round port on the Pacific Ocean. A tradition of large scientific expeditions that began in tsarist times was continued by the Soviet government, culminating in a thorough exploration in 1952–55.
China long resented the Russian acquisitions of 1858 and 1860, which the Chinese considered to be an example of the unequal treaties forced upon a weakened China. The Russians extended their influence over Manchuria to Harbin and southward to the port of Dairen (Dalian). Russian power, however, was eclipsed by the Japanese, whose empire spread into Manchuria in the decades before World War II. After the war, Sino-Soviet tensions in the area simmered until they erupted into armed conflict along the Ussuri in 1969. Since the breakup of the Soviet Union, however, Russia and China have made efforts toward greater political and economic cooperation in the region.Aleksandr Pavlovich Muranov Charles E. Greer Lewis Owen