A slow laptop makes your work slow, and it is quite stressful to spend your day on a device that takes a lot of time in the process.
In such a situation, you want to make your laptop run fast and process your tasks easily. normally, you can get a new and better laptop that has better performance, but in case you are low on budget, you can consider making changes to the existing laptop.
In case your laptop is slow, and you are wondering what makes a laptop fast, then we have a solution as some easy tips that can help in increasing the performance of your Laptop. So let’s see what makes a laptop fast.
Easy Tips For How To Make your laptop faster
Here are some of the easy tips that you can follow in order to solve the problem.
The processor is the most important component of any computing device. The speed of a laptop mainly depends on its processor. In case a laptop is of the new model, and it has the latest cores and threads, then it has a better performance. But in case your processor is outdated, it will most likely slow down the laptop, and you may not be able to perform your tasks on it well.
The laptop speed varies with the tasks being run with its processor. In these cases, dual-core processors are suitable for making your laptop faster. Single-core processors are really slow, and they don’t have enough performance. Consider getting a dual-core or more cores processor laptop.
RAM is another crucial component of your CPU that sticks to the motherboard and works independently with the processor and memory of a computer. In some situations, laptops have low RAM but better processors, but they still lack performance with multi-tasking. This is why you need to update the RAM in a laptop or get a laptop with more RAM.
Normally, it is considered a fast laptop that should have a minimum of 4 GB RAM that is suitable enough for multi-tasking as well as for playing games and other purposes.
Hard Drive Speed
The hard drive is your storage memory which can greatly affect the performance of your laptop. In case your hard drive is old, or its health is completely finished, then it will most probably need replacement. Otherwise, you will have to use a slow laptop. A fast laptop has a fresh and smooth hard drive. A simple HDD is normal for a laptop, but getting an SSD increases the performance of your laptop.
The hard drive works on RPM, which are as: 4300 rpm, 5400 rpm, 7200 rpm, and the last is SSD. SSD is the fastest hard drive that makes it easy to load and run programs quickly. They are a bit expensive, but they can provide good performance to your laptop. Hence you can make your laptop speed fast.
Overall, making your laptop fast is simple if you know what components you have to focus on and what you need to upgrade. These components play an important role in increasing the speed and performance of a laptop. You can consider getting DDR3 or DDR4 RAM that can perform under any type of load that you put on your laptop.
For a processor, you can consider getting Intel Core series of i5 or i7 with above 4th generation. Such processors have multiple cores and threads that provide great performance and experience for gaming. With the use of an SSD drive, your performance for overall laptop tasks and processing is greatly increased.
This was a discussion about what makes a laptop fast, and we discussed the processor, RAM, and SSD drive that plays an important role in increasing the performance of a laptop. For more info, leave your comments.
Q1: What is a good speed for a laptop?
Ans: A good processor clock speed of 3.5 GHz to 4.0 GHz is considered to be a good speed for multitasking and gaming. A processor with good single-thread performance would most likely perform well.
Q2: What makes a laptop faster?
Ans: A laptop relies on many components when it comes to performance. Generally, the RAM, processor and hard drive of a laptop play an important role in the performance. You need to upgrade your RAM and Processor with the replacement of HDD to SSD in order to increase the performance of your laptop.