Why Are My Gums Bleeding Houston, TX
Gum disease can take a toll on your health.Along with oral health issues, gum diseases can have lasting effects on the body. This makes it crucial to seek professional evaluation and treatment when noticing bleeding gums. In many cases, bleeding gums are often an early warning sign of gum disease.
Treatment for gum disease is available at Hermann Park Smiles in Houston and the surrounding area. First, our team performs an in-depth exam to determine the cause of your symptoms. Next, we offer a range of treatments to improve your oral health. Early diagnosis and treatment can help you avoid complications. Call us at (713) 379-2767 to schedule an appointment with a qualified dentist.
Diseases That Cause Gums to Bleed
Most forms of gum disease are caused by plaque. This sticky substance traps food and bacteria against the gum line. Over time, bacteria attack the gums, triggering inflammation and sensitivity. Without treatment, the problem can worsen. The gums may bleed while eating, brushing, or flossing. Gum problems have also been linked to heart disease and stroke.
Often, smoking and poor oral hygiene are to blame for gum disease. But some patients may be prone to gum disease even if they brush and floss daily. Pregnant women are at a high risk of gum disease, and so are people with diabetes. Patients who wear dentures are more likely to develop gum disease too.
In rare cases, bleeding gums can be a sign of a severe condition like leukemia. Patients who notice bleeding gums should seek dental care right away. Our team can determine the source of the problem. If further tests are required, we help patients make the necessary arrangements.
“Often, smoking and poor oral hygiene are to blame for gum disease.”
Gums may also bleed after a common mouth injury. Patients may notice bleeding after eating sharp foods or suffering a sports injury. More minor injuries may heal on their own, but severe dental bleeding can be dangerous. Seek medical care right away if you experience heavy or uncontrolled bleeding.
Taking some quick and easy precautions can help prevent dental injuries. For example, wearing a mouthguard protects the teeth and gums while playing sports. Avoid sharp foods like chips and hard candies, and never use the teeth to cut or tear objects. Keep appliances like dentures and retainers in good shape, too. Wearing a damaged or ill-fitting appliance can result in a serious mouth injury. If your device no longer fits, contact our dental team. We can provide a replacement.
“Taking some quick and easy precautions can help prevent dental injuries.”
Factors That Cause Gum Bleeding
Smoking, vaping, and chewing tobacco all increase one's risk for gum disease. The substances dry out the mouth and reduce blood flow to the gums. Over time, some patients may develop gum problems. Patients who notice gums bleeding should quit all tobacco products at once.
A poor diet can also lead to vitamin deficiencies. If the body does not receive enough of certain nutrients, patients may develop gum recession. Blood tests can determine whether a patient suffers from nutritional deficiencies. If a nutritional deficiency is to blame, supplements may resolve the problem.
Some prescription medications are associated with oral bleeding, too. Blood thinners, including aspirin, can increase the risk of bleeding. Patients who experience oral bleeding while taking these drugs need immediate care. Contact your healthcare provider for further advice.
“Smoking, vaping, and chewing tobacco all increase one’s risk for gum disease”
Check out what others are saying about our dental services on Yelp: Why Are My Gums Bleeding in Houston, TX
How to Stop Gums from Bleeding
Patients with bleeding gums sometimes stop brushing and flossing their teeth. Unfortunately, poor oral hygiene only worsens the underlying problem. As such, patients must continue brushing their teeth twice daily, even if they are experiencing gum bleeding. Use a soft-bristled brush and apply gentle pressure. Afterward, floss carefully to remove any debris that might be stuck in the gums.
Our team may also recommend a specially formulated mouthwash or a saltwater rinse. These treatments help clear up the infection and shrink swollen gums. Oral rinses also flush away debris and help prevent plaque buildup. Preventing plaque is an essential step in the gum-disease treatment process.
“Preventing plaque is an important step in the gum-disease treatment process.”
Questions Answered on This Page
Q. How can I prevent mouth injuries?
Q. What lifestyle factors can trigger gum bleeding?
Q. How can I treat bleeding gums at home?
Q. What happens after my office visit for gum bleeding?
People Also Ask
Q. What are the symptoms of gum recession?
Good dental hygiene can reduce gum bleeding. During each office visit, our team demonstrates brushing and flossing techniques. We can also provide advice on mouse washes and rises, which may reduce bleeding and gum disease. Individual treatment plans may vary. Our team will let each patient know how to care for their gums — even once they return home.
“Good dental hygiene can reduce gum bleeding.”
Frequently Asked Questions
Q. Should I be concerned about bleeding gums?
A. Bleeding gums can signify an underlying health problem. If you notice that your gums are inflamed, contact your dental provider right away. A dentist can examine your gums and determine the source of the problem.
Q. What causes gum bleeding?
A. Bleeding gums are usually a sign of gingivitis. Gingivitis develops when plaque and bacteria become trapped against the gum line. Treatment can get rid of plaque and destroy the bacteria.A. Bleeding gums can also result from:
- Prescription drugs
- Vitamin deficiencies
- Bleeding disorders
- Poor brushing habits
- Ill-fitting dental appliances
Q. How is gum bleeding treated?
A. Our team begins by identifying the cause of your symptoms. If you have gingivitis, our team can perform a scaling and root planing procedure. This treatment removes plaque and bacteria from below the gums. If your symptoms have a different cause, we deliver the appropriate treatment. As part of your treatment, our team demonstrates proper brushing techniques. We also adjust dental appliances to ensure a comfortable fit.
Q. Is it normal for gums to bleed while flossing?
A. Many patients mistakenly believe that gum bleeding is normal. But healthy gums should not bleed, even during flossing or a dental checkup. If you notice that your gums bleed while flossing, contact our team. We can check your gums for signs of gingivitis or other dental problems.
Q. Are bleeding gums linked to pregnancy?
A. Up to 40% of pregnant women experience gum disease during pregnancy. Hormonal changes can make you more susceptible to gum disease. Make sure to keep up with dental checkups while pregnant, and notify your team of any new symptoms. Prompt treatment can keep the problem from progressing.
- Calculus, also known as tartar, refers to the hardened dental plaque that forms on teeth due to a lack of proper oral hygiene.
- Necrotizing Periodontal Diseases
- A necrotizing periodontal disease is a disease that involves the necrosis of gingival tissues and lesions forming in the mouth.
- Periodontal Ligament
- A periodontal ligament is a tissue that connects the tooth to the bone and is destroyed by advanced periodontal disease.
- The periodontium is the tissue that surrounds and supports the teeth, gums, periodontal ligament and bone.
Call Us Today
If you notice bleeding gums, notify your dentist immediately. Bleeding can be a sign of gum disease. Without treatment, your symptoms may worsen. Receding gums can lead to tooth loss and other dental problems.
Do not let gum disease destroy your oral health. Let Hermann Park Smiles in Houston provide the care you need. Call us at 713-379-2767 to schedule an appointment with a qualified dentist.
Helpful Related Links
- American Dental Association (ADA). Glossary of Dental Clinical Terms. 2023
- American Academy of Cosmetic Dentistry® (AACD). Home Page. 2023
- WebMD. WebMD’s Oral Care Guide. 2023
About our business, license, and website security
- Hermann Park Smiles was established in 2016.
- We accept the following payment methods: Cash, Check, Discover, MasterCard, and Visa
- We serve patients from the following counties: Harris County
- We serve patients from the following cities: Houston, Second Ward, Galena Park, Park Place, Southside Place, Third Ward, Pearland, and Texas Medical Center
- TX (License #26378). View License Information and Specifics
- National Provider Identifier Database (1689909194). View NPI Registry Information
- Norton Safe Web. View Details
- Trend Micro Site Safety Center. View Details
Back to top of Why Are My Gums Bleeding
Common Procedures Performed By A General Dentist
When it comes to general dentistry treatments, many individuals are perplexed and overwhelmed. They are unsure about what a root canal or extraction is. Perhaps they are scared they will require the procedure or do not understand what it entails. Knowing what to expect from these treatments may help calm your nerves and make your…
Get An Improved Smile From A Cosmetic Dentist
A cosmetic dentist provides several treatments that can give teeth a makeover. Those looking to improve the appearance and restore full functionality to the teeth have multiple options available, depending on the condition of the teeth and one’s general oral health. Appearance can have a significant impact on one’s self-confidence, and a teeth makeover is…
General Dentistry: What Types Of Toothpastes Are Recommended?
General dentistry focuses on preventative treatments that help keep your teeth and gums healthy. Brushing and flossing are the foundations of preventative dentistry, and the type of toothpaste that you use can make your brushing sessions even more effective.With so many different types of toothpaste to choose from, figuring out what type works best can…
General Dentistry: How To Treat A Loose Tooth
General dentistry focuses on preventative dentistry, but it also includes restorative treatments that address problems like a loose tooth. A tooth becoming loose may eventually lead to it falling out of its socket, so such issues should never be ignored.General dentistry has multiple ways to address issues like a loose tooth. It often comes down…
Explore additional topics covered on our website:
Call Us Today
Scan here to call Hermann Park Smiles on mobile