Opioid addiction has devastating effects on entire families | Column
During a recent visit to Washington, D.C, advocating with Congress regarding children’s health, we were asked to discuss the impact of opioids on children and families. This epidemic is a massive public health crisis that does not discriminate by age, gender, race or socioeconomic status, affecting nearly all communities in Wisconsin and nationally.
Recently, one of us saw a 5-year-old girl in a clinic with vague abdominal pain and sleep concerns. We learned her mother was out of the home following a relapse for drug abuse, and her symptoms started after her mother’s departure. Another one of us took a call from a father wanting to know how to best help his 8-year-old daughter in the wake of her mother’s death from an accidental overdose with fentanyl. It is no longer unusual to read in a newborn’s chart that their mother was on medications used for treatment of opioid dependence.
RELATED: Hooked in Wisconsin: When heroin hits home
RELATED: He was 7 years old when he lost his mother to an overdose. At 12, he lost his father, too.
We need to look beyond those who are addicted to medications, and examine the effects that addiction has on the entire family. What does it mean to a family when a mother who is on methadone delivers an already opioid-dependent baby — who may then require inpatient hospitalization for neonatal withdrawal? What does it mean to the 5-year-old whose parent is opioid-dependent and in and out of the house leading to significant instability in family life? What effect does addiction have on love, attachment, and the security a child has at home? What does it do to the child’s ability to learn when they are worried about a parent?
We know children dealing with traumatic experiences face social, emotional, physical, and mental health challenges that reverberate into adulthood. Left unaddressed, this toxic stress and early childhood adversity can lead to school failure, higher-risk behaviors like alcohol and drug use, and an increased lifelong chance of health conditions like obesity and heart disease.
The opioid crisis is, sadly, growing and about 8.7 million children nationwide have a parent who suffers from a substance use disorder. It is alarming that nationally every 25 minutes, a baby is born suffering from opioid exposure. This condition can put the baby at risk for lower birth weight, respiratory problems, feeding difficulties, seizures and longer hospital stays. We know that of people in Wisconsin suffering from drug dependence or abuse, about 87% go untreated for their dependency. This takes an immense toll. For example, in Wisconsin 4,778 children were placed into foster care in 2016; in 23% of these placements, parental substance use was a factor. Opioid use destroys the structure of family life.
What can we do about this in Wisconsin? While it can seem daunting, we have some places to start. Working to keep families together from the beginning helps prevent further trauma and improves outcomes. Therefore, policies should prioritize prevention and allow children to remain safely with their families during treatment. Health care providers need tools and resources to recognize, treat, and lessen the lifelong impact of drug abuse and promote healthy families. Furthermore, we need to ensure families have real and timely access to services through Medicaid and other prevention and treatment programs.
As pediatricians we witness first-hand the troubling effects of drug abuse and addiction. Health care providers have a responsibility to make sure we are very cautious in our prescribing and good stewards with any medication that has an abuse potential. We must educate patients about prevention and risks of addiction.
Beyond that, as a society we also must be diligent in understanding this problem. Opioids affect not only the addicted individual, but their loved ones around them. Whatever we do must address the clear fact that when it comes to opioid addiction, the entire family is the patient.
Dr. Mala Mathur, Dr. Dipesh Navsaria and Dr. Sarah Campbell are officers of the Wisconsin Chapter of the American Academy of Pediatrics.