Ideologues of the political groups
There are no national parties in the European Parliament. All the candidates of the national parties join some political group in the European Parliament. These political groups are in a way ‘umbrella organisations’ for the various parties.
European People's Party, EPP
The Group of the European People's Party (EPP -Christian Democrats) is the largest political group in the European Parliament. It unites Christian Democrats and democratic groups in Europe. It also includes moderate centre parties. The group works for a competitive and more democratic Europe. The goal is a social market economy close to citizens. The group wants to create a Europe with a rich internal market. It would be competitive globally. It promotes the wellbeing of people in Europe and elsewhere in the world. Economic welfare must be in harmony with sustainable development.
Click here Lisätietoja EPP-ryhmästä.for more information on EPP.
Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament, S&D
TheGroup of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament (S&D) unites Europe’s social democrats and workers' parties. It is the second largest group in the European Parliament. The group’s top priority is to make the euro zone into a proper economic, monetary and social union. Reforms are needed in the operations of financial institutions and taxation. Tax havens must be eliminated and tax evasion stopped. Laws must guarantee the fundamental rights to work and social assistance for all workers and employees. The environment must be protected. Carbon dioxide emissions must be reduced. Sustainable development must be given priority in all agricultural policies. Research, technology and health services must be supported and developed.
Click hereLisätietoja S&D-ryhmästä for more information on S&D.
Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe (ALDE)
The Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe (ALDE) unites the liberal and liberal democratic parties of the EU member states. It is the third largest group in the European Parliament. In keeping with the liberal ideals, the party stands for individual freedom. Fundamental values include freedom of thought, freedom of religion, free enterprise and a free market economy. Also, freedom of association, freedom of trades, freedom of speech, freedom of the press and free mobility are important. The group works for economic and social responsibility. There are concerns about the future of the environment. The groups seeks to promote sustainable economic growth that safeguards jobs and ensures good operating conditions for companies. All forms of discrimination and poverty are opposed. Different cultures, languages and religions should be respected and tolerated.
Click hereLisätietoja ALDE-ryhmästä for more information on ALDE.
Greens/European Free Alliance (GREENS/ EFA )
As its name implies, the Group of the Greens/European Free Alliance (GREENS/EFA) focuses on the protection of the environment. The four cornerstones of the green philosophy are:environmental protection, social justice, grass root democracy and non-violence. The Free Alliance includes parties representing minority nationalities. It supports greater autonomy for provinces. Common to the parties is opposition to nuclear power. They support human rights and sustainable development. Languages and cultures must be supported.
Click here Lisätietoa Greens/EFA-ryhmästä for more information on EFA.
European Conservatives and Reformists Group (ECR)
The European Conservatives and Reformists Group (ECR) is the newest group in the European Parliament. It is very critical of the euro. The group wants to change and reform the ways of working of the European Union. The group is anti-federalist. Its goal is to bring decision making closer to EU citizens. Democracy, balanced economic development, human rights and security of energy supply are important. Another goal is to guarantee the security of citizens. There should be less regulation and lower taxes in the European Union. Unnecessary regulations and bureaucracy should be decreased. In energy production, due consideration must be given to the climate change objectives and protection of the environment.
Click here Lisätietoa ECR-ryhmästä.
ECR:n esittelyvideo suomenkielisellä tekstityksellä.for more information on ECR.
Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left (GUE/NGL)
The Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left ((GUE/ NGL) consists of European left-wing parties and Nordic green leftists. The group is opposed to Europe’s existing political power structure. Still, it is committed to European integration. The group’s aim is to make all EU institutions fully democratic. It wants to do away with the neo-liberalism controlled by finances. The group is opposed to NATO and wishes to strengthen the Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). The group does not give any instructions to the MEPs; instead, they are free to follow the policies of the national parties.
Click hereLisätietoa GUE/NGL-ryhmästä for more information on GUE/NGL.
Europe of Freedom and Democracy (EFD)
The Europe of Freedom and Democracy Group (EFD) is a Europe-sceptic group within the European Parliament. It is the most fragmented group in Europe. It includes both right- and left-wing parties. The group does not seek to control the MEPs’ opinions; instead, it allows them to vote according to their personal convictions. The group is committed to democracy, freedom and cooperation between nations. It is opposed to a bureaucratic Europe and a centralised European federation. It also opposes European integration. Any changes to the existing treaties should be confirmed by a referendum. The borders of countries are to be protected. Local traditions, history, religion and culture should be cherished. The party is against racial and other forms of discrimination.
Click hereLisätietoja EFD-ryhmästä for more information on EFD.
Some MEPs have chosen not to join any political group in the European Parliament.
Click here Euroopan parlamentin poliittisista ryhmistä for more information on the political groups in the European Parliament.