Without Fourier’s contributions in mathematics and physics, scientists of today would not be where they are. Most notably, Fourier’s theory of heat flux, led to the discovery of global warming. As such, Fourier is regarded as one of the grandfathers of thermal conductivity.
Ångström was awarded the Rumford medal from the Royal Society in 1872, for his work with spectrum analysis. More specifically, Ångström, deduced the theory that states a spark emits, not one, but two superposed spectra; one from the metal and the other from the gas.
It was Kirchhoff who proposed the equation that stated the difference in heat capacity between products and reactants, accounts for the variation of heat in a chemical reaction. In 1860, Kirchhoff helped lead Robert Bunsen to the discovery of two novel chemical elements; cesium and rubidium, thanks to his extraordinary knowledge of spectral analysis.
As lead writer and theory developer of the books: Conduction of heat in solids and Operational methods in applied mathematics, Carslaw contributed a “pure” sense to the pieces of work, while his partner, and previous student, John Conrad Jaeger contributed more of an “applied” sense.
Dr. William J. Parker received the highly acclaimed Thermal Conductivity Award for his dedicated work on the Laser Flash Method, which remains the most popular method of measuring the thermal diffusivity of solids.
Tye is an author and co-author of seven books, over 150 research papers, and has more than 700 citations. In 2005, Ronald P. Tye received the “ECTP Lifetime Award”, to honour his outstanding scientific research on thermophysical properties.
As an author of many books, Jaeger collaborated with Horatio S. Carslaw on two: Conduction of heat in solids and Operational methods in applied mathematics. After the passing of Carslaw, Jaeger continued his research efforts on the theory of heat conduction, to further improve the Carslaw method.
With a career spanning over 35 years, Marc Assael has published more than 186 papers in international journals, 163 papers in conference proceedings, 29 chapters, and 9 books.
With a lifelong career devoted to research and leadership, over 400 research items and 10,000 citations to his name, Wakeham is undoubtedly considered a founding father of modern thermal conductivity.
With a career spanning over 33 years, Boháč is the author and co-author of more than 60 published research papers, and co-authored the patents for the pulse method that measures thermophysical parameters.
In 2000, he received the “INCHEBA 2000” award at the 32nd International Chemical Fair in Bratislava for his Thermophysical Transient Tester RT 1.02. The following year, Kubicar accepted the “Thermal Conductivity Award” at the 26th International Thermal Conductivity Conference and the 14th International Thermal Expansion Symposium in Cambridge, MA, for that same work.
In 2014, he was the invited speaker at the Thermophysics Conference, where he presented his paper titled: Possible Ways of Measuring the Thermal Transport Properties of Anisotrophic Materials. Dr. Gustafsson was awarded the “ITCC Thermal Conductivity Award” at the 27th International Thermal Conductivity Conference in 2003.
Specializing in the standards and metrology of thin film thermophysical properties, Dr. Tetsuya Baba graduated from the University of Tokyo, earning a Doctor of Science degree in 1979. Baba currently works as the senior researcher of TherMAT and is an emeritus researcher at the National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology.
Dr. Akira Nagashima is known for his active role in the field of thermal conductivity. He is a member of several scientific committees, like international organizing committee of the European Conference on Thermophysical Properties.
Yeram Touloukian believed in the importance of high-quality research and was influential world-wide in the establishment of some of the best research facilities in thermophysical measurements. Born in Istanbul, Turkey, Touloukian earned his bachelor’s degree in mechanical engineering before moving to the United States to pursue his master’s degree and Ph.D.
As a condensed matter physicist and emeritus professor of physics, Paul G. Klemens was one of the top researchers on the theory of phonons. Born in Vienna, Klemens and his family fled to Australia shortly before World War II broke out, where he learned to speak English and was awarded a scholarship to the University of Sydney, earning his BS degree and his MS degree in physics.
As the founding editor of the International Journal of Thermophysics, Dr. Ared Cezairliyan is an internationally acclaimed physicist in the field of high-temperature thermophysics. Born in Turkey, Cezairliyan established an early reputation as an outstanding student and attended Robert College in Istanbul, receiving a B.S. degree in mechanical engineering and demonstrating a keen interest in arts and philosophy.