1. Pyrography is the art of decorating wood or other materials with burn marks resulting from the controlled application of a heated object such as a poker. It is also known as pokerwork or wood burning. Pyrography means “writing with fire” and is the traditional art of using a heated tip or wire to burn or scorch designs onto natural materials such as wood, leather, paper, etc. The process has been practiced by a number of cultures including the Egyptians and some African tribes since the dawn of recorded time. Pyrography is also a traditional folk art in many European countries, including Romania, Hungary, as well as countries such as Argentina in South America.
2. Fabergé Eggs are a symbol of luxury and the eggs are regarded as masterpieces of the jeweller’s art. The House of Fabergé made thousands of jeweled eggs from 1885 through 1917. The most famous eggs were the larger Imperial Easter Eggs made for Alexander III and Nicholas II of Russia. Fabergé was given complete creative freedom in creating the eggs. The only stipulations were that each egg must be unique and must contain a surprise. The eggs were made with precious metals or hard stones decorated with combinations of enamel and gem stones.
3. Environmental Art is art that helps improve and create awareness about our relationship with the natural world. It may include the use of recycled/ reclaimed materials and resources in an eco-friendly way to create art. It may also interpret nature and its processes, educate us about environmental problems, and show concern about environmental forces and materials. Artists may create artwork that is powered by wind, water, lightning, earthquakes etc. that re-envisions or propose new ways for us to co-exist with our environment. It may reclaim and remediate damaged environments, restoring ecosystems in artistic and aesthetic ways.
4. Pablo Picasso’s full name was Pablo Diego José Francisco de Paula Juan Nepomuceno María de los Remedios Cipriano de la Santísima Trinidad Martyr Patricio Clito Ruíz y Picasso. He was named after various saints and relatives. The “Picasso” is actually from his mother, Maria Picasso y Lopez. His father is named Jose Ruiz Blasco.
5. Early Art Education teaches children: to be more tolerant and open, promotes individuality, and self-confidence, improves academic performance, helps develop basic mental and physical capabilities, and improves interpersonal communications. Young people who participate in the arts every week are more likely to participate and be recognized in academic activities such as math and science.
The Art Lover’s Almanac : Serious Trivia for the Novice and the Connoisseur
Facts On File Encyclopedia Of Art ( 5 vol. set)