Satellite means any satellite owned by the Issuer or any of its Restricted Subsidiaries and any satellite purchased by the Issuer or any of its Restricted Subsidiaries pursuant to the terms of a Satellite Purchase Agreement, whether such satellite is in the process of manufacture, has been delivered for launch or is in orbit (whether or not in operational service).
Satellite Manufacturer means, with respect to any Satellite, the prime contractor and manufacturer of such Satellite.
Payload means all property to be flown or used on or in a Launch Vehicle or the ISS.
Spacecraft (7 9) means active and passive satellites and space probes.
Launch Vehicle means an object, or any part thereof, intended for launch, launched from Earth, or returning to Earth which carries Payloads or persons, or both.
Launch means the intentional ignition of the first-stage motor(s) of the Launch Vehicle intended to place or try to place a Launch Vehicle (which may or may not include any Transfer Vehicle, Payload or crew) from Earth:
Satellite facility means a secured facility at which collection and storage of household hazardous materials and hazardous materials from conditionally exempt small quantity generators are accomplished prior to transportation of these materials to a regional collection center. A satellite facility has a written contract with a regional collection center for the removal of collected household hazardous materials. A satellite facility may be operated by a government agency or a private agency under contract with a government agency as part of a solid waste comprehensive plan. A satellite facility is available for public drop off of household hazardous materials either during regularly scheduled hours or by appointment.
Boiler Fuel means natural gas used as fuel for the generation of steam and in internal combustion turbine engines for the generations of electricity.
Boiler means an enclosed fossil or other fuel-fired combustion device used to produce heat and to transfer heat to recirculating water, steam, or other medium.
Beam monitoring system means a system designed and installed in the radiation head to detect and measure the radiation present in the useful beam.
Fire alarm system means a system designed to detect and annunciate the presence of fire, or by-products of fire. Fire alarm system includes smoke detectors.
Satellite services means communications capabilities that utilize an on-orbit satellite for transmitting the signal from one location to another.
Module means specific portion of the Application Software designated as such in the Documentation made available to the Customer under the Notification Form.
heat pump means a machine, a device or installation that transfers heat from natural surroundings such as air, water or ground to buildings or industrial applications by reversing the natural flow of heat such that it flows from a lower to a higher temperature. For reversible heat pumps, it may also move heat from the building to the natural surroundings;
Engine means (a) each of the two [Engine Manufacturer and Model] engines (generic manufacturer and model [Generic Manufacturer and Model]) listed by manufacturer’s serial number and further described in Annex A to the Indenture Supplement originally executed and delivered under the Indenture, whether or not from time to time installed on the Airframe or installed on any other airframe or on any other aircraft, and (b) any Replacement Engine that may from time to time be substituted for an Engine pursuant to Section 7.04 or 7.05 of the Indenture; together in each case with any and all related Parts, but excluding items installed or incorporated in or attached to any such engine from time to time that are excluded from the definition of Parts. At such time as a Replacement Engine shall be so substituted and the Engine for which substitution is made shall be released from the Lien of the Indenture, such replaced Engine shall cease to be an Engine under the Indenture.
Camera means a device that renders an image of the outside world and then converts this image into a signal (e.g. video signal).
Basic Comprehensive User Guide means the Ministry document titled Basic Comprehensive Certificates of Approval (Air) User Guide” dated April 2004 as amended.
Deployment means a period of time extending from six (6) months before a member of the uniformed services' departure from their home station on military orders through six (6) months after return to his or her home station.
Signaling System 7 (SS7 means a signaling protocol used by the CCS Network.
Radiation therapy simulation system means a radiographic or fluoroscopic x-ray system intended for localizing the volume to be exposed during radiation therapy and confirming the position and size of the therapeutic irradiation field.
efficient exhaust draught means localised ventilation effected by mechanical means for the removal of gas, vapour, dust or fumes so as to prevent them (as far as practicable under the atmospheric conditions usually prevailing) from escaping into the air of any place in which work is carried on. No draught shall be deemed efficient which fails to remove smoke generated at the point where such gas, vapour, fume, or dust originate;
Sensor means any measurement device that is not part of the vehicle itself but installed to determine parameters other than the concentration of gaseous and particle pollutants and the exhaust mass flow.
Continuous emission monitoring system or "CEMS" means the equipment required under section 11 of this rule to sample, analyze, measure, and provide, by means of readings recorded at least once every fifteen (15) minutes, using an automated data acquisition and handling system (DAHS), a permanent record of nitrogen oxides emissions, stack gas volumetric flow rate, stack gas moisture content, and oxygen or carbon dioxide concentration, as applicable, in a manner consistent with 40 CFR 75*. The following systems are the principal types of continuous emission monitoring systems required under section 11 of this rule:
Subsystem means a functional grouping of items that combine to perform a major function within an end item, such as electrical power, attitude control, and propulsion.
Retrofit means the application of an emission control system to a non-new LSI engine.
Firefighter means a member of an organized fire department, including a volunteer member or a member paid on call, who is responsible for, or is in a capacity that includes responsibility for, the extinguishment of fires, the directing of the extinguishment of fires, the prevention and detection of fires, and the enforcement of the general fire laws of this state. Firefighter does not include a person whose job description, duties, or responsibilities do not include direct involvement in fire suppression.