Introduction to Floral Arrangements (Part 3)
Styles, Elements and Principles of Floral Design.
For this series, we will discuss the basic aspects of crafting floral arrangements. We'll also dive into the details of designing and assembling flower arrangements.
In Part 1, we talked about the know-hows in processing, storing, and maintaining flowers. In Part 2, we looked at the common flowers and plants used for decor. We also tackled how-tos in creating beautiful arrangements in an effective way.
Here in Part 3, we'll combine everything we learned into a clear and useful guide. We'll examine the origins of floral design all the way to current forms today. As budding florists, you'll get everything you need to know right here!
Interested in programs on designing floral arrangements? We recommend schools like the American Institute of Floral Designers (www.aifd.org). We also encourage you to check out the Society of American Florists (www.safnow.org).
Three Main Styles of Floral Design.
Various styles of floral design came about from diverse cultures around the world. Plenty of florists continue to apply these traditions in fresh and relevant ways.
The first primary style of floral design is the Oriental style. It highlights the lines of the arrangement. It pursues unity and balance in blending flowers and greens.
Next is the traditional or Western style. It emphasizes the look and use of flowers en masse. It tends towards uneven forms that still spark rhythm and creativity.
Coming in last is the modern floral style. It arose as a blend of Eastern and Western styles. It draws from the form and lines of the Oriental style. But it also allows florists to show their creative talent through unique design.
Elements and Principles of Floral Design.
As florists, we have our choice styles. Our customers also have different tastes and needs. But for each arrangement, each florist needs to feature a few basic elements. With this, you can create top-quality bouquets that still suit your client's demands.
Here is the list of important factors to remember:.
Every design sets out with producing a visual and theme. Are you aiming for a chic finish or a rustic appeal? Should your bouquet have a bright look or a subtle one? It is essential to consider these questions before creating your arrangement.
Proportion and Scale.
These two elements come hand in hand when you plan floral arrangements. They're especially useful when you prepare for large events and venues.
Proportion refers to the relationship between the sizes of features in your design. This includes your flowers, plants, and vases.
Scale refers to the positioning of your flowers in the desired space. For instance, will your arrangement serve as a centerpiece for a table or decor for the entire venue? This will help you see if your design fits the space where you set it.
This principle focuses on the form and structure of your floral design. Whatever your desired style is, each arrangement must have a sense of balance.
To achieve this, your bouquet should have an element of similar color, texture, or weight on each side. Flowers and ornaments need to balance each other well in creative ways.
This element brings life to your design! It creates flow and movement that seizes attention. It's all about aligning flowers based upon their shape and form. This way, it attracts the eye to the center of the design all the way to its edges.
Main flowers are the stars of your show! They act as the focal point of your design. This is where accents and foliage seem to rise from, creating a breathtaking illusion.
This principle is all about bringing focus to your main flowers. You can create emphasis by contrasting colors and kinds of blooms. This means you select accents and foliage to complement the main blossoms!
Harmony and Unity.
Every floral design needs to be relevant to the event and theme. It must ensure a harmonious blend of varying colors. It also needs to look unified with its container and placement.
For a more detailed guide on the use of color and design in floristry, see our next article!