What are coronary sulcus and their function?
The coronary sulcus is circumferential and separates the atria from the ventricles. The anterior and posterior interventricular sulci or grooves separate the ventricles.
What is the anterior ventricular sulcus?
The anterior interventricular sulcus (or anterior longitudinal sulcus) is one of two grooves that separates the ventricles of the heart, the other being the posterior interventricular sulcus. The anterior interventricular sulcus is situated on the sternocostal surface of the heart, close to its left margin.
What is the meaning of coronary sulcus?
n. A groove on the outer surface of the heart marking the division between the atria and the ventricles.
What’s in the coronary sulcus?
The superficial branch follows the groove (coronary sulcus) between the right ventricle and atrium and supplies the cardiac muscle of both chambers. The larger deep branch supplies the ventral wall of the right ventricle, the dorsal walls of both atria, and the muscular right atrioventricular valve.
What is the function of the left ventricle?
The left ventricle pumps the oxygen-rich blood through the aortic valve out to the rest of the body.
What is the sulcus terminalis of the heart?
The sulcus terminalis is an inconsistent depression of the myocardial surface of the right atrium of the heart. It extends a short distance inferiorly and to the right from the space intermediate to the superior vena cava and right auricle.
What is the function of the anterior interventricular artery?
It provides the major blood supply to the interventricular septum, and thus bundle branches of the conducting system. Hence, blockage of this artery due to coronary artery disease can lead to impairment or death (infarction) of the conducting system.
What does the left anterior descending artery supply?
The left anterior descending artery branches off the left coronary artery and supplies blood to the front of the left side of the heart. The circumflex artery branches off the left coronary artery and encircles the heart muscle. This artery supplies blood to the lateral side and back of the heart.
How do the coronary arteries relate to the atrioventricular sulcus?
One, the atrioventricular groove, is along the line where the right atrium and the right ventricle meet; it contains a branch of the right coronary artery (the coronary arteries deliver blood to the heart muscle).
Which artery travels in the coronary sulcus between the left atrium and the left ventricle?
Terms in this set (19) Which artery travels in the coronary sulcus between the left atrium and the left ventricle of the heart? The circumflex travels in the coronary sulcus. The left anterior descending travels down the anterior surface of the interventricular septum.
What is the heart left ventricle?
The left ventricle is the thickest of the heart’s chambers and is responsible for pumping oxygenated blood to tissues all over the body. By contrast, the right ventricle solely pumps blood to the lungs.