Checkbox, linear scale, drop-down menu or data
Insert formula into a document
It is possible to insert your own calculations in a document so that it is generated automatically in the document. Here are the steps to configure your automatic calculations.
1. When you add a number or data field, you can click on the pencil next to “Formulas”.
❗Note that you can transform the data format.
By default, they will have the format “Number”, but you can change them to:
2. You can then configure a specific condition for your calculation, such as:
Calculation for a specific sex;
Based on the age;
Without any particular condition.
3. You can create your calculation in the same way as in Excel, using the following symbols: * / + -
4. You can insert other fields contained in your document in this calculation. To do this:
Enter the symbol “!” Followed by the name of your field.
The software will automatically offer you the corresponding options.
Once selected, the software will change what you entered to a unique key.
Most common formulas
Add checkboxes: COUNT([checkbox1],[Checkbox2],etc.)
Round off: ROUND([element1]....)
Enter only the largest number: MAX([element1],[element2],etc.)
Enter only the smallest number: MIN([element1],[element2],etc.)
zeroIfEmpty: Allows calculation, even if a box is not filled
Insert client's age automatically: [A]
If you want to total the checkboxes completed, add them up
Checkbox checked = 1
Checkbox not checked = 0).
You can calculate the value of slider. (add, subtract, multiply or divide).
Example of addition:
Example of subtraction:
Drop down menu
You can calculate the value from drop-down menus. (add, subtract, multiply or divide).
Example of multiplication:
Example of division:
Example of an Average:
Check the document once created
Go to a client's file (Test/Dummy).
Create a “Document” type intervention.
Verify that your formula behaves as desired.
If this is not the case, you can return to edit the document in the administration.
Do not hesitate to contact a Hexpert via the chat bubble for support.
The most common reason for error messages is the inclusion of a special character that is not supported by the software. You can simply remove it in order to correct the error.
Sometimes a negative measurement (which should be positive) creates an error message.
If you want to create a custom data to do your calculation, click here to find out more.
To learn more about creating custom documents, click here.
To access the tutorial in our Academy, click here.