The receding gums or gingival recession consists of the weakening and displacement of gum tissue that surrounds the tooth, causing greater exposure of the root of the tooth.
It is a very common pathology in adulthood that must be addressed when it is detected, not only for aesthetic reasons, but also because of the serious problems it can cause in dental health.
Between the main causes of appearance of receding gums are: aggressive brushing, trauma or bruxism, periodontal diseases and tobacco.
Causes of receding gums
1. Aggressive brushing
Brushing your teeth aggressively or with a toothbrush that is harder than necessary can hurt gums generating a gingival recession. The correct brushing of the teeth should be soft, without squeezing.
Excessive brushing can do retraction in 4-5 teeth, in general, being common in tusks and canines.
2. Gum retraction due to trauma or bruxism
Blows or trauma to the mouth caused, for example, by an accident, could also cause the gums to recede.
In turn, unconsciously clenching the teeth also affects the health of the gums, causing them to expose the root of the piece.
3. Retraction of gums due to periodontal diseases
Periodontal diseases are another cause of receding gums. In its initial stage appears gingivitis, which if not treated, will progress until it leads to periodontitis. At the same time and as the periodontal disease progresses, the gums recede leaving, once again, the root of the tooth exposed.
tobacco causes inflammation in the gums and blocks the flow of blood. In this way, the gum tissues are weakened, bacteria advance more easily causing periodontal problems and gum retraction.
Solutions to receding gums
The solution in receding gums It will depend on each person and of course, their diagnosis.. Therefore, it is crucial to determine from the beginning what are the causes that have caused it and eliminate them, before performing any type of surgical treatment.
For example, in the event that the cause is aggressive brushing, the bad habit should be corrected.
In no case will gum loss be reversible using home methods. The only option to correct it once it has manifested it will be through the tissue grafting or stretching.
Treatment consists of remove tissue from the palate through a small incision and with it the gum is covered. Currently, with advances in technology, it has become a minimally invasive surgery with only 2 or 3 stitches.
In any case, those patients who still have the interdental papillae, that is, the tissue between the teeth, can undergo a gum stretching technique without the need to resort to a major intervention.
With this method it is possible to recover the gum and its usual appearance.
In any case, it will be necessary visit a periodontist to make a diagnosis tailored to each case.
In Dr. Vilar clinic we have more than 30 years of experience in periodontics. Call us at 932 01 71 52 either fill out this form.