We can all agree that if mankind ever venture to another planet, it will be Mars. Scientists believe that there was once water on the red planet, but they have yet to discover how humans on Earth could colonise it.
The ESA's Mars Express is about to make another astounding discovery: the Red Planet has astonishing atmospheres while having vastly different ones. The discovery has baffled scientists all around the world.
The difference between Mars' atmosphere and our planet's atmosphere is substantial, and having Earth-like clouds in these conditions looks unusual. Mars' atmosphere is almost entirely composed of carbon dioxide, whereas Earth's atmosphere is rich in nitrogen and oxygen.
SEE ALSO: NASA's Insight Lander Provides Its Final Information About Mars Before Dying On Martian Soil
What method did the researcher use to make this observation?
If you're a 'Mars nerd’ you might recall the dust storms that occurred in 2019 around the red planet's north pole. The storms were observed in the North Pole in the spring, when local storms frequently form around the melting ice cover.
The Visual Monitoring Camera (VMC) and the High Resolution Stereo Camera (HRSC), two crucial cameras onboard Mars Express, photographed the storms.
The VMC image sequence "shows that the storms appear to form and fade in recurrent cycles over a period of days, exhibiting common traits and structures," according to a ESA statement. On the other hand, the broader views of the HRSC photos clearly show spiral structures.
Closed Cell Convection
The photographs also show that dust storms on Mars are formed of tiny, regularly spaced cloud cells that are arranged like pebbles, giving clouds above Earth a garden-path-like pattern.
This process, known as closed-cell convection, occurs when hot air rises and denser, cooler air falls in cellular-like units. According to the researchers, as hot air rises through the centres of these cells, cold air descends through "pathways" that emerge in the spaces between the individual cells.
"We have seen that within their complexity, organised structures such as fronts and cellular convection patterns can emerge," said Agustn Sánchez-Levaga, leader of the VMC science team and lead author of the study. "Despite the unpredictable behaviour of dust storms on Mars and the strong wind gusts that accompany them, we have seen that these structures can emerge.”
SEE ALSO: A Colossal Meteorite Struck Mars. Then NASA Made An Even Bigger Discovery.
If you believe that Mars is the only planet in the solar system with such cellular convection, you may want to reconsider. The ESA's Venus Express satellite has discovered patterns in Venusian clouds that are identical to those seen on Mars.
Cover Image: ESA