Image for representational purpose only. (Photo credit: Wikimedia Commons)
`Environmental release‘ or open farming for seed production of India’s first genetically engineered food crop has been permitted by the apex committee of the Union Ministry of Environment, Forests and Climate Change. This is a significant step by the regulators considering the burgeoning import bill of edible oil to fulfil India’s domestic demand. So far India has had to rely on expensive imports and the war in Ukraine has also put a lot of stress on edible oil supply. Therefore, domestic farmers would benefit the most from this decision.
India is woefully short of edible oils and the genetically engineered mustard could help bridge the gap. Calling it a “bold decision,” Dr R S Paroda, former director general of Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR) says “it is in the best interest of our farmers and the nation. The decision to remove the unscientific ban on GM crops reflects the determination of the government to move towards an atmanirbhar Bharat.”
The genetically modified variety of mustard has been developed by the University of Delhi (DU) and there is hope that this could transform the mustard crop in India. The crucial question is will GM Mustard become a reality and will Indian consumers accept it? Fact is most of the imported edible soy bean and mustard oil is largely extracted from GM varieties grown in host countries.
“It is a decisive moment for India’s edible oil sector. The hybrid DMH-11 and a new genetic system of heterosis breeding has been approved by Union Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change (MOEFCC) for developing cost-effective, 100% fertile and high-yielding mustard hybrids under supervision of ICAR,” said Dr C D Mayee, president of South Asia Biotechnology Centre, Jodhpur.
Supporting the decision, Dr Mayee said that India imported about 14.5 million tons of edible oil costing US$18.99 billion (About Rs 1.5 lakh crore) to meet almost 70% of domestic edible oil demand due to abysmally low yield and production of local oilseed crops. GM Mustard could change this scenario.
India embraced genetically modified crops with the introduction of GM Cotton or Bt Cotton in 2002 and since then India’s cotton production has boomed and pesticide consumption for use to control the pink bollworm, the devastating pest of cotton, dipped dramatically. After the initial success, Indian scientists made an attempt to introduce Bt Brinjal but that was shot down by the then Minister of Environment & Forests, Jairam Ramesh, putting a moratorium on its release.
Today a GM crop comes in many flavours, with genetic transformation, gene editing and CRISPR CAS. There is a certain divide and debate on the introduction of GM in food crops, but with a burgeoning population India can ill afford to be averse to GM crops. “Since, the Indian land mass will not increase, low input, high output agriculture is probably the only sustainable solution,” asserts Dr Deepak Pental who has worked on this for the last 25 years. GM Cotton, introduced in 2004 is now more than 90% of all cotton cultivated in India.
India has struggled with genetic engineering. It has been a start-stop policy from the governments of the day. This has impacted research in this sector. To see GM Mustard plants tested and ready in the laboratory but not reaching the farmers’ fields is worrisome.
GM Mustard that increases yield and raises no safety or public health concern is the big take away from a report by a panel of the India’s environment ministry. The ministry released a 133-page food and environmental safety evaluation report on what is now India’s first genetically modified food crop – GM mustard.
The ministry report said that GM Mustard “does not raise any public health or safety concerns for human beings and animals with respect to overall nutritional characteristics.” The introduced component is non-toxic and not allergenic. The genetically modified component is not present in the mustard oil.
Dr Pental, a plant geneticist at DU and the man credited with having developed this GM Mustard says, “the biosafety study that has been carried out is as thorough as it can be and now ideology should not overwhelm scientific evidence.”
Elaborating on GM Mustard, Dr Bhagirath Choudhary of South Asia Biotechnology Centre emphasizes that “new hybrid development system is prerequisite to break yield barrier and the vicious cycle of edible oil import by harnessing genetic gain, addressing rapidly changing climatic situations and increasing adoption of hybridization of mustard.” Dr Choudhary rebuts one complaint saying that weedicides will not come in contact with bees that visit the mustard plants as the weedicides are used only when the mustard plant is non-flowering.
The MOEFCC notes that introduction of GM mustard has “no measureable risk” but as part of precautionary principle, honey bee populations and honey needs to be assessed and the impact on non-target organisms needs to be monitored after the environmental release.”
Is it swadeshi? This is a question some are asking. The GM Mustard plant has been developed by DU through a publicly funded grant with no involvement of any private seed company. The patent rights rest with the publicly-funded institutions.
GM Mustard has been bred to increase productivity of the oil seed. According to developers of the GM Mustard, the transgenic technology based hybrid seed production system has been developed since Brassica juncea is a predominantly self-pollinating crop, hence a pollination control mechanism is required to disallow self-pollination and facilitate cross-pollination for production of desired hybrid seeds. Therefore, a transgenic technology-based hybrid seed production system has been developed. The genetic engineering-based hybrid developed seed consists of the barnase gene for male sterility and barstar gene for restoration of male fertility.
Two years down the line when enough GM Mustard seeds have been accumulated, Union Ministry of Agriculture will take another call to introduce it or not, widely into farmers’ fields. We are one step closer but several hurdles remain for India to embrace the first GM food crop. Science must triumph if India wishes to become self-sufficient in edible oil production.