A team of astronomers says it may have spotted the youngest planet ever found, boasting an age of less than 100,000 years old, and perhaps as young as 1600 years old.
They say it bolsters a controversial theory that planets form very quickly, like stars – but other astronomers say the massive object may not be a planet at all but a ‘failed’ star, which explains its speedy birth.
Astronomers led by Jane Greaves at the University of St Andrews in Scotland used the Very Large Array of radio telescopes in New Mexico, US, and the MERLIN array at Jodrell Bank in the UK to image the dusty disc around a star called HL Tau. With an estimated age of less than 100,000 years, HL Tau lies about 460 light years away in the constellation Taurus.
Inside the disc, the team found a dense clump of matter at a distance of 65 astronomical units (where 1 AU is the distance between the Sun and Earth) from the star. The clump is about 14 times the mass of Jupiter.
The team reckons that the clump is a planet in its very early years of formation – at no more than 100,000 years old, it is much younger than the previous record holder for the youngest planet, which was less than 10 million years old.
“This is the first image of a planet at such an incredibly young age,” Greaves says. The team presented its results on Wednesday at the Royal Astronomical Society meeting in Belfast, UK.
They say the clump probably did not form by the ‘core accretion’ model favoured by most astronomers, in which planets form slowly, gradually building up mass like dust bunnies.
Instead, it probably formed quickly through a process called gravitational instability, whereby knots of matter in the dusty disc around the star collapse rapidly to form planets. The team says another star called XZ Tau may have kick-started the collapse when it passed near HL Tau as recently as 1600 years ago.
Such a process, which is similar to how stars form, reproduced the observations when team member Ken Rice of the University of Edinburgh in Scotland carried out a computer simulation of the system (watch a video of the simulation).
Alan Boss, a major proponent of the gravitational instability model at the Carnegie Institution of Washington in the US, agrees that the new object probably formed quickly through gravitational collapse.
That’s because of the great distance between the object and its parent star. He says there is not enough material in the disc at the object’s location to have formed the clump through core accretion in such a short time. “At that distance, it’s just about impossible to build something up that way,” Boss told New Scientist.
But he admits that the 14-Jupiter-mass object may not be a planet at all. Instead, it may be a brown dwarf – a type of object that is too massive to be a planet but not massive enough to trigger the type of nuclear fusion found in ordinary stars.
Brown dwarfs, often called ‘failed’ stars, are defined as having between about 13 and 75 times the mass of Jupiter. “Their mass estimate puts it right in the grey area between a planet and a brown dwarf,” Boss says.
Kevin Luhman, a planet formation expert at Pennsylvania State University, says the star itself is so young that it is still growing by taking material from its surroundings. The object, too, may get bigger still. “It’s hard to say how large the mass will be when it is finished forming,” he told New Scientist.
If the object grows to be a good-sized brown dwarf, it and its larger stellar neighbour will be more like a binary star system than a planetary system. “I think most astronomers would agree that it is a brown dwarf forming by a ‘stellar’ process,” says Gibor Basri of the University of California, Berkeley, US.
Alternatively, the clump could simply go away. “When astronomers detect blobs of this kind in radio maps of discs, it is difficult determine for certain whether the blob is a forming object, or a transient clump that will dissipate over time,” Luhman told New Scientist.