Food High in Potassium
Helps to Maintain Good Health
"A great list of potassium rich foods
that are also low in sodium!"
, obtained from food and especially food high in potassium, along with the mineral sodium
are necessary for a host of body functions from the action of your heart to the functioning of your brain.
These two nutrients are vital to the very mechanisms that power virtually every living cell
in your body. They play a major role in controlling:
- - The salinity of the fluids inside and outside your cells.
- - The acidity and alkalinity of your body.
- - The flow of numerous substances throughout your body.
To keep our bodies healthy, nature provides us with the right amount
of both these
elements in a wide variety of natural foods. For example:
Notice the very small
amount of sodium
compared to the much larger
Now look what happens to these same potassium rich foods
when we cook and process
|Beef, corned beef
In all cases the amount of the nutrient potassium is significantly reduced while in most
cases, the amount of sodium is drastically increased due to the common industrial
practice of adding table salt (sodium chloride) during processing for taste and
How much potassium do we need?
The government recommended daily allowance for potassium is 3,500 milligrams while
for sodium it is only 500 milligrams.
Because the typical North American diet is high in processed foods and lacking in food high in potassium,
the average American, according to the National Academy of Sciences, ingests only 2,500 milligrams
of potassium but a whopping 4,000 milligrams of sodium per day.
Effects of food low in potassium and high in sodium
, or high blood pressure, has for a long time been linked to excess sodium
the diet. Other factors include obesity and excess animal fat.
Unfortunately, two-thirds of Americans over the age of 60 have high blood pressure with
its associated higher risk of heart attack and stroke.
Many other health disorders can arise when we do not eat enough food high in potassium and too much food containing
excess sodium, including: (just to mention a few)
- - Accelerated aging
- - Fatigue
- - Glucose intolerance
- - Headaches
- - Cognitive impairment
- - Insomnia
We are what we eat - so eat more food high in potassium
To improve our body's potassium-sodium balance, we should all strive to eat more raw
fruits and vegetables, more whole grain foods and reduce our consumption of refined
Good nutrition is the number one contributor to healthy longevity.
To this end, the FDA has recently given manufacturers permission to put labels on
potassium rich foods
, touting their ability to reduce
both high blood pressure and stroke
Any food high in potassium which contains at least 350 milligrams of potassium per serving and not more than
140 milligrams of sodium and as well is low in saturated fat and cholesterol, can make
Unrefined apple cider vinegar
is a good source of potassium, which can be increased
even more by mixing in fresh, potassium rich berries or apricots to form a fruit vinegar.
Combine that with some of the following potassium rich foods
(which are also low in
sodium) and you'll have no trouble getting the recommended daily allowance of 3,500
mg. As well, food high in potassium will go a long way to help counter the adverse effects of excess salt
in your diet.
|Potassium Rich Foods
|Baked potatoes, with skin
|Beef, pot roast
|Green lima beans, raw
|Green peas, uncooked
|Tomato paste, canned
|Turkey, roast light meat
|Whole wheat flour
For many more facts about potassium and a comprehensive list of the potassium and
sodium content in over 150 common foods (both food high in potassium and food which is not), I highly
recommend you read the well-researched book called:
Everything You Always Wanted to Know About Potassium but Were Too Tired to Ask
by Betty Kamen, Ph.D.