When children live in a home where violence occurs, it does not matter if the home is in a large city like London or a small town, they are always affected. Even if the abusive parent does not directly harm the child emotionally or physically, they will still suffer from a number of negative consequences. These children will display various behaviors. For instance, some of them will misbehave while others tend to focus on their peacekeeping abilities. Once the court becomes involved, a experienced solicitor such as Herrington Carmichael Surrey may be needed. Keep in mind that a criminal solicitor defends various offenses including the use of a weapon during a crime, major injuries to a victim and probation violations.
Domestic Violence Effects
Some children will copy the violent behavior that they observe. In addition, children from abusive homes learn that violence is acceptable. They may also learn that violence is important to intimate relationships. Children who come from homes where violence is common may become abused or cruel adults.
Children from violent homes may become a target of the abusive parent's vicious behavior. In some cases, the child winds up being an unintended victim.
Neglect is another common problem that children living in violent homes face because abused parents may struggle to take care of them. People who are accused of enacting violence on others may need help from a criminal law firm.
As children who live in violent situations become older, they may suffer from low self-esteem and decreased confidence, which makes it hard for them to deal with everyday life issues. These children may even have trouble sleeping or managing stress. Depression and psychosomatic illnesses are other common emotional disorders in children from violent homes.
Some children will take on adult responsibilities such as caring for a younger sibling or managing household tasks. Violent situations often force children into a referee type role, but once they become arbitrators in their own home, they may withdraw from both parents.
Lack of trust is another problem that children from abusive homes face. These children cannot predict whether they will be abused, neglected or the recipient of excessive affection. Children from violent homes may fear that they will be abandoned because they are often sent to stay with other people during violent moments at home. Children who are caught in the middle of an abusive relationship may have uncontrollable rage, feelings of guilt or embarrassment. Older children may run away from home, and all children who live in violent homes may have trouble in school. Substance abuse, self-harming and thoughts of suicide are ways that children may cope with violence at home.
How Children Handle Domestic Violence based on Age
When infants live in violent households, they may have trouble sleeping. Babies may not form the proper bond to their caregiver. Injuries and unusual eating routines are also common in small children from abusive homes.
Toddlers and preschool age children who come from violent homes often exhibit regressive behaviors. This age group also demonstrates irritation and clinginess to their caregivers. Once children from abusive homes enter school, they may begin to mimic the behavior displayed by their parents. For instance, they may fight or express shameful feelings. School age children may also display angry feelings towards their family.
When teenagers live in violent homes, they may be cautious or secretive about their personal life. These teenagers generally do not bring friends home, but they may spend a lot of their time at other people's houses. Teens often blame others for their problems and do not attempt to solve issues. Teenagers may become sexually active or commit crimes.
You may be interested in Swiss bankruptcy information by SwissFirma
Children may exhibit negative behaviors when they live in domestic violence situations. With proper help, most children can overcome the effects of having lived in a violent home.