Kasigau Corridor REDD+
This project protects 500,000 acres of dryland forest that was previously under intense threat from slash and burn agriculture. Income from 11 million tons of REDD+ Verified Emissions Reductions will help protect endangered animals, such as the African elephant, and provide economic development for the community.
Eighteen new classrooms for primary school children have been built as well as an innovative rainwater catchment system to provide a clean water supply.
Rimba Raya Orangutan Reserve REDD+
A preservation and biodiversity reserve for hundreds of at risk species, this project protects 65,000 hectares of peat swamp rainforest. This initiative is the world’s largest privately-funded orangutan sanctuary. Income from REDD+ Verified Emission Reductions serves to protect High Conservation Value from the lowland peat swamps and has funded the distribution of “appropriate rural technology” (ART) low maintenance, ceramic water filters to each and every household in the project area.
Internet of things INNOVATION
Leveraging the world’s first first modern Operating System for the hardware of the Internet of Things (IoT) bringing intelligence to the inexpensive, low-power devices that drive IoT sensors, and providing a level of technological sophistication previously unavailable in such cost-effective and power-efficient hardware. The key innovation is a proprietary, hardware-agnostic Virtual-Machine (VM) application layer that runs on inexpensive, low-power embedded System on Chips (SoCs).
Mai Ndombe REDD+
Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC)
Designated as a high conservation priority within the central part of the Congo River Basin, this area of humid tropical and swamp forest was a former logging concession.
It includes some of the most important wetlands in the world and is the largest freshwater area in the African continent.
The Mai Ndombe project works to safeguard the communities’ environmental health and economic livelihoods, as well as their traditional, spiritual, and cultural values.
PROJECTS IN OUR PIPELINE
The Pipeline Includes 20 Countries That Make up over 77% of All Historical Forest Emissions
Oro Legal is a USAID funded $20 million program in Colombia. The program recognizes that uncontrolled artisanal gold mining is both a stimulus for illegality and wide-scale environmental degradation. Oro Legal formalizes illegal mines, rehabilitates areas degraded by previous gold mining activities and generates economic alternatives for those who cannot, or should not, be involved in artisanal gold mining. The timing of the Activity is apt as it seeks to harness the growing awareness and action at all levels of government and increasingly by private mining operations, to create a shared agenda for sustainable change in this economically important, yet much maligned, sector of the economy.
The last remaining forest left in the Amazon’s Belem Center of Endemism is home to the indigenous Tembe tribe. The Alto Guama Indigenouos Territory of the Tembe has a locus of unique species not found elsewhere anywhere else in the world. This REDD+ Project serves as long-term financing mechanism to support the tribe’s forest protection plan, cultural and spiritual preservation, health, education and sustainable development with alternative livelihoods.
Ol Ari Nyiro REDD+
The Ol Ari Nyiro (The Place of Springs) Conservancy REDD+ project will provide a sustainable long-term revenue stream to safeguard the biodiversity of the conservancy and fund local community initiatives.
This project is part of the Eastern Afromontane Biodiversity Hotspot, a critical protected area for the 7 endemic species of bird that are listed as globally threatened with extinction in the International Union for Conservation of Nature red list.
Kafa Biosphere REDD+
This reserve is one of the world’s most important biodiversity hotspot. Declared a Biosphere Reserve by UNESCO, it is one of the only remaining areas where the endemic Coffea Arabica, what produces coffee beans, grows wild. Found within the East Aftromontane Evergreen Forest Ecosystem, it is critically threatened by deforestation and degradation.
This project will focus on several conservation activities, in addition to propelling economic development through sustainable production of high value agriculture.
Infinite-Earth Ltd. developed the Rimba Raya Biodiversity Reserve and is driving impact by selling contract VCUs (verified emission reductions). The value in the protected natural capital will be monetized through the blockchain, using the Cryptographic token of bitNatura and VERIDIUM, both built on the Ethereum network and the Ether coin. Seeking to embed Environmental Mitigation Offset Credits within commodity settlements and (ultimately) within the price of finished consumer goods through the use of cryptographic Natural Capital assets.
Restorasi Habitat Orangutan Indonesisa REDD+
The Restorasi Habitat Orangutan Indonesisa (RHOI) ecosystem in the Heart of Borneo is vital to conserve. Satellite studies show that about 56% of protected lowland tropical rainforests in Indonesia’s Kalimantan were cut down between 1985 and 2001 to supply global timber demand. (Butler, 2012)
RHOI is now the frontier, at the edge of palm oil and timber plantations; it is the closest remaining forest for orangutan release from BOS Foundation’s Samboja orangutan rehabilitation center.
GuateCarbon forges a partnership, between the government of Guatemala and local communities, to conserve the biodiverse forest and develop new
Through the promotion of income-generating sustainable forestry activities, forest protection is strengthened. Effective forest management requires adequate funding.
This institutional presence will ensure a resilient future and provide a trusted platform for credible benchmarks for forest carbon projects.
Mangroves and Markets (MAM)
The Scaling up Mangrove Ecosystem Based Adaptation in the Mekong Delta (MAM2) project is an initiative for mangrove protection and restoration through organic shrimp certification in the picturesque coastal areas of Vietnam. The degradation and loss of mangrove forests, notably caused by the construction of shrimp ponds, has serious consequences. This project supports the development and introduction of sustainable aquaculture models which restore and protect mangrove forests, while enhancing smallholder livelihoods and resilience.
Environmental Engineering Company
The focus of FarmWorks is on Urban Farming. This project rethinks conventional industrial agriculture. It uses hydroponic technology to boost production while cutting water usage, energy consumption and land depletion.
It uses a patented Profusion HydroPod and Profusion HydroCube technologies to product a self-contained 3D hydroponic loop with a yield 100 times greater than convention farming systems, while using 90% less water.
Borneo Botanicals is an environmental and social enterprise initiative, focused on manufacturing ethno-botanical spa products. Their mission is to brand, market and distribute sustainable natural raw materials used widely in global consumer markets.
Borneo Botanicals takes a modern, transparent approach to the marketing and cultivation of these natural products for both business-to-business and direct to consumer distribution.
Karen Enterprise provides a substantial education program in hospitality for the community that was shaken by more than 50 years of civil war in Burma. Tourism is a rapidly growing industry in both Thailand and Burma, however there is a critical gap in hospitality training.
This project will create a Hotel School that will not only generate approximately 9000 new permanent jobs, but it will also drive future growth and economic stability.
Southern Cardamom REDD+
Home to Cambodia’s largest Asian elephant population (150-200 individuals), the Southern Cardamom Mountains are at serious risk. Pressure from mining, agri-business, and logging unleashes devastating consequences to this moist tropical forest. Through comprehensive social development, local communities are trained in professional skills such as ecotourism hospitality, financial and computer literacy, and small business management. This project will provide the necessary support to forest protection, economic development and species conservation.