Removing, destroying, and expunging all historical Civil War monuments does very little to win a war on change. In the end, we will all lose. You see, the war has already been fought and it was won…fought with the blood and ultimate sacrifice of approx. 620,000 American soldiers, not to mention the tens of thousands of innocent civilian casualties. The main point of fighting the Civil War was to give the Black man his freedom! Please remember your politics here because it is CRUCIAL to understand history as to NOT REPEAT IT. That was the very first comment that came out of my history teacher’s mouth in the 10th grade. Actually, it was the ever famous statement by George Santayana, “Those who cannot learn from history are doomed to repeat it.” As the majority of society who have that quote memorized, those famous words have lost their impact and importance. Why would anyone want to repeat a war that has already been won? The Black man is FREE in this county and no Civil War statue or monument will ever change that, indeed no, they are stark reminders of how many American lives were lost to give inalienable rights to others…to the Black man. Those images should stir up the soul and cause people to understand the politics of the time…how one political party could go so far, in a time not so long ago, simply to keep control and power, both over people and economies. This was the Democrat Party.
It’s all about politics, and that is where our focus should be. I have heard the arduous and overdone argument comparing these “offensive” Civil War statues to the Berlin Wall. Again, politics. One side wanted to keep people enslaved while those on the West enjoyed FREEDOM. The wall was built and heavily guarded by the East to keep people in, to keep them enslaved in Communism. It wasn’t the WALL that was bad, it was the politics behind the wall, the politics that built the wall. And ironically, when that wall finally came down, people from all over came to take a piece to remember that history and all the atrocities that occurred behind that wall, on the side of enslavement. It is important to note that when the Berlin wall finally came down, a section along Bernauer Strasse was kept and today it stands as a memorial to all who lost their lives trying to escape from the East. People MUST remember the POLITICS that DIVIDED the people! They must have their eye on it or it will be forgotten and history will be rewritten. Out of sight, out of mind...
Another quote that is dear to my heart is one from Edmund Burke, "People will not look forward to posterity, who never look backward to their ancestors." I have to wonder who is really behind the people defacing statues, tearing them down, destroying them…Does looking at them bring shame to a Liberal South? If so, why? Is it because they know the history of the Confederate’s; their very own history? Do they feel that taking them out of the mind’s eye will cause history to be revised or even forgotten, or do they hope it will be rewritten? The most important question would be asked of the Black community. When they view these statues, say of Lee atop his horse, do they see racism or do they think to themselves, “NEVER MORE” will we be enslaved by a political party!” Does removing these statues change history and the fact that it was the Democrat Party that not only wanted to keep Black people enslaved, but they were willing to send hundreds of thousands of young men to their deaths to keep it so. How is it possible that these truths have been forgotten? How is it possible that the Democrat party isn't barraged with Protesting, RIOTING, Black people DEMANDING apologies and reparations from the very people that brutally murdered, oppressed and tried to deny freedom to those already freed? Because...POLITICS! Democrat Politics!
Democrat Racism still lives but the narrative has been flipped to a lie to convince the ignorant that it is "right wing extremists." A KKK member would be deeply offended to be associated with anything resembling, "right wing"!
Founding of the Ku Klux Klan
"Founded in 1865, the Ku Klux Klan (KKK) extended into almost every southern state by 1870 and became a vehicle for white southern resistance to the Republican Party’s Reconstruction-era policies aimed at establishing political and economic equality for black Americans. Its members waged an underground campaign of intimidation and violence directed at white and black Republican leaders. Though Congress passed legislation designed to curb Klan terrorism, the organization saw its primary goal–the reestablishment of white supremacy–fulfilled through Democratic victories in state legislatures across the South in the 1870s. After a period of decline, white Protestant nativist groups revived the Klan in the early 20th century, burning crosses and staging rallies, parades and marches denouncing immigrants, Catholics, Jews, African Americans and organized labor. The civil rights movement of the 1960s also saw a surge of Ku Klux Klan activity, including bombings of black schools and churches and violence against black and white activists in the South." https://www.history.com/topics/reconstruction/ku-klux-klan
We know this to be true; then WHY isn’t the Black community waging WAR against the Democratic Party; tearing them down? Every single one of those "offensive" statues being ripped from their base by Liberals, REPRESENTS a DEMOCRAT, with the exception of Abraham Lincoln. They are the real culprit, not inanimate statues…they only PROVE history but do not create it. Do not allow history to be rewritten...it is imperative to remember exactly who created the, EXTREMEST, WHITE SUPREMACIST in our country. The narrative of the, "Right Wing Extremist" can be propagandized and even continually spun by the Liberal politicians, pushed on by the media monsters, but the TRUTH still remains. And the TRUTH WILL SET YOU FREE!
Enter your text here...