1.) The story Dead Girls Don’t Write Letters by Gail Giles makes you appreciate your family relationships through the mysterious plot line of the story. Jazz is popular and idolized by her parents and members in the community. She was homecoming queen and her mother describes her presence as, “Jazz has a touch, you know. Everything she did was, I don’t know…special.” “There wasn’t anything Jazz couldn’t do” (Giles 8). Jazz had a dark side to her perfect self as well. She didn’t treat Sunny like you would expect sisters to treat each other. Sunny was always the one who got the blame because Jazz saw to that through her manipulation. Jazz once deceived her dad by stealing money from his wallet, then confessing to him that she stole it to cover up for Sunny. Sunny tried saying
People always say, “Don't judge a book by it's cover.”. But do we really listen? Do we try and get to know people, or do we ignore what we know is right? In the novel, Define Normal, written by Julie Anne Peters, the stereotypes developed to teach the reader to not judge a book by it's cover.
One of the foremost important 20th century terms, “politically correct”, was born out of need for humanitarians, politicians, and the like to better organize the wide variety of ethnicities, cultures, and religions into groups that are true and non-offensive. So, it has often crossed my mind that maybe the name of the Gypsy Jazz style isn’t quite politically correct; the name Romani is the preferred name of the people once considered to be “gypsies.” After all, that term has been used as a slur by people who think of the Romani as inferior, we use Hot Club Swing and Manouche Jazz that are much less discriminatory names for the style anyway. We’ve use the slur and Romani culture for our amusement and to capture the attention of audiences who
In the shirt scene . Daisy began to cry as Nick Narrates and explain the reason why she was crying because she missed the times with Gatsby . She is overwhelmed by the shirts that she can't express her feeling . In the book it didn't say anything about her missing Gatsby .
To begin with, the author uses the literary theme conflict, to illustrate Jazz’s difficulties over the years. For instance, Jazz’s preschool was very strict about what students could and could not wear. This hindered her transition as a girl because she could not fully express herself. “The preeschool’s dress code also included what
“Even before Jazz, for most New Orleanians, music was not a luxury as it often is elsewhere - it was a necessity” (“A New Orleans Jazz History, 1895 - 1927”). Without music, New Orleans’ culture would not be the same as it is today. Jazz was not only an immense part of culture in New Orleans, but in the rest of the United States as well. Eventually, Jazz even diffused across the oceans, where different cultures gave their own twist to Jazz. A large factor to many individual cultures, Jazz widely influenced the youth on what they are and what they could be. Jazz exhibited the morals of the young generation, and therefore was a significant influence in the 1920s, not only in the United States, but in Europe as well.
In life, there are few things as organic as jazz music. With its raw sound and scrappy roots, one cannot help but feel life head-on whilst witnessing players produce such a sound right before their eyes. Its origins and arch are a product of the United States’ national culture and identity. Jazz exists not only as a deeply rooted form of art but as a cultural marker, particularly during its commercial peak in the first half of the 20th century. Its impact transcends borders, and it is one of the most beloved musical genres worldwide. The history, popularity and influence of jazz on human culture make it the seminal American art form.
In the text, The Great Gatsby, F. Scott Fitzgerald uses a wide range of literary techniques to convey a lack of spirituality, and immorality. Techniques such as characterisation, symbolism, and metaphors help to cement the ideas Fitzgerald explores. However, there are some features to this world that redeem it. Which are displayed through expert execution of techniques like characterisation, contrast, and repetition. The world of The Great Gatsby is home to many morally corrupt and spiritually empty characters however, the world itself is not a spiritual and moral wasteland.
The Harlem Renaissance was a period of revolutionary styles of music, dance, and literature that presented the hardships and culture of African Americans. The “Trumpet Player,” by Langston Hughes portrays the theme of the therapeutic effects of music through the development of an African American trumpeter’s music. The free verse poem “Trumpet Player” epitomizes the Harlem Renaissance and Jazz through the unique use of inconsistent rhymed and unrhymed lines mixed with the use of colloquialisms.
The Great Gatsby, written by Scott Fitzgerald, features the “American dream”. This dream comes with the fake perception of a person receiving everything they could only hope for. Scott’s romanticism plays as a major influence in his writings and his idea of reaching his own American dream. Scott Fitzgerald’s image of the good life is portrayed the through his writings of binging and a better self-image, but can he interpret the difference between fantasy and his own life realities?
‘What Happened, Miss Simone?’ is a documentary designed to let the audience view the ‘Other side’ of Nina Simone’s career. From her beginning of stardom, to her gradual collapse, this shows that not all music careers are easy. Through being abused to being the abuser, it shows that music can take a toll on anyone. This documentary film was nominated for an Oscar for Best Documentary and was a winner of five awards including “Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Documentary” and “Peabody Award for Documentary and Education”. Directed by Liz Garbus (Also known for ‘Bobby Fischer Against The World’ and ‘The Farm: Angola, USA’), through her journals, interviews, and stock footage, the film covers as the audience watches the downward spiral of yet
The genre of blues exploded into the blues craze during the 1920’s. During this time, white record producers saw the untapped goldmine that was blues music performed by people of color. Ma Rainey was one of them, and to some, one of the first, giving her the title, ‘The Mother of Blues’. The 1920’s was not only an era of continuing homophobia from the past (although that would change, briefly, into a mild form of acceptance until the more conservative 1930’s), but also of harsh racism. And yet, one singer, Ma Rainey’s, broke these restrictions. Her audience and shows flourished with both whites and blacks, peacefully mingling together to behold Ma’s performances. In this era taut with fear over race, both whites and black adored her.
Another dominant symbol within this novel is the billboard eyes of Dr. T.J. Eckleburg which is in the middle of the valley of ashes, right next to Wilson’s garage staring at the waste that careless capitalism has
Coasting my rusty black Chevy Cavalier into my garage parking spot after school while playing my music on full is apparently frowned upon. My stiff gray colored neighbor Miss Thelma sits on her porch awaiting my exit from the blasting loud vehicle while probably prepping her words to shun me for my actions. She rises from her perch and moves to make contact with me as I hurriedly rush away with my schools stuff. Her words were peaceful about my fun music choices but as I predicted, “...next time, wont you turn it down? Your gonna lose your hearing by fifty.” This is the stereotypical views of older generations opinions on today's music but many aren't like that at all. Take F. Scott Fitzgerald for an example, he became staid but still youthful
a) In The Dance of The Shades, the first three sentences of the story achieve characterization through its brief descriptions of Miss Marsalles, as well as the narrator’s mother. For example, the story begins with the narrator questioning whether Marsalles decided to have another party because of her “musical integrity” or her “bold yearning for festivity”. In both regards, however, the narrator conveys her belief that Marsalles is a lonely yet positive woman, as she longs for interaction, which in this case is in the form of a party. Her words “musical” and “integrity” also collectively have interesting connotations. On one hand, the term "musical" is used not in its literal meaning, but as