Receiving a cancer diagnosis for yourself or a loved one is one of the most distressing things you can experience. Knowing some facts about cancers in general and your diagnosis, in particular, can help reduce the number of unknowns and point you toward helpful resources.
Uncommon and Aggressive
Brain cancer is uncommon, and a glioblastoma is an unusual form of brain cancer. It is a quick-growing tumor and usually forms in the cerebrum. Non-profit organizations like the Glioblastoma Foundation help raise funds for research into various types of cancers, treatments and patient support programs. These organizations also help raise awareness for rare types of cancer and can be an excellent source of information on the current understanding of the condition.
Family and Palliative Care
Not only can brain cancers cause physical harm to patients, but they can also cause severe emotional, mental and familial stress, which will need to be addressed to give the cancer patient the best chances for remission and quality of life. This is where palliative care comes in, but what are the 5 stages of palliative care? They are stable, unstable, deteriorating, terminal, and bereavement. This type of care involves a team of professionals caring for a patient’s medical, practical, and emotional support during these stages. Some palliative care will include social and familial support as well.
Diagnoses of glioblastoma average around fourteen thousand cases in the US annually and represent approximately one in five cases of brain cancer. This is an aggressive type of cancer, and its treatments can impact patients’ quality of life. There are non-profit organizations dedicated to finding new and better treatments for cancer. These organizations can also help you find the resources for the best care possible.
Treatments and Outlook
There is no cure for this type of cancer, but patients can go into remission with the right combination of treatments. Since this is an aggressive brain cancer, treatments, including surgery, radiation and chemotherapy, tend to be bold. Many common treatments can degrade the quality of life for patients, so Glioblastoma Foundation professionals and cancer researchers are looking for easier and more effective treatments.