If an electrical fire starts. 1. Switch off the power. If you can safely reach the cord and outlet, unplug the equipment that is triggering the electrical fire. 2. Mix in the sodium bicarbonate. If the fire is little, cover it with baking soda to put it out. 3. Turn off the oxygen supply. If the …
Which fire extinguisher exacerbates electrical fires? When dealing with an electrical fire, water should never be used to put it out. Because water conducts electricity well, it can exacerbate the fire or even generate sparks and electrical shocks, placing you and your home in greater danger. Instead, a Class C fire extinguisher should be used.
Water Fire Extinguishers Should Not Be Used For These Fires
If you spray water onto an electrical fire, inadvertently or intentionally, you risk electrocuting yourself. In the case of a flammable liquid, water doesn’t extinguish it, and all the water does is spread it around. This results in the …
You should never use water to extinguish an electrical fire. Water is an electrical conductor, and thus the water could cause electrocution to you and anyone in the vicinity. A fire extinguisher rated for electrical fires is recommended instead. If you’re not sure what an electrical fire is or its risks, we’ll explain that ahead.
People Also Ask why not to use water extinguisher on electrical fire
Can you use a water extinguisher on an electrical fire?
Don’t Add Water. Never use a water extinguisher on electrical fires or any fire involving a flammable liquid. As any science student will tell you, water conducts the current. If you spray water onto an electrical fire, inadvertently or intentionally, you risk electrocuting yourself.
Does water extinguish flammable liquids?
In the case of a flammable liquid, water doesn’t extinguish it, and all the water does is spread it around. This results in the burning liquid spreading around much faster and doing much more damage, and would actually help to spread and exacerbate a fire
Can you put a CO2 extinguisher in an electrical fire?
For example, you may choose to have CO2 extinguishers in your office for electrical risks, and a wet chemical for cooking fats and oils. Don’t Add Water. Never use a water extinguisher on electrical fires or any fire involving a flammable liquid. As any science student will tell you, water conducts the current.
Do you have the right fire extinguishers in your premises?
The best way of ensuring you have the right extinguishers is to have a fire risk assessment carried out by a competent person, detailing all the hazards present and the correct procedures for handling them. Since October 2006 premises are legally required to have fire extinguishers.
People Also Searches why not to use water extinguisher on electrical fire
|water filled fire extinguisher|
|2.5 gallon pressurized water extinguisher|
|water pressure fire extinguisher|
|water can fire extinguisher parts|
|water fire extinguishers for sale|
|fire extinguisher 2.5 gallon water|
|air pressurized water fire extinguisher|
|pressurized water can firefighting|
What will happen if you put water on an electrical fire? Video Answer