Here are some lesser-known locations in Ireland that you may want to visit. 

1. Inishmore, the largest of the Aran Islands (County Galway), is your best choice for snagging all things made from Aran Wool and is the filming location for Golden Globe winner “The Banshees of Inisherin” starring Colin Ferrell. One of its many historical sites, the World Heritage site Dun Aonghasa sits on the edge of a 300-foot cliff, providing an opportunity for some Instagram-worthy photos. For those who enjoy getting close to nature, Aran Island has a rugged coastline and secluded sandy beaches.

2. Just 33 miles south of Dublin, Glendalough (County Wicklow) is home to many artists whose paintings and photographs will simply beg to go home with you. Founded in the 6th century, Glendalough provides history buffs with many ruins to explore, including the Round Tower and St. Mary’s Church. Exploration of the area’s lakes and walking trails will satisfy the need to get close to nature.

3.  A visit to Kilcar (County Donegal) is required if you are looking for the best in hand-spun yarn and authentic hand-woven tweed made on wooden looms just as it has been done for generations. Once you’ve wrapped yourself in a woolen scarf and cap, make your way to the Stone Fort of Grianán of Aileach. The origins of this historical site go back to around 1700 BC and the fort has links to the Tuatha de Danann. Situated 820 feet above sea level, the fort offers an unsurpassed view of the landscape, ideal for getting unforgettable photographs.

4. Considering its significant contribution to literature, no trip to Ireland would be complete without exploring a bookstore. Skibbereen (County Cork) has several options to help you find that book you’ve been looking for whether it’s written by Jonathan Swift, James Joyce, or  Seamus Heaney. Just 10 miles to the east, the 3,000-year-old Dromberg Stone Circle, excavated and restored in the late 1950s, is one of 40 stone circles in western Cork. A landscape featuring peaks and valleys, Skibbereen and County Cork offer a variety of outdoor spaces, as well as a Whale Watch tour.
