New images from space research shocked Earthlings. After China’s space agency last week released images of bright moon pearls, NASA has now published the strange recordings it obtained on Mars, showing a rock that scientists have dubbed “Sal d’Endrino” (Blackthorn salt), but is referred to by the media as Mars flower.
As reported by the operating team Curiosity Rover, it’s a mineral formation that will be the result of precipitation. The images have been enlarged for the audience, but this exact treasure will be smaller than a US dollar penny, she showed. Abigail FreemanFrom NASA on his Twitter account.
(1/3) Your Friday Zain Moment: A beautiful new micrograph from Tweet embed They show very small and minute structures formed by the precipitation of minerals from the water.
(Penny almost to scale added me)https://t.co/cs7t11BWAj pic.twitter.com/AU20LjY5pQ
– Abigail Freeman (@abbyfrae) February 26, 2022
Images of the small formation were obtained using the MAHLI lens aboard the Curiosity rover, which is widely used by geologists on Earth, but allows on Mars to reveal the surface textures of different rocks.
Is this the first time this “flower” has been seen?
This type of mineral formation is observed in different regions of the “Red Planet”. Previously, it was known as “Blueberries from Mars”because small areas were photographed.
Blueberries on Mars? Hmmm, you don’t say 😉
“Image taken by Opportunity of Sphere-like grains nicknamed ‘Blueberries’, due to their shape. Image is a mosaic of PANCAM and MI instruments.”
(Photo: Public Domain.)https://t.co/pw9KrI3ywt pic.twitter.com/Rw5j6KXMSq
– USGS (USGS) Feb 23 2022
In 2013, the same rover picked up similar rocks, in the shape of flowers, only more like the flowers on the Broccoli oh no cauliflower. From previous studies it is believed to be corrosion resistant.
Check out a 3D model of the “Venus of Mars”, made by Simeon Shams:
All about Mars
All about NASA
“Problem solver. Proud twitter specialist. Travel aficionado. Introvert. Coffee trailblazer. Professional zombie ninja. Extreme gamer.”
With a surprise in the case: a strange cell phone from Nokia was introduced
PlayStation Stars: what it is, how it works and what it offers to its users | Sony | video games | tdex | revtli | the answers
t3n – Digital Pioneers | digital business magazine