The chinese yuan
The yuan (or renminbi) has the currency of China since 1949, and the People’s Bank of China is responsible for issuing coins and banknotes.
The first objects used as currency in China were sea shells, which triggered the start of a barter system. Later on, bronze coins would be created as substitutes for those objects. The reason to mint coins in this material was that China had already been using it for a long time.
The growth of trade and the development of markets lead to the surface of several kinds of currencies such as fabrics (bu bi), knives (dao bin), shells carved in bronze (daiming tongbei) and round coins (huan qian), dating back to the era prior to the Qin dynasty. These are the result of the rapid development that the market economy was experiencing, which explains why currencies were based on shapes, instruments and tools used at that time. Those also varied according to the region and city.
On the other hand, during the Han dynasty, when the trading activity was very intense, there was a period of time when people were allowed to mint their own coins, leading to the very serious issue of counterfeiting and the appearance of poorer quality ones.
Today, the currency of legal tender is the yuan or renminbi, which appeared with the foundation of the People’s Bank of China, and was issued for the first time short before the triumph of the revolutionaries in the Chinese Civil War in 1949. One of the first tasks of the new government was to end the hyperinflation that had taken place in China in the final years of the Kuomintang era.
After going through several stages, the People’s Bank of China started issuing the third version of this coin in 1962.
The fourth series of the yuan came with the application of the policy of reforms and opening-up, the development of the urban and rural market economy and the increase of retail sales in social goods. This fourth version brought about certain upgrades and breakthroughs in the design, style and printing technique.
The basic unit of this currency is the yuan, which in Chinese is represented by the symbol «元». A yuan is divided into 10 Chinese jiǎo: 角. A jiǎo is subdivided into 10 fēn: 分.
Regarding coins, denominations of 1, 2 and 5 fēn, 1 and 5 jiǎo, and 1 yuan are in use.
Date of creation:
People’s Bank of China
Other currencies of the world
Order online and collect your currency at the branch of your choice.
|Globo Cambio||Your high-street bank|
|Variety of currencies||We have 10 currencies. We are specialists.||Only major currencies. Travel money is just a secondary business for banks.|
|Availability of currencies||Immediate availability of currencies in our branches. Click and collect or walk in to our stores.||If they can actually get your exotic currency, prepare for a couple of visits to your bank before you can have the money on your hands.|
|Expenses||Only the exchange rate, without commissions, and if you book online you guarantee the best price.||The bank sets its own margin plus a commission.|
|Different denominations available||At Globo Cambio, you’ll get a variety of banknotes with different values, adapted to all your payment needs.||No. Prepare for refusals and complaints in foreign languages when paying with «big» banknotes.|
|Delivery options||Order online to benefit from a price reduction and collect at the branch of your choice.||You’ll have to go first to your bank to order the currency you need, then wait for it to come and go back again to collect it.|