Our Sustainable Gardening Tips
We are all becoming more aware of how important it is to protect our environment for future generations. Below are some tips on how we can garden with out depleting the earths resources even further, and also ways we can help reverse the damage that has already been done.
Plant a Tree
Every single tree is vital as it plays an important role in removing harmful carbon from the atmosphere. They clean the air we breathe and filter the water we drink. One single tree can also provide a home to hundreds of species of, fungi, mammals and plants.
No matter how tiny a space you have, it is possible to plant a small tree even in a pot. At Creative Gardens, we have a tree to suit every situation.
Save on Water
Reduce water waste and install a water butt. For every millimetre of rain that falls on a metre square of roof we get 1 litre of water, that’s an average of 24,000 litres each year, now that’s a lot of water to save.
Water is a precious resource so rather than letting it literally run down the drain why not collect it in a water butt, it will then be at hand to use even during times of drought and hose pipe bans.
Watering with rainwater is much better for your plants, in fact it is similar to a light dose of fertiliser as it contains nitrates and organic matter and no harmful chemicals.
Water butts are easy to set up, all you need is a level ground surface.
Go Peat Free
The release of Carbon Dioxide into the atmosphere is one of the major contributions to the climate emergency.
Peat bogs are fantastic carbon sinks, locking it away forever, so let’s leave the peat bogs alone to do their very important job.
Gardening accounts for 60% of peat bought in the UK, so we can make a huge difference by purchasing an alternative product.
Alternatives to peat have been worked on so much that today there are excellent choices on the market all doing as good, if not better, a job than peat ever did, without any harm to the environment.
At Creative Gardens we have a peat-free range that is increasing all the time to make it easier to help you to play your part in protecting the environment.
Grow your own Vegetables & Fruit
Unfortunately, the sad fact is that when you buy from large supermarkets, your fruit and veg are grown in large commercial farms using harmful chemicals, wrapped in plastic, and transported long distances up to and above 1500 miles. Growing your own massively reduces these harmful processes.
The taste of home-grown produce is incomparable with that bought at a store as well as its freshness and nutritional value. Not only are you helping with the climate crises, but you are also getting fresh air ,exercise and vitamin D proven to help combat stress, anxiety and depression.
You don’t even need a large space; a pot or window box will do.
Feed the Birds
You may wonder how feeding the birds can help our environment. Birds play an important role in pollinating plants, controlling populations of pest species in our gardens, and of course, they help disperse seeds.
Having a good bird population is a good indicator of a healthy and thriving ecosystem so it's important to do everything we can as their once-natural habitats are becoming eroded.
Our Henry Bell products include a variety of feeds to suit certain species ranging from fat balls to seeds and nuts and a multitude of feeder designs to suit all.
Buy Locally and Reduce Air Miles
One of the ways that buying locally helps our environment is by reducing air miles.
Buying products locally not only supports our local economy also reducing shipping and storage automatically reduces greenhouse gas emissions and energy usage as it cuts down on fuel consumption and pollution.
As a business we try as much as possible to support our local growers. Look out for the ‘Locally Grown ‘signs on our plants.
Plants for Pollinating Insects
Pollinators allow plants to fruit, set seed, and breed. This then provides food and habitat for a range of other creatures creating a healthy ecosystem. So when choosing plants for your garden bear this in mind and choose wisely. Our favourites are Lavender, Primrose, Wallflower, Buddleia, and Verbena but there are many more. Just look for the sign saying, ‘Good for Pollination’.