Poverty funds extend to more schools
Brittany Braasch sat at a small, circular table with three Green Bay Washington Middle School students last week as they considered the legend of Big Foot.
"Let's think about whether scientists should continue to discuss Big Foot," the literacy interventionist suggested to the seventh- and eighth-graders. "Is this evidence real? What is your opinion about Big Foot?"
Students might have displayed mixed feelings about the mythical figure, but the topic drew all of them in to the discussion. They were thinking about the materials. The students need extra help in reading, and new federal dollars are giving them additional one-on-one support this year. Braasch meets with the group at noon daily to work on grammar, punctuation, reading and comprehension.
The teacher's work is funded through the federal Title 1 program, which aims to close academic achievement gaps by providing funding to schools with high numbers of students living in poverty. This is the first year Washington is part of the program, and Franklin Middle School could be required to participate next year. This is the first year middle schools in the Green Bay School District qualified. Fourteen elementary schools in the district also receive Title 1 funding.
Both middle schools are required to participate in Title 1 because more than three-fourths of their students live in low-income households.
However, Title 1 funding is inadequate to meet the cost of providing the assistance to students required under the program.
District leaders say the growth of Title 1 to the middle-school level forces them to divert funding from the elementary schools, where administrators believe additional help for low-income students can make the most difference by getting them on track before they move to sixth grade.
Federal program could help
For years, Green Bay has not received enough money to help schools that meet federal standards for Title 1 funding, according to Nancy Chartier, director of elementary teaching and learning for the district. That means stretching dollars as far as possible to meet the most critical needs.
The Green Bay School District received $5.7 million in funding for 2015-16, up $330,734 from last year, but diverting some of that money to middle school students means reductions elsewhere.
Administrators would prefer to give support to younger kids, with hopes they get on the right track before graduating to sixth grade, Chartier said.
Schools use Title 1 funds to buy books and materials, train staff, encourage parent involvement, and to hire bilingual coaches, social workers or math and reading specialists to give kids the extra help they might need. Each school has an individual plan to best fit its challenges.
One way to free up Title 1 money for elementary schools could be to participate in a federal program that provides free breakfast and lunch for every student at a school, with no application and regardless of household income, Chartier said.
The Community Eligibility Provision, created in 2010, provides meal funding for individual schools and districts where more than 40 percent of students are identified as living in low-income households. The cost of meals is fully covered for participating schools or districts where more than 62.5 percent of students are in poverty.
If the district offers free meals across the board, it could use a different formula now to determine which schools should receive Title 1 support, Chartier said. The Community Eligibility Provision determines poverty based on a family's qualification for other federal meal programs, as opposed to Title 1, which uses the number who receive free or reduced-price lunches.
Green Bay district spokeswoman Lori Blakeslee said administrators support the idea of participating in the program and are reviewing ways it might affect Title 1 funding if adopted.
Green Bay schools now offer free and reduced-price lunches to 56 percent of students, who qualify for the meal program based on self-reported family income.
That's up from 45 percent a decade ago. In a handful of schools, more than 90 percent of children come from poor families, according to state data.
Washington Middle School was required to become a Title 1 school because 75 percent of its students qualify for free or reduced-price lunches. Franklin Middle School also fits the criteria, but Green Bay received a reprieve from the Wisconsin Department of Public Instruction for that school this year because administrators did not learn about it until late spring, after staffing and other decisions had been made for other schools. The district agreed to fund support at Franklin out of its own budget to equal Title 1 dollars.
Under the Community Eligibility Provision guidelines, 48 percent of Washington students and 55 percent of Franklin students are considered to live in poverty, according to data compiled by the Washington, D.C.-based Center on Budget and Policy Priorities.
Chartier expects Green Bay to adjust its funding protocol next school year.
According to federal standards, at least 40 percent of a school's students must be poor in order for the school to participate. Other federal, state and local funds also should be used to upgrade schoolwide programs, according to the U.S. Department of Education. States determine funding for local school districts.
Signs of progress
Washington Middle School principal Toni Lardinois said the Title 1 funds allow for the one-one-one sessions with students in need of literacy and math help, but there are other ways to get the students the help they need.
"They still would get the extra support," she said. "But it might come from the teacher. This creates a safe place for them to get help. They aren't being singled out in front of their friends and going to the back of the classroom for the extra help."
Students work with Braasch or other interventionists for six weeks and then are evaluated to determine whether they need to continue with extra help. The work they do with her is completely different from classroom assignments but is meant to support that work, she said. Interventionists keep detailed notes on children's progress, she said.
"It's important to get them where they need to be," Braasch said. "You can see their self-esteem grow as they start to feel more confident. We want them to be prepared for high school. It helps to close the achievement gap."
Washington Middle School also developed a plan to keep parents involved and to buy boxes of books for classroom libraries.
"Our interventionists already have noticed improvements in their assessments," Lardinois said. "Some students are doubling their reading scores."
email@example.com or follow her on Twitter @PGPattiZarling