Is your child getting enough exercise? If she isn’t exercising at all, you should take steps to change that today. Encourage them to attend day camps. Exercise is important to your children’s health. Here are more reasons why your child benefits from a regular exercise routine:
1. Exercise reduces the risk of obesity. If your child participates in a regular exercise program, her chances of becoming obese are dramatically reduced. An active child means a healthier child.
2. Exercise lessens the risk of diseases. Diabetes and high blood pressure are combated by exercise. If you have a family history of such diseases, you should especially encourage your child to [tag-tec]exercise[/tag-tec].
3. Exercise strengthens your child’s body. As your child exercises on a regular routine, his muscles and bones will be strengthened.
4. Exercise induces feelings of well-being. Have you noticed your child struggling with [tag-tec]peer pressure[/tag-tec] or become comfortable with her body? Encourage an exercise routine. Exercising helps release frustrations and can help boost your child’s self-confidence.
Need some exercise ideas to encourage your child? Why not incorporate an exercise routine into your schedule with your children? Try these simple ideas:
WALKING – Walking is the simplest, and yet the best form of exercise for anyone. Just need good goot set of boots or a hiking shoe that’s worthy of your journey. Walking is a good way to get conversation flowing as well.
SPORTS – Is your child interested in any type of sports? Why not grab the basketball and head to the court with him? Make a date every Saturday to spend a couple of hours playing basketball with your son.
SWIMMING – Just about every kid loves to swim. People look at the Waterside Poolscapes website to get ideas for pool design. If you don’t have a personal swimming pool, invest in a monthly membership to a local gym.
BIKE RIDING – Next to walking, riding bikes is another easy way to get fun exercise.
HIKING – If your family loves the outdoors, get everyone a pair of hiking shoes and gear and get moving. Plan special outings once a month, in addition to your regular exercise. Kids usually love hiking because they get to explore and discover new things.
So, what can we do to make exercise more enjoyable for your child? Try these tips for making exercise fun:
1. Try exercising with music. Music can easily make your child forget about the time and have fun doing it.
2. Exercise with your child. Studies have shown that people who exercise alone usually do not keep their exercise routine. This will make it funner for child and parent.
3. KISS (Keep It Simple, Sweetie). Maybe start out simple, with a walk or a bike ride, or maybe some early morning stretches.
4. Get silly. Whatever you do, don’t let exercising become boring. If you do, you’ll never stick to it. Get silly with it. If you’re walking, listen to music with a faster tempo to put some pep in your step. Add a little dance to steps. Just don’t let it get boring! Your child will enjoy exercise more when its fun.
5. Set goals and reward your child when goals are reached.
6. Set a regular schedule and stick to it.
Remember, as with an adult, before starting with any excercise program be sure to consult with a health care professional to find out what is safe for your child, especially if they suffer from any health problems.