Disease Prevention and Control
4.10 Case 2: Public Health Approaches to Preventing Mother-to-Child HIV Transmission
International Health Systems Program Harvard T. H. Chan School of Public Health Boston , MA , USA
Health Science Keene State College Keene , NH , USA
e-mail: firstname.lastname@example.org Indira Nair
Department of Engineering and Public Policy Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh , PA , USA
This case is presented for instructional purposes only. The ideas and opinions expressed are the authors ’ own. The case is not meant to refl ect the offi cial position , views , or policies of the editors , the editors ’ host institutions , or the authors ’ host institutions .
The pursuit of global public health takes place in an unjust world , demanding that its prac- titioners judge when and to what extent to compromise their ideals and standards in order to remain effective. (Wikler and Cash 2009)
Mother-to-child transmission (MTCT)—also known as vertical transmission —is the primary cause of HIV infection in children under 10 years of age (Interagency Coalition on AIDS and Development 2011 ). Each year, more than 600,000 infants become infected with HIV from prenatal transmission during pregnancy , labor and delivery, or breastfeeding, primarily in under-resourced countries ( Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 2012 ; Interagency Coalition on AIDS and Development 2011 ; Mnyani and McIntyre 2009 ).
For wo men who are HIV-negative, breastfeeding is the preferred child survival strategy. It is linked to a lower risk of various health problems for babies, including a reduction in the risk of death from diarrhea and malnutrition (World Health Organization 2007 ; O’Reilly et al. 2012 ). However, the risk of an HIV-positive woman transmitting the virus to her baby in the absence of any intervention ranges from 15 to 45 % (De Cock et al. 2000 ; World Health Organization 2015 ). Avoidance of breast- feeding (use of replacement feeding) reduces the risk of neonatal transmission to 20 % (Interagency Coalition on AIDS and Development 2011 ). Modifi ed feeding, also known as mixed feeding (liquids or solids), results in a risk of transmission of about 30–35 % (Coutsoudis et al. 1999 ). The safety of replacing breastfeeding depends on access to clean water, a reliable supply of formula, and availability of instruction. Thus, use of mixed feeding techniques can be a challenge in many middle- or low- income countries (World Health Organization 2007 ; O’Reilly et al. 2012 ).
To help reduce the risk of babies becoming infected with HIV and to ensure quality services across the different levels of the health system, the World Health Organization (WHO) released revised guidelines in 2010 for use by managers of national HIV and AIDS programmers, as well as local managers and health care providers. The guide- lines emphasize treatment for pregnant, HIV-infected women. Those with stage 3 or stage 4 disease (CD4 count ≤350 cells/μL) require lifelong three-drug antiretroviral therapy (ART) to treat their own HIV infections and for pre vention of m other-to-child transmission of HIV (PMTCT). For women with less- advanced disease, WHO rec- ommends a country- or program-level choice between Option A (maternal zidovudine during pregnancy and infant nevirapine [NVP] throughout breastfeeding), and Option B (maternal three-drug ART regimens throughout pregnancy and breastfeeding) (WHO 2010 ). Mutations of the virus can occur when the required course of treatment is not followed (Interagency Coalition on AIDS and Development 2011 ).
In many countries, social stigma, fear of the risk of discrimination , rejection, and violence can thwart a woman’s intention to have an HIV test, take antiretroviral drugs, or substitute breast milk (Interagency Coalition on AIDS and Development 2011 ). Such obstacles arise in part from traditional beliefs and values and from unfamiliarity with the practice of biomedicine. In some cultures, a woman is viewed as responsible for her own HIV infection and that of her child, and she may suffer emotional or physical abuse at the hands of her family if her HIV status is discovered.
However, it can be important for her family to be aware of her HIV status, as they are often the ones who advise her on child feeding practices. Dealing with a wom- an’s fear of being exposed as an HIV-positive mother is a challenge inherent in programs that focus on PMTCT.
In a sub-Saharan African country, Dr. Charles directs a rural health clinic that an international organization funds. Funding requires the clinic to follow new WHO guidelines for the PMTCT. The guidelines specifi cally recommend using antiretro- viral drugs throughout the breastfeeding period by HIV-positive women (WHO 2010 ). The district health offi ce is also requiring Dr. Charles to develop guidance for his clinical staff on how to carry out the guidelines in a way that takes the values and beliefs of the community into account. Implementing the guidelines poses a major challenge for Dr. Charles because of the country’s weak health infrastructure, the small number of paid staff in his clinic, and an inadequate facility with limited general supplies. However, his facility boasts a lab, and he has received some fund- ing to support the PMTCT program.
Recently, a woman in labor came to the clinic and told Dr. Charles she was HIV positive. She wanted to know how she could breastfeed without awakening suspi- cions of her HIV status. She was worried that if neighbors or family found out, her husband would abandon her, and she would have to support herself and the child in a hostile environme nt.
1. How should this patient’s plight infl uence Dr. Charles as he helps his clinic carry out the WHO guidelines? From a public health perspective, what confl icts does Dr. Charles have in meeting his patient’s needs?
2. Who are the stakeholders Dr. Charles should consider as he develops his guid- ance and what information does he need to ensure success in reducing mother- to- child transmission of HIV in this community?
3. What procedures can he put in place to decrease the risk of HIV-positive women being stigmatized by their partners, family, or community?
4. How should the infant’s well-being be balanced with maintaining the mother’s health, social welfare, and survival?
5. To what extent should Dr. Charles consider the culture of his community in which family decision making and traditions about infant feeding often hamper mothers’ efforts to decrease the risk for HIV transmission? How can public health programs build fl exibility that anticipates cultural diversity in beliefs, values, and practice? 6. Instead of just focusing on his patients, should Dr. Charles consider holding struc-
tured conversations with people in the community to infl uence social norms or with village elders as a way to infl uence social norms counterproductive to program aims?
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 2012. HIV for women. http://www.cdc.gov/HIV/risk/
gender/women/facts/index.html . Accessed 23 May 2013.
Coutsoudis, A., K. Pillay, E. Spooner, L. Kuhn, and H.M. Coovadia. 1999. Infl uence of infant- feeding patterns on early mother-to-child transmission of HIV-1 in Durban, South-Africa: A prospective cohort study. Lancet 354(9177): 471–476.
De Cock, K.M., M. Fowler, E. Mercier, et al. 2000. Prevention of mother-to-child HIV transmis- sion in resource-poor countries: Translating research into policy and practice. JAMA 283(9): 1175–1182. doi: 10.1001/jama.283.9.1175 .
Interagency Coalition on AIDS and Development. 2011. HIV/AIDS: Mother-to-child transmission.
http://www.icad-cisd.com/ . Accessed 23 May 2013.
Mnyani, C., and J. McIntyre. 2009. Preventing mother-to-child transmission of HIV. BJOG: An International Journal of Obstetrics & Gynaecology 116(suppl 1): 71–76.
O’Reilly, C.E., P. Jaron, B. Ochieng, et al. 2012. Risk factors for death among children less than 5 years old hospitalized with diarrhea in rural western Kenya, 2005–2007: A cohort study. PLoS Medicine 9(7): e1001256. doi: 10.1371/journal.pmed.1001256 .
Wikler, D., and R. Cash. 2009. Ethical issues. In Global public health: A new era , ed. R. Beaglehole and R. Bonita, 249–266. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
World Health Organization (WHO). 2007. HIV transmission through breastfeeding: A review of available evidence. http://whqlibdoc.who.int/publications/2008/9789241596596_eng.pdf . Accessed 1 May 2013.
World Health Organization (WHO). 2010. Antiretroviral drugs for treating pregnant women and preventing HIV infection in infants. http://www.who.int/hiv/pub/mtct/guidelines/en/ . Accessed 1 May 2013.
World Health Organization (WHO). 2015. Mother-to-child transmission of HIV. http://www.who. int/hiv/topics/mtct/en/ . Accessed 1 June 2015.