Most American adults believe that proper oral healthcare is vital to overall wellbeing. In fact, a recent study conducted by the Health Policy Institute (a subdivision of the American Dental Association), concluded that 95 percent of individuals considered dental health absolutely essential. Moreover, 80 percent of Americans believe that an attractive, healthy smile is key to a successful career and an enjoyable life.
Because so many individuals ranked dental care as crucial to general health, it’s no surprise to learn that 85 percent of Americans believe that biannual exams and cleanings are necessary. But while 75 percent of participants planned to visit the dentist within the next 12 months, less than 40 percent actually did.
Has it been a while since you’ve been to the dentist? Your general dentist in Thornton can assess your oral health and make recommendations for a personalized treatment plan.
The ADA recommends brushing your teeth a minimum of twice every day, for at least two minutes each time. But how many Americans actually do this? One report launched by Delta Dental found that about 70 percent of adults in the United States follow this guideline. Most individuals fell slightly short of the two-minute recommendation; average brushing time was one minute and 52 seconds.
To clean between the teeth properly, the ADA recommends flossing once daily. Unfortunately, the majority of Americans fall short in this department. According to the same Delta Dental study mentioned above, approximately 40 percent of adults floss once a day. Shockingly, two out of every 10 individuals reported that they do not floss their teeth at all.
Have you ever had a cavity? If so, you are in the majority. According to the National Center for Health Statistics, over 90 percent of individuals between the ages of 20 and 64 had tooth decay at some point in their lives. Among the older population, this number is higher; 96 percent of those 65 and above were affected.
The good news is that the prevalence of tooth decay has decreased in recent years. Since the water fluoridation movement, there has been a 30 to 50 percent decrease in cavities among the American population.
Nearly as common as tooth decay and the leading cause of tooth loss, gum disease affects almost half of the United States population. In a research study conducted by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, experts found that 64.7 million Americans have had gum disease at some point. Over 70 percent of adults aged 65 and over experienced periodontal issues.
Avoid becoming a statistic. Proper oral hygiene and regular dental visits are absolutely essential to long-term oral health. Routine care can help keep your teeth and gums healthy for many years to come!