Here, even the Korean men with hats can look like the Hassidic Jews of today. "Maybe" this is what Adolf Hitler had found out about the Jews, because he himself had the Jewish blood (as he was not pure blooded as people may tell us). It shows that he had sent people to India and Tibet, because he knew those lands are where the Aryan people live to this day. In this short segment on the Germans visiting Tibet, it states that the Tibetans would be the "of the Aryans". However, when learning about who the real Ayrans are, details that they are the Aryans themselves, and that it has nothing to do with having blonde hair or blue eyes.
Now, in Genesis states that Jacob was supposed to have four different women, to which became the "twelve" sons. But then some of the sons also had children with the surrounding nations (as the Bible states). Perhaps, this could be why there are some that are lighter in comparison to the other tribes.
However, when you read Judges (after the death of Joshua), it states on how the Israelites were intermingling with the nations that weren't cast out. Apparently, the people in northern India are very much mixed with the Dravidian blood, whereas some are mixed with the black blood. In a research segment on China's DNA, the researchers did test on the Chinese, and it was revealed that "majority" have African DNA in them (See "Truth about Shang-di"), thus detailing the admixture in the land. When going down to places like Thailand, Cambodia, Indonesia, there are people that are shown with frizzy afro hair and dark skin, compared to the lighter complexioned people of those lands.
It states as they went over the Hindus river with Joshua, they took down kingdoms like Jericho, A.I., and others as they went further East. But then after the death of Joshua and the elders that lived in the time of Moses, in Judges states how the Israelites had went astray to worshiping the gods of the nations they weren't destroyed. It states they started to make marriages with them and learned their ways, to worshiping their gods. It seems that there would be people with hook noses, and then the flat nosed ones amongst the Chinese (indicating them intermingling as they came into the lands).
This is why the people down there still would worship the Black Buddha to this day (it's the harsh reality that the Aryans worship the Black Gods of Asia). And of course, when I would detail this to some, they still won't believe that the Buddha was originally Black in complexion. It would be the same in America, as there are many Christians thinking that Jesus Christ is white, when he originally was black in complexioned.
Now, based on the Aryans calling themselves "Nagas" (like the people of "Nagaland", and the Thailanese people), wouldn't be true. In the Chapter "The Devas", I detail how the real "Nagas" are really the Black nations of those lands, and how they would have the appearance of "Dragons", and have the braided hairs like that of a serpent.
Then there were those Israelites who were either taken away or sent to the different parts of Africa. And you can see that they are very different than the original African tribes just by their features alone.
The Israelites that went to Africa came from the Reubenites of Persia (see "Persian connection 2"). The Tribes of Judah would have a stronger look more so than than their other brethren, as you can see the "bird-like" features on them.
(The women in the middle has the Chaur which looks like a fan. The Sikhs and other nothern Indians would also have this fan like object)
When their DNA is taken, most of their results tend to end up in Iran or Central Asia. I can observe from certain tribes of the Yoruba, Ashanti, Fulani, Ethiopian etc., would be the Israelites that came there, and had mixed in with the people. As I've researched the subjects of the Israelites and where they got scattered to, I've always come to an interesting result. There would be particular practices, and interesting similarities between the people of West Africa and Persia.
You can clearly see how they look very much like "Persians" and Middle Eastern.
Personally, it seems that wherever the People (specifically) are, they would have "Hollywood" (See "Hollywood") in America, "Nollywood" in Nigeria, "Kollywood", "Bollywood" and "Tollywood" in India. Based from learning about the lands of India, Tibet, and Nepal, there is a city called "Dharamsala" to which sounds like "Jerusalem".
The Bible states that Aryans would have Breastplates upon themselves, and Ephods as a part of their garments. Here the "Ephod of Gideon" even looks like the "Samurai armor" of the Japanese.
Then Let’s look at the Priests called the Zoroastrians of Iran and how they kept the traditional ways similar to the Brahmins, on keeping the sacred fire going. Leviticus 6:13 “And the fire shall ever be burning upon the altar; it shall never go out.” These would be the considered practices of the Levitical priests.
This is the practice that is done by the Brahmins of India, the Zoroastrians of Iran, and by the Chinese and the Japanese. The modern Jewish practice is based from these older religions, and is where the practice of the God of fire is based on. The "Japanese Jewish connection" Documentary details how there is a Japanese Priest that would keep the importance of the fire.
Then there is a Documentary on the people called the "Chams", and how they have a religion that is a mixture of Brahmanism and Islam (This Documentary is called “the Strange Islam”). In this segment, shows that the men would do the practices in Leviticus, as the Levite priest would have to bless and eat the food offerings given to them by the people. AGNI states in Leviticus that they would have to eat the meat offerings as to somewhat "carry the burdens of the people".
Leviticus 6:18 “All the males among the children of Aaron shall eat of it. It shall be a statute forever in your generations concerning the offerings of the Lord made by fire: every one that toucheth them shall be holy.” So, as the Priests in India would do Agni Homa which is the offerings to the fire, then in Japan the Japanese priests would do the same thing, only they call it Goma as the offerings of the fire to Fudo Myoo (Agni).
This is where I start compiling everything together, based on what this practice is supposed to be from.
Now, when I came across the Chinese people as being the Israelites (Aryans) in the Bible, I was surprised as to why this is covered up. I started to see that the Children of Israel started to do theor won things, change their own culture and started to worship the Gods of the other nations. The people (not all) would have certain delicacies to eat, to which as the Bible states is an abomination in the vessel (body). You are what you eat.
Here in Isaiah 65:4,5 states “…in the monuments, which eat swine’s flesh and broth of abominable things is in their vessels. And which say, stand thyself come not near me, for I am holier than thou…” And in 66:17 “They that sanctify themselves and purify themselves in the gardens behind one tree in the midst, eating swine’s flesh, and the abomination, and the mouse, shall be consumed together, saith the Lord.”
It's also interesting that even Jesus would cast the demons into the pigs, to which I ask the question. Why were there pig farmers, handling pigs in the land?
It states that the Israelites were eating pig’s flesh, (and other things) and you as know swine is a big delicacy, along with the eating other strange animals. Now, not all Chinese are into eating these things, but this is still being done amongst some of the provinces to this day (as this is what the God of fire told the Aryans not to eat).
However, despite of all the idolatry and eating strange things, the Chinese are said to be the most populated, along with India. Now, I didn't believe (at first) the God of fire to being the God of the pillar (as this maybe Baal in the Bible), but I see that AGNI, is the very one that had blessed Jacob's seed to multiply like the "sands of the sea" and stars of Heaven.
The People in China, and the People of India tend to be more populated than the rest of the world. (being like the "sands of the sea"). And in the Bible states, that the nations will be blessed through the Children of Israel, seems to be true in a way. The Chinese and the other Israelites, tend to supplant many people’s products, companies and technology, even though they would have their own methods of doing so.
When I watched the movie "Crazy Rich Asians", the beginning details an interesting quote from Napoleon Bonaparte, stating how China is a "sleeping giant" in the world, and if awakened would be unstoppable (just paraphrasing here).
Here is an excerpt from what Marco Polo states in "Anacalypsis": 6. "The Chinese, with all their apparent idolatry, had only one God. Speaking of the religion of the Chinese, Sir W . Jones' says, "Of the religious opinions entertained by Confucius and his followers, we may glean a general notion from the fragments of "their works, translated by Couplet : they professed a firm belief in the Supreme God, and gave "a demonstration of his being and of his providence, from the exquisite beauty and perfection of "the celestial bodies, and the wonderful order of nature in the whole fabric of the visible world ."
"From this belief they deduced a system of ethics, which the philosopher sums up in a few words " at the close of the Lunyn. He" (says Confucius) " who shall be fully persuaded that the "Lord of Heaven governs the universe, who shall in all things choose moderation, who shall" perfectly know his own species, and so act among them, that his life and manners may conform "to his knowledge of God and man, may be truly said to discharge all the duties of a sage, and to "be exalted above the common herd of the human race!"
"Marco Paulos informs us, that in his time the Chinese paid their adoration to a tablet fixed against the wall in their houses, upon which was inscribed the name of the high, celestial, and supreme God ; to whose honour they burnt incense, but of whom they had no image . The words, Mr. Marsden says, which were on the tablet were three, tien, heaven; hoang-tien, supreme heaven ; and Shang-ti, sovereign Lord."
"De Guignes tells us, that the word tien stands indifferently for the visible heaven and the Supreme Deity.' Marco Paulo tells us, that from the God whose name was on the tablet the Chinese only petition for two things, sound intellect and health of body, but that they had another God, of whom they had a statue or idol called Natigai, who was the God of all terrestrial things ; in fact, God, the Creator of this world, (inferior or subordinate to the Supreme Being,) from whom they petition for fine weather, or whatever else they want-a sort of Mediator."
"Here is evidently a striking similarity to the doctrines of some of the early Christian heretics. It seems pretty clear from this account, that originally, and probably at this time also, like all the ancients of the West in the midst of their degrading idolatry, they yet acknowledged one Supreme God, with many subordinate agents, precisely the same as the Heathens of Greece and Rome, and modern Christians, under the names of inferior gods, angels, demons, saints, &c. In fact they were Deists."
Then there is the "Physical" God that Marco Polo had mentioned, to which he stated that the Chinese would pray for weather, crops and other means. He states this God was called "Natigai", and is a mediator of sorts. Though there is the "Spirit" that the Chinese would recognize, however the God of fire was the One that they would pay the animal sacrifices towards to, drink offerings, and the one who would deal with the laws to stand by.
It also states "The God that took the Israelites out of Egypt", and to whom the "His" name was put in for the House of God. So, solely the God of fire (AGNI) was the one that gave the laws to live by. Now, it also states that the Great Spirit would send an angel, where states this:
Exodus 23:20 “Behold, I send an Angel before thee, to keep thee in the way, and to bring thee into the place which I have prepared.”
Exodus 33:2 “And I will send an angel before thee; and I will drive out the Canaanite, the Amorite, and the Hittite, and the Perizzite, the Hivite, and the Jebusite:”
Here is an excerpt from Deuteronomy 11-17: "11But the land, whither ye go to possess it, is a land of hills and valleys, and drinketh water of the rain of heaven: 12A land which the LORD thy God careth for: the eyes of the LORD thy God are always upon it, from the beginning of the year even unto the end of the year." "13And it shall come to pass, if ye shall hearken diligently unto my commandments which I command you this day, to love the LORD your God, and to serve him with all your heart and with all your soul, 14That I will give you the rain of your land in his due season, the first rain and the latter rain, that thou mayest gather in thy corn, and thy wine, and thine oil." "15And I will send grass in thy fields for thy cattle, that thou mayest eat and be full. 16Take heed to yourselves, that your heart be not deceived, and ye turn aside, and serve other gods, and worship them; 17And then the LORD'S wrath be kindled against you, and he shut up the heaven, that there be no rain, and that the land yield not her fruit; and lest ye perish quickly from off the good land which the LORD giveth you."
Here, the "wrathful" nature of this God is shown throughout the Bible, thus detailing the connections the the Japanese God Fudo Myoo/Kojin.
Here in the Wiki states the Primordial God "Yuanshi Tianzu":
"Taoists claim that sacrifices offered to Yuanshi Tianzun by the king predate the Xia dynasty. The surviving archaeological record shows that by the Shang dynasty, the shoulder blades of sacrificed oxen were used to send questions or communication through fire and smoke to the divine realm, a practice known as scapulimancy. The heat would cause the bones to crack and royal diviners would interpret the marks as Yuanshi Tianzun's response to the king. Inscriptions used for divination were buried into special orderly pits while those that were for practice or records were buried in common middens after use."
"Under Yuanshi Tianzun or his later names, the deity received sacrifices from the ruler of China in every Chinese dynasty annually at a great Temple of Heaven in the imperial capital. Following the principles of Chinese geomancy, this would always be located in the southern quarter of the city. During the ritual, a completely healthy bull would be slaughtered and presented as an animal sacrifice to Yuanshi Tianzun. The Book of Rites states the sacrifice should occur on the "longest day" on a round-mound altar. The altar would have three tiers: the highest for Yuanshi Tianzun and the Son of Heaven; the second-highest for the sun and moon; and the lowest for the natural gods such as the stars, clouds, rain, wind, and thunder. The ten stages of the ritual were:
Offering of jade and silk Offering of sacrificial food
First offering of wine
Second offering of wine
Last offering of wine
Retreat of civil dancers and entry of military dancers
Performance of the military dance
Farewell to deities
Burning of sacrificial articles
"It is important to note that Yuanshi Tianzun is never represented with either images or idols. Instead, in the center building of the Temple of Heaven, in a structure called the "Imperial Vault of Heaven", a "spirit tablet" (神位, or shénwèi) inscribed with the name of Yuanshi Tianzun is stored on the throne, Huangtian Shangdi (皇天上帝). During an annual sacrifice, the emperor would carry these tablets to the north part of the Temple of Heaven, a place called the "Prayer Hall For Good Harvests", and place them on that throne."
This is further explained in "Truth about Shang-di" chapter, as "Shang-di" is somewhat different than the one called "Yuanshi Tianzun". However, Shang-di and Yunashi Tianzun are shown or portrayed with an image, but from the above statement states that Yuanshi Tianzun is "not" supposed to have an image, and is supposed to be "His name" inscripted on the spiritual Tablet in the Temple of Heaven.
Here are scriptures detailing the name of God: 2 Samuel 7:13 "He shall build an house for my name, and I will stablish the throne of his kingdom for ever."
1 Kings 5:5 "And, behold, I purpose to build an house unto the name of the LORD my God, as the LORD spake unto David my father, saying, Thy son, whom I will set upon thy throne in thy room, he shall build an house unto my name."
1 Kings 8:16 "Since the day that I brought forth my people Israel out of Egypt, I chose no city out of all the tribes of Israel to build an house, that my name might be therein; but I chose David to be over my people Israel."
1 Kings 8:18 "And the LORD said unto David my father, Whereas it was in thine heart to build an house unto my name, thou didst well that it was in thine heart."
1 Kings 8:19 "Nevertheless thou shalt not build the house; but thy son that shall come forth out of thy loins, he shall build the house unto my name."
1 Chronicles 22:8 "But the word of the LORD came to me, saying, Thou hast shed blood abundantly, and hast made great wars: thou shalt not build an house unto my name, because thou hast shed much blood upon the earth in my sight."
1 Chronicles 22:10 "He shall build an house for my name; and he shall be my son, and I will be his father; and I will establish the throne of his kingdom over Israel for ever."
2 Chronicles 6:6 "But I have chosen Jerusalem, that my name might be there; and have chosen David to be over my people Israel." 2 Chronicles 6:8 "But the LORD said to David my father, Forasmuch as it was in thine heart to build an house for my name, thou didst well in that it was in thine heart:"
Deuteronomy Chapter 12 :"1These are the statutes and judgments, which ye shall observe to do in the land, which the LORD God of thy fathers giveth thee to possess it, all the days that ye live upon the earth. 2Ye shall utterly destroy all the places, wherein the nations which ye shall possess served their gods, upon the high mountains, and upon the hills, and under every green tree: 3And ye shall overthrow their altars, and break their pillars, and burn their groves with fire; and ye shall hew down the graven images of their gods, and destroy the names of them out of that place. 4Ye shall not do so unto the LORD your God. 5But unto the place which the LORD your God shall choose out of all your tribes to put his name there, even unto his habitation shall ye seek, and thither thou shalt come:"
He clearly states that "His" name should be put there and that no image should be portrayed. This "House", in which is supposed to be in Jerusalem, has to be the Temple of Heaven that is located in Beijing, China. So, if Hebrews 12:29 and Deuteronomy 4:24 states "Our God is a consuming fire" and a "jealous God", only tells me that the Isrealites was supposed to blot out the name of the former deities in those lands, and put "His" name there instead, thus is towards the God of fire.
Now, based from Marco Polo's description stating of the Chinese praying for "health of mind and body", seems to pay homage to the "Spirit", or Energy that permiates throughout the whole Universe. This is where the term "Yoga" is based on, as you learn to deal with yourself as with others (thus going back to the second Commandment). This Energy is also called "Chi", "Ki", "Prana", or "Spirit", to which is the hidden force or power shown everywhere.
In the Chapter "Esoteric/Exoteric", I detail how Science has experimented on the water's molecular structure, and due to the vibration of good and bad sounds (whether music or words) the vibration/energy comes from within based from our thought process, thus connecting to how we live our lifestyle. (This affects us all in everday life)
So, if Marco Polo had stated that the Chinese would pray for "health of mind and body", then that is the everliving "law" or life force that Governs the Universe. This could possibly be why Jesus had stated "to be of water and Spirit" in John 3:5. (John 3:5 “Jesus answered, Verily, verily, I say unto thee, Except a man be born of water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God.”)
Now, people will state that it means something else based on their own perspective, but seeing Jesus' qoutes of "The Kingdom of God" does show that it's based on the internal aspect and not the physical. Though these books and some of the qoutes have been manipulated, the real Jesus had stated certain information based on the "two greatest commandments", and how he came to gather the Children of Israel together.
There are verses stating Jesus to be "God in the flesh", to which contradicts the Chapter Matthew 19:17 “And he said unto him, Why callest thou me good? there is none good but one, that is, God: but if thou wilt enter into life, keep the commandments.”
And also Mark 10:18 “And Jesus said unto him, Why callest thou me good? there is none good but one, that is, God.” So, if he stated this qoute, then that means (in these two versions) he did not consider himself to be God, but ackowledged himself as an Emissary, and thus was sent to do certain missions.
Then of course, there is the statement of Psalms 82:6 “I have said, Ye are gods; and all of you are children of the most High.” And then the "Sons of God" to which are deemed the Angels written in the Book of Enoch. The former statement of "gods" (in my own opinion) seems to detail the inner aspect of each individual. As the breath of God (or life force) is in every one and thing, but to understanding one's true self leads the person to a higher level of spiritual attainment. This occurs when the person begins to understand that they are not the body, but are spirits having an human experience.
However the case, there are truths in the Bible, but the reader must know that there are also changes given to hide a certain narrative. Then I can safely state that coming to the conclusion to the different changes (like timelines and locations) in the Bible, the Prophet Jesus' life is then amalgamated to the Black God Baal (who is Dagon and Moloch. See "Jesus is Muhammed" and "Changing the Bible")
The Problem with the Bible is that the locations has been changed, thus bringing the thought or idea that the lands of Israel is in the Middle East, when it's not. At first, I had to sift through the literatures based from the Christian, Islamic and Jewish, in order to find that those books has no validity to the reality. The real truth is that the Bible (as much as it's changed) is coded, (thus waiting to be decoded) through understanding Hinduism. Sir Godfrey Higgins details this many times in his book "The Anacalypsis, and even other people who can decipher the real truth.
Now, based from the Biblical stand point, it states that the God of fire was to be worshiped solely (Which is interesting). This is why Hebrews 12:29 states this: "For our God is a Consuming fire", and Deuteronomy 4:24, "For our God is a Jealous God and a consuming fire". This shows the Jealous and fiery nature of this particular God, to being AGNI the God of the Aryans.
Now, based form the "Serpent" symbolism belonging to the God of the Pillar and how this belongs to the original inhabitants that were in the land. Now, in the Chapter "The God of fire 1-3", I detail how the bird symbology belongs to the Agni, and how this is based on the original symbol of the Aryans.
Now, in the religion of Hinduism states that if the person had recieved a snake bite, that they would look upon the Garuda Bird for healing. It seems that after learning about the original symbol of the God of fire, it would be the Bird that was put upon the pole and not the serpent. I find this more fitting than the serpent on the pole reference.
Now, from this excerpt on "Kamado-jin" states this: "Kamadogami is a god enshrined in places that use fire, such as coffins, hearths, and kitchens. Like the God of Fire, he is also considered to be the guardian deity of agriculture, livestock, and families. It is also known as the God of God and the God of Kunato."
"In general, a mint and a god tag are enshrined in the sacred shelf by the kamado and the furnace, and the form of the method of the bite varies from region to region. In the Tohoku region, in the northern part of the territory of the Sendai Domain (from the northern part of Miyagi Prefecture to the southern part of Iwate Prefecture), clay or wooden surfaces called Kamagami and Kamao are enshrined in the pillars near the shrine for entrances and outdoors."
"It is dug with the material left over by the carpenter who built the house at the time of the new construction, and it has the appearance of anger, and it is characterized by teething with a piece of pottery and embedding the shell of the abwabi in the eyes . In the Shinetsu region, it is called Kamagami, and two wooden dolls of about one scale are shinto bodies, and in Kagoshima Prefecture, they enshrine a paper mint of doll style. There are also regions where you can put mints and god tags on pillars and shelves near the wall, and make the freeness of the furnace and the Five Virtues a divine body. It is said that Yasuchi-bushi, which is located in Yasuchi, Shimane Prefecture, also symbolizes the fire man."
"In The Amami Archipelago, Okinawa, it is called The God of Fire, and it is a god familiar to people as the guardian deity of the house. The statue of Sanho Aragami in Japanese Buddhism is known for being enshrined as a kamado deity. It is thought that this led to the god of fire because it is a god that honors cleanliness and removes uncleanness. In the Kinki and Chinese regions, the yin and yang-do god Dokojin is enshrined as a kamado dejin, and it is thought that it moves to the kamado in spring, the gate in summer, the well in autumn, and the garden in winter."
"In Shinto, it is not The Three Treasures Aragami, but the Three Pillar Gods (rarely the Three Aragamis). The three pillars of the shrine are said to be Otsuhiko (Okutsu Hikogami), Otsuhime (Okutsu Himeki), and Kagutsuchi (軻 Atsutomo, Fire Spirit)."
"The woodpecker is the god of the cicamus, and the god of fire is the god of fire. Because there is a dark image compared to the zashiki etc. in the residential space, there is also the idea that it is a place that forms the boundary between the shadow, the area of the back side, the spirit world (the world) and this world, and the having the role of the mediation of both worlds and the renewal of order."
"Moreover, it is said that it is a god with a violent character, and there is a legend that this god curses the person such as the punishment hits if it treats it poorly, and it gets angry when riding on the kamado. Yoshiyo Imakawa and Nakaaki Imakawa deeply believed in Okutsuhiko Shrine in Sakai-ku, Shizuoka City."
(They called Him "God of fire" or "The Fire Man")
Then here is the excerpt based from the Bible pertaining to the "Cooking God".
Numbers 28:6" It is a continual burnt offering, which was ordained in mount Sinai for a sweet savour, a sacrifice made by fire unto the LORD.
Numbers 28:27 "But ye shall offer the burnt offering for a sweet savour unto the LORD; two young bullocks, one ram, seven lambs of the first year;"
Numbers 15:13 "All that are born of the country shall do these things after this manner, in offering an offering made by fire, of a sweet savour unto the LORD."
Numbers 15:14 "And if a stranger sojourn with you, or whosoever be among you in your generations, and will offer an offering made by fire, of a sweet savour unto the LORD; as ye do, so he shall do."
Leviticus 3:16 "And the priest shall burn them upon the altar: it is the food of the offering made by fire for a sweet savour: all the fat is the LORD'S."
Exodus 29:18 “And thou shalt burn the whole ram upon the altar: it is a burnt offering unto the LORD: it is a sweet savour, an offering made by fire unto the LORD.”
Exodus 29:25 “And thou shalt receive them of their hands, and burn them upon the altar for a burnt offering, for a sweet savour before the LORD: it is an offering made by fire unto the LORD.”
This is where the legend of "Red Horn", as the One who has "Faces for Ears", and also braided red hair (thus Red horn, Agni, Rudra and Fudo Myoo) comes into play. This God is also called "Kiniche' Kakmaw" (Fire parrot) as the God of the Mayans who would come down to consume the offerings.
Here, AGNI would be called "Kojin", meaning "three way rough deity". He is said to have an "uncertain temper", have "fire", and be known as a destructive force against evil and impurities. He is also responsible for watching over the household and reporting any misdeeds to the kami of the village or city. These reports are discussed, and the according rewards or punishments assigned, by an assembly of gods in Izumo province in the tenth month of the traditional lunar calendar. (as He is a Lunar deity) And is also said to be Fudo Myoo as the the fire God who deals with misdeeds and punishments.
Now, here He how is presented near a hearth (as He teaches the Israelites to cook as in "fire offerings" of animal sacrifice). And states that this representation is in a form called a "Fuda" or "ofuda" (which is a memorial tablet), and sometimes a statue of this God. The statue describes "Kojin" as having "flaming red hair", a contorted face, fangs, two pairs of hands, a bow and arrows and three heads. This is what marco Polo describes the idol called "Natigai", as this God would be their protector and Guardian.
This confirms that Marco Polo knew what he was talking about. Nowadays, I hear the Chinese are bieng told that Marco Polo never went to China, and that event never happened (These Jesuits are trying to change the people's true history).
Anyway, this is what the "Fuda" (ofuda) is based on, and is compared to the Jewish "Mezuzuah". Now, if you read Marco Polo's excerpt on the Chinese having a fixed tablet on the wall dedicated to the Spiritual God, then you should also know of the Jewish tablet that is also fixed on the side door called the "Mezuzah". The Mezuzah is said to either be fixed upright or diagonal, and is said to host the prayers from the Talmud. This is interesting as the connections are still confirmed between the Chinese and the Japanese.
Here the WIki states on the "ofuda": "In Japanese religion, an ofuda (お札 or 御札, honorific form of fuda, "slip (of paper), card, plate") is a talisman made out of various materials such as paper, wood, cloth or metal. Ofuda are commonly found in both Shinto shrines and Buddhist temples and are considered to be imbued with the power of the deities (kami) or Buddhist figures revered therein. Such amulets are also called gofu (護符). A specific type of ofuda is a talisman issued by a Shinto shrine on which is written the name of the shrine or its enshrined kami and stamped with the shrine's seal."
"Such ofuda, also called shinsatsu (神札), go-shinsatsu (御神札) or shinpu (神符), are often placed on household Shinto altars (kamidana) and revered both as a symbol of the shrine and its deity (or deities) - indeed containing the kami's essence or power by virtue of its consecration - and a medium through which the kami in question can be accessed by the worshiper. In this regard they are somewhat similar to (but not the same as) goshintai, physical objects which serve as repositories for kami in Shinto shrines."
"Other kinds of ofuda are intended for a specific purpose (such as protection against calamity or misfortune, safety within the home, or finding love) and may be kept on one's person or placed on other areas of the home (such as gates, doorways, kitchens, ceilings). Paper ofuda may also be referred to as kamifuda (紙札), while those made of wood may be called kifuda (木札). Omamori, another kind of Japanese amulet, originated and may be considered as a smaller, portable version of ofuda."
Now, in the Bible in which the Israelites would offer animal sacrifice and drink offerings to the fire:
Numbers 28:8 "And the other lamb shalt thou offer at even: as the meat offering of the morning, and as the drink offering thereof, thou shalt offer it, a sacrifice made by fire, of a sweet savour unto the LORD."
Numbers 29:6 "Beside the burnt offering of the month, and his meat offering, and the daily burnt offering, and his meat offering, and their drink offerings, according unto their manner, for a sweet savour, a sacrifice made by fire unto the LORD."
Numbers 18:17 "But the firstling of a cow, or the firstling of a sheep, or the firstling of a goat, thou shalt not redeem; they are holy: thou shalt sprinkle their blood upon the altar, and shalt burn their fat for an offering made by fire, for a sweet savour unto the LORD."
Numbers 28:24 "After this manner ye shall offer daily, throughout the seven days, the meat of the sacrifice made by fire, of a sweet savour unto the LORD: it shall be offered beside the continual burnt offering, and his drink offering."
Exodus 29:18 "And thou shalt burn the whole ram upon the altar: it is a burnt offering unto the LORD: it is a sweet savour, an offering made by fire unto the LORD."
There are more scriptures on this, but this is to show that the God of fire was "eating" and "drinking" the offerings. Here are verses based on the Israelites giving wine as a drink offering to the God of fire:
Exodus 29:40 "And with the one lamb a tenth deal of flour mingled with the fourth part of an hin of beaten oil; and the fourth part of an hin of wine for a drink offering."
Numbers 15:5 "And the fourth part of an hin of wine for a drink offering shalt thou prepare with the burnt offering or sacrifice, for one lamb."
Numbers 15:7 "And for a drink offering thou shalt offer the third part of an hin of wine, for a sweet savour unto the LORD." Numbers 15:10 "And thou shalt bring for a drink offering half an hin of wine, for an offering made by fire, of a sweet savour unto the LORD."
Numbers 28:14 "And their drink offerings shall be half an hin of wine unto a bullock, and the third part of an hin unto a ram, and a fourth part of an hin unto a lamb: this is the burnt offering of every month throughout the months of the year."
This connects to AGNI eating and drinking wine given from the people, as Deuteronomy 32:38 states: "Which did eat the fat of their sacrifices, and drank the wine of their drink offerings..."
Deuteronomy 11:10-12, 8:18 . The irony of AGNI to being a "Kitchen God" is because He teaches the Israelites to cook, as He savors the animal sacrifice of burnt offerings. Here He is shown just like what Deuteronomy describes as Him having arrows and a weapons.
Deuteronomy Chapter 32:36-42 "For the LORD shall judge his people, and repent himself for his servants, when he seeth that their power is gone, and there is none shut up, or left. And he shall say, Where are their gods, their rock in whom they trusted, Which did eat the fat of their sacrifices, and drank the wine of their drink offerings? let them rise up and help you, and be your protection. See now that I, even I, am he, and there is no god with me: I kill, and I make alive; I wound, and I heal: neither is there any that can deliver out of my hand."
"For I lift up my hand to heaven, and say, I live for ever. If I whet my glittering sword, and mine hand take hold on judgment; I will render vengeance to mine enemies, and will reward them that hate me. I will make mine arrows drunk with blood, and my sword shall devour flesh; and that with the blood of the slain and of the captives, from the beginning of revenges upon the enemy."
A famous restaurant is named after Him:
Now, the Brahmins would do this ceremony called "Agnicayana" which is the building of the fire altar, and would chant the scriptures from the early Vedic scripts. They would also build this brick altar in the form of a bird, and later burn down the canopy with fire as a conclusion to the ceremony. This is somewhat mentioned in Sir Godfrey Higgins' book "The Anacalypsis" chapter 10 page 260. Now, this chapter is based on the connections of the Yajna and the passover, and how the Jewish passover is the same as the Hindus.
Let's look at this excerpt: "If the religions of Moses and the Hindoos were the same, it was reasonable to expect that we should find the celebrated Egyptian festival of the Passover in both countries, and it is found accordingly. We have in it the most solemn of the religious rites of the Brahmins, the sacrifice of the Yajna or the Lamb."
"… This history of the passage of the sun and of the passage of the Israelites from Egypt, affords a very remarkable example of the double meaning of the Hebrew books. Before the time of Moses, the Egyptians fixed the commencement of the year at the vernal equinox. … In the Oriental Chronicle it is said, that the day the sun entered into Aries, was solennis ac celeberrimus apud Ægyptios. But this Ægyptian festival commenced on the very day when the Paschal lamb was separated."
"… In this festival the Israelites marked their door-posts, &c., with blood, the Ægyptians marked their goods with red. The Hebrew name was (.5 psh pesach, which means transit. The Lamb itself is also called Pesech, or the Passover."
"In India, the devotees throw red powder on one another at the festival of the Huli or vernal equinox. This red powder, the Hindoos say, is an imitation of the pollen of plants, the principle of fructification, the flower of the plant. Here we arrive at the import of this mystery. A plant which has not this powder, this flower or flour, is useless; it does not produce seed."
"This Huli festival is the festival of the vernal equinox; it is the Yulé; it is the origin of our word holy; it is Julius, Yulius. The followers of Vishnu observes the custom, on grand occasions, of sacrificing a ram. This sacrifice was called Yajna; and the fire of the Yajna was called Yajneswara, of the God fire. The word "Yajna, M. Dubois says (p.316,) is derived from Agni fire, as if it were to this God that the sacrifice was really offered. I need not point out the resemblance of the word Agni and the Latin Ignis."
"And I suppose I need not point out the resemblance of the word Agni to the Latin Agnus, to those who have seen the numerous extraordinary coincidences in the languages of Italy and India, which I have shewn in this work and in my Celtic Druids. In this ceremony of sacrificing the lamb the devotees of India chaunt with a loud voice, When will it be that the Saviour will be born ! When will it be that the Redeemer will appear ! The Brahmins, though they eat no flesh on any other occasion, at this sacrifice taste the flesh of the animal : and the person offering the sacrifice makes a verbal confession of his sins* and receives absolution.**"
"… The Hindoos have a sacred fire which never dies, and a sacrifice connected with it, called Oman.*** They have also the custom of casting out devils from people possessed, by prayers and ceremonies,**** which is also practised by the people of Siam. All this is very important. * Loubière says, auricular confession is practised by the Siamese. ** Travels and Letters of the Jesuits, translated from the French, 1713; London, 1714, pp. 1423, signed Bouchet. *** ON the generative power of OM. **** Travel and Letters of the Jesuits, pp. 14-23. Page 262 The first sentence of the Rig-Veda is said to be Agnim-ile, I sing praise to fire."
"Here we are told that Agnim means fire. When we reflect upon the slain lamb, and the call for the Saviour, we must be struck with the scene in the fifth chapter of the Apocalypse, from verse five to ten, where praise is given to the slain Lamb. The identity of the Mythoses cannot be denied."
Now, let's view Rene Guenon's "The King of the World" and see what he states: "ACCORDING to Ossendowski's report, the 'Lord of the World' formerly appeared several times in India and in Siam, 'blessing the people with a golden apple surmounted with a lamb'. This is an extremely important detail when it is compared with Saint-Yves's description of the 'cycle of the Lamb and the Ram'."
"1 It is even more remarkable that there exist in Christian symbolism innumerable representations of the Lamb on a mountain from which flow down four rivers that are clearly identical with those four rivers of Terrestrial Paradise."
"2 As already mentioned, Agarttha possessed a different name before the onset of the Kali-Yuga; it was called Paradesha, which in Sanskrit means 'supreme country', and which applies well to the spiritual centre par excellence, also called the 'Heart of the World'. It is the word from which the Chaldeans formed Pardes, and Westerners Paradise. Such is the original sense of this last word, which should make it clear why, in one form or another, it always signifies the same thing as the Pardes of the Hebrew Kabbalah. On summing up what has been discussed about the symbolism of the 'Pole', it is not difficult to understand that the mountain of Terrestrial Paradise is the...."
(They literally cut off the location of this mountain, so the closest information would have to be from Mercator's map in which details a mountain in the North Pole....)
"1 We should be reminded here of the allusion, already made elsewhere, to the connection that exists between the Vedic Agni and the symbol of the Lamb (L’Esoterisme de Dante (1957 edn.), pp. 69-70; Man and his Becoming according to Vedanta, p. 44); in India the ram represents the vehicle of Agra'. Furthermore, Mr Ossendowski points out on several occasions that the cult of Rama still exists in Mongolia; hence there is something more than Buddhism there, contrary to what most of the orientalists maintain."
"From another side, we have had communications about the memories of the 'Cycle of Ram', which are said to still subsist in Cambodia, giving information which appeared so extraordinary that we have preferred not to remark on it; we therefore mention it only as a reminder."
"2 Note also the representation of the Lamb on the book sealed by seven seals mentioned in the Apocalypse; Tibetan lamaism also possesses seven mysterious seals and we doubt if this connection is purely accidental."
Here is an excerpt from the Wiki on Agni: Festivals: Holi and Diwali: "Two major festivals in Hinduism, namely Holi (festival of colors) and Diwali (festival of lights) incorporate Agni in their ritual grammar, as a symbol of divine energy. During the autumn celebrations of Diwali, traditional small fire lamps called Diya are included to mark the festivities. For Holi, Hindus burn bonfires as Holika, on the night before the spring festival. The bonfire marks god Agni, and in rural India mothers carry their babies around the fire clockwise on Holika in Agni's remembrance."
Now, when learning about the true origin of this God to being that of a "bird", states this to be the true symbol of AGNI. Though they would show Agni riding upon the Ram vehicle, thus having an esoteric relations to the star sign of "Aries". However, there would be several changes towards Agni, but the main focus is what the "Early Vedic scripts" details about this God, before the "Post Vedic scripts" were written down.
It's interesting as Godrey Higgins states this to be "the Passover" as they would use red powder and other colors. Although, I can agree with Higgins on the Yajna being a form of a "Passover", it's true that these practices are really towards AGNI for the fire ceremony and animal sacrifices. However, based from the "Agnicayana" practices, shows that the image of the "bird" is portrayed as the symbol of the God of fire.
In the website "Hindupedia.com", details this about Agnicayana: "Agnicayana By Swami Harshananda Agnicayana literally means ‘piling the fire’. According to the Bhagavadgītā, Prajāpati gave the yajña as the link between the human beings and the devas of the cosmic regions. Human beings were advised to propitiate these deities through various yajñas and the deities in turn would respond by bestowing upon them their needs. Vedic sacrifices which were simple fire rituals during the Saṃhitā period."
"They developed into a variety of rites and ceremonies with a labyrinth of details, by the period of the Brāhmaṇas. One of the complicated sacrifices is the Somayāga of which agnicayana forms an integral part. However this rite is not compulsory. Literally the word means ‘piling the fire’ but in practice it refers to the rite of building up the altar on which the sacrificial fire (āhavaniya) will be lighted. The Śatapatha Brāhmana of the Śukla Yajurveda, which is the basic authority on this rite, represents it as a human imitation of the construction of the cosmic world of Prajāpati."
"Detailed instructions are given for the manufacture of the various kinds of bricks, of different shapes and sizes and for the building up of the altar in several layers of specific prescribed shapes. The most common shapes are those of: Suparṇa - eagle Śyena - hawk Droṇa - trough Some of the details mentioned in the liturgical works are as follows: As many as 10,800 bricks are needed to complete the construction of the altar. A thorough knowledge of geometry is necessary on the part of the priests who guide and direct the construction."
"The bricks are usually laid in five layers, the 1st, the 3rd and the 5th being of the same pattern while the 2nd and 4th are different. The ground on which this altar is built is ploughed and sowed with several seeds. This ground is interred with the heads of five animals or their golden images and the golden image of the sacrificer."
"A living tortoise is also kept into the altar that is being built. The piling of the altar could be completed in one year (8 months for the first four layers and 4 months for the last) or only in five consecutive days. "The ‘Agnicit,’ i.e., the person who performs agnicayana, is expected to observe certain vows during this period. He is permitted to do ‘punaściti’ (doing agnicayana once again) if he does not prosper in the year after performing it."
"To obviate the effects of the sins of omission and commission during the agnicayana rite, several prāyaścittas (expiations) are prescribed. The esoteric doctrine of agnicayana is said to have originated with Prajāpati himself and come down through a succession of teachers from Tura Kāvaṣeya to Śāṇḍilya."
(From Wiki states: "The entire ritual takes twelve days to perform, in the course of which a great bird-shaped altar, the uttaravedi "northern altar" is built out of 1005 bricks.")
In this documentary called the “Agnicayana” made in the 1970s, shows the Brahmins making a figure in the shape of a "bird", made with bricks for the coming ceremony. However, the group who documented this segment seemingly cut off a part of the ceremony where they would sacrifice a goat for an offering. This is just like the bible, as the sin offering is connected to sacrificing a goat for the children of Israel’s sins.
Here the Wiki states this: "The Agnicayana (ati-rātra agni-cayana; lit. 'over-night piling up of the fire') or Athirathram is a category of advanced Śrauta rituals. After one has established the routine of the twice-daily routine of Agnihotra offerings and biweekly dara-purna-masa offerings, one is eligible to perform the Agnistoma, the simplest soma rite. After the agnistoma, one is eligible to perform more extensive soma rites and Agnicayana rites. There are various varieties of Agnicayana. Agnicayana continues to be performed in Kerala, Andhra."
"The entire ritual takes twelve days to perform, in the course of which a great bird-shaped altar, the uttaravedi "northern altar" is built out of 1005 bricks. The liturgical text is in Chapters 20 through 25 of the Krishna Yajurveda. The immediate purpose of the Agnicayana is to build up for the sacrificer an immortal body that is permanently beyond the reach of the transitory nature of life, suffering and death that, according to this rite, characterizes man's mortal existence. The ritual emerged from predecessor rituals, which were incorporated as building blocks, around the 10th century BCE, and was likely continuously practiced until the late Vedic period, or the 6th century BCE."
"In post-Vedic times, there were various revivals of the practice, under the Gupta Empire in the north (ca. 4th to 6th century), and under the Chola Empire in the south (ca. 9th century), but by the 11th century, the practice was held to have been discontinued, with the exception of the Nambudiris of Kerala. The 1975 Nambudiri Agnicayana filmed by Frits Staal, was criticized by Andhra Śrautins who claimed the Nambudiri omitted animal sacrifice, which is an element in their own opinion."
The symbol of the God of fire is the Garuda, (in Japan is the Karura) to which is the fiery phoenix (Pa hanok as the "House of Enoch") sitting on top of the Mikoshi. Apparently, there are two gods called "Enoch", who are called "Thoth", "Hermes" etc. (As it's important to know "which" God is being talked here).
Here, the Japanese have kept what is called the "Mikoshi" in their festivals, to which looks like the "Ark of the covenant", as it's held up. It is said that the Mikoshi “Houses the gods” and power would emit from the Mikoshi, just like Exodus 25 states. The Cherubims would be the Phoenix, which symbolizes the God of Fire as He states in Exodus 25:22 “And there I will meet with thee and I will commune with thee from above the mercy seat, from between the two cherubims which are upon the ark of the testimony” (The Palanquin).
In the Wiki it states this: "At some festivals, the people who bear the mikoshi wave it wildly from side to side to "amuse" the deity (kami) inside." (See "The Case of Amun Ra")
So, when learning about the true origin of the Hindu God Vishnu and Krishna, he connects to Gods like Murugan, Dionysus and the Buddha. Based from this information, I am careful as to how these religions got mixed altogether. It is no doubt that the Children of Israel started to make the images of those Gods, from Black to the lighter complexioned versions. In the Bible states that this was something that the God of fire had told the Aryans to destroy when coming into the land.
Now, one interesting factor that was made, was the connection of the religion of the Brahmins and the Egyptians. This is what the movie "Indiana Jones: Raiders of the Lost Ark", are based on, as Jones had went to "Tibet", then to Egypt, to find the Ark of the Covenant. The altar for the fire is called "Yajna", which is where they make the offerings. Based from the connections of Brahminism and the Egyptian religion, Higgins details that many of the things of Moses had originated from the practice of the Egyptians (as "Ark" is an Egyptian terminology).
Now, people will also state quotes from books like "The Kabbalah" (whether Jewish or Hermetic), and detail the authenticity of the Torah and other related Jewish books. However, through research and understanding where the Israelites/Aryans really came to, it defeats the Jewish aspects of Theology and their claims of the current lands of Israel.
I have also heard claims that there was never a settlement, nor any travel of the Jews from Egypt to the current lands of Palestine (and these are information based from Jewish Archeologist). Now, just because a person is a Rabbi or a learned Jew who studies the Torah (and other books), doesn't mean that the books that they have now are considered "authentic", but has been changed to fit one's narrative.
The Kabbalah and the current religion called Judaism, are obviously not older compared to the religions of Zoroastrianism, Hinduism and Buddhism (as the three supposed Abrahamic faiths came from those religions). You can also look up the Youtuber Corey Gil Schuster's "The Ask Project", to which details very interesting and controversial questions given to both Palestinians and Jews. Even observing the different answers based from the different questions, also shows that the people (whether Israelis or Palestinians), have no clue why this land has been targeted to start a narrative of a new History.
Some of the interesting questions asked was "Why do people don't like the Jews?", to which was stated towards an Israeli man and woman. Both different answers was stated, as the man stated that the Jews are blessed and are smarter than the other races etc. However, the woman refutes the man's answers stating that it is an arrogant statement. Rather interesting responses, but if the reader is interested, then check out his Youtube Channel.
Now, I have provided different source materials that shows the people going towards India and China, to whom the Gods really are, and why the world is going the way it is. But like always, there will always be people that don't want to know the real truth even if the evidence has been provided, it's only up to the individual to do their own research as well. You can also look up "Will the real Tabernacle please stand up?" on open.org written by Dean Smith (Chapter "The real Aryans 1"), as the Tabernacle is really a Mongolian Yurt.
One interesting book I've read from the legendary Samurai Miyamoto Musashi, is called "The Book of five Rings" ("Go Rin No sho"), to which is basically understanding the strategy of the Samurai Warrior. Though a very controversial figure in Japanese History, he has been portrayed as a famous icon by being featured in numerous movies, Television shows, and even pop culture. He is stated to have never lost a Duel in his life, thus went 61-0 (as the battle would be a matter of life or death).
Now, having to read his book based on his life, I have came across some interesting things based on the connections to the Bible. But first let's see some of the excerpts based from the famous (and controversial) duel between Miyamoto and Sasku Kojiro, from the website "miyamotomusashi.eu/duels/sasaki-kojiro":
"....It was through Okinaga’s offices, then, that, sometime in the summer of 1612, in the first third of the hour of the Dragon (7:00–7:40), Musashi and Kojirō met in duel on the small, remote island, situated a few miles sailing to the east from Kokura in the Straits of Shimonoseki. Little more that little more than a raised sand bank, it lay on the border of Buzen and Nagato provinces, and was known variously as Funashima or Mukôjima, although today it is better known as Ganryūjima."
"The various sources differ on which of the two swordsmen arrived at the island first. Whereas the Bukōden claims that Kojirō was the first to arrive at the island, the Bushû denraiki, holds that it was Musashi who first set foot on the island. Predictably, given the outcome of the bout, both scenarios are made to work in Musashi’s favor, according to the former because he causes his opponent to lose patience, according to the latter because he can dictate events. Remarkably, the Kokura hibun, on which both works seem to rely a great deal, claims that both men met on the island “at the same time.”
"There are other, more pertinent differences between these two versions of events. While the Bushū denraiki claims that the event was witnessed by Hosokawa Tadaoki’s son, Tadatoshi, (then still lord of Moji castle, north of Kokura), the Bukôden only mentions Lord Tadaoki’s kenshi, or “inspectors.”
"No mention is made of Tadaoki’s son. Instead, it mentions that Musashi was chased off the island by Hosokawa retainers riled by the outcome of the bout. Though these may have been Kojirō's deshi, it seems unlikely since, according to the same source, Tadaoki had strictly forbidden anyone to observe or participate in the duel. There is less disagreement on the duel itself."
"Both sources have Kojirô open the attack: according to the Bukōden “he struck out at Musashi’s brow, cutting the knot in the latter head towel, which fell to the ground;” according to the Bushû denraiki he attacked Musashi “by striking left and right with his two-feet-seven-inch-long Aoe sword using a mizukuruma technique, without turning his head.” Both sources state that Musashi was fighting with a bokutō he had crafted from a wooden oar. They also confirm that his improvised weapon struck Kojirō's head, causing him to fall. Yet they differ on Musashi’s subsequent moves: The Bushū denraiki (which still refers to Musashi by his infant name of Bennosuke) claims that:
"When Bennosuke moved in for the second strike Kojirō quickly rose to his knees and struck out horizontally, tearing through Bennosuke hakama. Bennosuke’s second strike, however, was a fierce one. Striking twice at the same spot with all his might the sturdy bokutô he had crafted from the oar crushed the skull and Kojirō slumped forward and lay prostate. The Bukôden, by contrast, claims that:
"Musashi lowered his oar and stood there for some time before he raised it to strike out again. But Kojirō who was still lying down, struck out at Musashi’s legs, cutting away some three inches of the hakama he had tied up above his knees. But already Musashi’s oar had struck his opponent in the side, causing his hips to break under the impact and Kojirō to pass out. A widely diverging—and far less heroic—version of events is given by the Numata kaki. The family records of the Numata clan, the Numata kaki was compiled in 1672 by a descendant of Numata Nobumoto, the keeper of Moji castle, situated some ten miles northwest of Kokura. Going agains most other records, it claims that:
"Kojirô had not brought along any deshi, as he had promised, but Musashi’s deshi had come to the island and hid themselves. Following the duel Kojirô regained consciousness, yet Musashi’s deshi ganged in on him and killed him. Though it does confirm that Musashi won the duel, it throws a controversial light on Kojirō's death. It also is the one record to describe how, like his behavior following the Yoshioka ambush at Sagarimatsu, Musashi sought to escape the many followers of those he had slain in duel. Thus it describes how that:
"It was for this reason, in order to avoid trouble, that Musashi fled to Moji, seeking the help of master Nobumoto, who acquiesced and gave Musashi shelter at his castle, so that the latter was spared."
If you read the part where Miyamoto flees to the Province of Moji to seek safety under the care of Nobumoto (Nobumoto's castle). This is exactly where the term "City of refuge" is based on in the Bible. When Miyamoto had defeated Sasake Kojiro in the Duel, he knew his men would try to kill him to avenge their leader, so he flees to seek safety under a Lord's castle.
Now, let's see what the Bible states based the "Cities of refuge":
Numbers 35:13 “And of these cities which ye shall give six cities shall ye have for refuge.”
Numbers 35:11 “Then ye shall appoint you cities to be cities of refuge for you; that the slayer may flee thither, which killeth any person at unawares.”
Numbers 35:14 "Ye shall give three cities on this side Jordan, and three cities shall ye give in the land of Canaan, which shall be cities of refuge."
Numbers 35:6 "And among the cities which ye shall give unto the Levites there shall be six cities for refuge, which ye shall appoint for the manslayer, that he may flee thither: and to them ye shall add forty and two cities."
Joshua 20:2 "Speak to the children of Israel, saying, Appoint out for you cities of refuge, whereof I spake unto you by the hand of Moses:"
Numbers 35:12 "And they shall be unto you cities for refuge from the avenger; that the manslayer die not, until he stand before the congregation in judgment."
Numbers 35:15 “These six cities shall be a refuge, both for the children of Israel, and for the stranger, and for the sojourner among them: that every one that killeth any person unawares may flee thither.”
Though it states if the man has accidently killed the person, then it's probable to seek refuge from the avenger. Then there would be those that have killed a person based on their own intentions, and thus would be a fugitive fleeing from the death penalty.
However, because this was an apparent duel viewed by the spectators, this dealing would have to be based on Kojiro's men wanting to kill Miyamoto. Though quite controversial as one party expresses their support for the other, none the less this connects to the Japanese as the real Children of Israel/Aryans in the Bible.
Now, when it comes to the "Passover" in Exodus Chapter 12, there is the lamb in which they smear the blood over the lintel and two side post. Here in Exodus 12 states this :
"Speak ye unto all the congregation of Israel, saying, In the tenth day of this month they shall take to them every man a lamb, according to the house of their fathers, a lamb for an house: 4And if the household be too little for the lamb, let him and his neighbour next unto his house take it according to the number of the souls; every man according to his eating shall make your count for the lamb. 5Your lamb shall be without blemish, a male of the first year: ye shall take it out from the sheep, or from the goats:"
"6And ye shall keep it up until the fourteenth day of the same month: and the whole assembly of the congregation of Israel shall kill it in the evening. 7And they shall take of the blood, and strike it on the two side posts and on the upper door post of the houses, wherein they shall eat it. 8And they shall eat the flesh in that night, roast with fire, and unleavened bread; and with bitter herbs they shall eat it."
"9Eat not of it raw, nor sodden at all with water, but roast with fire; his head with his legs, and with the purtenance thereof. 10And ye shall let nothing of it remain until the morning; and that which remaineth of it until the morning ye shall burn with fire.11And thus shall ye eat it; with your loins girded, your shoes on your feet, and your staff in your hand; and ye shall eat it in haste: it is the LORD'S passover."
"12For I will pass through the land of Egypt this night, and will smite all the firstborn in the land of Egypt, both man and beast; and against all the gods of Egypt I will execute judgment: I am the LORD. 13And the blood shall be to you for a token upon the houses where ye are: and when I see the blood, I will pass over you, and the plague shall not be upon you to destroy you, when I smite the land of Egypt. 14And this day shall be unto you for a memorial; and ye shall keep it a feast to the LORD throughout your generations; ye shall keep it a feast by an ordinance for ever."
"15Seven days shall ye eat unleavened bread; even the first day ye shall put away leaven out of your houses: for whosoever eateth leavened bread from the first day until the seventh day, that soul shall be cut off from Israel. 16And in the first day there shall be an holy convocation, and in the seventh day there shall be an holy convocation to you; no manner of work shall be done in them, save that which every man must eat, that only may be done of you."
"17And ye shall observe the feast of unleavened bread; for in this selfsame day have I brought your armies out of the land of Egypt: therefore shall ye observe this day in your generations by an ordinance for ever. 18In the first month, on the fourteenth day of the month at even, ye shall eat unleavened bread, until the one and twentieth day of the month at even."
"19Seven days shall there be no leaven found in your houses: for whosoever eateth that which is leavened, even that soul shall be cut off from the congregation of Israel, whether he be a stranger, or born in the land. 20Ye shall eat nothing leavened; in all your habitations shall ye eat unleavened bread." (This is the "flat bread" that is similar to the Naan bread in India)
"Then Moses called for all the elders of Israel, and said unto them, Draw out and take you a lamb according to your families, and kill the passover. 22And ye shall take a bunch of hyssop, and dip it in the blood that is in the bason, and strike the lintel and the two side posts with the blood that is in the bason; and none of you shall go out at the door of his house until the morning. 23For the LORD will pass through to smite the Egyptians; and when he seeth the blood upon the lintel, and on the two side posts, the LORD will pass over the door, and will not suffer the destroyer to come in unto your houses to smite you."
"24And ye shall observe this thing for an ordinance to thee and to thy sons for ever. 25And it shall come to pass, when ye be come to the land which the LORD will give you, according as he hath promised, that ye shall keep this service. 26And it shall come to pass, when your children shall say unto you, What mean ye by this service? 27That ye shall say, It is the sacrifice of the LORD'S passover, who passed over the houses of the children of Israel in Egypt, when he smote the Egyptians, and delivered our houses. And the people bowed the head and worshipped. "
"28And the children of Israel went away, and did as the LORD had commanded Moses and Aaron, so did they. 29And it came to pass, that at midnight the LORD smote all the firstborn in the land of Egypt, from the firstborn of Pharaoh that sat on his throne unto the firstborn of the captive that was in the dungeon; and all the firstborn of cattle."
The description of the Passover is shown smearing blood on the lintel and two side post. "Coincidently", the Torii gates in Japan are considered to be shown in the color of "Vermilion", in which I will connect to the "Vermillion bird" symbolism.
Now, it states this in the Wiki: "A torii (Japanese: 鳥居, literally bird abode, Japanese pronunciation: [to.ɾi.i]) is a traditional Japanese gate most commonly found at the entrance of or within a Shinto shrine, where it symbolically marks the transition from the mundane to the sacred. The presence of a torii at the entrance is usually the simplest way to identify Shinto shrines, and a small torii icon represents them on Japanese road maps."
"The first appearance of torii gates in Japan can be reliably pinpointed to at least the mid-Heian period; they are mentioned in a text written in 922. The oldest existing stone torii was built in the 12th century and belongs to a Hachiman Shrine in Yamagata prefecture. The oldest existing wooden torii is a ryōbu torii (see description below) at Kubō Hachiman Shrine in Yamanashi prefecture built in 1535."
"Torii gates were traditionally made from wood or stone, but today they can be also made of reinforced concrete, copper, stainless steel or other materials. They are usually either unpainted or painted vermilion with a black upper lintel. Inari shrines typically have many torii because those who have been successful in business often donate in gratitude a torii to Inari, kami of fertility and industry."
(The "Inari" is the Fox spirit, similar to the Nine tailed Fox) "The torii, a gateway erected on the approach to every Shinto shrine, was derived from the Indian word torana. While the Indian term denotes a gateway, the Japanese characters can be translated as "bird perch".
"Ancient Indian torana sacred gateway architecture has influenced gateway architecture across Asia, specially where Buddhism was transmitted from India; Chinese paifang gateways, Japanese torii gateways, Korean Hongsalmun gateway, and Sao Ching Cha in Thailand have been derived from the Indian torana. The functions of all are similar, but they generally differ based on their respective architectural styles."
"According to several scholars, the vast evidence shows how the torii, both etymologically and architecturally, were originally derived from the torana, a free-standing sacred ceremonial gateway which marks the entrance of a sacred enclosure, such as Hindu-Buddhist temple or shrine, or city. Bernhard Scheid wonders whether torii existed in Japan before Buddhism or arrived with it from India..."
"The origins of the torii are unknown and there are several different theories on the subject, none of which has gained universal acceptance. Because the use of symbolic gates is widespread in Asia—such structures can be found for example in India, China, Thailand, Korea, and within Nicobarese and Shompen villages—historians believe they may be an imported tradition. They may, for example, have originated in India from the torana gates in the monastery of Sanchi in central India."
"According to this theory, the torana was adopted by Shingon Buddhism founder Kūkai, who used it to demarcate the sacred space used for the homa ceremony. The hypothesis arose in the 19th and 20th centuries due to similarities in structure and name between the two gates. Linguistic and historical objections have now emerged, but no conclusion has yet been reached. In Bangkok, Thailand, a Brahmin structure called Sao Ching Cha strongly resembles a torii. Functionally, however, it is very different as it is used as a swing."
"During ceremonies Brahmins swing, trying to grab a bag of coins placed on one of the pillars. Other theories claim torii may be related to the pailou of China. These structures however can assume a great variety of forms, only some of which actually somewhat resemble a torii. The same goes for Korea's "hongsal-mun". Unlike its Chinese counterpart, the hongsal-mun does not vary greatly in design and is always painted red, with "arrowsticks" located on the top of the structure (hence the name)."
(Interesting as they state this "Torii" gate to be unknown. However, after connecting the God Kojin to the God in the Bible, there is no doubt the connection of the Passover towards the Torii gate) "Various tentative etymologies of the word torii exist. According to one of them, the name derives from the term tōri-iru (通り入る, pass through and enter)."
"Another hypothesis takes the name literally: the gate would originally have been some kind of bird perch. This is based on the religious use of bird perches in Asia, such as the Korean sotdae (솟대), which are poles with one or more wooden birds resting on their top. Commonly found in groups at the entrance of villages together with totem poles called jangseung, they are talismans which ward off evil spirits and bring the villagers good luck."
"Bird perches" similar in form and function to the sotdae exist also in other shamanistic cultures in China, Mongolia and Siberia. Although they do not look like torii and serve a different function, these "bird perches" show how birds in several Asian cultures are believed to have magic or spiritual properties, and may therefore help explain the enigmatic literal meaning of the torii's name ("bird perch")."
"Poles believed to have supported wooden bird figures very similar to the sotdae have been found together with wooden birds, and are believed by some historians to have somehow evolved into today's torii. Intriguingly, in both Korea and Japan single poles represent deities (kami in the case of Japan) and hashira (柱, pole) is the counter for kami."
"In Japan birds have also long had a connection with the dead, this may mean it was born in connection with some prehistorical funerary rite. Ancient Japanese texts like the Kojiki and the Nihon Shoki for example mention how Yamato Takeru after his death became a white bird and in that form chose a place for his own burial. For this reason, his mausoleum was then called shiratori misasagi (白鳥陵, white bird grave)."
"Many later texts also show some relationship between dead souls and white birds, a link common also in other cultures, shamanic like the Japanese. Bird motifs from the Yayoi and Kofun periods associating birds with the dead have also been found in several archeological sites. This relationship between birds and death would also explain why, in spite of their name, no visible trace of birds remains in today's torii: birds were symbols of death, which in Shinto brings defilement (kegare)."
Now, in the documentary called "Only in Japan: Kanamara festival", details a Japanese Priestess stating the origin of this festival to be based on the "Real" God of fire.
Now, even though there are pillars attributed to the other gods, however, I stated it's "possible" that the God of fire may have a pillar for Himself. Let's see Exodus Chapter 24:4 "And Moses wrote all the words of the LORD, and rose up early in the morning, and builded an altar under the hill, and twelve pillars, according to the twelve tribes of Israel." The twelve pillars are based on the twelve tribes of Israel.
Then there is the scripture of the God of fire telling the Israelites to destroy the pillars of the gods and their groves in Deuteronomy 12:2,3 "Ye shall utterly destroy all the places, wherein the nations which ye shall possess served their gods, upon the high mountains, and upon the hills, and under every green tree: And ye shall overthrow their altars, and break their pillars, and burn their groves with fire; and ye shall hew down the graven images of their gods, and destroy the names of them out of that place."
Since the Black God Shiva is known for the Pillar, and that the other God called "AGNI" is the real God who led them into the lands of India and China, and is the one who told the Aryans to destroy the pillars in those lands (as two covenants were made). Apparently, He would be the one to tell them to destroy the Pillars and Groves, that even Jacob and Abraham had made towards those other Gods.
Now, upon learning about the Timelines of Christianity being changed, and how it's really based on the worship of Dagon, only then I see that History is totally wrong. And apparently, the God Dagon has a pillar addressed to him, to which would be what Jacob saw in his dream (As the ancestors were seemingly making an "Alien covenant" to this God).
There was a purpose for the Jesuits to change people's History, give them a "Communist Socialist ideaology", to which is to destroy the People's real culture. By far, I can safely state through His Guidance, it's fortunate understand the truth of who the real Aryans are. It is apparent that History today, do not want people to know who the real God of the Aryans are and how they connect to the Children of Israel in the Bible.
Now, when I would look up "Manna" in the Bible, it is described as this: Exodus 16:14 "And when the dew that lay was gone up, behold, upon the face of the wilderness there lay a small round thing, as small as the hoar frost on the ground."
Exodus 16:31 "And the house of Israel called the name thereof Manna: and it was like coriander seed, white; and the taste of it was like wafers made with honey." Numbers 11:7 "And the manna was as coriander seed, and the colour thereof as the colour of bdellium." Numbers 11:9 "And when the dew fell upon the camp in the night, the manna fell upon it."
The term "Coriander seed", and "white" connects to the alternate name "Chinese parsley" or cilantro. It is supposed to be a small round thing like the hoar frost. Usually the color of Bdellium is brownish gold, but there is something called "white bdellium stone", and it's sweet like honey wafers (I originally thought it was describing the Guggulu plant, as it gives off the resin like gum texture and is supposed to have health benefits).
Now, someone did post the white bdellium stones on the internet, and it does look like the hoar frost that the Bible describes it to be. In the Bdellium Wiki states this: "Bdellium is the common English translation in the Bible (Genesis 2:12; Numbers 11:7) for Hebrew bedolach. In both passages the Septuagint understands it as the name of some precious stone, as does Rashi, who interprets it as "a precious stone, crystal", and Saadiah Gaon, as "pearls".... In Numbers, the reference to bdellium is in the context of the manna eaten by the Israelites in the wilderness, which is said to have "the color of bdellium" (Numbers 11:7). Manna was described as looking "like coriander seed, and being white in color and tasting like wafers of honey" (Exodus 16:14). In Numbers 11:7 Manna is said to have "the color of bdellium".
Coriander seed is small and spherical, and the fruit of the Bdellium plant is spherical and looks light green to white depending on maturity. So one could conclude that Manna looked like small, round, white, soft or flaky pellets that tasted like sweet cream or honey. Bdillium fruit are small, round and white as are pearls, so Bdellium may have been a name for Pearls in Biblical times, resembling the round white fruit, and used by the author to describe Manna." But what kind of food is this that the God of fire gave to the Children of Israel, that's small like Bdellium and the hoar frost, taste similar to honey, and looks like coriander?
On the left is the Bdellium stones as the Wiki states. Then on the right is a specific rice called "Glutinous rice", in which is used by the Japanese, Chinese, Koreans, Thailanese, Bhutanese etc. Let's look that Wiki about Glutinous rice:
"Glutinous rice (Oryza sativa var. glutinosa; also called sticky rice, sweet rice or waxy rice) is a type of rice grown mainly in Southeast and East Asia, Northeastern India and Bhutan which has opaque grains, very low amylose content, and is especially sticky when cooked. It is widely consumed across Asia. It is called glutinous in the sense of being glue-like or sticky, and not in the sense of containing gluten (which it does not). While often called "sticky rice", it differs from non-glutinous strains of japonica rice which also become sticky to some degree when cooked. There are numerous cultivars of glutinous rice, which include japonica, indica and tropical japonica strains."
It is considered a "sticky rice, waxy or sweet rice", meaning that it supposed to have natural sugar elements imbedded in the rice, and thus could be the reason why it has the taste of honey (as it's sweet). I have heard that it's based on mushrooms to which indicates the hallucinations though I don't personally buy this theory. It may be the case but rice seems to be describe as the Manna that came from Heaven, and in which became a staple diet among the (Aryans) to this day.