January Cultural Awareness and Recognitions: Poverty Awareness Month & Lunar New Year
January Cultural Awareness and Recognitions: Poverty Awareness Month
According to the 2020 Census Report, approximately 10% of households in the United States live at or below the poverty line. In Snohomish County, the numbers are similar. On average, one out of every 10 households lives in poverty.
Poverty is generally defined as a condition where the income for an individual or family fails to provide for all their basic needs. Inability to provide for basic needs can include homelessness, food insecurity, inadequate clothing and resources for inclement weather, and lack of access to transportation. Causes and impacts of poverty are complex and can include stress, anxiety, depression, withdrawal, and sense of not belonging or “fitting-in." Poverty requires awareness, conversation, and collective action to ensure efforts are initiated and maintained to support the needs of our community.
January is Poverty Awareness Month. It was first recognized in 2009 yet remains a topic which is sometimes brushed aside. In our efforts to improve awareness around diversity, equity, and inclusion, the Snohomish School District is working with community partners to improve communication around resources for our families living in poverty. If you are aware of any programs or organization currently working to support families, please reach out to our office of Equity and Inclusion. Together we can ensure that each family in our community is connected and know they belong.
Click here to download a flier developed by city and community partners that identifies resources within our community.
January Cultural Awareness and Recognitions: Lunar New Year (January 22)
In the Snohomish School District and community, we honor and recognize our diversity. Please join with us as we acknowledge the Lunar New Year.
Happy Lunar New Year! Sometimes referred to as Chinese New Year, this is one of the most important celebrations in East and Southeast Asian cultures. The celebration coincides with the first new moon between the end of January and runs until the full moon arrives.
Celebrations vary amongst cultures, but is typically marked by food, decorations, and activities which promote prosperity, abundance, and togetherness. The celebration concludes with the Lantern Festival which includes parades, dances, and fireworks.
For some more information on recognitions throughout the year please check out this link.