The benefits of fluoride treatment
Fluoride is a naturally occurring mineral found in both soil and water, but it is also used in toothpaste and mouth rinses to prevent tooth decay. In the dentist’s office, a higher concentration of fluoride can be applied to the teeth or even prescribed for patients who can benefit from it. In Westminster, Colorado, patients can also obtain fluoride by drinking the city water into which it is added.
Why do we need fluoride?
Fluoride helps to prevent cavities by making the tooth enamel (outer layer of the tooth) more robust and more resistant to acid attacks. Tooth decay is caused by acid-producing bacteria that live in the mouth and on the teeth. These bacteria produce acids when they come into contact with sugary or starchy foods. The acids eat away at the natural tooth enamel, causing cavities.
Fluoride works to protect teeth by strengthening the enamel and making it more resistant to these acid attacks. It also helps to repair early signs of tooth decay before they become full-blown cavities. For these reasons, fluoride is essential to a good oral hygiene routine.
How much fluoride do we need?
The amount of fluoride treatment for teeth that a person needs depends on their age, overall health, and risk for tooth decay. Children and teenagers need more fluoride because their teeth are still developing and more prone to cavities. Seniors also have an increased risk for cavities and may need more fluoride to protect their teeth.
People at high risk for tooth decay may need to use a fluoride mouth rinse or take fluoride supplements. Your dentist can help you determine if you are at an increased risk for cavities and if you need additional fluoride treatment, whether you are an adult or a kid!
Do I need more fluoride?
Drs. Jepsen, Murphy, and Schmidt of Jepsen, Murphy & Associates Dental in Westminster, CO, can evaluate you and determine if you can benefit from added fluoride. Call the office at (303) 800-6884 to request an appointment at our office, conveniently located at 2921 West 120th Avenue, Suite #210. We are currently accepting new patients.