Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1991.
First Edition; First Printing. Hardcover. Very Good- with no dust jacket. Item #10344
Library stamps/marks/labels/slip, rear hinge creaks, otherwise light wear. Solid hardcover.; "Kin recognition, or the ability to recognize one's genetic relations, is universal throughout the animal kingdom, from amebas to humans. This trait benefits the organism by helping to insure the survival of a specific gene group, and it is also an important factor in mate choice. Indeed, kin recognition is one of the fastest growing and most exciting areas of behavior. The study of kin recognition requires a multidisciplinary approach, and Dr. Hepper has brought together leading researchers from zoology, biology, psychology, and sociology to create a thought-provoking and critical analysis of our current knowledge of the phenomenon, with particular emphasis on the underlying processes involved and their significance for the evolution of social behavior. Together they attempt to answer the questions of how individuals recognize other individuals as kin, nonkin, or different classes of kin and why they respond differently to kin and nonkin." Contents: Contributors; Preface; Introduction / P. G. Hepper; 1. The correlation between kinship and behaviour in non-human primates / I. S. Bernstein; 2. Cooperation and reciprocity in birds and mammals / J. D. Ligon; 3. Kinship and fellowship in ants and social wasps / P. Jaisson; 4. Successes and failures of parent-offspring recognition in animals / M. D. Beecher; 5. Kinship, kin discrimination and mate choice criteria / C. J. Barnard and P. G. M. Aldous; 6. Genetic components of kin recognition in mammals / E. A. Boyse; 7. Kin recognition in amphibians / B. Waldman; 8. Kin recognition cues of vertebrates / Z. T. Halpin; 9. Recognizing kin: ontogeny and classification / P. G. Hepper; 10. Parental states as mechanisms for kinship recognition and deception about relatedness / R. W. Elwood; 11. Fetal learning: implications for the development of kin recognition / S. R. Robinson and W. P. Smotherman; 12. Information processing and storage during filial imprinting / M. H. Johnson; 13. The honey bee as a model kin recognition system / W. M. Getz; 14. Mutual mother-infant recognition in humans / R. H. Porter; Author Index; Species and common name index; Subject index. ; Ex-Library; xii, 457 pages.