The woodlouse spider, Dysdera crocata, is a nocturnal hunting spider commonly found in homes and gardens nationwide, but especially here in Northern Utah and Southern Idaho. They are most active between May and July. The woodlouse spider gets its name from its primary prey, woodlice, also known as isopods, pillbugs, roly-poly bugs, and sowbugs. These spiders can look frightening if you happen upon them, making it important to learn about them. The spider control experts at Rentokil are here to share everything you need to know about these pests.
What Do Woodlouse Spiders Look Like?
The woodlouse hunter spider is a bigger spider with unique coloring. Here are the most notable characteristics that may help you identify these pests:
- Dark-red body and legs, with a shiny mahogany abdomen.
- Large protruding fangs
- Yellow or gray-colored abdomen
- Males (11–15 mm) are larger than females (9–10 mm)
Woodlouse Hunter Spider Habitat
The woodlouse spider is most commonly found around damp areas close to their food source, woodlice. They prefer rotting vegetation and wood and are most often found in basements, under stones and boards, around doors and windows, and other areas that contain rotting wood. Gardeners tend to welcome these arachnids in their yards, as they help them get rid of woodlice, which are notorious plant pests.
Woodlouse spiders hunt at night without the use of a web. This spider hides during the day in a silken retreat constructed under rocks, logs, wood, or other debris where isopods live. In homes, this spider is generally found in basements and areas with high humidity.
Need a Pest Control Estimate?
Are Woodlouse Spiders Poisonous?
If handled, the woodlouse hunter spider may be capable of inflicting a bite, but they do not possess venom that poses any danger to humans. These spiders are not aggressive and will not bite unless they’re threatened or handled. A woodlouse spider bite is less painful than a bee sting and, for the most part, does not cause any medical problems. The most common symptom when people have been bitten by this spider is slight itchiness at the site of the bite. As with all spiders, it’s imperative to seek help from a medical professional if you experience any concerning symptoms.
Need to Get Rid of Woodlouse Spiders?
When it comes to dealing with spiders, it’s important to be cautious. While most spiders are harmless and want nothing to do with you, they can occasionally bite. At Rentokil, we know how distressing spiders can be—especially for those who fear these pests. If you need help identifying a woodlouse spider or need tips on getting rid of them, contact us today!
Woodlouse Spider in Salt Lake County and Northern Utah
Serving Northern Utah and Southern Idaho since 1999