Early signs and symptoms of diabetesFrequent urination. When your blood sugar level is high, your kidneys expel excess sugar from your blood, causing you to urinate more often. . The most common early signs of type 2 diabetes are frequent urination, extreme thirst, and persistent hunger.
However, there are other symptoms that can alert you to this disease. A diagnosis can be life-changing, but type 2 diabetes is very manageable if detected early. According to some estimates, diabetes rates among American adults exceed 10%, and the chances that you or someone you know will have diabetes are high. The question is, could you have diabetes without knowing it? Unlike other medical conditions, the initial signs of diabetes can be as subtle as the need to drink more water than usual.
The early signs of diabetes are quite subtle and may not be recognized by most people. Fortunately, if you know what to look for, the warning signs of diabetes can give you time to avoid the most damaging symptoms of this disease, such as diabetic neuropathy. Three of the first signs of diabetes you may notice are frequent urination, increased thirst, and unexplained hunger. As your body tries to cope with rising blood glucose levels, your kidneys must work harder to filter glucose, which means you'll have to urinate more often.
This, in turn, leads to dehydration, which explains why you are thirsty. The first signs of insulin resistance usually appear very slowly in people with high blood sugar levels. Blurred vision, increased urge to urinate, feeling hungry, extreme thirst, and a feeling of itchy and dry skin are warning signs that you may be in the early stages of type 2 diabetes. Some other signs may be more difficult to pinpoint.
For women, an increase in the frequency of urinary tract infections may be a sign of high blood sugar levels, but this is just one of the possible causes of a UTI. In the case of type 1 diabetes, unexplained weight loss and vomiting can also stem from a number of gastrointestinal conditions and diseases, including serious conditions such as cancer. Similarly, dry, itchy skin could be a sign that you're progressing through the stages of prediabetes, but there are also a number of other skin conditions that could be at play. Since the rates of prediabetes are almost three times higher than the number of confirmed cases of type 2 diabetes, the likelihood that you are at risk of developing diabetes or that you are already in the early stages of the disease is quite high.
Initial symptoms, such as frequent urination, may not seem alarming, but if they appear along with risk factors such as obesity, you should visit your healthcare provider as soon as possible. Frequent urination and excessive thirst, the telltale signs of type 2 diabetes, are usually mild and can easily be attributed to other factors. This is common in people with type 2 diabetes because insulin resistance is the main precursor to type 2 diabetes. The mood changes associated with type 2 diabetes usually appear along with other signs of diabetes, not on their own.
This serious complication can lead to diabetic coma and even death with either type of diabetes, although it is more common in type 2.Read on to learn about other symptoms that may be a sign of type 2 diabetes and how to start treatment as soon as possible. Dry mouth is one of the most common oral symptoms of diabetes, according to the National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases (NIDDKD). Type 2 diabetes is a common condition in which the body loses the ability to consume blood glucose, also known as blood sugar. .