Attitudes and behavior of minorities in Denizli, Isparta, Burdur and surrounding areas in the national struggle
Keywords: National Struggle, Minorities, Denizli, Isparta, Burdur
As it is known, no nation in the world has treated the minorities under their control as leniently as the Turks. There are many examples of this in history. After conquering Istanbul, Fatih did not interfere with the religion and conscience of the people of this place, nor did he release them in their economic activities. In fact, in 1461, the Armenian Bishop in Bursa invited Hovakim to Istanbul and gave him the title of" Patriarch", encouraged the Armenian community to settle in Istanbul, and provided various opportunities for their prosperity. As a matter of fact, he is the Armenian writer. In his work the Sultan and his People, published in New York in 1857, Oscanyan clearly states that the Armenians in the Ottoman Empire lived in economic prosperity and peace, becoming the most influential of the real. Minorities were not prevented from reaching high levels within the state wheel as well as in social life. The Armenian Noradonkian Effendi was the Minister of Foreign Affairs. The influence of the Greek Cypriots in Babylon was not to be underestimated. In spite of this, most of the minorities in Turkey, in the most depressing days of the state, formed various mischief-making centers in the country and did not stop to stand against the state. History is full of examples of this. In particular, the issue of "Orient" was brought up in the 19th.century. from the beginning, while the state was constantly at war with external enemies, it had to fight minorities on the one hand, which constitutes the most depressing period in Turkish history. In the years after World War II, the attitude of minorities towards the state emerged in the form of establishing secret associations or cooperating with the enemy or even openly engaging in armed struggle. It is possible to see such behavior of minorities in most parts of Anatolia, with some exceptions, during a remarkable period such as the national struggle when the Turkish nation is on the edge of existence or extinction.