Declawing a cat may appear to be as easy as clipping your cat’s nails. It is, however, serious surgery. A veterinarian amputates a portion of your little furry companions’ toes, from the last knuckle to the tip of the claw, by cutting through the joint. Scratching is an instinct for cats. It allows them to get some good stretching exercise while also relieving stress.
While playing, a cat may scratch you unintentionally. Alternatively, a cat may lash out with its claws. Onychectomy, or declawing surgery, is frequently chosen by a pet owner to prevent scratching injury to people or damage to things.
Your pet may be hesitant to move, climb up on objects, or behave grumpily. Some pain is to be anticipated. Pain after the declaw treatment should subside in younger cats within ten days, and lameness (limping) should recover within a week. This time range may get extended in senior cats.
Declawing does not treat the underlying problem that causes a cat to act aggressively. Therefore the risk of damage from biting persists. According to one study, nearly half of cats occasionally demonstrate aggressiveness toward individuals they know as well as strangers.
Complications are a possibility with this operation. The cat will be in pain immediately after being declawed. Veterinarians will prescribe medications to help manage the pain in the short term. Blood loss, edema, and infection are also possible.
According to one study, 42% of declawed cats experience long-term pain, and around a quarter of declawed cats hobble. The claws can regenerate in up to 15% of cases after surgery.
Once a cat has been declawed, you must only keep it indoors. The cat’s primary means of defense and climbing are gone when the claws get removed.
Some pet owners consider declawing to be their last resort before euthanizing a scratching cat. Before enrolling a cat up for the operation, the American Veterinary Medical Association “highly recommends” people to learn more about it. An owner may be unaware of regular scratching activity or the gravity of the procedure.
How Should A Newly Declawed Cat Be Cared For?
- Give Your Cat Pain Relievers Regularly:
Declawing your feline is a painful procedure that entails removing the claws and a portion of the bone from each of her front paws. Her discomfort will be better managed, allowing her to heal sooner and avoid future difficulties. Your veterinarian will prescribe pain medicine for at least a few days to keep your cat comfortable. It will use a skin patch, a tablet, or a liquid to administer these drugs. Even though she appears to be well, cats are pretty skilled at masking pain, so keep giving her the medication as instructed.
Follow these guidelines for administering medication to your cat.
Cats are notoriously difficult to medicate. You know the pain relievers will make your cat feel better, but she doesn’t seem to agree. If you’re not cautious, you could get scratched or bitten when attempting to give your cat a pain reliever—and so miss out on the prescription she requires. Here are a few tips to make the process go as smoothly as possible; consult your veterinarian if you still have difficulties giving your cat medication.
· Wrapping your cat in a towel like a burrito will reduce your chances of being bitten or scratched, as silly as it sounds.
· Put the tablet in a pill pocket, a delectable goodie with a hole in the center where the tablet would go. You won’t get bitten, and your cat will love the medication. If your cat isn’t interested in pill pockets, try a pill popper, which you can find at most pet stores.
· If you’re giving your cat liquid medication, place the syringe tip slightly past the front teeth and point it via the back of the mouth. Then, softly distribute the medicines in small increments, closing your cat’s mouth and gently blowing on its nose to encourage it to swallow.
- Make A Warm, Quiet, Enclosed Environment For Your Cat To Recuperate In:
Your cat’s feet will be sore, and the pain medication may make him disoriented or drowsy. Find her a quiet location away from pets and children to rest for 7-10 days. Give your cat food and water bowls, a litter box, attractive bedding, and amusing toys to make this small room more comfortable. A giant dog cage is an excellent alternative if confining your cat in a tight space isn’t an option. Try to keep your feline in an area where she won’t be tempted to climb or jump, as this could hurt her paws. If your cat leaps and you observe blood afterward, apply light pressure to the incision for 10 to 15 minutes with paper towels or facial tissues.
- Keep Your Cat’s Paws Clean At All Times:
After surgery, take care of your cat’s paws to keep them from becoming infected. Infection can develop if external things, like dirt or litter, enter into the surgical wounds. Paw infections are prevalent in newly declawed cats. There is no need to apply anything to the damages unless your veterinarian gave you an antibiotic ointment to take home with your cat. The incisions on your cat’s paws should be cared for by gently wiping them with a warm, soft towel.
- Several Times A Day, Inspect Your Cat’s Paws:
Keep an eye on your cat’s wounds to ensure that they heal correctly and do not become infected. Slight bleeding is common after surgery, but if it persists (e.g., the damage has opened and applying pressure hasn’t stopped the flow), contact your veterinarian. If there is any discharge from the injury, take the cat to the vet.
For Your Cat’s Litter Box, Choose A Soft, Fine Litter:
Many cats find it difficult to use the litter box following declawing surgery because they are accustomed to scooping litter over waste with their front paws. It’s usually painful to do this after surgery, especially if the debris is gritty or has jagged edges, as some clay and crystal litters have. If you typically use coarse waste, consider clumping litter instead—its softness and fine texture should be gentler on your cat’s delicate feet. For newly declawed cats, urinating and defecating outside the litter box is a typical problem, and using the correct garbage during recovery can help avoid this.
If possible, give your cat a few days or more with the new litter before surgery. It might not want to use it otherwise. Cats are creatures who stick to their routines! If you prefer to use a specific kind of litter for your cat, don’t worry about switching to this new sort of litter forever. You only need to change scraps for as long as your cat is recovering from surgery, usually 10 to 14 days.