St Paul's Catholic Primary School
A Voluntary Academy
Aspire not to have more but to be more – St Oscar Romero
We are continuing with our Read, Write Inc videos. Please do try and watch them every day to practise the sounds and word blending skills.
Today's lesson details are below:
Set 1 speed sounds - today's sound is ng
Set 1 word time
Set 1 spellings
Set 2 speed sounds - today's sound is oo 'look at a book'
Set 2 spellings
If you're child has completed Set 2 sounds - please keep revising the sounds, but if they are confident with these they can complete Red words 1 lessons and hold a sentence 1 lessons. If they are really confident they can begin to join in with the Set 3 lessons.
Set 3 lesson - today's sound is oa
Below are the links to two books from Oxford Owl to choose the most suitable for your child to read. If they have been reading the Ditty sheets then have a go at the Red Ditty book - practise the speed sounds and green and red words first then read the short story. You can take it in turns to read the sentences whilst your child builds up enough stamina to read the whole story. If your child was reading the Red Ditty stories before half term and would like a slightly trickier challenge please move onto the Green level book. They work in exactly the same way as the Red books so do practise the green and red words before reading the story.
If there are any problems with the links during the day please google www.oxfordowl.co.uk and use the class login to sign in - make sure you are on the 'student' tab when you use the login details and click on e books and read write inc books - the books are then there to choose from also.
If your child is still finding blending tricky you can also access the sound blending books there for another practise.
Please practise writing some letters today - remember to use the Read, Write Inc rhymes to help you form the letters correctly. You can do this on paper, whiteboard, in flour, or shaving foam or you might like to go outside and use chalk. If you don't have chalk but it is dry you can use water and a paintbrush to draw the letters too! I hope you enjoy trying one of these ideas.
Today's lesson is looking at representing and sorting 9 and 10. Watch the video and have a go at the activity.
Today's lesson is comparing numbers within 50. Watch the video and pause at the points to complete the worksheet.
Afternoon topic activities
We are continuing to learn about Africa and will be introducing our new story focus for this half term. Please follow the link below to choose from our topic activities.