this is a game every parent in India must encourage their children to play. ‘Safety
and Mobility for All,’ is an educational game designed to increase awareness of
children ages seven to twelve to road safety and sustainable mobility. The game
is now available in a digital version.
initiative, according to a press release, will help achieve the United Nations’
objective of cutting the number of road fatalities in half by 2020.
in 2000, the worldwide “Safety and Mobility for All” programme is the most extensive
campaign to raise road safety awareness ever conducted by an automobile
manufacturer.The "Safety and mobility for all" programme has been
expanded this year with a new educational section. This involves a serious game
for children ages seven to twelve years. You need not send your children out on
the roads to play the game. It is designed to be played within the confines of
one’s home with the family. It can also be played in a classroom or in
extracurricular activities as part of educational programmes on the themes of
road safety and environmental protection.
are two characters in the game, Léa and Jules. The two participate in the big
transport contest organised by their school and have three assignments. They
must organise –
trips, such as those between home and school;
trips in small groups, to go the country, for example; and
trips in a larger group, like a class trip at the end of the school year.
these role-playing exercises the children learn to travel about safely and get
an introduction to the driving code. They have to recognise the shapes and colours
of signs, understand lanes and the direction of traffic and also taking into
account weather conditions, etc..
playing the game must rely on their capacity for observation, their critical
faculties, and their team spirit. While playing, they also discover various
aspects of sustainable mobility such as the use of soft transport, car-pooling,
electric vehicles, renewable energies, and recycling of materials. There can be
no better learning than this.
Martin, vice president, Corporate Social Responsibility, Renault explains that
the expanding population, increasing urbanisation and steadily growing
automobile fleet contribute to a situation where the number of people injured
and killed on the world’s roads continues to be very high. He stated that 70pc of
the 20 to 50 million annual victims are vulnerable road users, among them many
children and teenagers.
felt that an awareness could be spread through this interactive game inspired
by the Safety and Mobility for All programme.
“Safety and Mobility for All,” developed
exclusively for Renault by Terra Project1, is free and available on http://www.safety-mobility-for-all-the-game.com