An Insight into Sanitizing Food Contact Surfaces
About 10 percent of the population gets contaminated with tainted food annually. With all the foodborne diseases it is essential to understand how the food surfaces should be disinfected.
Disinfection Service in terms of "Food-contact surfaces" implies something specifically connected to foodstuffs, including cutting tools and other utensils such as pans, panels, and trim boards.
Cleanliness is a major component of the customer experience when it comes to foodservice. The cleanliness of the front of your restaurant or house can make a lasting impression for many visitors who visit your area, which can affect how they view your restaurant, house, or your organization Cleaning Company in Singaporen as a whole. Office Cleaning as well as House Cleaning is a major sector where it is vital to always keep the area sanitized. Cleaning Company in Singapore
Effective sanitation decreases the risk of harmful bacteria or viruses. Appropriate cleaning supplies and disinfectants to be used in the house or organizations are necessary, but to optimize safety you need to use them properly.
The proper purification and sanitization of food contact surfaces include the following steps in a particular order.
Continue to read the three steps on food surface disinfection and sanitization so that they remain germ-free:
Start with Cleaning the Food surface
The first step starts with a thorough cleaning of the food surface. Begin with wiping the surface with any visible dirt or debris. Then apply a good food-grade disinfectant with a cloth.
A clean surface is vital for the process of sanitization, where the sanitizer needs to perform its job of removing pathogens to provide a cleaner, organic surface, and residue from the cleaning solution.
Wash the Surface
The next step is to rinse or wash the food surface with clean water. Any residue left by the cleaner can be removed with a damp cloth. Make sure you use hot water, as any leftover debris is best removed.
Sanitizing the Surface
The final step is the most important i.e to sanitize the food surface. This usually involves reducing the bacteria present on the surfaces. Washing the surface with water is always a good choice whenever the contact period has been reached, before sanitizing the area.
As per the policy standards of the FDA guidelines, one must allow an area to drain or air dry after sanitizing before it may come into contact with food.
Precautions and Measures to keep in Mind
When you are in the process of cleaning and sanitizing a food contact surface, several measures have to be taken carefully. Some of these are listed below:
Always remember the proper sequence of the steps while sanitizing, i.e cleaning, rinsing, and then sanitizing.
There are certain conditions for sanitizing food surfaces. If we talk about a restaurant, before the cook starts dealing with another kind of food, washing and sanitizing must be done thoroughly. The same goes for an office or a residence. The office pantries and house kitchens must be cleaned and sanitized properly with good quality and eco-friendly sanitizers.
The sanitizers you are working with must be EPA approved, All sanitizing chemicals must be licensed by the Environmental Protection Agency. The manufacturer of sanitizers also needs evidence to support their statements on how well they perform. They must meet a strict level of quality and be licensed for use on food contact surfaces.
Get high-quality services from the Best House Cleaning contact us for any type of disinfection and sanitizing services.