“Fine, I’ll take 1,200, but we can’t exactly provide any extra services for that price. And once we reach Rodia, you’re on your own. We won’t be ferrying you all about the planet.”

Goreth gave the human his best piercing glare. “I expect to land in Iskaayuma City. Don’t try and dump me in some random port.”

“We’ll get you to Iskaayuma.”

“Good. I’ll need no further assistance from there.”

“Then you’ve got yourself a ship. Find me at Docking Bay 21 in four hours.”

Goreth downed his drink and left the smelly pub. He wouldn’t trust this Han Solo character to bag groceries honestly, but he was scraping the bottom of the barrel now. Nobody else was willing to take him to Rodia for anything resembling an affordable price. He had been left with no choice but to hope the Empire didn’t decide to search Solo’s ship for the drugs or guns he was no doubt smuggling.

Approaching Docking Bay 21 several hours later, Goreth assumed his best intimidation expression. Though just as peaceful by nature as most of his people, Goreth knew he cut an imposing figure. His horns put his height well over two meters. His scowl sent most beings running. These years on Sullust had forced him to use the tools of intimidation with depressing regularity. His distinct lack of funds had occasionally forced him to go further. He disliked violence, but he knew how to use it.

Certainly, he was not going to let this Han Solo dictate any revisions to their deal. The dock’s door slid open and Goreth was met not with the dishonest human’s pink face but the huge hairy form of a Wookiee staring down at him. The creature wailed a greeting at him but made no effort to look less menacing. 

"So much for my plan of playing top brute on this trek," Goreth thought.

The Wookiee led him up the ramp of the dilapidated YT-1300 freighter. It was one of the endless parades of Corellian designs that couldn’t carry a meaningful amount of cargo but were ideal for drugs, explosives, and spies. 

"Fine," Goreth thought. "I can deal with that as long as I get where I’m going."
