Electrical engineering is a professional engineering discipline that generally deals with the study and application of electricity, electronics, and electromagnetism.
At EIU, we will prepare electrical engineers to make a difference in the world through their technical abilities, knowledge and creativity.
Electrical Engineering is one specialty of Engineering. People often think that the job of an electrical engineer is to design and develop new electrical systems, but they can do so much more.
In the big picture, they study and apply the physics and mathematics of electricity, electromagnetism and electronics to a variety of systems in order to solve many real-life issues in this technological world. They are involved in design and construction of faster and smarter computer systems, optimizing the efficiency of large-scale power grids, design and construction of the power system, the electronics of electric automobiles, operation and placement of cell phone towers, and much more.
The tools of the engineer are science and mathematics, but engineering also involves creativity and art, making models, and using approximations.
Introductory science and math classes in the Electrical Engineering program typically have about 25 students, and advanced courses in Physics and Engineering will typically have about 12 students.
The faculty of the Electrical Engineering program are committed to undergraduate education. All of the faculty in the Electrical Engineering program hold PhDs in Engineering or Physics. The classes and labs are almost all taught by faculty, not graduate students. You will have ample opportunity to interact directly with faculty who are committed to your education.
EIU has research and teaching facilities for Electrical Engineering that are designed for student success. The electronics lab is fully integrated for a wide range of measurement capabilities, and students can fabricate electronic devices. We have a variety of research projects available that give students experience solving real-world problems and pushing the frontiers of science.
EIU has partnered with nearby companies to offer internships that will give our students direct experience in Electrical Engineering. The internship is a capstone experience to help them mature into professionals in the field.
"My research concentrates in Theoretical Physics and Astrophysics: compact X-ray sources, neutron stars, physics of accretion, Coulomb collisions in strong magnetic field, radiation processes in strong magnetic field, radiative transfer, numerical hydrodynamics."
“I find lasers and optics fascinating. Recently I have been studying the polarization of light. In particular polarized light is expected to be transmitted by a polarizer aligned parallel to the direction of polarization. A crossed polarizer should block the light. However, what happens if the light does not impinge on the polarizer perpendicular to the surface? It may seem like this is a simple problem of geometry, but it is much more difficult than that."
Research interests include: Cyber Security, Biometrics, Data Telecommunications, Applied Statistics, System Simulation, Quality Design
Physical Sciences Building
Eastern Illinois University 600 Lincoln Ave
Charleston, IL 61920