Did you know that over 120 million Americans are missing at least one tooth? If you are amongst this group, you are truly not alone. Thankfully, there are options for you to replace a missing tooth or teeth. One of the best options available to solve this problem are dental implants.
Dental implants are made to look as close as possible to your natural teeth. They also function like your natural teeth do. We understand that you might have some questions about how dental implants work so we have compiled some information for you below.
What Are Dental Implants?
Dental implants are a titanium post with a dental crown that are used to replace the missing tooth from its root. The titanium post provides a strong foundation for your new replacement tooth.
In addition to re-establishing your original smile, dental implants also improve your bone density and bone health. Everytime you chew with your new tooth, the action stimulates bone growth in the jaw.
How Do Dental Implants Work?
There are three parts that compose a dental implant.
- The implanted titanium post which is similar in aesthetics to a screw
- The abutment that goes on top of the titanium post
- The dental crown which will look and feel like your tooth
In order for the new tooth to be secure, the titanium post is embedded into the jawbone. The post works as your former root and it is placed on the healthy part of the jawbone to ensure it stays there safely. The post is made of titanium so that it can integrate with bone without being recognized as a foreign object by your body.
What Can You Expect During Your Dental Implants Procedure?
We understand that you want to preserve your smile and dental health so before the dental implants procedure takes place, we will do a full dental exam. This will help us identify if there are any underlying health issues that could cause problems later on for either the implants or your overall dental health.
Once it is established that your jawbone is healthy and ready to receive the implant, we can safely begin. The first step is then to numb the area where the new tooth will be inserted. When the anesthetic takes effect, a small hole will be drilled in the jawbone where the titanium post will be screwed in. The implant will have to heal before proceeding with a second surgery to attach the abutment and the new tooth.
How Long Does the Dental Implants Recovery Take?
There are two recovery stages when it comes to dental implants. These are the recovery after the titanium post is implanted and the recovery after the abutment and crown are inserted. The titanium post recovery is the longest and lasts multiple months. Once your jaw heals, the second minor surgery takes place and the abutment and dental crown are inserted. The second recovery is much shorter than the first!
It is also important to remember that recovery varies from person to person. There are many factors that are involved in healing, one of them being the number of implants you will be getting. We want to provide you with answers that are specific to your dental needs. We would be delighted to welcome you to our office and discuss these details with you. Please contact our team to book an appointment with us.