Federal Information Security Management Act
FISMA abbreviated as Federal Information Security Management Act. It is a executed in December 17, 2002 and enacted by the 107the United Sates Congress. It is introduced in the House by Thomas M. Davis on March 5,2002. It is passed by the House and senate without any objection and signed by President George W. Bush. Hence it is regulated by government. It is enacted when the importance of information security recognized which is in the interests of economic and national security of United States. The Title III of Federal Information Security Management act (FISMA) impose compulsion to every federal agency to develop, document and apply the security program for the information systems to protect the information and other assets from cybercrime. FISMA is responsible to assign duties to federal agencies, Office of management and Business and the National Institute of Standards and Technology(NIST). The NIST is government agency that is non-regulatory. It is responsible to develop technology metric and guidelines. Federal agencies or government organizations which comply with NIST, may also further ensure compliance with FISMA as NIST guidelines directs organizations to comply with FISMA. NIST has provide some rules to move towards FISMA compliance.
We will analyze the current and the previous administrations approaches to cyber security and analyze how each administrations succeeded in different areas and what enhancements required for the economic and information security of United States. We will also see how they enunciated them alongside the activities of people around them that mirror their needs give extraordinary understanding into the inward reasoning of the Administrations. Through an intelligent and top to bottom investigation of these issues we can see the zones in which the Administrations have enhanced digital security and give proposal on the best way to keep on improving.
Key Current Administration’s Cyber Security Tenets:
The Current Administration has plainly outlined the needs of the Administration through an assortment of talks, Executive Orders, Presidential Policy Directives, Security Frameworks, and strategy surveys . These activities are essential as cybersecurity touches every texture of our general public and one zone not concentrating on their associations cybersecurity has a considerably more extensive effect than simply that association . As the cyber risk has kept on developing all through the Current Administration it was key that they verbalize what their needs are to tending to cybersecurity.