Based on many research studies, we can say that the health benefits of music are proven. For example, music can help improve your IQ score and sharpen your mind as you age. Below are 8 proven benefits of listening to your favorite music. Read on to find out more.
1) Listen to music to be happy
When you listen to your favorite music, your brain releases dopamine. And that’s the chemical that makes you happier when released. Staying happy is important for your physical and mental health.
2) Better mileage
If you are a runner, you can improve your running performance by listening to music before you run. It is better to choose motivating music for this purpose.
3) Less stress
Listening to music can lower levels of cortisone, which is a stress hormone. According to a study, people experienced better immunity after participating in singing and playing instruments.
On a stressful day, you can listen to the radio to calm down and enjoy the healing effects of music.
4) Improved sleep
Another study found that those who listened to music for at least 30 minutes before going to bed slept better than those who did nothing before bed. We know that sleep is of the utmost importance to all of us, especially those who have to study or do office work. Sleep deprivation can also cause many other health problems.
5) Reduced depression
According to statistics, more than 350 million people suffer from depression and 9 out of 10 suffer from insomnia. Research studies have found that listening to music can help you reduce your depression symptoms to stay calm and peaceful.
6) Better mood
While driving, music can help you improve your focus and mood. According to studies, music can have a positive effect on mood, which is important for a safe driving experience. Nothing works without a good mood. Also, bad mood while driving can cause an accident.
7) Better learning and memory
Many research studies have found that listening to music can improve your memory and learning. The volunteers who took part in the study performed better after listening to music. On the other hand, other participants showed slower learning and weaker memory.
8) Improved verbal intelligence
According to a study, 9 out of 10 children could better understand different words and the number of their meanings. Another study found that participants performed much better after listening to music.
The ages of these children were 4 and 10. Therefore, we can say that music can help improve children’s verbal intelligence.
In short, you can see that there are many benefits to listening to music. In fact, music is an effective international language that is provided based on many research studies. Therefore, if you are a student or learner in any field, you can benefit from listening to your favorite music tracks.
Thanks to Shalini M | #benefits #listening #music