Gum Disease Treatment in Federal Way, WA
Gum disease begins with a bacterial growth that causes destruction to the gums, ligaments, and bone in the mouth. If the plaque is not removed by flossing, brushing, and regular dental checkups at our Federal Way dental office, it will continue to build up and create toxins that can damage the gums.
Gum disease has two stages: gingivitis and periodontitis.
Gingivitis is inflammation of the gums that causes irritation, redness, and swelling to the gums. At this stage, the disease is treatable and can usually be eliminated by daily brushing and flossing. If left untreated, gingivitis can lead to gum disease called periodontitis.
Periodontitis is a gum infection that causes destruction to the ligaments and bone that support the teeth and it can lead to tooth loss if not treated.
Gum Disease Causes
Gum disease or periodontal disease is mainly caused by plaque buildup. However, many other factors contribute to periodontal disease.
Risk factors for gum disease include:
- Systemic conditions (diabetes mellitus, cancer, HIV, heart disease, osteoporosis)
- Tobacco use
- Hormonal changes
- Poor oral hygiene
- Family history of gum disease
Gum Disease Treatment
To treat periodontal disease, Dr. Dang and our team thoroughly deep clean the pockets around the teeth removing plaque, calculus build-up, and bacteria from the teeth surfaces that will allow the gums and ligaments of the tissues to reattach and heal. This procedure usually takes a few appointments at our Federal Way dental office depending on how many teeth are treated. In some cases, further surgical treatment may be necessary.
Gum Disease Prevention
The best way to treat gum disease is to avoid developing it in the first place. To prevent gum disease, start with good habits on a daily routine. We highly recommend brushing teeth twice a day and to floss daily. Also, talk to Dr. Dang or your hygienist about your risks of developing gum disease. We can recommend personalized solutions based on your unique needs.
At Federal Way Family Dental, we are passionate about preventing gum disease. We would like to team up with you to help you restore your oral health and to prevent any future damage to your gums and bone. We do thorough professional dental cleanings and strive to accomplish comfortable care while using the latest treatments and technology with numbing options and ultrasonic scalers.