A shade net house structure made of wood, pipes, bamboo, iron rods, and other similar materials is known as a net house. The moniker “net home” comes from the fact that the entire structure is internet-connected. Keep in mind that the shade net is different from the one we use at home. The strings are well-crafted and constructed completely of polyethylene, and they are robust enough to screen UV radiation from the sun. The net also acts as a vermin and bird repellent.
Because Delhi’s population is rapidly increasing, the demand for net housing is increasing by the day, even as agricultural land is depleting. People can produce plants in natural settings, but in some parts of Delhi, the environment is so hostile that humans are unable to grow food. Net homes are in high demand as demand for vegetables and fruits rises, as this is the only method to ensure that people will have adequate food in the near future. Plants are severely harmed when they are exposed to too much sunlight. To avoid this, the net home is the superior option. The net home alone would be in high demand in Delhi in a few years. Shade net house project nets are estimated to use more than 20% of the fibers produced in India’s textile sector. Consider the entire globe for a moment.
The ability to alter the net house price based on the weather and maintain a temperature that is acceptable for plants is one of the primary reasons for the surge in demand. In net house farming, crop yields are significantly easier to achieve.
Delhi farmers have been employing this ground-breaking technology for vegetable growth and output. According to research, farmers can produce 2-3 times more vegetables with net house technology than they can with traditional vegetable farming. The market potential of Delhi, India, is demonstrated in this study. Although it is initially more expensive, this vegetable planning technique is unrivaled when considering the long-term benefits.
Farmers who employ net house technology can make significantly more money than those who use the traditional plantation technique. It enables growth in all-weather circumstances, as well as better yields and higher quality vegetable production because it provides ideal microenvironment conditions for vegetable plants. It also requires less watering as well as improved pest and bird control. There will be no water shortages, irrigation expenditures, or fertilizer and chemical waste as a result of this. As a result, a little initial investment might pay off handsomely in the long run.
A net house may be used to raise a variety of vegetables, fruits, and other plants and earn a higher profit in Delhi or any other state. Here’s a list of vegetables that Zeelco Farms can help you produce in your state, along with an estimate of how much money you can make.
Cucumbers grown in net house farms have a crop cycle of 90 to 100 days, with harvest beginning 45 to 50 days after planting, depending on the location. You can grow up to 12000 plants, but due to plant mortality of roughly 1000, you’ll only get about 11000 productive plants. Because not all plants are capable of growing in the manner that we desire. Each plant can produce around 3 kilograms, and the average cucumber price per kilogram is 15 INR, resulting in total production of 33,000 kilograms. As a consequence, the season’s gross profit will be around 4,95,000 INR. At least three seasons can be experienced in a year. Cucumber’s overall revenue for the year is expected to be around $14,950,000.
Green Capsicum has a 279–290-day crop cycle, with production starting after 45–50 days, depending on the location. You can grow up to 12000 plants, but due to plant mortality of roughly 1000, you’ll only get about 11000 productive plants. Because not all plants are capable of growing in the manner that we desire. Green Capsicum plants may produce about 3 kg per plant, with an average price per kilogram of 30 INR, resulting in a total production of 33,000 kg. As a consequence, each season’s gross profit will be around 9,90,000 INR.
Tomatoes have a 120-150 day crop cycle, with harvest beginning 45–50 days after planting, depending on your location. You can grow up to 12000 plants, but due to plant mortality of roughly 1000, you’ll only get about 11000 productive plants. Because not all plants are capable of growing in the manner that we desire. Each plant may yield about 7 kilograms, and the average cost per kilogram for tomatoes is 30 INR, resulting in a total yield of 77,000 kg. As a consequence, each season’s gross profit will be around 7,77,000 INR.
Depending on the agricultural zone, the betel leaf (Pan) has a 15-year crop cycle, with production commencing after 180 days. You can produce 50,000 plants. However, due to plant mortality of roughly 5000, you’ll only get about 45000 productive plants. Because not all plants are capable of growing in the manner that we desire. For betel leaf (Pan), each plant may produce about 30 leaves at an average rate of 75 paise per leaf, resulting in total production of 13,50,000 leaves. As a consequence, the gross profit for the year will be around 10,12,500 INR. You may compute the revenue on your own because this crop has a 15-year cycle. Is there anything else that needs to be stated regarding the 15-year total?