NIH Doctor Says Vaccines 'Not A Very Good Match' For Common Flu Strain
The country's top infectious disease doctor says this year's vaccine is only a 58% match for influenza B/Victoria, which most often affects kids.
The National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases is reporting that this year's flu vaccine is "not a very good match" for children. That's according to the agency's director, Dr. Anthony Fauci.
According to CDC data, the vaccine is only a 58% match for the influenza strain B/Victoria, which most often affects children. This means that a child who has received this year's flu vaccine still has a pretty decent chance of getting the virus — at least 42%.
However, Fauci said the vaccine could still help protect kids from developing other complications. He has also advocated for the development of a "universal flu vaccine" that could potentially guard against every strain of the flu over multiple seasons.
Flu season typically begins in October, and this one has been particularly rough, especially for kids. The CDC has received reports of at least 32 influenza-associated pediatric deaths during the 2019-2020 flu season.
The agency reports that the flu has killed more children at this time of the season than at any other time since 2004, when the CDC first began collecting pediatric death data. The only exception to this was during the swine flu pandemic in 2009 and 2010.
The CDC recommends that everyone 6 months and older receive a seasonal flu shot. But it says some children aged 6 months to 8 years may need two doses at least four weeks apart for "adequate protection."
Contains footage from CNN
Remote fitness classes are helping seniors in rural areas in U.S.
Due to the pandemic, a lot of health classes transitioned from in-person to remote delivery, improving access to better health outcomes.
How you can clean the air to protect yourself from COVID
People can remove harmful aerosol particles, like the virus that causes COVID, from the air on their own terms.
1.7 tons of beef recalled in 9 states over E. coli concerns
The recall affects beef products shipped to Connecticut, Illinois, Indiana, Maryland, Massachusetts, Michigan, New Jersey, New York, and Pennsylvania.
Senate committee says bank 'complicit' in tax evasion by wealthy
A Senate investigation accused Credit Suisse of concealing dozens of accounts of Americans with more than $20 million in assets.
Community in anguish remembers Nashville school shooting victims
Scripps News is learning more about the six victims killed in the shooting at The Covenant School.
FDA approves over-the-counter sales of Narcan
Narcan can reverse overdoses of opioids, including street drugs such as heroin and fentanyl, and prescription versions including oxycodone.