The Diversity, Equity & Inclusion Council put together a list of resources for faculty and staff on the importance of diversity and how to be more inclusive.
TWU's Center for Faculty Excellence DEI Resources
Resources and training for inclusive pedagogy.
Audio series on how slavery transformed America and examines the shadow of American slavery.
American Council on Education: Talk About Race with Beverly Daniel Tatum and Robin DiAngelo
A discussion on the role of race in the US and on college campuses. Educates on how university leaders can engage communities on race and closing equity gaps.
Anti-Defamation League Glossary of Diversity Terms
Terms and definitions relating to diversity, equity and inclusion.
Anti-Racism Resources by Fractured Atlas
Resources for white people on how to talk about race and anti-racism.
University-specific conversations related to diversit and inclusion.
Resources and best practices on diversity and inclusion in the workplace.
A podcast discussing diversity, equity and inclusion. Each episode covers a different topic and explores the latest research.
Harvard Implicit Association Test
Knowing your implicit biases is the first step to breaking free of them. Harvard's implicit bias test helps you discover your implicit associations about race, gender, sexual orientation and more.
Human Rights Campaign Resources
Resources from LGBTQ activists on issue faced by the LGBTQ community and how you can be an ally.
Independent Sector: Why DEI Matters
This article covers the foundational understanding of diversity issues.
Toolkits and guides on diversity and inclusion relating to the LGBTQ community.
Society for Human Resource Management (SHRM) diversity tools.
Wharton Leading Diversity Series
Insights on navigating diverse organizational settings.
Blog posting on the basics of what diversity, equity and inclusion are.
United Way Denton County Racial Equity Education Resources
Find resources, including articles and lectures, to build your racial equity muscle with United Way of Denton County.
NERCHE Self-Assessment Rubric for the Institutionalization of Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion in Higher Education.
Find events, training and resources to build a more diverse workplace and inclusive society.
Diversity, equity and inclusion insights into efficient and practical solutions for the workplace.
Page last updated 4:42 PM, January 3, 2023