Education should only be concerned with what is useful in life. Discuss.
Education is championed to be the solution of many prevailing problems society is facing today. An overarching view of education can be seen as a way in which people gain knowledge, information and understanding, and learn new skills. One can safely say that the breadth and depth of what can be learned cannot be finished in a lifetime and thus it often forces educators to sieve out and choose areas that are deemed useful in society today. Yet, it must also be recognized that usefulness, as defined by society, is subjected to constant change, due to ever-evolving contexts and perspectives. Hence education cannot be allowed to only be concerned with what is deemed …show more content…
But a farmer’s son may not always remain farmer. In this world where time and change are perhaps the only constants, it would be perceptive if individuals learn to see possibilities and not be bounded by circumstances, consequently allowing themselves to gain sufficient access to the rest of the world. There have been many individuals who have gone beyond the realms of what society deemed to be their life thanks to the education they have allowed themselves to receive. Joan of Arc was an illiterate female and though she knew nothing about warfare, she led the French army to victory in the 15th century as she claimed to be guided by visions of saints. Though Beethoven became deaf at a young age, it did not prevent him from composing some of the greatest music of all time. In our century, Nick Vujicic was born without limbs, but teaches people all around the world how to get up. The common thread running through such inspirations was the learning they allowed themselves to experience, eventually allowing them to achieve more than what their backgrounds had predicted they would, proving the pertinence of an education beyond what is useful in life.
Furthermore, though the significance in learning one’s culture appears to hold little or no perceivable utility, it is one of the most important forms of education anyone can receive. Embracing one’s culture not only allows the upholding of legacy but also serves as a moral compass that directs