HELLLLLLLLO! Welcome to the Colosseum tonight, Ladies and Gentlemen! Do we have a show for you tonight!? 
The main event is between two of the best soldiers from overseas! They fight not with their weapons, because their limbs are lethal weapons. Both are experts at hand to hand combat! Crazy I tell you, CRAZY!
Let's welcome them to the main stage! 
First up, from the country Wa from overseas! A man with a savage taste for action. He is always looking for the next fight. He defeated many of our soldiers with ease, let's welcome the Red Belt, Kai!
His opponent, from the foreign land of Kan-el, is a man with a thirst for knowledge. He easily knocked out half of our force with pure skill and strategy! Let's welcome him, from the land of Kan-el, One-Eye Horus!

Now, gentlemen, this match is decided by knocking your opponent over the edge into the waters below. BUT! There is an alternate win condition. This match is no holds barred! Once your opponent is knocked out, you win the duel! We're not savages, by the way. Do not kill your opponent. There will be a referee watching from each gate so no funny business! Now that all the legal mumbo jumbo is out of the way, we know what the fans in the audience are here for! Can you hear them cheering for violence!? There is a grand show just waiting in THREE! TWO! ONE! AND GO!

And we're off! Kai dashes straight toward Horus! He wants to end this fight quickly! He starts with a right punch that Horus blocked immediately and there's the counterattack from Horus! This is the martial arts that took out 90% of our army! The flurry of punches from Kai and Horus is getting pushed back like a cornered animal. He needs to strike back as soon as possible. He can't handle this pressure! Oh? Is Horus now going on the offense? Whoa! His punches are more savage than Kai's! Kai is attempting to block but he's taking major damage! Did Horus unlock a new skill? What perfect timing, as now Horus is on the offense! He's not letting Kai get away! Kai is faster than Horus though, so soon enough, speed may be the deciding factor in this clash!
