The Cambridge American Cemetery and Memorial site in England, 30.5 acres in total, was donated by the University of Cambridge. It lies on a slope with the west and south sides framed by woodland. The cemetery contains the remains of 3,811 of our war dead; 5,127 names are recorded on the Walls of the Missing. Rosettes mark the names of those since recovered and identified. Most died in the Battle of the Atlantic or in the strategic air bombardment of northwest Europe.
From the flagpole platform near the main entrance, the great mall with its reflecting pools stretches eastward. It is from the mall that the wide, sweeping curve of the burial area across the lawn is best appreciated. Along the south side are the Walls of the Missing, and at the far end is the memorial with a chapel, two huge military maps, stained glass windows bearing the state seals and military decorations, and a mosaic ceiling memorial honoring the dead of our air forces.
A new, 4,000-square-foot center visitor center opened in May 2014. Through interpretive exhibits that incorporate personal stories, photographs, films, and interactive displays, visitors will gain a better understanding of this critical campaign that contributed to the Allied victory in Europe during World War II.
Cambridge American Cemetery and Memorial
Coton CB23 7PH
A new, 4,000-square-foot center visitor center opened in May 2014. Through interpretive exhibits that incorporate personal stories, photographs, films, and interactive displays, visitors will gain a better understanding of this critical campaign that contributed to the Allied victory in Europe during World War II. Interactive displays in the visitor center include the Battle of the Atlantic and Americans in Great Britain.
The demands of World War II called again upon American youth to defend the liberties of free peoples. Young Americans lost their lives long before Pearl Harbor, as merchant seaman rallied to the British cause in the Battle of the Atlantic and American Eagle Squadrons joined the Royal Air Force in the skies above Britain.
Once the United States entered the war in December 1941, air, ground, and naval forces streamed into Britain. The Eighth Air Force made Britain its home, striking enemy targets in Europe from August 1942 to May 1945. More than 220,000 Americans were stationed here until 75 percent were sent to battle in North Africa, starting in November 1942. Campaigns to liberate North Africa, Sicily, and Italy governed troop commitments over the next year.
The mid-1943 decision to launch the cross-Channel invasion at Normandy in 1944 renewed the buildup in Britain—the “Friendly Invasion.” By June 6, 1944, 1.6 million Americans lived here. Within three months of D-Day, 1.2 million had surged into battle on the continent.
The U.S. commitment to liberty and democracy brought more than 3 million Americans to the British Isles in World War II. Separated by a common language, we learned about each other. Relationships built then remain strong in the 21st Century. Cambridge American Cemetery became a symbol of our nation’s sacrifice and a sacred meeting place to recall our mutual past.
Cambridge American Cemetery is situated three miles west of the university city of Cambridge, England.
Travel via Car:
Travel north from London on the motorway M11. Leave at junction 13 and turn left onto road A1303.
From the north-west (Peterborough) on A14 stay in lane for A1307. Leave dual carriageway and at the first roundabout turn right and stay on A1307. After the next roundabout turn left to Madingley. Drive through village, straight across the next roundabout. Carry on to final roundabout and turn left onto A1303.
From the east on the A14. Stay in lane for A428. Leave road at Hardwick junction; cross A428 and re-join eastbound. Take exit for A1303.
Travel via Train:
Cambridge may be reached by train from the King's Cross and Liverpool Street stations. Travel time is about one hour.
Travel via Airplane:
London is about 60 miles from the cemetery and is served by Heathrow and Gatwick airports. Within a 30 minute drive of the cemetery are two other international airports – Stansted and Luton.
Travel via Public Transportation:
Taxis are available at the Cambridge rail station. And the No. 4 service bus and the City Sightseeing Hop On Hop Off bus also stop and pick up directly at the cemetery gates.
Hotels are available in Cambridge.
For those who may need special parking, wheelchair accessibility, etc., learn more about the accessibility of Cambridge American Cemetery.
Free Visitor Services:
All visitor services at Cambridge American Cemetery are completely free. Entry is free. Group tours are available for free. To schedule a group tour, contact the cemetery.
News & Events
The 4,000-square-foot center will honor the men and women who participated in the Battle of the Atlantic, the Strategic Air Campaign, and the build-up to the D-Day Normandy invasion.
Experience the history of World War II through a new interactive timeline. View maps, watch videos, see photos and read about the events that shaped the war.