There are three types of fire suppression systems: Dry chemical fire suppression systems, Foam deluge systems, and Halon-based systems. First, we’ll discuss some differences. Then, read on to discover what makes each type better. Then, you’ll have an easier time deciding when you’ll choose a fire protection systems NYC for your business or home.
Dry chemical fire suppression systems
A dry chemical fire suppression system is an integral part of a business’s safety plan. These systems are designed to contain the vapor and spray produced by fires by limiting the amount of residue emitted. These systems also smother the fire by blocking oxygen from reaching the fuel. As a result, dry chemical fire suppression systems effectively minimize the damage that a fire can do to a business’s people and property. Therefore, it is important to choose a safe and reliable system for the needs of your business.
Dry chemical fire suppression systems are extremely reliable and highly effective. They can quickly and efficiently suppress the fire with a large number of agents. They are rechargeable, making them a smart choice for many types of industrial settings. Additionally, they are perfect for environments where water or sprinklers are unavailable. Lastly, they can protect electronics from damage in a fire. They are also a cost-effective solution when water supplies are nonexistent.
Dry chemical fire suppression systems work by discharging a dry chemical powder, typically sodium bicarbonate or mono-ammonium phosphate. This agent can extinguish fires caused by flammable liquids or combustible materials and is effective in residential and industrial environments. However, dry chemical systems create a mess – which can be a pain to clean up but is far less of a burden than the devastating effects of a fire.
Foam deluge systems
In large applications, foam deluge systems are best suited for smothering fires. They are commonly installed in industrial warehouses, refineries, and other locations where flammable liquids and gases are present. Foam deluge systems operate on the same principle as conventional fire extinguishers in that they use a mixture of water and foam to create an expanding agent that can douse a fire.
A deluge system uses water to extinguish a fire and may also incorporate a foam concentrate. When activated, these systems will flood an area within seconds, resulting in a protective blanket of foam. This type of fire suppression system can protect both commercial and residential properties. Foam deluge systems are available from VFP Fire.
A factory representative must demonstrate that the system works properly. In addition, all piping must be in accordance with NFPA standards, and fire inspectors must test the connections. Foam deluge fire suppression systems must be installed according to the manufacturer’s guidelines and coordinate with other trades to meet all required requirements. If you are unsure which system you need, consult the manufacturer for advice.
Although no longer produced in the United States, Halon-based fire suppression systems can still be recharged. However, halon-based systems are highly compressed and need specialized handling to prevent leaks. Moreover, parts for Halon systems may be scarce or unusable. If you are planning to replace your existing system with a new one, you should contact a fire suppression company with expertise in this field. In addition, Technicians can provide you with the proper advice and guarantee that your existing system is working properly.
The Aerospace industry has high volume/weight requirements and commercial benefits, so this sector has extended regulations. Despite limitations, halon-based fire suppression systems remain used in aircraft and storage.
Clean Agents have an advantage over traditional halon-based systems as an alternative to halon-based fire suppression systems. They deliver an environmentally friendly agent in less than 10 seconds and leave no residue. And they have the added benefit of reducing costs. So if you have a fire in your building, this is an excellent option for you. You’ll be able to protect your facility while reducing your environmental footprint while also keeping the cost of the system low.