MCT Carbon Composite Shells
What are Carbon Fibres?
Carbon fibers or carbon fibres are fibres about 5 to 10 micrometres (0.00020–0.00039 inch) in diameter and composed mostly of carbon atoms. Carbon fibres have several advantages including high stiffness, high tensile strength, low weight, high chemical resistance, high temperature tolerance and low thermal expansion. These properties have made carbon fibre very popular in: aerospace, civil engineering, military, bicycle industry, car manufacturing and motorsports and many other components where light weight and high strength is needed.
What does 3K woven mean?
The “k” refers to a thousand, so a 3k tow is made of 3,000 carbon filaments. A standard 3k tow is typically 0.125” (3.175 mm) wide, so that is a lot of fibre packed into a very small space.
Using a plain weave, or 1×1 weave, carbon fibre fabric is symmetrical and resembles a checkerboard. The tows are woven in an over/under pattern, offering tightly interlaced fibres which are highly stable and very strong.
What is Carbon Composite?
A composite is a material which is produced from two or more constituent materials. These constituent materials have notably dissimilar chemical or physical properties and are merged to create a material with properties unlike the individual elements. Carbon Fibre Reinforced Thermoplastic (CFRP) also known as carbon composite, or just carbon, is an extremely strong and light fibre-reinforced plastic which contains carbon fibres
All SP Marching shells are manufactured with a top and bottom reinforcement ring. They are meant to keep the drum round and rigid under tension.
Because we chose a carbon composite shell thickness of 1.5~1.8 mm to upgrade the sound to a more resonant, definable and responsive drum, we added reinforcement rings to make sure the shell stays solid and round.
This shell can stand extreme high pressures and allows using Kevlar heads.
Why 3K Carbon Fibre Composite?
Using carbon fibre and other composite materials solves the problem for weight and the sound quality. It is not only light weight, but the density is 20 times higher than traditional wooden drum shells. The shell thickness of 1.5~1.8 mm for the carbon drum set has a strong body structure and powerful sound quality. A very solid steady base for a long lasting high quality marching drum that defies any type of weather and … with an incredible own specific sound.
MCT – Ming Composite Technology
For our shells we work closely together with the Ming Company. Using their composite technology and knowledge in manufacturing high end Carbon fibre shells, we create our unique exclusive marching shells for our custom drums.
A close cooperation with MCT Director Jormo Huang and factory owner James Xie makes our shells the ultimate base for a new generation of quality lightweight marching drums.