In the middle western state of Wisconsin, there is a lake called “Rock Lake”. This huge body of water is in south central Wisconsin, at Lake Mills in Jefferson County about 20 miles (32 kilometers) east of the city of Madison. Rock Lake is a 1,365 acre watery area that reaches a depth of 60 feet (18.3 meters). For many thousands of years, Native American Indian tribes have lived in the area and left many artifacts behind. Of particular interest, there are ancient burial mounds created by various American Indian peoples. Some of the burial mounds in Wisconsin also have rock formations called petroforms within them, on them, or near them.
A huge claim of fame regarding Rock Lake is the many stories of seeing tall stone pyramids with sharp pointed tops just like the type of ancient pyramids a person could see today in Egypt. Such Wisconsin pyramids are deep under the water at the lake and these structures were believed to have been on the land, but a flood, from ages ago, drove them submerged in the waters. Some people have said the pyramids are made up of black rocks or black stones. People have wondered if there is any sort of connection between ancient Egypt and the Native American Indians very long ago. If not, then the whole scenario seems to be a very strange coincidence.Many Wisconsin Native American Indians have claimed those submerged solid cones of Rock Lake were built by their ancestors centuries and centuries ago.
Scientists came up with an explanation that those underwater pyramids are natural structures that are remnants of glaciers that created the lake a little over 10,000 years ago. A few scientists have claimed the pointed top effect comes from a part of a glacier that was pushed outward from opposing tearing forces at various sides of the material, all by natural means.If people today search under the waters of Rock Lake, Wisconsin; what is seen are just natural formations of deposits from glacial debris as silted rock piles, but no true pyramids according to the scientific community.
There are a lot of people who do not accept the idea that the pointy pyramids in the lake were created naturally by glaciers and not by man. If glaciers were able to create such pointy triangular arrangements, then those pyramids should be a common enough phenomena encountered that would be known throughout the world whenever there are glaciers and where glaciers did occur. Yet, such a pyramid incident is not reported by people, tourists, and others who have viewed glaciers.
There are stories that the Native American Indians of Wisconsin first told the white Caucasin settlers of the 1830’s and especially of the early 1840’s at the area of Lake Mills, a town on the eastern coast of Rock Lake ,( that began to considerably grow in population back then), about “stone teepees”, (that were) “built by foreigners” under the waters of Rock Lake. The American Indian tribes reputedly told the white people that the stone teepees were originally on the land but were eventually sunk under the waters by a long, long ago flood. According to further lore, the first settlers in the 1840’s saw strange formations sticking out of the lake, but such features became completely submerged in the 1850’s when dams for sawmills caused the water level to rise. However there are no written accounts from the 1800’s or even the early 1900’s of the Native American Indians telling the white people anything about such tales that involve submerged stone conical structures.
There are, however, written documentation, from the 1800’s, of particular Native American Indians legends of Rock Lake Wisconsin and thereabout, of long, long, long ago some Aztec Indians settled in the the area of present day Saint Louis, Missouri after paddling in canoes up the Mississippi River. Here, these Aztecs Indians, who originally came from northern Mexico, intermingled and bred with the Cahotic American Indian peoples. These Aztecs, according to white anthropological theorists, believed the Aztecs escaped their land during a time of terrible prolonged drought which started in 1066. Some Aztecs lived in the large city of Cahokia in southern Illinois that was near the Mississippi River.
There has been discovered, in the area comprising Aztalan, a town in Jefferson County, Wisconsin,(this is how it got its name in the 1800’s) and includes the Aztalan State Park, (that features historical ancient Indian mounds and other various artifacts), which is near Rock Lake, Wisconsin;- evidence was found that suggests the practice of human sacrifice and cannibalism, so frequent in past Aztec culture. Also, the remains of a young woman, named the “Princess of Aztalan” were found in a burial mound. She was wearing a very great many clam shell beads, some of them came from as far away as the Gulf of Mexico.There are further Native American Indian tales that other Aztecs traveled up the Mississippi River to its connection at Rock Lake, Wisconsin. Another migration of Aztecs, from current area of Illinois, Missouri, and Wisconsin came when the Spanish conquistadors conquered and brutally ruled over the Aztecs. Between 1519 and 1521 Hernan Cortez conquered the Aztecs. (And between 1532 and 1533 Francisco Pizarro and his followers toppled the Inca empire in Peru.)
The story of the first white folks to see pyramids underwater at Rock Lake, Wisconsin goes back to by or around the year 1900, but. the incident was not told until many years later. Two local brothers, Claude Wilson and Lee Wilson were duck hunting when the lake was unusually clear instead of its usual murkiness and the water level dropped 6 feet during a drought the boys and the other people were experiencing. The brothers went to the middle of the lake in a small boat when their paddle struck something, Upon investigation they discovered, upon the bottom of the lake, two pyramids; a first one and then a second one. In the following week, the rains came, clouding the view, and the brothers never again saw any pyramids.
Since then, over the many years, various people hunted for these triangular appearing artifacts, but the vast majority of people did not find any. In the summer of 1937 a young Milwaukee native, the famed scuba diver Max Eugene “Gene” Nohl claimed to have found a structure under the waters of the lake that looked like “an upside down ice cream cone”. The massive stone object he related about is in the form of a truncated cone (without a pointed apex). Max measured its size and said the structure indicated approximate figures of being 29 feet tall with a diameter 3 feet upper base, and a diameter bottom of 18 feet. Nohl produced no type of proof to his claim of discovery.
There have been, over the many years, sonar images of the waters that show a roughly looking pyramid type-shape that scientists have dismissed simply as a natural rock pile. But, unless there is a very thorough underwater photographic scan of the whole lake, using ground penetrating radar to see through the murkiness and more importantly what is buried at the bottom in the slit, sand, earth, how do we not know that there are Both somewhat crude naturally produced very- much- looking- like pyramids that inspired the Native American Indians to make a few real pyramids of their own, with perhaps pointed tops, centuries and centuries ago?
Therefore, any and all cone forms in the entire area of Rock Lake, Wisconsin that are visible or hidden; buried under sediment, must be carefully scientifically examined to separate the naturally occurring stone or rock pyramid looking structures from any and all man made pyramid appearing creations.