Most house and building owners in West Haven CT feel relatively safe in their homes. Generally, air pollution is not a problem in New Haven County, Connecticut. However, radon gas is a significant problem in our community and is the single greatest health threat to West Haven CT families. Radon is a colorless, odorless gas that results from the breakdown of radioactive uranium, thorium and radium. Contrary to popular belief, radon can invade older and newer homes alike. Radon is commonly detected in random air samples and is generally harmless when encountered outdoors. However, radon that rises into a structure from the soil or rock beneath the basement, crawl space, or foundation slab may become concentrated indoors and reach dangerously high levels. When this occurs, it can cause health issues, even lung cancer, in individuals who regularly occupy the structure.
Radium, thorium and uranium are naturally occurring elements that are commonly found in soil, bedrock and groundwater sources across the United States, including here in West Haven CT. The widespread prevalence of these substances means that radon gas is an issue faced by many home and commercial property owners. Because Rn is a noble gas, it does not harm indoor plants. However, plants can’t remove radon from the atmosphere as they can do with carbon dioxide.
Here is What Some of Our Radon Mitigation Customers from the West Haven Area are Saying About Our Services:
Radon Testing & Mitigation in West Haven CT Homes
Without testing, most West Haven property owners aren’t aware of the presence of radon gas until someone who lives in their household or works in their business develops serious health problems. Short-term tests for radon are conducted over a period of two to seven days while long-term tests measure the levels of radon for 90 days or longer. Information gathered from both types of tests is valuable in determining the extent of the gas’s potential impact on the property and its inhabitants. These tests are available in home improvement “big box” stores, such as Lowe’s and Home Depot, and in some West Haven CT hardware stores. When radon levels are 4 pCi/L or higher, radon mitigation is recommended.
Tests are conducted by placing a small canister, cardboard strip, or digital measurement device in the lowest level of the structure where the gas is most likely to accumulate. The collection kit is left in one location for the specified amount of time and is then collected and processed to determine the level of radon that was present during the testing period. The residents or workers who occupy the property are asked to reduce exterior ventilation as much as possible during the test, but no other input or actions are required. We realize it can often be difficult to keep all windows closed, especially during hot West Haven, Connecticut summers, but this is very important to assess accurate results. Once we’ve determined the presence and level of radon in a structure, our team can then offer a range of mitigation options that are tailored to the specific situation.
More Reviews from Happy SWAT Environmental Customers:
Learn More About the West Haven Connecticut Area
West Haven is located in New Haven County, Connecticut. The public education system is West Haven School District, which has the following registration number: 9009154500. A Popular School in the Area Is Engineering – Science University Magnet School, 500 Boston Post Road, West Haven Ct 6516 – Phone: (475) 220-6000. You Can Visit the Local Post Office at 589 Campbell Ave, West Haven Ct. The population of the West Haven CT area is 54,620 with an anverage income of $35,863. The average age for residents of West Haven is 36.6, the average home value is $193,976 and median rent cost is “$1,164”. The Local Law Enforcement Agency Is West Haven Police Department, 200 Saw Mill Road, West Haven Ct. They Can Be Reached at (203) 937-3900. The city is located within the New York-Newark, NY-NJ-CT-PA mapping zone.
If Your Home Has Elevated Radon Levels, Don’t Panic! In West Haven CT Radon Mitigation Systems are Very Common.
Due to radon’s radioactive characteristics and the serious health problems associated with long-term radon exposure, West Haven property owners should take immediate steps to mitigate even moderate levels of radon gas in their buildings. According to Mickala Wood, radiation exposure causes more fatalities every year than any other environmental pollutant. One symptom of radon-induced cancer is unintended weight loss.
At SWAT Environmental of West Haven CT, we supply an array of radon removal options that are designed to prevent radon entry into the dwelling. Our mitigation systems operate by creating a vacuum in the soil beneath or immediately adjacent to the structure. This negative pressure draws any radon that is present upwards through the connected piping instead of entering the building’s basement, crawl space, or living area. The gas is then safely released through a vent above the roofline.
Our West Haven CT Customers Rave About Our Top-Notch Staff & Service:
In Connecticut radon mitigation systems are always installed in the lowest level of the home, typically where the foundation contacts the earth below. In West Haven Connecticut, SWAT Environmental engineers and installs systems that are suitable for use in buildings with slab foundations, crawl spaces and basements alike. Our comprehensive mitigation services include diagnostic testing and trouble-shooting existing systems that malfunction or fail.
Radon gas exposure is the most common form of radiation exposure currently known for human beings throughout the worldwide community. If you’re concerned about radon gas in your West Haven CT home or commercial property, contact SWAT Environmental to learn more about our available mitigation measures and to schedule a free, no-obligation price quote right away. Our knowledgeable personnel will gladly assess your home and advise you on the most appropriate radon mitigation system based on the radon levels, the structure’s foundation type, applicable building codes in your community, and other relevant factors. Call SWAT Radon Mitigation of West Haven Connecticut today to learn more.
More Details About West Haven Connecticut
If you are considering moving to West Haven or visiting in the near future, here is some useful information about the area:
The city center is located near 276 Sawmill Road, West Haven, CT 06516. The Local Fire Department Is Allingtown Fire District Headquarters, 20 Admiral Street, West Haven Ct. The Local Ems / Ambulance Service Is Located at 318 Fairfax Street, West Haven Ct. A Trusted Local Pharmacy Is Cvs 2584, 252 Orange Avenue, West Haven Ct | Phone: 203-931-4541. West Haven resides within the following county(s): New Haven, these zip code(s): 06516 06504, and the following area code: 203. West Haven CT real estate is currently very high in demand, so if you find a home in the area you like, you should get your offer in as quickly as possible. However, shopping for vacant land in West Haven CT could be a better option than buying an existing home since there is limited inventory of homes for sale. The weather in West Haven is generally fair without any extreme highs or lows, even in the summer and winter months.
The Recommended Local Shipping Center Is Ups, 535 Campbell Ave, West Haven Ct.
In the Event of an Emergency, There Is a Safety Shelter Located at Allingtown Fire House, 20 Admiral St, West Haven Ct.
The Local Lending Institution Is Keybank National Association, 20 Ocean Avenue, West Haven Ct.
A Reputable Child Care Facilty in the Area Is West Haven Community House Head Start Ii, 227 Elm Street, West Haven Ct. You Can Reach Them at (203) 934-5221.
A Local Church or Place of Worship Is First Baptist Church of West Haven, 308 Center St, West Haven, Connecticut, 06516.
A Reliable Senior Nursing Home in the Area Is Forest Hills Guest Home, 462 Derby Ave, West Haven Ct. Their Phone Number Is (800) 466-3227.
If you and your family are facing a radon problem, don’t wait too long to address the issue. Call SWAT Radon Mitigation of West Haven today for a FREE, no-obligation price quote to quickly, professionally, and affordably handle the situation. Results and 100% satisfaction are guaranteed, so don’t delay. Call SWAT today at 203-846-5906.