Blood test for diagnosing osteoarthritis developed
Researchers from the University of Missouri have created a blood test that may accurately identify individuals who are developing osteoarthritis and predict the future severity of the condition.
Researchers from the University of Missouri have created a blood test that may accurately identify individuals who are developing osteoarthritis and predict the future severity of the condition. The test could make it easier for doctors to determine whether a patient requires a prescription to buy Celebrex.
Arthritis can be treated relatively effectively when it is diagnosed early on and therapies are started immediately. However, as the condition progresses it becomes harder to treat. Most people are not diagnosed until the disease has reached a relatively advanced stage.
For the study, researchers looked at various biomarkers in the blood of dogs that were suffering from arthritis. They found a particular set of chemicals in the blood samples that accurately predicted whether the animal would experience joint pain. The team is currently working to develop a similar test for diagnosing arthritis in humans.
"With this biomarker test, we can study the levels of specific proteins that we now know are associated with osteoarthritis," said lead researcher James Cook. "Not only does the test have the potential to help predict future arthritis, but it also tells us about the early mechanisms of arthritis, which will lead to better treatments in the future."
See also ...
|IMPORTANT DISCLOSURE: All medical content and news articles on this website is supplied by an independent third party company. While the information can be useful, this website relies on others for its creation and cannot guarantee the accuracy, medical efficacy, or reliability of the information provided. In all circumstances, you should always seek the advice of your physician and/or other qualified health professional(s) for drug, medical condition, or treatment advice. This website does not provide any medical advice. The content provided on this website is not a substitute for professional medical advice, diagnosis or treatment.|