The aim of the project - which is in the style of a Wikipedia - is to make the large volume of information that exists on children's rights more accessible, to highlight persistent violations and inspire collective action. Much of the information in the new Wiki is already available on the CRIN website but might not be easily retrieveable.
See the Wiki here: http://wiki.crin.org/mediawiki/index.php?title=Main_Page
We are launching the Wiki with an initial batch of 41 country pages, with more to follow. They are:
Afghanistan, Angola, Argentina, Bahrain, Belarus, Belgium, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Colombia, Costa Rica, Czech Republic, Denmark, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Finland, Grenada, Guatemala, Japan, Lao, PDR, Macedonia, former Yugoslav Republic of, Mongolia, Montenegro, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Norway, Pakistan, Paraguay, Serbia, Singapore, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Tajikistan, Tunisia, Turkey, Ukraine, Yemen
The Wiki is a web-based, multi-lingual and interactive project - this means we need your input to ensure the pages are kept up to date. Find out how to contribute below.
Please note that this project is still being tested, if you have comments or suggestions, please email them to email@example.com.
Why are we doing this?
The purpose of making all information about children's rights available in one place is to build a clearer picture of some of the repeated violations of children's rights in a given country. The eventual goal will be to try to match these violations with possible avenues of redress.
We have found that few children's rights advocates are aware of or make use of the full range of opportunities within the UN and regional human rights mechanisms to pursue children's rights advocacy. Yet many of the bodies which are not specifically child rights-focused, such as the UN Special Procedures and the Universal Periodic Review, also issue recommendations on children's rights. The Wiki therefore brings together all recommendations and decisions on children's rights made by these bodies, including courts, to make it easy for advocates to make the most of all available options.
What is in the Wiki?
Each country has its own homepage with the following sections:
In addition, the Wiki contains state-by-state information on ratifications of international human rights treaties, communications/ complaints mechanisms and inquiry procedures.
On the Wiki, read:
Our eventual aim is to make all information about children's rights available in English as well as the official language of the country concerned. Parts of the Wiki which exist in other languages are currently linked to from the English version. If you are planning to translate any sections of the Wiki into your language or are available to volunteer your time to help with this, please contact CRIN at firstname.lastname@example.org