The symptoms of type 1 diabetes appear suddenly and may be rather
severe in nature. Usually detected during childhood, type 1 diabetes may cause a serious condition called
diabetic ketoacidosis, which causes vomiting, nausea and dehydration. If left untreated, symptoms become more
intense and the condition may eventually lead to coma or even death.
The signs of type 2 diabetes are usually subtle, often going
unnoticed for many years before a blood test reveals the presence of the disease. The symptoms of diabetes
may also be wrongly attributed to obesity or aging, and if not properly treated, may lead to other serious
complications including heart disease, kidney failure, blindness, or permanent nerve
The common symptoms of diabetes that occur with both major types
of the disease include:
urination: Excessive urination, or polyuria, occurs
when the body attempts to rid the system of extra glucose through the urine. This condition may then
lead to dehydration after losing large amounts of water when excreting the excess
thirst: Excessive thirst, or polydipsia, occurs when
the brain receives a signal to dilute the blood in order to deal with the extra glucose. This signal is
translated as thirst by the body, which needs to consume more water to counteract the loss by the
loss: People with diabetes may experience weight loss
even though they are taking in a normal, healthy amount of food, or even an excessive amount, as the
disease affects the way the body processes calories. Dehydration and excessive urination are other
symptoms that may also contribute to unexplained weight loss.
eating:One of the functions of insulin, which is
secreted to counter high levels of blood sugar, is to stimulate the appetite. Too much insulin may
cause increased hunger and lead to overeating, a condition known as
Fatigue: Diabetes causes the body
to have difficulty processing and using glucose as a means of fuel. To compensate, the body must then
work harder to metabolize fat as an alternate source of fuel, which may cause fatigue and a constant
feeling of tiredness.
wounds: Both oxygen and white blood cells are
necessary for healing and regenerating new tissue, but when the level of sugar is too high, those cells
aren't able to function normally, causing the body to be susceptible to infections and taking longer
than usual to heal. Those who have had diabetes for many years may also have poor circulation, which
also causes wounds to need more healing time due to a thickening of the blood
infections: Urinary tract infections and both skin
and yeast infections are symptoms of diabetes that may be the result of a suppressed immune system.
Infections may also be from the extra glucose within the body's tissues, which allows bacteria to grow
vision: While blurred vision isn't technically a
symptom that's specific for either type of diabetes, it does occur frequently when blood sugar levels
are abnormally high.
state: Symptoms of diabetes, such as confusion,
agitation or irritability, may be the result of either very low levels of blood sugar, which is known
as hypoglycemia, or from extremely high blood glucose levels, or