Just as human beings are occasionally born with skins devoid of
pigment, an occasional plant is lacking its natural coloring. One
plant, the Indian Paintbrush, normally red, is sometimes found white.
On a circuit of the Reflection Lakes the write noticed albino
paintbrushes, white Jacob's Ladder (normally blue) and white Red
Heather. The last was a peculiar plant, most of the blossoms being red,
but a few being white. This is, of course, entirely distinct from the
true white heather, the leaves of the albino being true red heather
leaves. White gentians and white monkey-flowers, the former normally
blue, the latter normally red, have also been reported.
ELECTRICAL STORM HITS MUIR
Thunder on the left, on the right, in front, behind was the
experience of two men at Anvil Rock during the thunder storm of August
1st. Anvil Rock, 9585 feet, is the site of a forest fire lookout
maintained by the Park and the Forest Service. A new cabin is nearing
completion, lacking only finishing touches, including lightning rods.
Consequently, during the storm of August 1st, the severest seen here in
recent years, the men at the lookout were not very comfortable. They
had literally a hair-raising experience. Mr. Julius Mann describes it:
"When we took off our hats our hair bristled up and our ears tingled."
Every point of rock seemed to be splitting electricity. When a flash of
lightning came, the whole atmosphere seemed to collapse. It was like
diving into deep water. Then the charge would build up again, hair
would bristle, and rocks wold fizz, until another stroke discharged.
Bolts struck Camp Muir, 500 feet above Anvil, struck the glacier below,
struck all around. But the Anvil lookout, the most exposed spot on the
landscape, was spared. The men attribute their immunity to the grounded
telephone wire, which is the lookout's means of communication. This
line must have functioned as a lightning rod, discharging the atmosphere
in the vicinity of the rock. Messrs. Meade and Mann are thankful it is
not a wireless telephone.