Your body composition which is the percentage
of body fat a person has in comparison to his or her total body mass.
By working on these three fitness components you will lose body fat.
This will greatly improve your overall health. You will gain speed,
agility, muscle power, eye-hand coordination, and eye-foot are all
part of Physical Fitness.
The right kind of training can improve
these factors within the limits of your potential. Your weight loss
and fitness program should help to improve or maintain all the
components of physical fitness routines.
Principles of Exercise
Adherence to certain basic exercise
routines is important for developing an effective program for you to
become fit and lose weight. The same principles of exercise apply to
everyone at all levels of physical training, from the pro athlete to
the weekend jogger or sports person. You must exercise often to
maintain your Physical Fitness. Infrequent exercise can do more harm
than good. Regularity is also important in resting, sleeping, and
following a sensible diet.
Training must be geared toward specific
goals. You will become a better runner if your training emphasizes
Recovery after a hard day of training
for a given component of fitness should be followed by an easier
training day or rest day for that component and or muscle group, and
make sure to stay hydrated. Another way to allow recovery is to switch
the muscle groups exercised every other day, especially when training
for strength and or muscle endurance.
There are two common problems here with
beginning exercisers. You can cause long lasting damage to muscles,
tendons and ligaments if you work out while you are in pain, without
allowing enough rest time to heal. You might find yourself in constant
and long lasting pain if you do this which means that you will no
longer be able to exercise.
If you wake up the next morning after
you exercised and can barely drag your aching body out of bed because
everything hurts, you are going to be less motivated to exercise at
all. Constant pain is a sure way to kill your exercise program.
Sacrificing Quality for Quantity.
Discover how less time, more intensity and
sensible planned rest will fire up your body for change and real
improvement like nothing else ever before. The most incredible fat
burning and muscle protecting program ever devised will lead you step
by step to fat loss and lean muscle results and have your body
in a constant fat burning state! This is no joke- this is how we
When you are ready to increase the number of reps of a particular
exercise, and strengthen the corresponding muscles, instead of forcing
yourself to do a little more each time try decreasing the number of
repetitions in a set but increase the number of sets.
Anyone can do it. So rest more, train less and get the results you
want. No one said it had to be excessive! You are about to train