There is two characters from Alice in Wonderland that are now in Drago's top fifty. Because Tim Burton's recreation of the children's book has made such a big impact on movie goers and fans of Alice in Wonderland, learning how to draw the characters from the magical film is on the rise. One of the main characters from the movie is played by Johnny Depp as he gives his performance as the “Mad Hatter”. I also have a lesson on Mad Hatter if you are looking to learn how to draw him. That lesson can be found in the Disney section under the “Cartoons” category. I received a few requests for me to submit a tutorial that shows you “how to draw The Queen of Hearts", step by step. Initially I was going to draw her anyway a while ago, but then realized that she may not be that popular. But what was I thinking? The Queen of Hearts is one of the more popular characters from the story. Of course she is made to be somewhat of a caricature of Queen Elizabeth. The Queen is what you call a short tempered, angry, foul mouthed ruler that doesn't think twice before she carries out a sentence of deadly degree no matter how offensive, or defensive the crime may be. Sometimes she will have someone beheaded even if they didn't commit any crime at all. The Queen of Hearts is famous for her four worded command, “Off with their heads!” She is a fat looking woman that wears a red and black colored gown, and a very small crown. Her pompous, tyrannical personality makes her unapproachable, and even unlikeable. In fact, one can only guess how she even pulled off marrying a shy, timid man who is of course The King of Hearts. Why in the world would someone want to spend their lives with a woman like her? I guess sometimes women in power are attractive even if they are unattractive. In all she is a memorable character from the Disney collection, and she was well written and created by the books original inventor, Lewis Carroll. If you like Alice in Wonderland, then you will love learning “how to draw The Queen of Hearts”, step by step. I still have more drawing fun on the way for you all so stay tuned in to see what pops up next. If you have a request for me don't forget to leave a comment and ask for the lesson you would like to see next. Have fun guys and have a happy drawing day.