Science Educators' Day
Science Educators' Day 2011
“Science Educators’ Day” (EDAY) is a special free event hosted by The Optical Society (OSA) for pre-college educators! This program will focus on effective and innovative approaches to science education, with an emphasis on hands-on, interactive classroom activities. Please register by September 31 to reserve your place!
Date: Wednesday, 19 October 2011
Time: 5:00 p.m. - 8:00 p.m.
(5:00-6:30 dinner/demonstrations; 6:30-8:00 hands-on workshop)
Where: Sainte Claire Hotel in downtown San Jose, CA
Includes: Dinner, parking, classroom materials, lesson plans, hands-on workshop, activity kits and more!
The registration process is EASY! To confirm your attendance you may either
To learn more about OSA and EDAY, please visit www.osa-foundation.org/programs/resources/eday.
Science Educators' Day 2010
EDAY 2010: LASERAMA IN ROCHESTER!
Special FREE event for Middle and High School Educators!
What is EDAY: LASERAMA? This annual event is being held at the Rochester Riverside Convention Center in Rochester, NY, USA, on October 27 from 4:30-8:00 pm and focuses on effective and innovative approaches to science education, with an emphasis on hands-on, interactive classroom lessons. Over fifty years ago, the invention of the laser revolutionized the way we live. This program focuses on methods for incorporating laser-focused learning activities into the classroom.
And so much more!
The registration process is EASY; sign up one of three ways:
Check back for more details or email us if you’d like to receive an event announcement.
Science Educators' Day 2009
SCIENCE EDUCATORS' DAY
Thursday, October 15, 2009 6:00-8:00 pm
Frances C. Arrillaga Alumni Center
Attend this FREE event for middle and high school science teachers sponsored by the Optical Society of America (OSA), the Stanford OSA Student Chapter, and the Department of Electrical Engineering
The program will focus on effective and innovative approaches to science education, with an emphasis on hands-on, interactive classroom lessons
Come see low-cost experiments and demonstrations on optical phenomena (that you can use in your classroom!):
Fluorescence: Viewing Glowing Colors and Invisible Ink
Splitting White Light: Prisms, Soap bubbles, and Rainbows
Creating Colors from Polarization
Waveguides: Water and Jell-O Light Pipes, Fiber Optics
And Much More!
- Gift bags containing demonstration aids and lesson plans for the first 100 registrants; additional optics materials available as door prizes
Enjoy a complimentary dinner with other local science educators
Meet Stanford and Berkeley graduate students, staff, and local educators interested in science outreach
Space will be limited, register today! Deadline: Friday, October 2nd, 2009.
The registration process is simple; teachers can register one of three ways:
- Fill out the quick, easy online form at http://www.frontiersinoptics.org/Forms/EdayOnlineForm.aspx
- Email their contact information to firstname.lastname@example.org to let us know they plan to attend, or
- Fax the completed registration form (download the PDF version) to 202-416-6134.
Please feel free to distribute registration information to your fellow teachers and make additional copies of the registration form if needed!
To learn more about OSA and EDAY, visit:
Please contact us if you have any questions about the program!
Science Educators' Day 2008
EDAY 2009 was held in Rochester, NY. Stanford OSA/SPIE had our popular Polarization demonstration on hand:
See a whole collection of videos at http://www.youtube.com/user/OSAEDay2008!
Science Educators' Day 2007
|Science Educators' Day (EDAY) 2007
Sept. 20, 2007
Event type: Outreach, Collaboration
Summary: Science Educators' Day (EDAY) 2007 is a annual event held in conjunction with the Frontiers in Optics Conference/ Annual OSA Meeting. This year, Stanford Student OSA/SPIE, Berkeley Student OSA/SPIE, OSA and the OSA Foundation coordinated the event for local pre-college (middle and high school) teachers. For the first time, 8 universities (Stanford, UC Berkeley, Caltech, UC Davis, UC Irvine, UC Santa Cruz, San Jose State, and University of Rochester) had hands-on optics demonstrations as part of EDAY!
Attendees of EDAY were given teacher handbooks filled with lesson plans, instructions for how to recreate many of the demonstrations on a budget, and more.
- The EDAY 2007 Program: Descriptions of the Demos
- The EDAY 2007 Demonstration Booth Map
- Full PDF Teacher Handbook Created for EDAY 2007
EDAY 2007 was recently featured in Optics and Photonics News: Download it here!