Peary-MacMillan Arctic Museum Audio Guide: This Extraordinary Paradise
Take a virtual tour of the gallery from home or download the tour and visit us on the Bowdoin College campus in Brunswick, Maine.
NASA CONNECT Virtual Earth: Using Concept Maps to Solve Problems
In NASA CONNECT Virtual Earth, students will be introduced to Earth system science. They will learn what a system is and how to apply the concept of systems to learn more about how the Earth functions. Students will understand the only way to really comprehend the workings of our planet is to look at the Earth as a whole system. They will also focus on Earth science applications of national priority to expand and accelerate the use of knowledge, science, and technologies resulting from the Earth
Virtual Textbook of Organic Chemistry
This virtual textbook allows for visualization of 3D-molecular models while teaching principles of Organic Chemistry.
Union Men Competing Against Each Other: Anne and Al Filardo Describe the Construction Industry in Ne
House building came to a virtual standstill during the depression and war years, a lull that gave way to a massive construction boom that reached far into the postwar period. By that time, however, the nature of the construction industry was undergoing rapid changes. The introduction of new technologies ...
During World War II, housing construction came to a virtual standstill. The return of millions of servicemen to civilian life in 1945 set off a national housing crisis, followed by a construction boom. Although other New Deal and wartime housing programs emphasized rental apartments in close proximity ...
The Whole Frog Project
Computers can't teach everything in anatomy, but they can teach some things better, either by themselves or through synergy with conventional methods. Try out this award-winning virtual frog- as a case in point.
Objeto Virtual de Aprendizaje acerca de, Mecanismos de Protección para redes de comunicación. Este OVA profundiza en temas como: Conceptos Básicos de Criptografía, Criptografía de Clave Simétrica, Criptografía de Clave Publica, Protección a nivel de red - IPSEC, Protección da nivel de transporte ...
The Search for the Hereditary Molecule
Using this simulation, you can manipulate virtual tubes of bacteria in a virtual lab to discover the transforming principle and recreate classic experiments in the discovery of DNA. How was the hereditary molecule isolated and identified? What decisions do we need to make as we recreate the lab work of researchers like Oswald Avery and his colleagues?
Virtual field trip
An interactive map containing computer generated 3D views of the Bowscale and Bannerdale area overlain with geology, and also alternative map data layers for the two study site is available via the 'Virtual Tour' icon on the computer desktops.
You can access the problems below via the Load Homework dialogue in the File menu of the Virtual Lab. They have been organized by concept and ranked by difficulty (A ranking of 1 denotes an easier problem; 5 is more challenging). Word files for these problems are provided so that you may edit and distribute the assignments in your classroom. The following types of problems can be found: Temperature and the Solubility of Salts, Determining the Solubility Product, Determining the Solubility of Cup
You can access the problems below via the Load Homework dialogue in the File menu of the Virtual Lab. They have been organized by concept and ranked by difficulty (A ranking of 1 denotes an easier problem; 5 is more challenging). Word files for these problems are provided so that you may edit and distribute the assignments in your classroom. The following types of problems can be found: Determining the Heat of Reactions in Aqueous Solution, Coffee, Coolant, Camping, ATP Reaction (Thermochemistry
Visualizing inequality, envisioning a future
This activity uses mapmaking and geography to plot the presence of the MDGs in communities, as well as visually represent development inequalities. The maps made in this lesson may be created using chart paper and markers, or using the Class Maps feature in TIGed Virtual Classrooms.
Who's Using Who?
This activity is part of TeenNet's Virtual Classroom on Tobacco Control.
The Ocean That Surrounds Us
This site contains links to course information, outlines, summaries and computer-based drills and exercises, called Virtual Voyages, for an Introductory Oceanography class at San Francisco State University. Virtual Voyages engage students outside of the classroom and cover such topics as the seafloor, ...
Virtual Dating: Isochron Diagrams
Virtual Dating teaching package contain exercises, questions and interactive diagrams describing absolute dating techniques used in geology. The Isochron exercise contains interactive (Flash) online exercises that help students to understand radioactive decay in rocks and minerals. Users will also find ...
Water Safari, A Journey of Life
invites students on a virtual safari through African countries using the Water in Africa Web site. They can then create a water journal that demonstrates how water affects the cultural and physical features of each location.
Jazz, A Film by Ken Burns
This is the companion website to the Ken Burns PBS series that aired in January 2001. Explore cities and clubs where jazz developed; listen to excerpts of bebop, cool jazz and other styles; discover what makes jazz jazz and the theory behind the art form often called the purest expression of American democracy. The site provides biographies of nearly 100 musicians, transcripts of interviews that went into the making of the show, a virtual piano, a study guide and more than a dozen lessons.
Virtual State Tour
Students will create a virtual tour of the state including geography, history, famous people, and points of interest using Sketchy.
Virtual Fieldtrips in the Elementary School Classroom
This module focuses on the use of virtual fieldtrips in the elementary school classroom. Classroom based examples are listed, advantages and disadvantages of using this technology are described, and tips for effective implementation are reviewed for exploring virtual fieldtrips in the classroom.
The Hobby of Chess
MEET ME AT THE CORNER, Virtual Field Tips for Kids introduces you to August in this kid-friendly video about the joy of learning to play chess. For more video podcasts for kids by kids to to our website