Serving Alpine, Colusa, El Dorado, Nevada, Placer, Sacramento, Sierra, Sutter, Yolo, and Yuba Counties
Welcome to Capital CREEC Network
The California Regional Environmental Education Community (CREEC) Network is an educational project supported by the California Department of Education, Environmental Education Program, in collaboration with state, regional, and local partners. The CREEC Network is the best source for Environmental Education resources in California.
Check out resources to engage your students in learning about the local environment. Our online searchable Resource Directory includes Environmental Education providers, programs and resources available to educators in your area. Please check the Calendar to find environmental education activities and exhibits, funding opportunities, and teacher professional development opportunities.
What's New in the Region
Project WET Workshops for K-12 Educators
Project WET (Water Education for Teachers) is an award-winning environmental education program for anyone interested in teaching about one of our most precious natural resources in classrooms, after school programs and other settings. Participants receive the Project WET 2.0 Guide - containing 65 activities on water concepts and each aligned with California science, history and national common core standards.
Upcoming hands-on, interactive workshop:
Tuesday, November 27, 4:30 - 7:30 p.m. and Wednesday, November 28, 4:30 - 7:30 p.m.
SMUD Energy & Technology Center
For more information (or to register) contact Suzette Delbono, 916-732-5175.
Fall Educator Workshops at SMUD (Sacramento Municipal Utility District)
Check out the impressive list of FREE educator workshops at SMUD this fall. Offerings range from the best in GEMS (Great Explorations in Math & Science) to Beginning Solar Energy with the Solar Schoolhouse to Memories with California State Parks (learn more about educational offerings through our state parks). Visit the SMUD website to see all the course offerings and register today!
Where Does My Water Come From?
When a person opens a spigot to draw a glass of water, he or she may be tapping a source close to home or one hundreds of miles away. This website is intended to help Californians identify their source(s) of drinking water, learn more about how drinking water is treated, and learn how to help prevent pollution of our groundwater and surface water supplies. Students can select the region where they live from a map on the first page of the website. Next, they select their community to find out the specific source of their water: streams, wells, etc. Linked to the regional page are resources about the Water Cycle, how water is treated and distributed, and much more. The more Californians know about the sources of their drinking water, the better informed voters will be on this very important issue.
[ Print This Page ] [ Email This Page ]