|— Province —|
|Subdivisions||1 cities; 11 counties|
|• Total||14,317 km2 (5,528 sq mi)|
|• Density||50/km2 ( 130/sq mi)|
Ryanggang Province (Ryangkangto) (Korean: 량강도, Ryanggang-do, pronounced [ɾjaŋɡaŋ] or [jaŋɡaŋ]) is a province in North Korea. The province is bordered by China on the north, North Hamgyong on the east, South Hamgyong on the south, and Chagang on the west. Ryanggang was formed in 1954, when it was separated from South Hamgyŏng. The provincial capital is Hyesan. In South Korean usage, "Ryanggang" is spelled and pronounced as "Yanggang."
Along the northern border with China runs the Yalu River and the Tumen River. In between the rivers, and the source of both, is Baekdu Mountain, revered by both the Koreans and Manchurians as the mythic origin of each people. The North Korean government claims that Kim Jong-il was born there when his parents were at a Communist resistance camp at the mountain. The North Korean-Chinese border for 20 miles east of the mountain is "dry, remote and mountainous, barely patrolled," making it one of the crossing areas for refugees from North Korea into China, although most, including refugees from Ryanggang itself, prefer to cross over the Tumen River.
Although all of North Korea is economically depressed, Ryanggang province, along with neighboring North Hamgyong and South Hamgyong provinces, are the poorest, forming North Korea's "Rust Belt" of industrialized cities with factories now decrepit and failing. The worst hunger of the 1990s famine years occurred in these three provinces, and most refugees into China come from the Rust Belt region.
An explosion and mushroom cloud was reportedly detected in Kimhyŏngjik-gun on 9 September 2004, the 56th anniversary of the creation of North Korea. This was reported a few days later on 12 September.
Power supply issues
In recent years, power supply problems have become prevalent in Ryanggang.
Ryanggang is divided into 1 city ("Si") and 11 counties ("gun").
- Onishi, Norimitsu (22 October 2006). "Tension, Desperation: The China-North Korean Border". New York Times. The information cited in this footnote comes from the captions to the large illustrated map published with the newspaper article and available online with it.
|Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Ryanggang|
- 행정 구역 현황 (Haengjeong Guyeok Hyeonhwang) (in Korean only)
- Administrative divisions of North Korea (in simplified Chinese; used as reference for Hanja)