The mesh is only possible thanks to major developments made in computer and communication technologies and nanofabrication. Wireless radio transmitters and receivers are so unobtrusively tiny that they can literally be factored into anything. As a result, everything is computerized and connected, or at least tagged with a radio frequency ID (RFID) chip. Even food is tagged with edible chips, complete with expiration date and nutritional content.
Other communications mediums, such as laser and microwave links, add to the information flow. Data storage technology has advanced to such high levels that even an individual user’s surplus storage capacity can maintain an amount of information easily surpassing the entire 20th-century internet. Lifeloggers can literally record every moment of their life and never fear about running out of room. The amount of data that people carry around in the mesh inserts in their head or in portable ecto personal computers is staggering.
Processing capabilities also exist at hyper-efficient levels. Massive supercomputers are a thing of the past when modest handheld devices can fulfill almost all of your needs even while simultaneously running a personal AI assistant, downloading media, uploading porn, and scanning thousands of newsfeeds. Within the mesh network, devices that near their processing limits simply share the burden with devices around them, creating a massively distributed framework that in some ways is like an entire supercomputer to itself, shared by everyone.
Similarly, transmission capacity now far exceeds most citizens’ definition of need. Anyone born within the last several generations has always lived in a world in which hyper-realistic, multi sensory media of nearly any length is available for instantaneous download or upload from anywhere. Massive databases and archives are copied back and forth with ease. Bandwidth is such a non-issue that most people forget it ever was. In fact, given the sheer amount of data available, finding the information or media you’re looking for takes considerably longer than downloading it. The mesh is also never down. As a decentralized network, if any one device is taken offline, connections merely route around it, finding a path via the thousands if not millions of available nodes. The entire mesh behaves like a peer-to-peer network, so that large transfers are broken into manageable chunks that take independent routes. In fact, most users maintain personal torrent archives that are publicly accessible and shared.