Sacred geometry involves sacred universal patterns used in the design of everything in our reality, most often seen in sacred architecture and sacred art.
The basic belief is that geometry and mathematical ratios, harmonics and proportion are also found in music, light, cosmology. This value system is seen as widespread even in prehistory, a cultural universal of the human condition. It is considered foundational to building sacred structures such as temples, megaliths, monuments and churches; sacred spaces such as altars, temenoi and tabernacles; meeting places such as sacred groves, village greens and holy wells and the creation of religious art, iconography and using "divine" proportions.
Sacred geometry may be understood as a worldview of pattern recognition, a complex system of religious symbols and structures involving space, time and form. According to this view the basic patterns of existence are perceived as sacred. By connecting with these, a believer contemplates the Great Mysteries, and the Great Design. By studying the nature of these patterns, forms and relationships and their connections, insight may be gained into the mysteries the laws and lore of the Universe.
Does that sound a bit much? What is incredible is that Sacred Geometry has been worked into the great architecture of antiquity. Consider this: The Pyramid lies in the centre of gravity of the continents. It also lies in the exact center of all the land area of the world, dividing the earth's land mass into approximately equal quarters. The structure of the Great Pyramid contains detailed information including the diameter of the Earth and, amazingly, the Moon. It also accurately describes the distance form the Sun to the Earth. This structure was built by people who were allegedly scientifically inferior to ourselves - yet the knowledge they had is only just becoming available to us.
Is it possible that the ancient mythologies from every part of the Earth which mention a technologically advanced society may be based on fact? What is for certain is that we have been misinformed about the history of our planet. We are now approaching a technological level which we are told has never been reached before. This is not true! The question is to whether we have merely forgotten, or have we been lied to about our past? If the latter, why?
This fascinating subject is so immense it could not possibly be explored in a simple blog. It would not be going too far to suggest that an understanding of the many aspects of the Flower of Life (from the Seed of Life to Metatron's Cube) is required in order to gain an understanding of the origins of everything. When associated with Electric Cosmology, as it must be, this area of study offers so many answers to the questions of literally 'life, the universe and everything' that it demands attention.
Click here to see how Metatron's cube has been incorporated in the structure of Washington DC.