The purpose of this course is to familiarize the student with the various methods of inquiry, terminologies, and theoretical systems that comprise the history of psychology. A broader view is used to introduce the modern era of psychology and its use. These include: structuralism, functionalism, Gestalt, behaviorism, psychoanalysis, and phenomenological/existential approaches.
The Developing BioPsychoSocial Model of Psychology
Examine the role of social psychology in the BioPsychoSocial Model.
Explain the interrelationship between biological foundations, individual psychological characteristics, and social psychological phenomena.
Identify the central issues of biological psychology pertaining to human development and psychological function.
Effects of Developing Technology on Psychology Research and Practice
Examine the role of computers in advancing psychology research.
Identify major technologies that have contributed to advancements in the understanding of brain and behavior relationships.
Examine the changes in technology over the 20th century that impacted psychology as it has developed to the present.
Early Developments in the Cognitive Psychology Paradigm
Examine major tenets of the Cognitive Psychology Model in relationship to modern psychology research.
Explore early research on memory and the development of this line of research into modern cognitive-based models.
Identify major points of change from the behavioral to the cognitive paradigm in academic psychology.
Logical Positivism and American Behaviorism in Psychology
Examine the development of Operant Behaviorism during the 20th century.
Distinguish between Classical Conditioning and Instrumental Learning in the early American Schools of Psychology.
Identify the major contributors to Behaviorism in American psychology.
Psychoanalytic Schools of Psychology
Define what is meant by psychoanalytic models for psychology and how these are used to explain human behavior.
Identify the major theoretical contributors to psychoanalytic schools of psychology during the late 19th and early 20th centuries.
Examine the development and growth of the psychoanalytic tradition in psychology.
The Formation of Psychology as a Discipline 1850-1950
Describe the development of psychology experimental laboratories in Europe and the United States.
Identify the role of individual differences in the development of psychology and the contributions of Francis Galton.
Explore the relationship between the practice of medicine and the development of clinical applications of psychology.
Examine the role of evolution theory and naturalist science in the development of psychology in the 19th century.
Mental Illness, Mental Health, and Mental Function in the 18th and 19th Centuries
Define the links between the physical body and mental illness from antiquity to the 20th century.
Identify links between early theories of mental functioning in philosophy and early concepts of mental illness.
Identify historical explanations for abnormal behavior and mental illness.
The Mind/Body Relationships of Psychology
Identify major historical steps toward the mapping of brain structures that are associated with behavioral processes.
Describe major developments in medicine and biological studies that contributed to the early field of psychology.
Examine the historical elements of the study of the physical body and brain in antiquity.
Psychology in Historical Perspective: Early Developments
Explore the development of the science of psychology during the 19th century.
Identify major philosophers in the western tradition that were primary contributors to the formation of psychology as a discipline.
Examine the roots in early philosophy that lead to modern psychology.
The Development of Psychology in America
Identify early theorists of the structuralist and functionalist schools of psychology.
Explore the influences that impacted the development of American Behaviorism in the early 20th century.
Examine the differences in American and European psychology at the beginning of the 20th century.
Identify major contributors to American psychology in the late 19th century.
The University of Phoenix reserves the right to modify courses.
While widely available, not all programs are available in all locations or in both online and on-campus formats. Please check with a University Enrollment Advisor.
Transferability of credit is at the discretion of the receiving institution. It is the student’s responsibility to confirm whether or not credits earned at University of Phoenix will be accepted by another institution of the student’s choice.