Focus on friendship by writing and singing songs, talking about friendship skills, and creating textured art images about the joy of having friends.
1. Read a book or watch a video about friendship with your classmates. Think of people you call your friends. How do friendships start? What are the characteristics of a good friend? How do friends keep a relationship going?
2. Work in groups of 2 or 3. Choose a common tune such as "Row, Row, Row Your Boat" or "This Land is Your Land." Sing the song together, and notice the musical phrases. Come up with your own lyrics, matching the tune of the original song, but focusing on ideas about friendship. Write the words with Crayola® Crayons on construction paper. Share your song with the group.
3. Create a textured image with your own unique designs. Carefully cut imaginative Friendship Shapes from sandpaper with Crayola Scissors. Arrange the shapes in a pleasing manner on oaktag or poster board, and attach them with Crayola School Glue. Dry.
4. Remove the wrapper from a favorite crayon color. Ask a friend to hold a sheet of construction paper over the shape arrangement for you. Rub the side of the crayon over the surface of the paper to reveal your image.
5. Slightly reposition the paper on top of the shape arrangement. Choose a second crayon color and repeat to create a shadow effect. Create several rubbings, experimenting with different color combinations and degrees of pressure when rubbing crayon over surface.
Adult supervision is required for any arts & crafts project. Observe children closely and intervene as necessary to prevent potential safety problems and ensure appropriate use of arts and crafts materials. Some craft items, particularly beads and buttons, are potential choking hazards for young children. Avoid use of such small parts with children younger than 3 years. Craft items such as scissors, push pins and chenille sticks may have sharp points or edges. Avoid use of materials with sharp points by children younger than 4 years. Read all manufacturers' safety warnings before using arts and craft supplies.
Scissors—ATTENTION: The cutting edges of scissors are sharp and care should be taken whenever cutting or handling. Blunt-tip scissors should be used only by children 4 years and older. Pointed-tip scissors should be used only by children 6 years and older.
- Hang friendship designs as a backdrop for a performance of friendship songs. Ask children to teach their songs to the whole class, then invite other classes to a Friendship Festival.
- Attach Friendship Shapes to larger pieces of poster board and add captions in Crayola® Marker about how good friends act. Post as year-round reminders.
- Make copies of the lyrics to children's friendship songs. Children design covers for their songbooks. Make extras for other classes.