Norwegian Lundehund Breed Information
Breed Group: Not AKC Recognized
Weight: Male: 15.5; Female: 13.5 lbs
Height: Male: 13-15; Female: 12-14 inches
Color(s): White, reddish brown, gray, black, yellow, sable and white.
The Norwegian Lundehund breed is considered to be one of the world's rarest dogs. A member of the Spitz family, the Norwegian Lundehund originated in Norway as hunters of Puffins. During the 1800's Puffins became a protected species and this breed fell out of favor. They nearly became extinct after World War II with only five dogs surviving. Today, this breed is slowly being revived and recognized. There are currently an estimated 1500 Lundehunds in the entire world. They are extremely difficult to acquire.
The Norwegian Lundehund is a remarkable breed. They possess many unique characteristics that include having six toes on each foot, the ability to bend their head backwards over their shoulders, is able to close their ears to protect against water and dirt, and last but not least, the mobility to stretch both front legs out completely to the sides. All of these unusual abilities enabled this breed to hunt on cliffs and uneven terrain.
Norwegian Lundehund's are lively, friendly, and playful. A primitive breed, the Norwegian Lundehund is protective of their family and home. They are alert, watchful, suspicious, and quick to bark at every new sight and sound. They do well with children and dogs they have been raised with. They do not do well if bored and will become destructive. This exceptional breed is cheerful, affectionate, and makes a wonderful companion. However, Norwegian Lundehund are not recommended for first time dog owners.
Weekly brushing to remove loose and dead hair is recommended. Special attention should be given to the coat during their seasonal shedding. Their coat is self-cleaning and bathing is only required when necessary. The Norwegian Lundehund has a tendency to suffer from an extremely serious health issue known as Lundehund Syndrome. This series of digestive problems has the potential to result in costly veterinarian bills.
The Norwegian Lundehund is a double coat breed. The outer coat is short, dense, and rough but more profuse around the neck, the tail, and back of thighs. The under coat is thick and soft. This breed is a seasonal heavy shedder.
The Norwegian Lundehund is stubborn, willful, manipulative, and obstinate. Early socialization and basic obedience is recommended. This breed is extremely difficult to housebreak. The crate training method is highly recommended, although some Lundehunds may never be completely housebroken. Training must be done with firmness, fairness, and consistency.
The Norwegian Lundehund breed is not recommended for apartment living. The Norwegian Lundehund requires a large securely fenced yard or rural setting where they are able to run, play, and receive family interaction.
If you are looking for Norwegian Lundehund puppies for sale from reputable Norwegian Lundehund breeders or to adopt Norwegian Lundehunds from a Norwegian Lundehund rescue then make sure you understand as much about the dog breeds you are interested in as you can. Every puppy breed is different. Begin your research by reading the breed information about the Norwegian Lundehund puppy above. Search our dog breeds section to find Norwegian Lundehund puppies that make great pets.
Rate this Breed Information - Provided by Next Day Pets
3.4 out of 5 based on 5 ratings for the Norwegian Lundehund puppy breed profile.