What is a feminist anyway?
I changed the title of this article from sexism to asking the question after a conversation with a great friend. The definition of a feminist according to directionary.com is advocating social, political, legal, and economic rights for women equal to those of men. Feminism according to wiki is a collection of movements aimed at defining, establishing, and defending equal political, economic, and social rights and equal opportunities for women. Feminism is mainly focused on women’s issues, but because feminism seeks gender equality, some feminists argue that men’s liberation is therefore a necessary part of feminism, and that men are also harmed by sexism and gender roles.
Some women’s ignorance that inequality doesn’t exist may depend on individual experience or ignorance to see beyond immediate surroundings. Even if you have not experienced gender, economic and social unfairness in your personal life. If you have been outside your home and read time to time, you will know it exist. I would also say that the media is where you see clear inequality, if you look at how women are exploited at every level, particular when it comes to sex. Addressing inequality has to do with the power to know that you are a victim of it. We’ve all experienced some form of inequality in our lives, women and men alike. I have had discussions with women and men alike who have said a feminist is someone who fight against men. If you believe by standing up for women equality is to go against men, I wonder who gave you birth? There are those who detest the opposite sex and I think that’s where the misunderstandings are.
Sexism is an attitudes or behavior based on traditional stereotypes of sexual roles. Discrimination or devaluation based on a person’s sex, as in restricted job opportunities; especially, such discrimination directed against women – Online dictionary definition. Sexism is alive and well. When I hear people say “conservatives” or women in the Republican Party do not believe sexism or women inequality exists, I ask myself if that’s really true? Perhaps they are in denial or playing the ignorance card if that is the case.
Inequality should be everyone’s concerned. Inequality isn’t going anywhere as long human beings exist, it is here to stay. It’s like an incurable disease, you will not cure it but you can treat it so that you can live with it. The idea that people are dying for not having equal opportunities, unable to live in peace because of race, gender, religion, or one culture refusal to accept the other is very evil. As long someone isn’t a threat, imposing their values onto you or disturbing your peace, what right should you have to isolate or treat them differently?
Women are fighting for equal rights in every corner. If women continue to blame each other and men for their issues, then we have a problem. If you believe the reasons that men hold the majority of the wealth in your country, make the decisions that affect you, control your freedom and abuse you because they have the right, than stand up and fight. Speak up and be heard, perhaps men are not aware of the problems you are facing and we need to educate them. Men have fought in many corners to help women gain freedom, some will listen if we speak to them and some we may have to fight them. Yes, that comes with consequences. I know this isn’t easy, but the more you deny your disease the less curable it becomes. To answer my own question, I will say this. If your definition of a feminist is someone who is against the opposite sex, than I am NOT that woman. If a feminist is someone who believes in equal rights for all, than yes, I AM a proud feminist and hope to be for as long as I live.
This entry was posted on Thursday, October 13th, 2011 at 11:21 and is filed under General. You can follow any responses to this entry through the RSS 2.0 feed. You can leave a response, or trackback from your own site.