All over the world, and within different cultures, bonds with newborn babies develop through music, sound and movement.
The musical connection between the mother and her baby is unique and precious. It is composed of five essential contacts: Eye contact, Voice contact, Sound contact, Movement contact and Touch contact and it evolves when the mother is singing, playing or playing movement and touch games with her baby.
Singing to Your Baby
Singing is the first and therefore the most important way in which you can communicate with your baby.
The best time to do so is a few minutes after feeding, as this is when the baby is most ready to listen. Sit comfortably, with your face close to the baby’s face and look brightly and intentionally into her eyes. Choose a lovable song and sing it three times in a row. Sing softly and slowly with exaggerated pronunciation. While doing so, watch for the tiny messages that start coming from the baby. After a very short time you will see that the baby responds to your “invitation” to make eye and voice contact, by looking back into your eyes and into your mouth.
Playing Musical Instruments With Your Baby
Babies from the age of 5 weeks are ready to explore with their little hands some special musical instruments. They can play the instruments by touching, grasping, pulling and swaying their components. Each of these musical instruments has a unique shape, a gentle movement and a calming soothing sound that will bring joy and happiness to the whole new family.
Choose one little instrument at a time, (eg a wind chime, rattle or shaker) and preferably those made from natural materials, hold it above the baby’s chest and wait…
Enjoying Movement Games With Your Baby
Movement extends the musical experience of the mother and her baby. It brings vision into focus and concentrates the baby’s attention towards the gestures of her mother and her own body movements.
As its shown in the attached clip, you can play with a scarf while you sing to your baby or quietly observe her responses or when listening together to a lovely piece of music.
Touching Your Baby
The touch contact is extremely important to both the mother and her baby. Through the touch moments both are learning to feel safe and comfortable with each other.
Keep your baby close to your body, hold her softly in a comforting hug and walk peacefully in a quiet room. Hum a lovable lullaby or play a calming piece of music and share the flow of beautiful feelings that will unite you with your baby.
A fabulous birth and birthday present to all music lovers.
Musical Baby Bonding Kit includes 8 hand percussion instruments, packed in a beautiful basket, suitable for babies and toddlers. The collection has been thoroughly selected and has been in use since 2005 in Musical Baby Bonding classes. The kit’s unique sounds, shapes, textures and colours bring interest and fun into the family playtime. Buy It Now.
“All over the world, and within different cultures, bonds with newborn babies develop through music, sound and movement. The reason for that is that babies are born with the capability to watch, listen and enjoy their mothers’ voice, face expressions and gestures.” says O. Zalel the author of Musical Baby Bonding Guide.
Orly Zalel is an experienced developmental musician, music teacher and post-natal specialist and the Musical Baby Bonding Programme creator. She has dedicated her working life to exploring, understanding and sharing the musical knowledge. Her personal goal is to teach as many parents as possible how simple music-making and natural singing can contribute to their babies’ general development.
Orly has collaborated with leading authorities in music and child development in Israel and in the UK to develop her Musical Baby Bonding programme, which is backed up by updated scientific research and by the wisdom of folk and pre-modern cultures.
Musical Baby Bonding is a programme of joyful and practical parent-baby based activities that guides parents through their own journey: bonding with their newborn babies. Through music and movement and in a calm environment, babies start communicating with their parents. At the same time parents learn how to stimulate and support their babies’ new responses by singing baby songs, playing special musical instruments and dancing to various styles of music. The principles of Musical Baby Bonding are published in the Musical Baby Bonding Guide and can help every parent to develop their own unique bond with their baby.
Musical Baby Bonding is a programme that guides parents through their own journey – bonding with their newborn babies. In the sessions (90 min) we sing miniatures baby songs, play special musical instruments and dance to various styles of music. The principles of Musical Baby Bonding will help every parent to find their own unique bond with their baby. We welcome mothers and babies aged 9-19 weeks.
For more information about antenatal, birth and postnatal support, MBB courses and franchise, please contact us by email.
To learn more about the MBB activities please visit the
Links to studies, articles and relevant research about parental-baby bonding, musicality from birth and the connections between these 2 phenomenons in FB page ? Musical Baby Bonding.