Yogurt is eaten around the world. It has been cultured for generations by the Mongols, Russians, Greeks, Armenians, and French to name a few.
However, yogurt was virtually unknown in the United States until the 1960's. Now thanks to its taste, convenience, and aid to good health, yogurt is eaten in 3 out of 4 U.S. households. That's a higher per capita consumption than milk.
Yogurt is a milk that has been fermented using beneficial bacteria. It is an excellent dairy product that contains calcium, vitamins, and minerals. Yogurt is low in calories, sodium, cholesterol and lactose. It comes in low-fat, no-fat, soy, and organic versions. Yogurts containing probiotics (bacterias trademarked Bifidus Regularis in the U.S.) are thought to aid digestion. Many consider yogurt one of the healthiest food available.
Today, yogurt comes in a wide variety of flavours and forms. No longer are taste buds restricted to unflavored yogurt from a carton. Flavors range from classic blueberry, peach or coffee to the more exotic mango guava and bubble gum. Grocery stores, restaurants, and dessert shops sell it in squeezable, spoonable, and drinkable forms. Yogurt has truly become a snack of choice for both kids and adults.
Tzatziki, a garlic enhanced yogurt dish, is a recipe that is found in Greek and Middle Eastern cookery.
Add slices of cucumber, a few fresh sprigs of mint, and you have an enjoyable refreshing summer dish. It is a common complement to lamb.
|(more worldwide recipes)|
Yogurt is more than a snack. It can be used as a substitute for cream cheese, sour cream, ricotta cheese, whipped cream, and even mayonnaise. This makes it the perfect ingredient in many common recipes like breads, biscuits, muffins, waffles, and pancakes. Some cooks like to make their own yogurt.
And don't forget those wonderful dishes from around the world. Lassi, is a typical East Indian drink made with yogurt. It is usually flavored with mango pulp and served with crushed ice. A similar drink is called "tan" in the Armenian cuisine.
Yogurt--the food that tastes good and is good for you. When was the last time you and your family enjoyed some?
Article by: St. Louis Public Library staff