The real name of kaka sahib is "Kastheer",
derived from pushto language which means "a yellow flower",
also called "Zafron" in persian and arabic.
As kakasahib's family got settled in areas of Khattak tribe
about 200 years before the birth of kakasahib,hence this
settlement lead them to socio-cultural change and they
caught the colours of khattaks' Traditions,norms and values.
His elders chose this name according to pushtuns
traditions.Later on people, with love, added the word "GUL"(flower)
with his name hence it became "KASTHEER
He was famous with name of "REHAMKAR".He
got this label because he was very kind and loving to
everyone.He was always busy in helping people, in charity
works, and in the freedom of slaves, all these kind acts
made people to call him "rehamkar" (the one with kind acts).
The famous poet of Pashtun nation,:Khushal Khan Khattak has
always mentioned kakasahib in his poems as "rehamkar",e.g:
"da khushal takya pa khuday
bia pa tha sheikh rehamkara".
Another famous poet Ashraf Khan Hijri mentions this name for
kakasahib in his poem which he wrote in a Mughal prison in
King Aurangzeb's empire as:
" za pa band da Aurangzeb na
yam chey ba khlaas sham
za band karhey sheikh rehamkar ziarhee-kaka yam".
this name "rehamkar" was equally famous among pushtuns and
mughals as it has been mentioned in books written in Mughal
This was another name famous for him due to his pale
complexion. He was always busy in worship and due to
hardships he took in Prayers and spiritual purifications he
got weak health and his complexion turned pale(ziarhee=yellow).
Pushtun people call their elders like father,uncle and all
elders with respect as "kaka".As for all Pushtuns he was
like a "spiritual father" so they used to call him "kaka"
and with respect added "sahib"(honoured),hence he became
famous as "kakasahib".This name got so much popularity that
his generations are called as "kakakhel"(kaka's tribe) and
the place where he is burried is now called "Ziarath
Ziarath Kakasahib is situated at the north of Nowshera ,
about 10km away, between the mountains and is at 400ft
height from sea level.
Kakasahib is Hussaini-sayed.(from Hussain r.A.t.a),as is
shown in family tree he is connected to Hazrath Hussain (r.A.t.a)
at 23rd step.He is connected to Imam Jaffar Sadiq's elder
son Imam Ismail.
(983 H.1st Ramadan)
Kakasahib came to this world in the holy month of Ramadan
sharif, the night between 30th Shaaban muazam and 1st
Ramadan Sharif,before the dawn , in the Hijra year of 983H.
It was the era of Mughal Empror Akbar on sub-continent, and
the tribal areas and N.W.F.P was under his step-brother
Mirza Hakeem Wali-e-Kabul's management.
This Site is still underconstruction
If anyone have information or pictures about Ziarat Kaka
Sahib (kakakhel) please send me on my email address
Copyright © 2007 All Rights Reserved :
Site Designed, Developed and Maintained by :
Adnan Aziz Shah