Tom Cruise's Best Moments: The Original Jack of All Trades

Introduction
Tom Cruise is one of the best-known actors in the world, famous for performing his own death-defying stunts. It’s hard not to be impressed by a close-up shot of Mr. Cruise driving a car at breakneck speeds while weaving in between traffic, or piloting a helicopter. But you may be surprised that our top 3 picks contain more tense moments based on great acting rather than just adrenaline-pumping action.

-The Color of Money (1986)
Cruise’s first entry on the list is a sequel to a film that he wasn’t in. You may not have heard of The Color of Money, but you will have probably heard of a little film that came out the same year, by the name of Top Gun. 1986 was clearly a good year for Tom Cruise. 

A film about playing pool may not sound like everyone’s cup of tea, but if you give the film a chance, both Cruise and his co-stars, most notably Paul Newman who was the star of the prequel “The Hustler” manage to draw you into their world. Cruise and the old, wise character of Newman grow closer throughout the film. 

-Minority Report (2002)
A movie about a future where murderers are arrested before they have committed any crime. One of the teams tasked with arresting these future murderers is accused of a future murder himself. 

This movie felt fresh and even groundbreaking when it was first released back in 2002. The film even featured a reference to future technology, such as the scene where Chief Anderton, played by Cruise, is using his hands to manipulate images and information on a large screen. 18 years later, we can all do this on our phones every day, but the film was shot 5 years before the first iPhone was even released.

-Rain Man (1988)
Another film where Cruise firmly has his acting hat on—a real tear-jerker with some great comedic moments, too. 
A selfish young entrepreneur finds out that his father has left a fortune to his Autistic brother. Charlie (Cruise) decides to take his brother (Hoffman) across America on a trip to convince him to give the money over to him.
