Shown here is a screenshot of the interactive map, which makes Nevada National Security Site data more accessible to the public.
LAS VEGAS, NV – For decades, the Nevada Site Office (NSO) has been investigating, characterizing, identifying, and performing corrective actions in areas contaminated by historical nuclear research, development and testing.
More recently, the NSO consolidated this body of work into a single, accessible information repository for stakeholders.
Now, with the help of a new computer map and database known as the NNSS Remediation Sites map, interested members of the public can literally open the book on thousands of sites located on the Nevada National Security Site (NNSS) and surrounding Nevada Test and Training Range.
These sites undergo corrective actions in accordance with the Federal Facility Agreement and Consent Order, a formal agreement between the NSO and the State of Nevada Division of Environmental Protection. By simply clicking on a specific historical test location on the map, users can activate an information box that identifies the type and quantity of contaminated media present at that location. Additional hyperlinks allow the user to access more in-depth reports that include information on the various cleanup approaches and closure methods used at each site as well as a thoroughly-researched site history.
These site reports are housed on the U.S. Department of Energy Scientific and Technical Information (OSTI) library. The library, known as the OSTI Information Bridge, includes approximately 2,000 NSO documents, published as early as 1982, that address historical NNSS contamination challenges.
The interactive map was designed to give users flexibility. Clicking the “More” button will activate options for altering the map’s detail, such as include or exclude roads and boundaries. Users can also group sites according to Surface/Near Surface Contamination, Defense Threat Reduction Agency (DTRA) Locations, Defense Programs (DP) Locations, Environmental Restoration (ER) Locations, Deep Sub-Surface Contamination, All Locations, and a combination of these options.
The idea for the map originated in discussions with stakeholders during public meetings in September 2011.
“As we shared the progress of our cleanup efforts, we realized that locating relevant documents and reports wasn’t as easy as it could be,” NSO Environmental Management Operations Manager, Rob Boehlecke explained. “Our hope is that the interactive map not only makes information more readily available, but that it also gives users a visual context for the quantity and variety of work being accomplished at the NNSS.”
Though fully operational, the interactive map is a pilot program. Over the next few months the NSO will evaluate its use and seek feedback from the public.
“We want to make sure stakeholders are satisfied with the map’s overall utility and ease of use,” said Boehlecke.
Additional information on the NSO Environmental Management mission can be found at www.nv.energy.gov/envmgt. To submit comments or suggestions relating to the map, please e-mail email@example.com, or call 702-295-3521.