WWF in Suriname and the Guianas
WWF Guianas Project Office,
H.A.E. Arronstraat 63,
+597 42 2357
+597 42 2349
WWF Conservation Projects in the Guianas Region
Movements of Atlantic Leatherback Turtles - Trans-Oceanic Cooperation for Bycatch Reduction
PRICTMA WWF's gobal programme of work on bycatch, of which this project forms part, aims to mitigate bycatch in a coordinated and strategic manner....
Conserving the natural resources of the Guianas
The Guianas – made up of French Guiana, Guyana and Suriname on the northeast coast of South America – have a rich diversity of coastal mangroves, glob...
Conservation of Guianas Forests...
The Guianas Forests and Environmental Conservation Project (GFECP) focuses on the conservation of the Guayanan Forest Ecoregion. Its primary targets a...
Conservation News concerning the Guianas Region
Members of marine turtle convention reaffirm commitment to conservation
Parties to the Inter-American Convention for the Protection and Conservation of Sea Turtles (IAC) ...
French Guiana set to tackle bycatch
A new law requiring French Guianese shrimp fishers to use special devices that reduce unwanted fish ...
Forests fundamental to effective climate deal
The world’s ability to control climate change could be crippled if global leaders do not support ...
Amazon could prosper thanks to emission payments, be lost without
Global payments for ecological services rendered by the Amazon such as the carbon retaining in its ...
WWF to closely monitor outcomes of Guiana gold mining agreement
WWF, long a campaigner against gold mining impacts in the Amazon and Guiana shield, has committed ...
Vague land ownership a factor in Amazon deforestation
A "fragile" land tenure system and "a scarce presence" by the State were identified as key factors ...
13 river, 5 nation river dolphin census to help conservation on two continents
Santiago de Cali, Colombia: A milestone in the protection of the world's engangered river dolphins ...
Climate change speeds up Amazon’s destruction
Report: A vicious cycle of climate change and deforestation could wipe out or severely damage the ...
Sea turtles threatened by rising seas
Sea turtles lay their eggs into the beach sand. Many return to the exact beaches that they were ...
WWF Statement on Barama Company Ltd's FSC Certification
WWF presents its main findings after a visit of the Barama Company Ltd (BCL) forest concession in ...