Justice for former slaves 162 years later
On June 6, 1850, eight freed slaves were snatched from their Ohio home and used to satisfy the debts of their former owner.
Nearly 162 years later, members of the Polley family received justice after a judge in West Virginia declared their ancestors had been kidnapped and were not repossessed property as had been originally claimed.
“I am struck by the overwhelming emotions of this entire event,” Theresa Polley Shellcroft of Victorville said after Friday’s verdict. “To go from not knowing who you are — or your roots — to knowing your family history with court records to document that history, to witnessing the decision that began 160 years ago about whether your ancestors were legally free or slaves is overwhelming.”
The purpose of the case wasn’t to seek reparations, according to Chris Saunders, a self-described “history geek” from Ohio who helped gather evidence alongside Shellcroft’s cousin and the plaintiff in the suit, James Hale. The case was tried “nunc pro tunc” or “now for then,” to set the record straight and right a historic wrong.
“A slave case like this has been heard after the fact and taken to trial only three times in U.S. history,” Saunders said.
According to the records compiled by Saunders and Hale for the case, eight members of the Polley family (also historically spelled Polly and Pauley) were owned by a man named David Campbell who was deeply in debt. In 1849, Campbell’s wife urged him to sell the slaves for very little money to their relative Douglas Polly — who was a a “free man of color,” according to court records — because the wife didn’t want to see the family go to auction.
Douglas Polly took the family members he purchased to Ohio, where he set them free. However, Campbell’s creditors claimed that he had no right to sell the slaves privately because they were part of his holdings and should have been used to satisfy his debts. Those creditors instituted proceedings against Douglas Polly, who paid off all of the claims on the former slaves.
Then David Campbell’s brother-in-law, David Justice — “a kidnapping, swindling slave dealer,” according to Hale — forged a bill of sale from Campbell. He attempted to use the legal system to claim ownership of the family, saying they were fugitives. His claim was denied in Ohio.
So on June 6, 1850, a 1851 Ohio House of Representatives resolution states: “a body of armed men came into this State in the night, and kidnapped all of the children, leaving the father and mother behind. One of said children, thus kidnapped was an infant, born in the state of Ohio.”
Ohio took up the cause of the kidnapped Polly children after their father, Peyton, was declared “a pauper of color” who couldn’t fund litigation. The state pursued the case in Kentucky, where the children were initially taken, and in Virginia, where Harrison, Nelson, Louisa and Anna Polly later were sold to William Radcliffe.
Nelson died in slavery in 1855. All but the three Pollys captive in Virginia were freed. But at that point, the case stalled, awash in political intrigue. Efforts to declare the final three Pollys free were stymied and came to an end not long before Abraham Lincoln was elected president. Once he signed the Emancipation Proclamation, freeing all slaves in the United States, the Polly case was moot.
However, a quiet effort continued to set the historical record straight and make it official that the Pollys who remained in slavery were free people who were unlawfully kidnapped.
“Putting the pieces together and passing it on to future generations is really important,” Shellcroft said. “There are not many people, period, in the world who can find their family history documented. It’s overwhelming. It’s knowing who you are and where you came from. For many African-Americans that’s not possible.”
Presiding Judge Darrell Pratt took an interest in the story and agreed to hear the case in his Wayne County, W. Va. courtroom, according to Hale. Judge Steve Lewis provided all the legal writings and advice pro bono, and Attorney Sean Maynard represented the Polley family pro bono.
On Friday, Pratt ruled in favor of Hale, agreeing that Radcliffe had illegally bought the three Pollys and moved them to what is now West Virginia.
“I grew up with segregation and the civil rights movement,” said Shellcroft, who teaches art locally and is an accomplished quilter. “I feel like I’m the generation that’s the bridge between generations — my grandparents and the generation growing up without segregation.”
Now a new generation of Polleys has visited the Ohio property outside of Burlington where their ancestors were kidnapped. The church on the adjacent property is still there today, and last summer the ninth generation of Polleys visited the church, cemetery and burial site.
“We took grandnieces to the church, and I have pictures of them ringing the bell on that church,” Shellcroft said. “That generation ringing the bell, words can’t describe that.”