For Release: August 2, 2001
Katherine K. Martin
Media Relations Office
Lori J. Rachul
Media Relations Office
Twenty-five teachers and administrators recently witnessed wind tunnel tests, learned about Mars exploration efforts and participated in various hands-on space and aeronautics-related activities at NASA Glenn Research Center in Cleveland, OH. These educators came from schools in twelve states to attend the NASA Educator Workshop (NEW) from June 18-30. Participants were selected from hundreds of applicants to attend the program lasting two weeks.
Ann Giove of Monadnock Area Cooperative School, Hancock, NH was one of the participants. She said, "This has been an amazing professional development experience. I am looking forward to bringing the knowledge and activities into my school this year. I feel honored to have received this training."
The NEW Program was established in 1984 to encourage students' enthusiasm for math, science, technology and geography by engaging their teachers in an exciting program that can be easily infused into their curricula. Teachers attending the workshop learn about cutting-edge NASA technology, visit world class facilities, attend seminars given by NASA researchers, engineers and technicians and study topics ranging from airplane flight to interplanetary exploration.
Educators are encouraged to spread the knowledge they gained at the workshop beyond the classroom to other educators and to their community, resulting in a heightened awareness of the importance of strong math and science skills in our technologically-dominated world.
NEW is funded by NASA and is a collaborative effort between Glenn's Office of Educational Programs and the National Science Teachers Association.
Additional information on NEW is available on the Internet at: http://www.nsta.org/programs/new.htm
# # #
- end -
NASA Glenn Research Center news releases are available automatically by sending an Internet electronic mail message to:
Leave the subject and body blank. The system will reply with a confirmation via e-mail of each subscription. You must reply to that message to begin your subscription.
To unsubscribe, address an e-mail message to:
Leave the subject and body blank.