Journal Ideas – Health Journal
A health journal is a fabulous place to keep track of all all aspects of one’s health, from issues to habits, improvements to challenges. Of course a health journal may be used by kids and adults alike.
If you are a health conscious person looking to create a healthier lifestyle, maintaining a health journal will help keep your thoughts, conditions, and anything else related to your overall well-being organized.
Journal Ideas for Kids Health Journals
Keeping a health journal is just one of many wonderful journaling ideas a child can start using in the New Year. Say for example that a child needs to reference information from her doctor, she can keep it or write it in her health journal and even keep records of past and future visits with her primary doctor or other physicians or health care practitioners she happens to visit.
When writing in a health journal, kids should keep track of any illnesses or injuries that have occurred, any hospitalizations, surgeries or even any trips to the school nurse they’ve had recently. This is especially pertinent to athletes or those children who are dealing with a personal medical condition,
Another idea is to track in a health journal any kind of food or medicine that a child is allergic to; medications, vitamins or supplements that they are currently taking; and their family health history. This will encourages the child to begin taking an active part in understanding and tracking their health — a habit that will serve her well throughout her lifetime!
If the child is a student athlete trying to keep in top condition for the team, a health journal can help her keep track of her daily routines, practices, times, and any other things that relate to athletic life. If she is on the track, swim, or dance team, a health journal can help her keep track of routines, diet, and any exercises she need to do in order to strengthen her body. Once a child becomes successful and confident in her health journal keeping, she can try to encourage her teammates, coach, and others to do the same. She could challenge everyone to keep a health journal and help each other to stay on track. (Hint: Students, if you have any problems with this, ask your parents,coach, health teacher, or doctor to help you organize and launch your idea into action.)
As a child looks back on her past history in athletics, diets or sports, she will be able to see how her body has changed and what kind of health conditions were affected by which actions.The child will also see how much healthier they have become and how keeping a health journal can offer valuable insights into one’s overall health and health-centered actions and activities.
If your child wants to start a health journal, the best time to do so is now (or as soon as possible). Children are encouraged to talk to their parents and other relatives about their illnesses and sicknesses and if they have any records that they have kept in the past related to their heath so that they can keep an accurate, complete health record.
The child may also want to find out information about their own illnesses from past records, or keep track of health challenges such as weight management. Children should also speak to their parents about anything related to their health and ask for their help and guidance. Once a child has accomplished this, she will feel safe in knowing that her health is recorded and kept for future references and for continued and improved health and well-being.
The benefits of keeping a journal are vast, and keeping a health journal is no exception. The journal ideas one may use are truly endless, and the key is to choose a topic that engages your interest. This way you help ensure that you’ll continue on in your journal writing efforts.
Until next time, happy journaling…