The ignition and detonation of low flash point lubricants due to the high temperature generated during the rapid compression of air in a spring-piston air gun.
If a petrol (gasoline) engine gets overheated it is possible that with no spark being produced the engine still continues to run. To stop the engine the fuel needs to be turned off.
This is similar to diesel engines that rely on the combustion of air and fuel when compressed. In this case the pressure is provided by the main pumps and the cause is excessive air in the fluid and/or too high a vacuum on the suction side that allows the formation of free air bubbles. Temperatures in the wall of the air bubble being compressed can reportedly reach hundreds of degrees so that some fluid degradation is likely. It can also be called adiabatic compression that is the worse case scenario with no heat transfer into the fluid.
Engine runs when you turn off the car because fuel continues to burn.
The engine seems to continue running after the ignition has been turned off; run-on that occurs when a petrol engine is idling too high. Differential A geared unit that allows the wheels on opposite sides of the vehicle to turn at different speeds. This is vital while turning.
Undesirable precombustion of the fuel in a diesel pile hammer (usually due to overheating or improper fuel). Also called Prefiring, Preignition.
The engine continues to run after the car is shut off; caused by fuel continuing to be burned in the combustion chamber.
This is the term used to describe an engine that continues to run after the ignition key has been switched off. This condition is often due to using fuel with too high an octane rating.
A condition in which gasoline continues to fire after the ignition has been shut off. In late-model engines, dieseling , or run-on, is caused by heat and the unusually high manifold pressure that result from retarding the spark at idle. In fuel-injected cars when the engine is turned off, fuel is automatically shut off, eliminating dieseling.
the continued running of a spark-ignited engine after the ignition is turned off. There are two basic causes of dieseling: surface ignition, where combustion chamber surfaces remain hot enough to ignite fuel after the spark is terminated; compression ignition, where the conditions of temperature, pressure, fuel composition and engine idle speed allow ignition to continue.
A condition in which hot spots in the combustion chamber cause the engine to run on after the key is turned off.
Dieseling or engine run-on is a condition which can occur in sparkplug internal combustion engines whereby the engine keeps running for a short period after being turned off, due to fuel igniting without spark. Dieseling is so-named because this is essentially how diesel engines operate (without spark).