A blended people
Over the next few decades the strongest force shaping American culture may well be Mexican
IN 1519 a group of Spanish soldiers who had been sent to explore Mexico heard an extraordinary rumour. A sailor, Gonzalo Guerrero, had drifted there on a wrecked ship eight years earlier and was living among the Indians. He had married an Indian woman, with whom he had raised three children, and was tattooed and pierced. Odder still, he intended to stay put. Hernán Cortés, the leader of the expedition, was furious. “It will never do to leave him here,” he scowled.
What Cortés took to be a slight against Spanish civilisation, Gregory Rodriguez hails as a vision of America's future. Guerrero was the first Mexican settler and his children were the first mixed-race Mexicans. But only narrowly: Cortés himself soon took an Indian lover, as did many of his men. Gradually Spaniards and Indians (and later blacks) blended to create a mongrel nation. Mexico became a counterpoint to the caste society that developed in its northern neighbour. Then it began to permeate and change that society.
By 2001 Latinos, most of them Mexicans or descended from Mexicans, had become the second-biggest ethnic group in America. This worried African-Americans, who were thus relegated to third place. It also alarmed some whites, who felt that Latinos were failing to conform to American mores. In an influential book “Who Are We?” published in 2004, Samuel Huntington, a Harvard University professor, argued that Mexicans threatened Anglo-Protestant traditions. “Mongrels, Bastards, Orphans, and Vagabonds” is a much shrewder, less paranoid work. Yet, in some ways, it reaches a similar conclusion.
Victory in the Mexican-American war in the late 1840s led to the first big influx of Mexicans to the United States. Perhaps 100,000 were absorbed as their territory was annexed. That outraged American nativists. William Wick, a congressman from Indiana, said he did “not want any mixed races in our Union, nor men of any colour except white, unless they be slaves”. In a clumsy way, Wick had identified the problem with Mexicans: how would they fit into a system that drew a sharp distinction between blacks and whites?
This has remained a puzzle ever since. It complicated attempts to segregate the races in the early 20th century. One Texas drugstore clerk explained that Mexicans, unlike blacks, were allowed to drink at the soda fountain. But if they wanted a table they would be seated apart from whites. In the 1960s and 1970s Mexicans' uncertain status bedevilled attempts to create a civil-rights movement as potent as the black one was.
The other problem with Mexicans is that they retained ties to the mother country. Or, at least, some did. In 1897, a group of Mexican-Americans in El Paso refused to observe Mexico's independence day, explaining that it meant nothing to them. The local Spanish newspaper condemned them, calling them “Agringados” (Americanised). Dolores del Rio, a Hollywood star, said fiercely in 1928: “Never will I become an American citizen. Never!”
Yet most Mexicans did become American—a transition symbolised, for many, by the loss of the mother tongue. Even in the ghettos the march of English was relentless. New arrivals spoke mostly Spanish, their children were bilingual and their grandchildren spoke almost no Spanish at all. Along the route to monolingualism there were some delightful byways. By the mid-20th century a man driving to a meeting with the mayor would parkear his carro before climbing the steps of sitijol.
If such adaptations are not always obvious it is because Mexicans, unlike Africans, Italians or Germans, never stopped coming to America in large numbers. Immigration took off in the 1920s when some 1,000 people a day were arriving in Juárez with the intention of entering the United States. Farmers quickly came to depend on workers from the south, and lobbied the government to let more in.
The flow briefly reversed in the 1930s, when economic depression and raids by immigration officials pushed perhaps 400,000 people—many of them American citizens—south of the border. But it soon resumed. Despite frequent attempts to staunch immigration from the south or divert it into legal channels, the supply of Mexican labour has continued to find ways to get in touch with American demand. The only thing that changes is the proportion of migrants who come to America legally.
At times this fascinating story is too neatly told. Even in the old South, Anglophone America was not as strictly divided by race as Mr Rodriguez supposes. Nor have Mexicans proved more enlightened than others. In many cities, the sharpest ethnic divide is between blacks and Latinos. Yet the conclusion of this excellent book is surely right. In the next few decades one of the strongest forces shaping American culture—perhaps the strongest force—will be Mexican. With his pierced lip and odd-looking children, the stubborn Guerrero knew where the future lay.