Venturing Archives: Cave Exploring Ranger Elective
To earn complete the Cave Exploring elective for the Venturing Ranger award, Venturers must learn about caving and the skills needed to explore caves. Then they must explore a cave and share their knowledge with others.
Venturing Ranger Award Requirements – Cave Exploring Elective : A printable list of the requirements for the Ranger Cave Exploring Elective
Helps and Requirements for the Ranger Award : Information about the other Ranger award requirements and electives.
Complete Caving Manual by Andy Sparrow Caving (or spelunking) requires knowledge and preparation for a safe outdoor adventure.
The Outdoor Knots Book (Mountaineers Outdoor Basics) Many outdoor activities require extensive knowledge of knots: camping, climbing, rappelling, spelunking, and more.
Venturing Ranger Award Requirements - Cave Exploring Elective To complete the Venturing Ranger Award requirements for Cave Exploring, a Venturer must learn about caves and how to safely explore them. Then the Venturer must use these skills and teach them to others.
Tips for a Great Table Top Display Table top displays are a way to show off a hobby, collection, event, or other project. Or you can showcase your unit's program. As part of the Hobbies Troop Program Feature for Boy Scouts, table top displays are used in a hobby fair to show of each Scout's particular hobby. In addition, for several of the Venturing awards, Venturers must create a table top display.
Helps and Requirements for the Ranger Award Venturing is a BSA program for young men and women. The Venturing Ranger Award exemplifies a challenging high-level outdoor/high-adventure skills program.
BSA Methods - Teaching Others The methods of Scouting are the ways that Scouting's aims of developing character, citizenship, and fitness in youth are achieved. One of the methods for Venturers is “teaching others”. Teaching others is the best way to really acquire deep knowledge of an area. By sharing their skills with others, Venturers retain their knowledge better and provide service to others