Dr. Ivar Mendez uses art and science to “benefit the people who need the most and have the least.”
“This book is a part of that,” says Mendez, sitting in the neurosurgery library at the Queen Elizabeth II Health Sciences Centre.
He has produced the second edition of his sold-out 2006 book Bolivia (Glen Margaret Publishing, $40), which contains colour photographs of mountain ranges, jungles, salt flats and people in his native country.
All proceeds from the book go to the Ivar Mendez International Foundation to run breakfast, dental care and art education programs in remote villages in the Bolivian Andes.
Mendez, originally from La Paz, Bolivia, is a neurosurgeon, a founder of the Brain Repair Centre and a Dalhousie University professor as well as a photographer and a sculptor.
“The problems and the suffering I see in life and death in the clinic, in the operating room and in the Third World have made me act and I use the tools I have, medicine on one hand and art on the other,” says Mendez, who sees the two sides of the brain as “synergistic.”
“To solve problems scientists need to be as creative as artists.”
Mendez sees creativity as key to helping young people reach their potential.
“We wanted to give the poor children of the Andes the chance to not only survive but to develop their potential.”
That starts with breakfast. On his travels to take photographs for the first book, Mendez noticed that school children were hungry.
“They were all half asleep and they didn’t want to participate,” he recalls. “The other thing that was shocking to me was in the Bolivian Andes young children are not given enough nutrition. The family will decide nutrition should go to the older children because they know they have survived and will be able to contribute to the family.”
Children under 12 are given less to eat, says Mendez.
“By the age of five, if you don’t have proper nutrition, you have a permanent injury to the brain that will not allow you to develop fully and will keep you in poverty. And that has been proven scientifically.”
His foundation runs 26 breakfast programs for thousands of children and brings university art students in from the cities to teach art and “foster creative thinking.”
“The idea is that real change comes from within. If we can stimulate the creative thinking of 5,000 children, maybe two or three will be agents of change for their community and their whole country.”
Mendez’s foundation has also developed a nutritional bar, as an afternoon snack, made of quinoa, an original crop in the Andes.
“It has as much protein as meat,” says Mendez. “We’re thinking of doing the same for the children of the Arctic. The Inuit, 60 to 70 per cent of the children report hunger on a regular basis. They say they’re hungry in comparison to two per cent of the children in the south.”
Mendez travels to Bolivia at least once a year with his digital Canon camera.
For his new book he’s added photographs of the unworldly Uyuni Salt Flats, where the Incas harvested salt.
There are three new chapters in the book, one on the valleys of Bolivia and two on indigenous culture, which is undergoing a renaissance in the landlocked South American country.
“The socio-economic, political makeup of Bolivia has changed significantly since 2006,” says Mendez. “For the first time there is an indigenous president and the aboriginals of Bolivia have a more important role in the decisions of the country.”
Mendez photographed women in pink skirts, brown shawls and distinctive bowler hats sharing a traditional communal meal of hundreds of different types of potato.
“The Incans developed 250 types of potatoes,” says Mendez, adding that the Irish famine was so terrible because the Irish had only one type of potato.
Mendez used sepia as a background for photographs of the outlandish, antique costumes created for the Wakatokoris dance, created during colonial times to attack the Spaniards’ love of bullfighting and their Catholic religion.
“When the Spanish conquistadors came to South America, they subjected the people, they were slaves. The one way they got back was to mock them in these dances.”
Mendez, who is of mixed Spanish and indigenous ancestry, feels a spiritual connection to Bolivia.
“If you are sitting above the clouds and seeing these vast landscapes that take your breath away, it takes you back to some sort of harmony with the universe. You can’t help but feel there is some sort of meaning, not only in your life but in the landscape.
“I want to open the door for people to see the magic of the country but the fundamental purpose is to have the book as a tool to continue to support the work with the children.”