An introduction to basic accounting concepts and procedures, including the accounting cycle, operating activities, and investing and financing activities, and to develop the student's ability to interpret and analyze accounting problems, and to use accounting information to understand business situations and make business decisions.
An introductory course that stresses accounting concepts and procedures that relate to preparing reports for internal users (management) of accounting information. Virtually all managers need to plan and control their operations and make a variety of decisions. The goal of managerial accounting is to provide the information they need for planning, control, and decision making. Pre-requisite: ACC 110 Financial Accounting
A survey of current issues and trends in global business. Specific emphasis will be placed on the impact of these trends on managers in the multinational organizational setting. Topics include a study of the economic, financial and legal environments of international business. In addition, trade issues and corporate strategies will be discussed.
An introductory course designed to provide students with fundamental knowledge of management information systems and their concepts including the use of information systems for management decision-making and the impact of information systems on management. Topics may vary as technology changes but the students will learn the tools of productivity (e.g. Excel) such as electronic spreadsheet, database, and graphics.
An application of biblical principles, philosophy, and ethics to the practice of business, focusing on the nature of work and excellence in business.
An introduction to the use of basic descriptive and inferential statistical techniques for solving business-oriented problems. Analytical thinking in a managerial environment will be stressed.
A study in managerial finance and the environment within which the financial decision-maker functions. Topics include: concepts and tools of financial analysis, working capital management, capital budgeting, the cost of capital, long-term financial management, and international financial management. Familiarity with basic accounting is essential to success in the course.
Description and analysis of marketing processes, methods, policies, and institutions involved in the distribution process with an evaluation of marketing institutions and middleman according to functions they perform.
An examination of the basic functions of management: planning, organizing, influencing, and controlling. Emphasis is placed on motivational theory and its application to individual and group functioning in work situations. Leadership styles and their relationship to particular circumstances are analyzed.
A study in the theories, practices, and laws involved in the human resource function. Recruiting, selecting, training, evaluating, promoting, and disciplining personnel within business, nonprofit, and international operations will be explored.
A study of the management of operation variables and their part in the overall strategy of a business or NGO. Topics include: business process engineering, allocation of resources, cost control, quality control, and standards and procedures development.
An introduction to theoretical, philosophical, practical and ethical perspectives related to nonprofit organization creation and administration. The course will examine the historical development of the nonprofit sector, the multiple rationales for the existence of the nonprofit sector, the distinctive characteristics of nonprofit organizations, the structures, processes and complexities of organizational governance shared by volunteer board members and professional staff, the dynamic environment of the contemporary nonprofit organization, and the current issues of importance to nonprofit decision makers.
An examination of current issues, theories, policies, and methods in the development and management of nonprofit organizations, with emphasis upon strategic planning; resource acquisition through marketing, fund-raising, and grants; financial and managerial accounting; and human resources development, including the board, staff, and volunteers.
An introduction to the history, theory, and applications of organizational behavior including personality, stress, motivation, job design, goal setting, learning theory, group behavior, power, leadership, organizational structure, decision-making, and control.
A course that focuses on the formulation, implementation, evaluation and control of business strategies and their supporting organizational policies.
A study of areas of law of particular importance to business, including contracts, sales, negotiable instruments, secured transactions, agency, partnerships, and corporations.
An examination of factors that contribute to successful executive leadership practice in a wide variety of organizational settings. Topics include: the nature of leadership, the challenges leaders face, the impact of leadership, and how leaders build organizations and key relationships. Emphasis is placed on leadership knowledge, approach, and application.
A course designed to provide students with an understanding of the process for identifying and evaluating entrepreneurial opportunities. Students will also learn how strategy, marketing, financing, legal matters, and cash flow impact opportunities in terms of execution and growth and how to position a new firm for success.
An introduction of mission strategies using various business platforms for access into restricted or limited access countries. Topics include "tent making" strategies as well as professional service and corporate points of access. The course will also explore ways to serve and develop others through the ministry of business.
A course designed to prepare students for management roles in camp ministry settings. Topics include program development, counselor/staff training, board relationships, financial management, legal environment, facilities management, and strategic planning.
A course designed to provide students with the opportunity to gain valuable insight into actual business operations in order to better correlate their academic experience with professional experience. The student will assume professional business responsibilities within a commercial environment.
A course designed to provide students with the opportunity to gain valuable insight into actual business operations in order to better correlate their academic experience with professional experience. The student will assume professional business responsibilities within a ministry environment.
A study of the strategies and skills necessary for effective writing and speaking in business organizations. The course will emphasize editing and proofreading for accuracy and expression.
An introduction to the theories and problems of macroeconomic policy. The emphasis of this course is on macro analysis and covers areas such as national income, commercial banking, business fluctuations, monetary and fiscal policies and economic growth. Topics include supply and demand, measurement, inflation, unemployment, macroeconomic relationships and models, as well as fiscal and monetary policy. May be used as a social science elective.
An introduction to basic concepts of micro-economics. Topics include constrained maximization, scarcity, opportunity costs, marginal decision-making, indifference curve analysis, budget constraint analysis, production cost analysis, market structures, the roles of various economic sectors, and diverse economic problems. May be used as a social science elective.
2570 Asbury RoadDubuque, IA 52001Phone: email@example.com