Response to What do Prototypes Prototype
As I was going over the reading, there were four principal categories of prototypes in a model. There were Role, Implementation, Look-and-Feel, and nuts and bolts (Integration). First, Role, “The purpose of the prototype was primarily to explore and visualize an example of the role of the future artifact.” (page 4, line 24) In my own understanding, prototype’s role is about presenting the functionality of a finished object. Second, Implementation, “It refers to questions about the techniques and components through which an artifact performs its function.” (page 3, line 42) Throughout the process of prototyping a finished object, we need to figure out which sort of technologies need to be added to fulfill its’ functionality. That’s the Implementation part of prototyping. Third, Look and Feel, ” it denotes questions about the concrete sensory experience of using an artifact-what the user looks at, feels and hears while using it.” (page 3, line 39) As a finished product is designed for users to experience, prototype needs to be specific about its use and its’ purpose of being developed. How it is going to function and what outcome will be brought to the users are the key aspects of prototyping. Lastly, Nuts and bolts(Integration), “How prototype actually works.” (page 3, line 44) When we are developing the prototypes, we have to be concrete with the idea of how it is going to be used. We have to be specific about its’ functionality.
The goal of prototyping is about solving a problem. “Given a design problem, designers can use the model to separate design issues into three classes of question which frequently demand different approaches to prototyping.” (page 3, line 47) Designers need to come up with a solution for the exact problem. That’s the key idea of prototyping. Designers should provide an idea that can convince others to know what the problem is going to be when prototype comes to a finished product. As designer precisions about the problem of finished product of prototype, designers need to examine a solution for its problem.
To conclude, while I was finishing the reading, I was able to remember the time when I made a prototype of my designed object called, “Emotion Capture.” (Please see the picture below) As it is shown on below picture, this is a prototype that is combined with three objects which are digital frame, alarm clock, and a film clapper. Its’ functionality is to have users to remember the moment when they want to reminiscence the moment of specific time they want to remember. As a film clapper is clapped, one of memorable music that is associated with the time of certain period will be played and associated pictures will be shown on the digital frame, when this device is being used. By having this result, users are able to remember their precious moment of their life with emotion. As I was crafting this prototype, I was able to think about, how this designed object needs to be finished and what technological aspects need to be added on as a finished product.