The areas covered by sinusitis treatments are the spaces within the skull behind the face that are lined with mucus cells. Usually the linings are open to circulation of air and can drain out without problem. Sometimes when the openings become blocked the areas affected can be attacked by bacteria and other germs and viruses. That is when the sufferer will be looking for sinusitis treatment that works.
If the opening of a one or more cavities become jammed up, the flow out of mucus is blocked and pressure builds up, causing pain and and inflammation. That is a very bad feeling and many people try many products looking for relief.
The openings to the sinuses can become blocked in any of several ways. One could be because small hairs in the sinuses, which help to move mucus, do not work for some reason. Cold or allergies can cause too much mucus to be produced or block the openings. Growths such as polyps may block the sinus opening.
An ear, nose and throat specialist or an allergist can be very helpful in diagnosing and recommending sinusitis-type treatment. This ailment, when it lasts up to four weeks is classified as acute sinusitis, four weeks to three months is called sub-acute, and if it lasts longer than three months it is called chronic sinusitis.
Indications of acute sinusitis in adult patients usually follow after a cold that does not improve, or actually seems to worsen after five to seven days. Symptoms can include bad breath, loss of smell, coughing, a general fatigue, a fever, headache pressure behind the eyes and facial sensitivity, congestion and discharge, sore throat and postnasal drip.
“Self” Treatment of Sinus Areas
This is a miserable ailment for many people. Self treatment can include applying a warm, moistened washcloth to ones face several times daily, drinking plenty of fluids, and inhaling steam two to four times per day. This can be from running the shower. One could also run a humidifier and spray saline into the nose several times per day.
One should contact a doctor if symptoms of a cold last longer than 10-14 days, or a cold that seems to get worse after seven days. Other reasons to seek medical help are a headache that is not relieved by over the counter pain medication, having a fever over 100 degrees Fahrenheit, continued symptoms after a round of antibiotic treatment, and vision changes. This would be a most excellent time for treatment of sinusitis problems.
The range of possible causes and treatments for sinus problems is enormous, and your site does the subject justice.
— Carlos Weaver Mar 12, 2012
Nice variety of topics been covered - haven't seen this much on other sites.
— Norman Hunt, Oklahoma City,OK Jan 9, 2012
i like the herbal things - they have eased my sinisitis a lot. thankx
— Sherry Simpson, NYC Dec 9, 2011
i appreciate the effort puit into this site - keep it coming
— Louis G. Wood Jan 29, 2012
gotta say its a lot of stuff on this site - and most of it is real usfeul stuff too. thankyou
— Benbo Apr 9, 2012