BY: Dr. Stuart R. Pomper
Varicose veins are a common problem found in around 40 percent of women and 20 percent of men age 50. But people may still have questions about them, such as what are they and why does someone get them? Is it possible to get rid of them, and is treatment covered by insurance?
In the simplest terms, varicose veins are dilated, tortuous veins that occur when the valves in leg veins become incompetent. Under normal circumstances, the veins in the legs contain one-way valves that allow blood to flow back to the heart and prevent blood from backing up. When the leaflets of these one-way valves no longer meet, gravity and abdominal pressure push blood back down the leg, which leads to the veins dilating and becoming varicose veins.
There are a number of factors as to why varicose veins occur, including gender, genetics, occupation, activities and gravity. Women are more prone than men, and both hormonal factors and pregnancies play a role. When a woman is pregnant, the enlarged gravid uterus compromises venous return from the legs. This is why many women frequently get leg swelling during pregnancy.
But even women that have never been pregnant are more prone to varicose veins than their male counterparts. Genetics clearly play a role and varicose veins tend to run in families. Additionally, certain ethnic groups see a significantly lower rate of varicose veins.
Occupations and activities also can contribute to their occurrence. An occupation in which a worker stands or sits in one position for prolonged periods of time can put someone at risk. Gravity is pulling blood back down his or her leg and the individual is not getting the benefit of having the calf muscles contract, which facilitates blood return from the legs to the heart. I particularly have found that teachers seem to have a very high incidence of varicose veins.
As for treatments, there are both non-invasive and minimally-invasive options, all of which can be performed in an office setting. Additionally, the procedures can be done with just local anesthesia and have little or no recovery period.
With all the options available today, traditional vein stripping surgery is rarely, if ever, the appropriate therapy. Since the Staten Island Vein Center opened in February 2004, we have never done a vein stripping operation.
Non-invasive treatments of varicose veins include surgical support stockings, leg elevation, analgesics and exercise. These treatments frequently will lead to symptomatic control. Although they do not cure the problem, they rid the patient of the varicosities and symptoms, and the disease often is much more tolerable.
Minimally-invasive treatments include venous closure procedures, injection sclerotherapy and microphlebectomy. Venous closure procedures are used to close veins with incompetent valves. It can be done by radiofrequency or with a laser. Once this vein is closed, the veins being fed by this diseased vein will drain into the deep veins, which will then return blood in a normal fashion to the heart.
Sclerotherapy accomplishes the same thing by the injection of a chemical into the incompetent vein. Microphlebectomy is the removal of residual veins through tiny 2 to 3 millimeter (approximately one-tenth of an inch) incisions.
Lastly, people may wonder about the practical consideration of cost. Many with varicose veins are reluctant to seek treatment because they don’t think they’ll be covered by their insurance.
Yet, varicose veins are frequently symptomatic; the most common symptoms are pain, swelling, heaviness, throbbing, itching and tiredness. The symptoms are generally non-existent in the morning and tend to increase in severity as the day goes on.
More severe and serious symptoms such as bleeding and ulcers also can occur. Occasionally, varicose veins can cause cramping and difficulty walking (the so-called venous claudication). If any of these are present, insurance companies usually will cover the needed treatments. In our experience at Staten Island Vein Center, patients have had their treatments covered in more than 95 percent of cases.
This column is provided by the Richmond County Medical Society. Dr. Pomper is the medical director of the Staten Island Vein Treatment Center.