Farmers have joined business people and researchers worldwide in using the
Internet, but are they finding the information they need for their farms?
The University of California Sustainable Agriculture Research and Education
Program (SAREP) has a new book to help them.
"How to Find Agricultural Information on the Internet" shows farmers,
ranchers, Extension agents, consultants and gardeners the basics of choosing
an Internet provider, figuring costs, using electronic mail, getting answers
from e-mail discussion groups, searching the World Wide Web for practical
information, finding graphics on the Web, and copying information from the
'Net for their own use.
"Farmers are going beyond using computers just for bookkeeping," says Jill
Shore Auburn, SAREP associate director and editor of the book by Mark
Campidonica. "But many of them are unsure of the methods used to get good
information off the Internet, and need basic 'how to do it' details. Our
book does just that."
Auburn says the new book is aimed at both beginning and intermediate
Internet users, and walks readers through real-life examples of farmers
looking for and copying information, posting questions to international user
groups, and shows a university scientist answering client questions.
Although it is aimed at the agricultural community, the book offers plenty
of good beginning Internet information and is useful for anyone who wants to
A recent USDA survey shows that more than 2 million computers are in use on
farms of all sizes in the U.S., with 13 percent having access to the
Internet. In California, 23 percent of the state's farmers have access to
the Internet, almost twice the national average (highest: 31 percent, New
Jersey; lowest: 4 percent, Louisiana and Mississippi).
Purchase the book through University of California DANR Communication
Services, 6701 San Pablo Ave., Oakland, CA 94608-1239 for $12 (add $3
handling + $0.99 Calif. tax). Checks payable to UC Regents. VISA,
MasterCard or purchase orders: (800) 994-8849, (510) 642-2431; FAX: (510)
[Excerpts on the SAREP Web Site: http://www.sarep.ucdavis.edu ]
Lyra Halprin, Public Information Officer
University of California Sustainable Agriculture
Research & Education Program (UC SAREP)
Davis, CA 95616
Voice: (916) 752-8664
FAX: (916) 754-8550
Award Winning Web Site: http://www.sarep.ucdavis.edu
[Note: After Nov. 1, 1997, area code will change to 530]
To Unsubscribe: Email email@example.com with "unsubscribe sanet-mg".
To Subscribe to Digest: Email firstname.lastname@example.org with the command