|Easton's Bible Dictionary|
The covering (1 Kings 7:3, 7) of the inside roof and walls of a house with planks of wood (2 Chronicles 3:5; Jeremiah 22:14). Ceilings were sometimes adorned with various ornaments in stucco, gold, silver, gems, and ivory. The ceilings of the temple and of Solomon's palace are described 1 Kings 6:9, 15; 7:3; 2 Chronicles 3:5,9.
Noah Webster's Dictionary
1. (p. pr. & vb. n.) of Ceil.
2. (n.) The inside lining of a room overhead; the under side of the floor above; the upper surface opposite to the floor.
3. (n.) The lining or finishing of any wall or other surface, with plaster, thin boards, etc.; also, the work when done.
4. (n.) The inner planking of a vessel.
Int. Standard Bible Encyclopedia
seld, sel'-ing (the King James Version and the English Revised Version Cieled, Cieling; the Hebrew words for "ceiled" are chippah, caphan, sachiph; for "ceiling," cippun): Ceiling occurs only in 1 Kings 6:15. It comes from the root caphan, meaning "to cover." It has its common meaning of the upper surface of a room; there is, however, some doubt of the textual Ceiled is found in 2 Chronicles 3:5 ((chippah); Jeremiah 22:14 Haggai 1:4 (caphan in both); Ezekiel 41:16 (sachiph)), the text of the last passage being doubtful. In none of these cases does "ceiled" refer to the upper surface of a room, but to the covering or paneling of the inner walls of a house with cedar or other costly wood. This is in accordance with a common early use of the English word, no longer frequent.
George Ricker Berry
Ceiling (7 Occurrences)
1 Kings 6:9 So he built the house, and finished it; and he covered the house with beams and planks of cedar. (See RSV)
1 Kings 6:15 He built the walls of the house within with boards of cedar: from the floor of the house to the walls of the ceiling, he covered them on the inside with wood; and he covered the floor of the house with boards of fir. (WEB KJV JPS ASV WBS YLT NAS RSV NIV)
1 Kings 6:16 He built twenty cubits on the hinder part of the house with boards of cedar from the floor to the walls of the ceiling : he built them for it within, for an oracle, even for the most holy place. (WEB ASV NAS NIV)
1 Kings 7:7 He made the porch of the throne where he was to judge, even the porch of judgment: and it was covered with cedar from floor to floor. (See NIV)
2 Chronicles 3:5 The greater house he made a ceiling with fir wood, which he overlaid with fine gold, and ornamented it with palm trees and chains. (WEB)
2 Chronicles 3:7 He overlaid also the house, the beams, the thresholds, and its walls, and its doors, with gold; and engraved cherubim on the walls. (See NIV)
Jeremiah 22:14 who says, I will build me a wide house and spacious chambers, and cuts him out windows; and it is ceiling with cedar, and painted with vermilion. (WEB)