Seattle's Museum of Flight already owns the only known piece of the Lockheed Model 10-E Electra that Amelia Earhart was flying on her ill-fated attempt to fly around the world in 1937. Now, it's getting a whole Electra.
The aircraft is scheduled to arrive in September from Reno and become the centerpiece of a new exhibit honoring Earhart.
The Electra was Lockheed's response to the Douglas DC-2 and the Boeing 247 passenger aircraft. It could carry 10 passengers, plus a crew of two, at a cruising speed of 190 mph, with a ceiling of 19,400 feet and range of 810 miles.
Lockheed built 149 Electras between Aug. 4, 1934 and July 18, 1941, including four commercial and five military versions.
Earhart's Electra was lost with her and navigator Fred Noonan near Howland Island in the Pacific Ocean on July 2, 1937, during their second attempt to fly around the world. The museum's piece of the plane is a bit of crumpled metal approximately four inches by five-and-a-half inches.
The museum's new Electra was the 15th built and started its life as a Model 10-A, delivered to Northwest Airlines in 1935. The U.S. Army Air Forces "drafted" the airplane after the attack on Pearl Harbor drew the country into World War II and used it briefly as a VIP transport before returning it to Northwest in May 1944.
Northwest sold it to VARIG, the first Brazilian airline, after the war. It also served briefly in the Brazilian Air Force.
Eventually, the plane was returned to the United States and, after several private owners, Lockheed, which converted it to a Model 10-E configuration.
San Antonio businesswoman, pilot and aviation historian Linda Finch happened upon the plane in 1994 and restored it to Earhart's custom specifications with the help of original engine maker Pratt & Whitney, Lockheed drawings and vintage photographs. She matched everything from rivets to the exterior color scheme and registration of NR16020.
In 1997, the 60th anniversary of Earhart's flight, Finch flew as close to Earhart's original flight plan as possible. While flying over Howland Island, which was to be Earhart's final destination, Finch dropped a wreath in salute of Earhart and Noonan.
Late last summer, the Museum of Flight launched a fundraising campaign to buy the plane.