Vaccination to ease shingles suffering on the wayPUBLISHED: 17 Oct 2012 00:09:01 | UPDATED: 17 Oct 2012 07:49:14PUBLISHED: 17 Oct 2012 PRINT EDITION: 17 Oct 2012
Caused by a virus, shingles is a painful rash that ulcerates and crusts as it follows nerve pathways usually around the abdomen, the neck or the face.
Shingles is on the march in Australia. Its incidence has doubled in the past decade and experts advise it is best to get out of its way, particularly if you are healthy and over 60.
If you are over 50 they say you should consider it too.
The best way to avoid this painful condition is with a vaccine that will cost you $220.
Few people know of this because the vaccine is in short supply and is not being promoted.
In 2008, the Pharmaceutical Benefits Advisory Committee recommended listing the vaccine on the National Immunisation Program for people aged 60 and a catch-up for people 61-79.
Had this listing gone ahead, more than 3.5 million Australians would have been be eligible over the catch-up period.
But attempts at listing were stalled because, since then, there has been almost no vaccine in the country.
Now there are 5000 doses, says Sharon McHale, senior director of public affairs for CSL, which holds the licence to distribute it.
The vaccine, Zostavax, is manufactured by American company Merck & Co, which expects to meet Australia’s needs by the end of 2013.
McHale says CSL is now working with the government in the hope of implementing the recommendation by the start of 2014.
This requires several steps, including funding approval from the government.
In the meantime, anyone wishing to have it needs a private script and a family doctor to administer it.
“The vaccine should be routinely offered to those 60 years or older and can be considered in those aged 50-59 years,” says Dominic Dwyer, professor of virology and director of the Institute of Clinical Pathology and Medical Research at Westmead Hospital in Sydney.
Although it doesn’t guarantee preventing shingles, it reduces the burden of disease in more than 60 per cent of cases. It also reduces pain and complications in those who still develop shingles.
While the rash is painful, Dwyer says it is the damage to the nerves underneath that can be the real problem.
“A high proportion of people who attend pain clinics at large hospitals attend because of post- herpetic neuralgia [nerve pain following shingles].”
“Most people will have pain a month after the rash has first appeared and disappeared. In a lower proportion, the pain will persist for three to six months and in some even longer.”
Loss of immune control enables shingles to develop (see above) and Dwyer says some 10 per cent of Australian adults have problems with immunity as a result of disease or prescribed medication.
Writing in the Australian Prescriber, Dwyer and Michael Wehrhahn, an infectious diseases specialist at Westmead, urge more widespread uptake of the vaccine.
They note that the incidence of shingles has doubled in the past decade and that hospital emergency departments report a 2-6 per cent increase in cases each year.
Recurrent attacks are also more common than previously thought and the vaccine can be given to people at least a year after an episode.
With age, immunity weakens and while the aging population is one reason for the rise in shingles, the increased use of immuno-suppressant drugs is probably another.
A third possible cause is the widespread use of the chickenpox vaccination in children.
Because there is now less chickenpox in children, older people have not boosted their immunity to the virus and so may be more susceptible to shingles later in life.
Although shingles is less contagious than chickenpox, recent research has found the shingles virus in human saliva, meaning it could be more contagious than previously thought.
People with shingles are advised to avoid contact with others who may be susceptible, especially pregnant women and people with low immunity.
When all lesions have crusted, the rash is considered non-infectious.
The vaccine, which is 14 times more potent than the chicken pox vaccine given to children, should not be given to people with impaired immunity, such as those on high-dose steroids, some patients with HIV and pregnant women.
It is also very important that people take anti-viral drugs within 72 hours of their shingles rash appearing because this lessens the pain and the long-term risks.
It is also important for pain associated with shingles to be treated as early as possible as this too can reduce the severity and likelihood of complications.
Some people wrongly think shingles is an adult form of chicken pox. Dwyer says it is not. Chicken pox in adults can be extremely serious, as the pox can occur in the lungs and the brain and in rare cases, be fatal.
The Australian Financial Review