Saturday, March 24th 2- 4pm
SOIL LIFE AND FERTILITY
This workshop will begin with some foundational knowledge about soil structure and soil ecology. We will move from these concepts into the practical ways to create a thriving soil ecology, that will, in turn support healthy and nutritious plant growth. We will cover practices such as no-till gardening, soil amendments and fertilizers, mulch and the role of organic matter in the soil. Participants will leave this workshop with a clear understanding of what healthy soil is, and the basic steps to build and maintain it.
Thursday, April 5th 4:30 – 6:30pm
PLANNING THE GARDEN FOR MAXIMUM HARVEST – keys to successful succession planting
In this workshop we will look at some planning tools and tips to maximize harvests in small spaces. We will cover a number of plant varieties and how they work in a succession planting model, where the soil is never left bare, and something is always growing! We will also cover basic seeding and transplanting techniques to increase germination and reduce transplant shock. As well, we will briefly touch upon planning considerations for seed saving.
Wednesday, April 25th 4:30 – 6:30pm
Learn how to create amazing compost and overcome some of the challenges to composting in an urban setting. We will cover successful composting practices, compost bin options, rodent management, vermicompost (with worms!), troubleshooting, and community scale compost options. Bring all your questions – we have time for a good Q &A.
Thursday, May 24th 6:30 – 8pm
PLANT HEALTH AND NUTRITION – signs and symptoms
What are your plants telling you? Learn how to read the signs of plant health and deficiency, and diagnose a number of plant diseases. We will cover some insect identification, and participants will leave the workshop with a set of holistic principles for growing healthy, disease resistant, nutritious plants!
Wednesday, June 20th 4:30 – 6:30pm – CANCELLED
Please note workshop is cancelled. More information to come on Water Wisdom on our website, later this season
Summer and Fall Workshop Series – More to come!
WINTER GARDENING (July)
SEED SAVING (September)
PUTTING THE GARDEN TO BED (October)