American Heritage® Dictionary of the English Language, Fourth Edition
- n. The condition of being in need of repair: a house in disrepair.
Century Dictionary and Cyclopedia
- n. The state of being out of repair or in bad condition; the condition of needing repair.
GNU Webster's 1913
- n. A state of being in bad condition, and needing repair.
- n. in need of repairs
- dis- + repair (Wiktionary)
“The docks are in disrepair, many of the picnic tables are in shambles, field drainage problems are numerous, the toilets are usually very filthy, the paved walking trails are rough and haven't been paved in over 35 years, and even the light poles are rusting away at the bottoms.”
“The roadway is dismal and in disrepair over much of the drive but the scenery is so magnificent it hardly matters.”
“Andy found himself wandering through a section of the city that he remembered as it had been, vibrant and alive, but as he trudged down the streets and through the alleys, he found the roads in disrepair and littered with rubble and refuse.”
“For example, although you might not be delinquent on your mortgage, the bank-owned house down the street that hasn't gone to foreclosure sale - and has been sitting vacant and in disrepair for months - might not be resold for an extended period to new owners who would make needed repairs and capital improvements.”
“Each looks like it's in disrepair, but that's just what the owners intended.”
“Also, the ship is in disrepair and the hypersleep has wiped his memory.”
“A number of those sites are in disrepair, with timbers that can dislodge in storms, threatening navigation, Lopez said last week.”
“Roads are still in disrepair and the recognizable landscape has been drastically altered as commercial and residential buildings were destroyed and removed.”
“The relationship was in disrepair over trust issues, and we didn't know where our kids were.”
“Plumbing not properly installed or maintained; anti-siphonage or backflow prevention device not provided where required; equipment or floor not properly drained; sewage disposal system in disrepair or not functioning properly.”
These user-created lists contain the word ‘disrepair’.
All my favourite words that I come across!
Don't tell them they are not real--they might cry.
These words I know, I just haven't used them in a while. Time to bring them back into vogue.
Looking for tweets for disrepair.