Time and nature are all our gods really are.
TRUE! That would make a great signature, DO.g's!
When I was teaching, one of the things my students loved to do was study different land formations and, of course, the Canyon was one of them. They were fascinated by the geological aspects of this natural wonder, including its age and how it was formed. We would incorporate literature during our study, with Brighty of the Grand Canyon
being one of the favorites. I'm so glad I'm no longer teaching....I'd never go along with teaching religious nonsense in place of scientific evidence to my students.
Well known for its geologic significance, the Grand Canyon is one of the most studied geologic landscapes in the world. It offers an excellent record of three of the four eras of geological time, a rich and diverse fossil record, a vast array of geologic features and rock types, and numerous caves containing extensive and significant geological, paleontological, archeological and biological resources. It is considered one of the finest examples of arid-land erosion in the world. The Canyon, incised by the Colorado River, is immense, averaging 4,000 feet deep for its entire 277 miles. It is 6,000 feet deep at its deepest point and 15 miles at its widest. However, the significance of Grand Canyon is not limited to its geology.
The Park contains several major ecosystems. Its great biological diversity can be attributed to the presence of five of the seven life zones and three of the four desert types in North America. The five life zones represented are the Lower Sonoran, Upper Sonoran, Transition, Canadian, and Hudsonian. This is equivalent to traveling from Mexico to Canada. The Park also serves as an ecological refuge, with relatively undisturbed remnants of dwindling ecosystems (such as boreal forest and desert riparian communities). It is home to numerous rare, endemic (found only at Grand Canyon), and specially protected (threatened/endangered) plant and animal species. Over 1,500 plant, 355 bird, 89 mammalian, 47 reptile, 9 amphibian, and 17 fish species are found in the park.
You'll also note that at the link, one is asked to "support YOUR park." The religious fundies are trying to make the Grand Canyon THEIR park, but my tax dollars aren't marked with a cross or any other religious symbol. Nor are those tax dollars paid into the US government by US citizens who are Muslims, Buddhists, Hindus, Jews, and lots of other non-Christian people. Since a portion of those tax dollars are going to the NPS, as well as the tax dollars of the Christians, I don't see how it's fair that one religion can force its doctrines onto the NPS.
Perhaps its just not been challenged?