American Heritage® Dictionary of the English Language, Fourth Edition
- n. Luminous intensity expressed in candelas.
Century Dictionary and Cyclopedia
- n. The illuminating power of a candle; specifically, the illuminating power of a candle of determinate composition and rate of burning, taken as a unit in estimating the luminosity of any illuminating agent: as, a gas-jet of 25 candle-power. The standard usually employed for this purpose is a spermaceti candle burning at the rate of 120 grains of sperm per hour.
GNU Webster's 1913
- n. (Photom.) illuminating power, as of a lamp, or gas flame, reckoned in terms of the light of a standard candle.
- (Photom.) luminous intensity; illuminating power, as of a lamp, or gas flame, measured in candelas, referring to the light of a standard candle.
- n. luminous intensity measured in candelas
“And go ahead, laugh all you want at the humble candle-perhaps loved only by luddites and brownout victims-but "candlepower" is still the unit of choice for many measures of brightness.”
“And 2 1/2 stories ( "Lockheed," "Emily" and part of "April") are inhabited by female narrators, which works surprisingly well and betrays at least a hint of imaginative candlepower.”
“She even indulged me when I boasted about all the candlepower I'd harnessed on my old bike, enough to drive country roads at night.”
“Innovage LLC is recalling 1.4 million one-million candlepower rechargeable halogen spotlights because the charging adapter can overcharge the battery, which can cause it to rupture and leak battery acid.”
“I feel an elbow in my back, turn and see that some serious candlepower is being directed at a good-looking actor in a light gray suit.”
“The candlepower increases exponentially when James Franco, the film's Allen Ginsberg, arrives.”
“Each Xenon light emits 1 billion candlepower, or 20 kilowatts.”
“Beeswax, schmeeswax, for bright candles you want spermaceti - so good they named the candlepower after it.”
“Directly overhead, a dazzling star burst into life-the billion-candlepower flare that was drenching both Space Station One and Discovery with its brilliance.”
“This guy has more candlepower than the whole Republican party combined.”
These user-created lists contain the word ‘candlepower’.
Candles, candle-making; photometry, and a couple of oily fish used as light sources.
Words used quite often in steampunk
Names for firecrackers, real or imagined . . .
The more martial, erotic, ferocious, or just plain ridiculous, the better
Looking for tweets for candlepower.