64,197 of 127,809 schools have worse air.
Note: Rankings are based on modeled concentrations and severity of chemicals known or believed to cause cancer. Learn More
Note: Rankings are based on modeled concentrations of chemicals that cause health problems other than cancer. Learn More
Definition: Chromium is present in the environment in several different forms, some harmless and some harmful. Chromium 3 is an essential nutrient that helps the body process sugars, proteins and fats. Chromium 6, produced by industrial processes, can in high doses cause convulsions, kidney and liver damage, and even death. The World Health Organization, EPA and the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services have concluded that chromium 6 can cause cancer in humans.
Definition: Ammonia is a colorless gas used in many household and industrial cleaners as well as fertilizers. Routine exposure to ammonia has no effects on health, but breathing very high concentrations can cause lung damage and swallowing ammonia can cause burns. No connection has been found between ammonia and cancer. Source: EPA
Definition: Nickel, a metal, can be combined with other metals to make coins, jewelry, and stainless steel. People working in nickel refineries or nickel-processing plants have experienced chronic bronchitis, reduced lung function, and lung and sinus cancers. EPA classifies nickel refinery dust and nickel subsulfide as human carcinogens. Source: EPA, HHS
Definition: Not Available
Definition: Xylenes occur naturally in petroleum and coal tar. They are used as solvents and in the printing, rubber, and leather industries. Exposure for short periods can cause headaches, dizziness and confusion. High levels of exposure can cause unconsciousness or even death. Both the International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) and the EPA have found that there is insufficient information to determine xylene is carcinogenic. Source: EPA
Sources: U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, University of Massachusetts at Amherst Political Economy Research Institute
* Chemicals most responsible for the toxicity outside this school may not add up to 100% because only the top chemicals are listed.