A bladder infection is also called a urinary tract infection (UTI) by most medical people, so if you hear both names, don't get scared or confused. It is a bacterial infection that affects any part of the urinary tract. Although urine contains a variety of fluids. salts, and waste products, it normally does not have bacteria in it. When bacteria get into the bladder and multiply in the urine, it causes a UTI. The most common type of UTI is a bladder infection, which is also often called cystitis. Cystitis means an inflammation of the bladder. The other kind of UTI is a kidney infection, which is also known as pyelonephritis. This kind of infection can be serious.
Although they cause discomfort, urinary tract infections are usually quickly and easily treated - but it's important that they are treated promptly. You can not get a urinary tract infection from someone else, although females who are just becoming sexually active often get UTIs.
UTIs are caused by bacteria. Usually by the bacteria that are found in the intestines and sometimes on the skin around the rectal and vaginal areas. Yes, that means from fecal contamination. Nearly 85% of UTIs are caused by the bacteria Escherichia coli, or E. coli --for short. When the bacteria pass through the urethra (the narrow urine canal that connects the bladder to the outside), they can get inside the bladder and cause an infection. Some females get urinary tract infections more frequently, this may be because of the differences in the shape and length of the urethra in different people. A female with a shorter urethra may get more UTIs. Males generally get fewer UTIs than females because they have longer urethras.
There are several ways bacteria can get into the urethra. During sexual intercourse, the bacteria in the vaginal area can be pushed into the urethra, which causes irritation in the bladder. In fact, any time the vaginal area is rubbed, bacteria can be pushed into the urethra. You can get a bladder infection from oral sex too. Infections are also common in women who wear tight jeans.
There are a number of symptoms associated with UTIs. Bladder infections are characterized by an urgent desire to empty the bladder. Symptoms include frequent urination, burning or pain during urination, bladder spasms and the feeling of having to urinate even though little or no urine actually comes out. In some cases, you may have bloody or foul-smelling urine, and maybe a mild fever.
A kidney infection may involve more serious symptoms, including fever, chills, and nausea. There may also be cloudy or bloody urine, abdominal pain and burning, and frequent urination. Most people with kidney infections also experience back pain just above the waist.
Most people will turn to anti-biotics. Antibiotics begin fighting the infection right away, but they can't stop all the symptoms .
Here is the biggest difference between using a anti-biotic and a probiotic. Anti-biotics only treat the symtons. Probiotics , namely Probiotics by Dr. Ohirra Probiotics treats the source and will work if taken in proper dosage and length of time.
It's important to drink lots of water during and after treatment because each time you urinate, the bladder cleanses itself a little bit more..
Vitamin C may also be recommended for you to take. If you get help right away, a UTI should completely clear up within 10 days to 2 weeks. Many customers report excellent results in just a few days, using Dr. Ohhira's Probiotics. It would be advised to avoid sexual intercourse until the symptoms have been gone for 2 weeks, which allows the inflammation to disappear completely.
You Can Prevent UTIs
There are several ways you may be able to prevent UTIs. After urination, females should wipe from front to back with toilet paper. After bowel movements, be sure to wipe from front to back to avoid spreading bacteria from the rectal area to the urethra. Another thing you can do to prevent bladder infections, whether you're a male or female, is to go to the bathroom to empty your bladder frequently. Avoid holding your urine for long periods of time.
Males and females should also keep the genital area clean and dry. Frequent bubble baths can cause irritation of the vaginal area, so girls should take showers or take baths without adding bubble bath to the water. Avoid prolonged exposure to moisture in the genital area by not wearing nylon underwear or wet swimsuits. Remember that wearing underwear with cotton crotches is also helpful.
If you are sexually active, urinate within 15 minutes after intercourse (or right after) and gently wash the genital area to remove any bacteria. Avoid sexual positions that irritate or hurt your urethra or bladder, and if you need lubrication during sex, use a water-soluble lubricant, such as K-Y Jelly. Finally, drinking lots of water - six to eight glasses a day - keeps your bladder active and bacteria-free. The sooner you start taking Probiotics, the sooner you'll be able to clear up the infection.
You have a MONEY BACK GUANANTEE, that if taken in the proper dosage in an adequate time frame and if you fail to get expected results, CHOOSETOBEHEALTHY.COM will refund all monies paid upon the return of unused product.
Dr. Ohhira's Probitics will work, period! Give it a chance, you will be glad you did. You simply have nothing to lose , except the problem.
Dr. Ohhira's Probiotic is the most powerful probiotic on the market today and is very effective against Vaginal Yeast Infection, Vaginal Thrush. Epstein-Barr, Inflammatory Bowel and Peptic Ulcers and Bladder infection.
Please e mail me firstname.lastname@example.org or call toll free 1-866-424-1077 for more information.
Choose to Be Healthy