|Hong Kong Rhododendron is "Bred for cold hardiness, this tall, attractive hybrid rhododendron offers an upright, well-branched habit and flat, glossy yellow-green leaves. Pale yellow flowers appear in late spring, each one with a bright greenish-yellow blotch in its throat. Grow the plant in moist but well-drained leafy, humus-rich acidic soil and partial shade. In hot areas, 'Hong Kong' can be susceptible to leaf dieback.."|
--Brooklyn Botanic Garden
Rhododendron (from the Greek: rhodos, "rose", and dendron, "tree") is a genus of flowering plants in the Heath Family (Ericaceae). It is a large genus with over 1000 species. Most have very colorful, showy flowers. It includes the plants known to gardeners as azaleas.
Rhododendron grow as shrubs or small trees. The smallest species grows to 10-100 cm tall, and the largest, R. giganteum, has been reported at 90 feet. Leaves are spirally arranged; leaf size can range from 1-2 cm to over 50 cm, exceptionally 100 cm in R. sinogrande. They may be either evergreen or deciduous. In some species the underside of the leaves is covered with scales (lepidote) or hairs (indumentum. Some of the best known species are noted for their many clusters of large flowers.
Both species and hybrid rhododendrons (including azaleas) are used extensively as ornamental plants in landscaping in many parts of the world, and many species and cultivars are grown commercially. Most large commercial growers in the United States are located on the west coast.
Rhododendrons are valued in landscaping for their structure, size, flowers, and the fact that many of them are evergreen. Azaleas are frequently used around foundations and occasionally as hedges, and many larger-leafed rhododendrons lend themselves well to more informal plantings and woodland gardens, or as specimen plants. In some areas, larger rhododendrons can be pruned to encourage more tree-like form, with some such as R. arboreum and R. falconeri eventually growing to 10-15 m or more tall.
Most rhododendrons prefer acid soils with a pH of roughly 4.5-5.5; some tropical Vireyas and a few other rhododendron species grow as epiphytes and need a planting mix similar to that required for orchids. Rhododendrons have fibrous roots and prefer well-drained soils high in organic material. In areas with poorly-drained or alkaline soils, rhododendrons are often grown in raised beds using mediums such as composted pine bark. Mulching and careful watering are important, especially before the plant is established.
There are a number of insects that either target rhododendrons or will opportunistically attack them. Rhododendron borers and various weevils are major pests of rhododendrons, and many caterpillars will attack rhododendrons. Major diseases include Phytophthora root rot, stem and twig fungal dieback. 
All parts of Rhododendrons are toxic to animals if ingested. Symptoms include vomiting, diarrhea, hyper-salivation, weakness, coma, hypotension, CNS depression, cardiovascular collapse and death. 
Girard's Fuschia Azalea
North American Insects and Spiders / Tree Encyclopedia
Explore over 5,000 close-up pictures of live, wild insects and spiders with descriptions and natural history. Our tree encyclopedia offers information and photos of over 450 tree species. We hope our resources will help you familiarize yourself with organisms common in your vicinity. Flowers | Rhododendrons | Skipper Butterflies | Moths | Spiders
Tree Encyclopedia | Trees Index | Fruit Trees | Nut Trees | Cottonmouth