The Woodrow Wilson Center Press
Race, Self-Employment, and Upward Mobility
Race, Self-Employment, and Upward Mobility refutes conventional notions about entrepreneurship with a wealth of unimpeachable data. Timothy Bates finds that self-employment and upward mobility are open to those who are highly educated and skilled, often possessing significant personal financial resources. This is true among Asian Americans, African Americans, and everybody else, too. Asian immigrants are prominent in low-profit, high-risk small-scale inner-city retailing, Bates explains, because they are often pushed into it by poor English language skills and problems of credentialing—when they can secure other employment, they do so. African Americans, in contrast, who have the education, capital, and inclination to become entrepreneurs find better-paying opportunities and avoid ghetto shopkeeping.
Bates compares black and Asian self-employment. He reviews who becomes self-employed, what factors encourage continuing self-employment, and how people escape unsuccessful self-employment. He addresses the place of entrepreneurship in upward mobility among disadvantaged persons and the role of the government in assisting them. Bates's analysis is based largely on the massive Characteristics of Business Owners survey compiled by the U.S. Census Bureau, which provides nationwide information on small business success and survival patterns.
What People are Saying
1. Entrepreneurship and Upward Mobility among Asian Immigrants and African Americans
2. Class Resources and Self-employment Entry and Exit Patterns
3. Social Resources Generated by Group Support Networks: Do They Benefit Asian-Immigrant-Owned Small Businesses?
4. Escaping from Self-Employment: An Analysis of Asian-Owned Small Businesses
5. Explaining the Self-Employment Patterns of Asian Immigrants in the United States
6. Financing Small-Business Creation: The Case of Chinese and Korean Entrepreneurs
7. Traditional and Emerging Lines of Black-Owned Small Businesses
8. The Owner's Human Capital and Market Accessibility: Factors Shaping the Black Business Community
9. Access to Financial Capital: Factors Shaping the Black Business Community
10. Government's Role in Assisting Minority-Owned Businesses
12. The Meaning of Small Business Success