Kids in the Kitchen
It's never too early to start fooling around with food. So check out these cookbooks to discover lots of creative and healthy options for easy meals and fun snacks. Then, while you're enjoying a bite to eat, read about the fascinating history of how recipes were developed, learn about how gardens grow or share a story that centers on special treats like apple pie---or other, ickier, options.
How Did That Get in My Lunchbox?: The Story of Food
Focusing on the contents of one child's lunchbox, Butterworth describes where the bread, cheese, tomatoes, apple juice, carrots, chocolate chips, and a clementine come from and how they get to local stores.
Strega Nona's Harvest
After helping Strega Nona plant her vegetable garden just so, Big Anthony takes some extra seeds and sows another garden willy nilly, then must find a way to deal with the consequences.
Paula Deen's My First Cookbook
Paula Deen invites you to share her favorite dishes and childhood memories in this cookbook for the very young.
Indoor S'mores: And Other Tasty Treats for Special Occasions
14 easy-to-follow snack recipes divided into easy, intermediate & advanced sections.
Bring Me Some Apples and I'll Make You a Pie: A Story about Edna Lewis
From the whippoorwill's call on the first day of spring through the first snowfall, Edna and members of her family gather fruits, berries, and vegetables from the fields, garden, and orchard on their Virginia farm and turn them into wonderful meals. Includes facts about the life of Edna Lewis, a descendant of slaves who grew up to be a famous chef, and five recipes.
Fannie in the Kitchen
Fannie Farmer is a mother's helper in the Shaw house, where the daughter gives her the idea of writing down precise instructions for measuring and cooking, which eventually became one of the first modern cookbooks.
Cook It Together
Taking 10 common ingredients that kids love, including tomatoes, potatoes, and chocolate, this cookbook explains where each food comes from and how it's made, then offers 20 healthful, easy-to-follow recipes.
A Green, Green Garden
Little Critter and his family plant some vegetables. After lots of watering, weeding, and waiting, they enjoy a delicious meal--all from their green, green garden.
Beetle McGrady Eats Bugs!
During Fun with Food Week in her school science class, second-grader Beetle McGrady tries to work up the courage to eat an ant.
The Everything Kids' Cookbook: From Mac 'n Cheese to Double Chocolate Chip Cookies-- 90 Recipes to Have Some Finger-lickin' Fun
Information on cooking terms, measuring, kitchen safety, and nutrition precedes recipes for all sorts of dishes for breakfast, lunch, dinner, dessert, and snacks.
Amelia Bedelia's First Apple Pie
While visiting her grandparents, literal-minded Amelia Bedelia finally learns, despite some mishaps, how to bake an apple pie.
George Crum and the Saratoga Chip
An account of the life and career of George Crum, a biracial chef who is credited with the invention of the potato chip at a Saratoga Springs, New York, restaurant in 1853.
How to Make an Apple Pie and See the World
Since the market is closed, the reader is led around the world to gather the ingredients for making an apple pie. Includes recipe.
Simple text and illustrations explain how to behave during mealtime.
Increasing numbers of rabbits plant, tend, harvest, and eat carrots from their garden.
Bear Wants More
When spring comes, Bear wakes up very hungry and is treated to great food by his friends.