University of Houston optometrist finds small reduction in progression of myopia promising. Research by an optometrist at the University of Houston (UH) supports the continued investigation of optical treatments that attempt to slow the progression of nearsightedness in children. Conducted by UH College of Optometry assistant professor David Berntsen and his colleagues from The Ohio [...]
Facilitates systematic comparison of mouse models of disorders including schizophrenia, autism A new technology developed by neuroscientists at Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory (CSHL) transforms the way highly detailed anatomical images can be made of whole brains. Until now, means of obtaining such images – used in cutting-edge projects to map the mammalian brain — have [...]
Quite early in its development, the mammalian brain has all the raw materials on hand to forge complex neural networks. But forming the connections that make these intricate networks so exquisitely functional is a process that occurs one synapse at a time. An important question for neuroscience has been: how exactly do stable synapses form? [...]
This post is sponsored by Unruly Media. Teenagers between the ages of 13 and 18 years old are invited to submit science projects in the Google Science Fair 2011. Participating in the global science fair could be a wonderful life changing experience for a young, budding scientist, or team of scientists, and could result in [...]
New psychology research from CU-Boulder suggests that “neural inhibition” is a critical component in our ability to make choices. Psychologists have proposed people who suffer from anxiety could have decreased neuronal inhibition, which makes it more difficult to make important decisions.
Neuroscience researchers have identified a new molecular pathway underlying Parkinson’s disease. The pathway involves polyamines, which were discovered to be responsible for increased build-up of other toxic proteins in neurons. The research also suggests polyamine lowering drugs could have a protective effect from Parkinson’s disease.
Leading neuroscience researchers will be attending a conference in Milwaukee this month. The conference will focus on obtaining better insights into the inner workings of the brain to better understand thinking, brain development and neurological diseases. Some key neuroscience presentations will include Neuropsychiatric Disorders, The Genetics of Brain Connectivity and The Mathematical Modeling of Brain Regions.
Neuroscience researchers have discovered how a structural component within neurons performs coordinated movements when connections are strengthened. Researchers also distinguished two separate steps during long term potentiation which are involved in remodeling the internal “skeletons” of dendritic spines. The research could be influential in providing further understanding of many neurological, cognitive and neurodegenerative diseases.
Neuroscience researchers are investigating axon clusters in order to develop a “brain atlas”. The research could provide a way for clinicians to recognize groups of abnormal axon clusters. When systematically arranged into the “brain atlas”, abnormal axon clusters could be used as bio-markers to diagnose neurological disorders.
Neurologists have established new guidelines for the diagnosis and treatment of infantile spasms. Infantile spasms is a rare epileptic disorder which typically affects children under the of age 8 months.