Dr. Charles "Pat" Davis, MD, PhD, is a board certified Emergency Medicine doctor who currently practices as a consultant and staff member for hospitals. He has a PhD in Microbiology (UT at Austin), and the MD (Univ. Texas Medical Branch, Galveston). He is a Clinical Professor (retired) in the Division of Emergency Medicine, UT Health Science Center at San Antonio, and has been the Chief of Emergency Medicine at UT Medical Branch and at UTHSCSA with over 250 publications.
Dr. Balentine received his undergraduate degree from McDaniel College in Westminster, Maryland. He attended medical school at the Philadelphia College of Osteopathic Medicine graduating in1983. He completed his internship at St. Joseph's Hospital in Philadelphia and his Emergency Medicine residency at Lincoln Medical and Mental Health Center in the Bronx, where he served as chief resident.
Men's Health Basic Physical and Mental Do's and Don'ts
All men have to eat food for growth and maintenance of a healthy body, but
men have different requirements as
teenagers, young adults, adults, and
seniors. For example, infants require feeding every 4 hours until they
gradually age and begin to take in more solid foods. Boys develop into the more
normal pattern of eating three times per day; however, as most
parents know, most boys, teenagers, and young adults often snack between
meals. Snacking is often not limited to these age groups because adults and
seniors often do the same.
Eat three meals a day (breakfast, lunch, and dinner). It is important to
remember that dinner does not have to be the largest meal; choose lunch as the
The bulk of food consumption should consist of fruits,
vegetables, whole grains, and fat-free or low-fat milk products.
meats, poultry, fish, beans, eggs, and nuts (with emphasis on beans and nuts);
try to limit meats and dairy products to avoid fats and cholesterol.
foods that are low in saturated fats, trans fats,
cholesterol, salt (sodium), and added sugars. Look at the labels because the
first listed items on the labels usually comprise the highest concentrations of
Control portion sizes. Eat the smallest portion that can satisfy
hunger and then stop eating.
Snacks are OK in moderation and should consist of
items like fruit, whole grains, or nuts (especially) to satisfy hunger and not
Avoid sodas and sugar-enhanced drinks because of the excessive
calories in the sodas and sugar drinks. Diet
drinks may not be a good choice as they make some people hungrier and increase
Avoid heavy meals in the summer
months, especially during hot days.
vegetarian lifestyle has been promoted for a healthy lifestyle and
loss. Vegetarians should check with their physicians to be sure they are
getting enough vitamins, minerals, and
iron in their food. A balanced vegetarian
lifestyle will not compromise a man's development as evidenced by athletes who
choose such a lifestyle.
Cooking foods (above 165 F or 73.8 C) destroys most harmful
bacteria and other pathogens. If men choose to eat uncooked foods like fruits or
vegetables they should be washed thoroughly before consumption. Avoid eating raw
or undercooked meats of any type.