Nice video. I thought that people used to believe that Comanche was the only survivor of the Battle of Little Bighorn, but many reports say that other horses did survive, but were taken by the indians, and Comanche was left because of his wounds has anyone else heard this?
"The most widely claimed fact about Comanche is that he was the only survivor of the Battle of Little Big Horn. This however, is not true. He was one of the only survivors of this awful event, but it has been reported that at least 100 other horses made it as well. His special notoriety and fame probably came from his previous heroic battle acts (he was known as a very stoic horse who could have arrows and bullets pulled out of him without sedation) as well as being the mount of Captain Keogh at Little Big Horn."
"As they walked among the bloating, decaying bodies of their fallen comrades, all was still. As the cavalrymen bowed their heads in silent prayer before beginning the odious task of burying the dead, the silence was abruptly broken by the faint whinny of a horse. As the men looked up and searched the broken terrain with weary, tearful eyes, down by the river a horse was struggling to get to its feet. Several of the men recognized the horse because of its peculiar buckskin-like color. It was Comanche, the favorite mount of Capt. Myles Keogh, who had valiantly rallied the men of “I” Company right up to the end, when they were overwhelmed by the charge of warriors under Crazy Horse and Gall. The horse was on its haunches, seemingly too weak to move any further. He had apparently sustained at least seven wounds, and his coat was matted with dried blood and soil. CPT Nowlan ordered the men to get water for the horse from the river. Several other troopers coaxed the horse onto its feet and led it away. The farrier field dressed the wounds. Comanche marched with the command to the junction of the Little Bighorn and Bighorn Rivers, and was loaded aboard the steamer “Far West” with the battle casualties, heading home to Fort Lincoln. Comanche never again was to charge to the sound of the bugle."