A Practical Guide for Crisis Response in Our Schools provides
an overview of what a crisis is, as well as responses to crisis situations.
The guide also includes crisis response checklists, sample letters, case
examples, and sample media announcements.
The Child Development Project offers a variety of print and video
resources that provide practical, piloted strategies for building classroom
and schoolwide community.
Coping with Weapons and Violence at School on Your Streets explores
the roots of violence and extreme behaviors. The book also examines ways
that students, peer mediators, teachers, and community members can make
a difference, as well as gives examples of people who have made their
streets and schools safe environments.
Creating Safe Schools: What the Principal Can Do reviews the sources
and causes of violence, as well as describes nine approaches for creating
a safer school setting. The book also describes techniques for getting
students, parents, the community, and the central office involved in creating
a safer school.
Crime in the Schools gives an overview of crime in schools, traditional
police responses to school crime, and a description of the West Mecklenburg
High School problem-solving model. This model gives students the power,
proficiency, and partnership to develop innovative strategies for increasing
safety and reducing fear in school.
Dangerous Schools: What We Can Do About the Physical and Emotional
Abuse of Our Children discusses how unnecessarily harsh and punitive
disciplinary action against students creates a climate that contributes
to school violence. The book also offers guidelines for assisting parent
and educators in recognizing illegal and unethical school practices.
Deadly Consequences: How Violence is Destroying Our Teenage Population
and a Plan to Begin Solving the Problem examines the epidemic of violence
and describes a public health approach to reduce violence.
Preventing Teenage Violence: An Empirical Paradigm for Schools and
Families describes a complete prevention program and a battery of
assessment measures that help service providers plan and evaluate the
delivery of youth violence prevention programs.
Reaching Out to Troubled Kids offers ideas for adults who want
to develop trust with the at-risk children and adolescents in their lives.
School Violence: A Reference Handbook gives an overview of the
issue of school violence and offers strategies to eliminate and prevent
School Violence Intervention: A Practical Handbook discusses interventions
for controlling and reducing school violence. The book includes topics
such as practitioners' perspectives, student-oriented interventions, school-oriented
interventions, and system-oriented interventions.
Solving Violence Problems in Your School: Why a Systematic Approach
is Necessary examines the issue of violence and makes a case for systematic
approaches to violence. The book also includes a survey for assessing
where a school system stands on violence problems.
Violence in American Schools reviews the latest research on the
causes of youth violence, as well as describes and evaluates strategies
for the prevention and treatment of violence. Lastly, the book offers
a new strategy for the problem of youth violence.
Violence Prevention and Reduction in Schools provides an overview
of violence in the classroom and provides strategies that have been shown
to positively affect levels of disruptive behaviors and violence in schools.
Violence Prevention Curriculum for Adolescents seeks to show high
school students the extent to which they are at risk of homicide, the
factors that usually attend a homicide, the major caused of homicide,
and positive ways to deal with anger and arguments.
Return to Resources page.