1. Recognition of gallant performance by grant of Battle Honours, Theatre Honours and Honour Titles to units, reinforces motivation of soldiers for collective acts of valour during war. It caters for intrinsic and extrinsic needs of the arms in combat. Units will be awarded the honours due to them for taking active and creditable part for claiming an award of Battle Honours.
2. Battle Honours are official commemoration of battles, actions or engagements and are awarded to Regiments whose units or sub-units have taken active and creditable part in these operations. Battle Honours may be awarded in the form of ‘Battle Honour, Theatre Honour or Honour Title’.
(a) Mechanised Forces A unit will consist of one complete Armoured Regiment/Mechanised Infantry Battalion or one or more Armoured Squadrons/ Mechanised Infantry Companies integral to that Armourd Regiment/Mechanised Infantry Battalion.
(b) Artillery & Air Defence Artillery A unit will consist of one complete regiment or one or more Batteries integral to that regiment of the Regular Army or embodied Regiment of the Territorial Army.
(c) Engineers A unit will consist of an Engineer Regiment or one or more Field/Field Park Companies integral to the Regiment or an Independent Engineer unit when not forming part of an Engineer Regiment.
(d) Infantry A unit will consist of Battalion of the Regular Army or embodied Battalion of Territorial Army.
(e) Army Aviation Corps A unit will consist of a Squadron or one or more Flights when not forming part of a squadron.
(f) Signals A unit will consist of a Regiment or one or more companies when not forming part of a Regiment.
4. Battle/Theatre Honours and Honour Titles so awarded will be included in the title of a unit. Details of the award will be published at the appropriate place in the Army List from time to time.
5. The policy regarding emblazonment of Battle Honours on... [continues]
Cite This Essay
(2011, 01). Indian Army. StudyMode.com. Retrieved 01, 2011, from http://www.studymode.com/essays/Indian-Army-567361.html
"Indian Army" StudyMode.com. 01 2011. 01 2011 <http://www.studymode.com/essays/Indian-Army-567361.html>.
"Indian Army." StudyMode.com. 01, 2011. Accessed 01, 2011. http://www.studymode.com/essays/Indian-Army-567361.html.