Center for 4-H and Youth Development
CAUSES is committed to building strong, vibrant communities of active and engaged citizens. The Center for 4-H and Youth Development develops innovative programs that emphasize experiential learning opportunities for young people and their families. Through "hands-on" interactive programming, participants develop life skills, leadership abilities, and an ethic of civic stewardship. The center offers the following programming to support and engage District youth.
4-H Clubs young people, ages five through nineteen, in developing knowledge, skills and attitudes that will enable them to become self-directing, responsible, productive citizens, and contributing members of society. The 4-H program educates youth in arts and sciences, health and fitness, science, technology, environmental science, math, sewing and fashion design, cooking and healthy eating and a host of other subject areas while encouraging fellowship and service opportunities. 4-H continues to develop new projects for its members to study beyond agriculture and animal husbandry, including photography, conservation, cooking, public speaking, various sports, history, art, and other pursuits.
4-H Living Interactive Family Education (4-H LIFE) is a youth development program that addresses the needs of children with incarcerated parents. The goal of the 4-H LIFE program is to provide a strong, healthy, and nurturing family environment while helping the incarcerated parents become positive role models. The program consists of three components, including parenting skills classes, monthly planning meetings, and family club meetings.
4-H International Network was launched to connect 4-Hers from around the world. Youth from US meet with 4-H Club members from other countries via Skype to compare environmental challenges in their communities and share potential solutions.
4-H STEM consists of specialized programs designed to introduce and encourage participation in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Math disciplines among youth in the District of Columbia. The program is supported by the Alteria Foundation through the National 4-H Council and works collaboratively with UDC's STEM Center.
4-H Summer Camp consists of hands-on learning projects designed for enrichment during the summer months. Located on the campus of the University of the District of Columbia, the camp includes opportunities for youth to explore new learning projects, develop new friendships, practice healthy eating and exercise, and have plenty of fun.
EnvironMentors is a sustainability-focused mentoring program which engages youth leaders in becoming active stewards of their communities and the environment. Over the course of the school year, students work with mentors to develop rigorous environmental science projects based on relevant environmental circumstances in their communities. Upon completion of their chosen research projects, they develop lesson plans and present to an elementary school class, science fairs, and at the annual EnvironMentors Science Fair where they have a chance to compete for college scholarships.
LifeSmarts Consumer Education for Teenagers creates savvy consumers and develops marketplace skills among teens in a fun and engaging format. Complementing high school curricula, Lifesmarts is run as a game-show style competition for 9th through 12th grade students.
Operation Military Kids serves children of deployed parents by hosting special events and training sessions to mobilize a support network consisting of youth, parents, and educators. "Ready, Set, Go" training is offered to educate communities about the needs of military families in the deployment cycle. The program also distributes "Hero Packs," Operation Military Kids-branded backpacks filled with a variety of items from partner agencies and local businesses, provided to military youth as a way of communicating thanks for the sacrifices that they make while their parents are deployed.
The Health Rocks Program is a healthy living program that strives to reduce tobacco, alcohol and drug use among youth in the District of Columbia and to develop life skills that lead to healthy lifestyle choices. It is our goal to engage youth and adults in a partnership to develop and implement community strategies that help youth understand influences and heath consequences of tobacco, alcohol and drug use. It is an interactive program that is adaptable to multiple teaching situations, uses interactive hands on learning and meets National Health Education Standards.
5 Steps to Start a Club
Basics (Teaching and Training) for New Leaders
4-H Factsheet - Bullying is a Big Deal
4-H Factsheet - Grandparents Raising Grandchildren
4-H Factsheet - I still Need Time for Me (Parent Resource)
4-H Factsheet - Involving Parents in 4-H
4-H Factsheet - Operation Military Kids
4-H Factsheet - Parental Involvement in School
4-H Factsheet - School Stress
4-H Factsheet Value of Clubs
4-H Factshhet - Turn Off the TV
4-H Frequently Asked Questions and Answers
4-H Grandparenting Program Brochure
4-H Info Doc Fathers Reading Every Day (FRED)
4-H Parenting Education Brochure
4-H Parenting Resource Guide
Mastering Soft Skills for Workplace Success - Skills to pay the Bills