Negotiators for Canada and more than 100 other countries have signed a draft blueprint for sustainable development, but critics say Canada was instrumental in making the plan unduly weak.
After months of trying to boil down proposals, environmental officials at the Rio+20 conference in Brazil this week finally compromised and delivered a 283-point “vision” for leaders and politicians to ratify later this week.
In the draft, the countries pledge to work with civil society to “renew our commitment to sustainable development, and to ensure the promotion of economically, socially and environmentally sustainable future for our planet and for present and future generations.”
The plan would commit countries to fight climate change with “urgent and ambitious action,” increase their aid for developing countries, and work out a global set of long-term sustainable development goals to alleviate poverty and prevent global warming.
Critics say the draft is weak on timelines and firm commitments, and lacks heft when it comes to overseeing the state of the world’s oceans.
“The text is extremely weak, and as it stands represents a sellout of people and the planet,” Cameron Fenton, director of the Canadian Youth Climate Coalition, said in an email from Rio.
“Canada’s role has been at its best not engaging in the process, and at worst acting to weaken ambitious language and delete commitments.”
About 50,000 delegates and activists have descended on the Brazilian city for the week. Dozens of heads of state will meet Wednesday and Thursday, although many industrialized countries sent ministers instead of leaders.
Canadian Environment Minister Peter Kent arrived Tuesday afternoon, and was set to meet with provincial delegations Tuesday night. Premiers from Quebec and Manitoba are both in Rio, along with officials and ministers from some other provinces.
Environmentalists blamed Canada, in part, for arguing against a new agreement that would better protect the biodiversity of the high seas, where no country has any firm control.
Europe and some developing countries, as well as many environmental groups, hoped to see leaders commit to a new agreement to protect marine habitat and keep an eye on deep-sea mining.
Instead, negotiators agreed to talk some more, and decide later.
“It’s a big failure of Rio, especially since this was talked about as the ‘summit of the seas,“’ said Susanna Fuller, marine conservation co-ordinator for the Ecology Action Centre in Halifax who was in the negotiating room in Rio.
While regional agreements and fishing accords control some aspects of biodiversity in parts of the world’s oceans, there are gaps that beg a global agreement to prevent destruction of habitat and ocean pollution, she said.