Hormone produced by D-cells of the gastric antrum; acts to inhibit release of growth hormone - balances somatoliberin and has widespread actions in consequence.
peptide hormone secreted by many tissues that tends to suppress secretion of other hormones.
Hormone which helps to control the secretion of insulin by the pancreas and gastrin by the stomach.
a native hormone that inhibits several endocrine functions
A hormone produced by the delta cells of the islets; helps regulate blood sugar levels by controlling release of insulin and glucagon between meals.
A hormone believed to play a role in regulating growth hormone and also playing a role in the regulation of glucagon and insulin.
A hormone secreted from the pancreas. Somatostatin tells the body when to make hormone such as insulin, glucagon, and secretin. Also provides important "breaking" of the chyme (partially digested food) as it passes through the ileum. This is the so-called ileal break.
A hormone widely distributed throughout the body, especially in the hypothalamus and pancreas, that acts as an important regulator of endocrine and nervous system function by inhibiting the secretion of several other hormones such as growth hormone, insulin , and gastrin. It exerts its biologic actions by binding to specific high-affinity receptors on the cell surface. The gene encoding somatostatin is termed SST and is on chromosome 3 in region 3q28. See the entire definition of Somatostatin
hormone in the pancreas that helps tell the body when to make the hormones insulin, glucagon, gastrin, secretin, and renin.
Pancreatic hormone that controls the rate of nutrient absorption into the bloodstream.
a pituitary hormone that inhibits the production of growth hormone and is use to treat diarrhea.
A hormone made by the delta cells of the pancreas (in areas called the islets of Langerhans). Scientists think it may control how the body secretes two other hormones, insulin and glucagon.
A hormone which inhibits the release of somatotropin. It also inhibits the secretion of insulin and gastrin. Somatostatin also inhibits the target tissues of the hormones it inhibits and has been used experimentally to inhibit hormone production by tumors.
a hormone produced in the nervous system, intestine, and various endocrine glands. Somatostatin helps control many body functions, including nerve transmission, intestinal function, and cell growth.
Gastrointestinal and hypothalmic peptide hormone (two forms: 14 and 28 residues), found in gastric mucosa, pancreatic islets, nerves of the gastrointestinal tract, in posterior pituitary and in the central nervous system. Inhibits gastric secretion and motility: in hypothalamus/pituitary inhibits somatotropin release.
A human growth hormone.
Somatostatin is a peptide hormone that regulates the endocrine system and affects neurotransmission and cell proliferation via interaction with G-protein-coupled somatostatin receptors and inhibition of the release of numerous secondary hormones. Somatostatin has two active forms produced by alternative cleavage of a single preproprotein: one of 14 amino acids, the other of 28 amino acids.