[Steadily changing food consumption of Danes. Clear trends during the period 1995-2001].
ABSTRACT The aim of the study was to describe trends in food habits in Denmark derived from a food frequency survey conducted by the Danish Nutrition Council in 2001 and compare it to similar surveys from 1995 and 1998.
A random population sample of 1000 men and women (aged 15-91 years) were interviewed by telephone. They were asked 13 food frequency questions about nutritionally important foods (yoghurt, milk, cheese, rye bread, wheat bread, sandwiches with fish, fish as the main meal, meat as the main meal, potatoes, rice/pasta, vegetables (two questions) fruit) and about the type of milk and fat spreads most often used.
Several of the changes seen from 1995 to 1998 had continued into the 1998-2001 period. The results showed increased frequencies for shredded salad/raw vegetables and rice/pasta, but reduced frequencies for meat as the main meal and potatoes. Fruit consumption had also increased between 1998 and 2001. Average frequencies differed by 13-28%. Another pronounced trend was the increased use of low-fat milk (< or = 0.5% fat) instead of whole milk (42% drinking low-fat milk in 2001 versus 28% in 1998) and the greater numbers who did not spread any kind of fat on their bread (40% versus 22% in 1995, for rye bread).
In general the observed trends point in the right direction in respect of food-based dietary guidelines and other recommendations. This indicates that the Danish population has been influenced by the nutritional messages and campaigns stressing fat reduction and increased intake of fruit and vegetables. An important factor in this context is the increasing availability of low-fat milk products on the Danish market. Whether or not the positive trends for foods included are supported by the rest of the diet remains to be answered.
Article: How to find information on national food and nutrient consumption surveys across Europe: systematic literature review and questionnaires to selected country experts are both good strategies.[show abstract] [hide abstract]
ABSTRACT: The present research was conducted within the framework of the EURopean micronutrient RECommendations Aligned project. In order to identify the best practice in assessing nutrient intakes, a search strategy for collecting data from national food consumption surveys/studies in Europe was developed. Systematic literature searches were carried out on twenty-eight European and the four European Free Trade Association countries. A questionnaire was also sent to two to five experts in each country. Systematic reviews using PubMed yielded 12 703 abstracts that were reduced to 200 studies using inclusion and exclusion criteria. Similarly, a search of ministry web sites yielded 3033 hits, and subsequently reduced to nine surveys. Belgium, France, Germany, Ireland, Sweden, Spain and the United Kingdom were the countries with most data and Slovenia and Liechtenstein were those with the least. Seventy-eight expert questionnaires were obtained from all countries except for Liechtenstein, Luxembourg and Slovakia. Detailed results and references are given. A systematic search and questionnaires are equally good at identifying national surveys across countries. Literature searching provides globally accessible and objective information albeit limited, whereas the questionnaire provides information that, depending upon responders, can be more complete. A combination of both strategies is recommended.The British journal of nutrition 08/2009; 101 Suppl 2:S37-50. · 3.45 Impact Factor