Tag: "clams" at biology news
UAF scientists discover new marine habitat in Alaska
...ariety of species, from commercial species such as clams
and scallops to true corals. The discovery of rhodoliths in Alaska is likely to fuel the debate over the protection of seafloor habitats. "Now that we found them, we want to find more of these beds and learn precisely what their role in the Alas...
Scientists explore genome of methane-breathing microbe
...acteria those that live inside of animals such as clams
and mussels in deep-sea methane seeps that are extremely difficult to study. Such methane-fixing bacterial symbionts allow their host animals to feed off of the methane collected in seeps. "The methane-fixing symbionts are very important ecological...
Clams: They're not just for chowder anymore
...logical Laboratory to begin sequencing some of the clams
active genes. The effort, called the Clam Project...to provide scientists with better knowledge of the clams
active DNA. Such information is crucial to the study of the basic cellular processes involved in man...
Congress to fund Sequim-based coastal security research effort
... evaluate the use of living marine systems such as clams
and mussels as biosensors to concentrate and detect the presence of biological, chemical or nuclear materials in coastal waterways, beaches and estuaries. Another will look at developing novel ultra-small nanomaterials to serve as surrogate collector...
Revealing bizarre deep-sea secrets
...l. The third site is a community of chemosynthetic clams
and worms that rely on methane-eating bacteria for nutrition. The worms are plentiful around the seeps and attract a number of predators such as fish and deep-sea sharks. Finally, the group will travel to a bizarre site 150 miles southeast of New ...
Ecosystem bounces back from hurricanes
...atch numbers of shrimp or bivalve molluscs such as clams
and scallops did not suffer long-term effects from the storms. The one species affected negatively for a longer period of time by the storms was the blue crab, the paper asserts. Reductions in the number of blue crabs can be attributed, says Dr. Davi...
Penguins ingest mollusk shells to obtain calcium for thicker eggshells
...ins have significantly more mollusk shells, mainly clams
and mussels, in their stomachs than males do. The mollusk shells gradually leach calcium used to form eggshells. Penguins typically nest on hard surfaces near coastlines and, if soil conditions are right, they might build burrows. Because they can't ...
Mantis shrimp may have swiftest kick in the animal kingdom
...cean floor in search of other crustaceans - crabs, clams
and snails - and smash them open with their club-shaped front appendages. In captivity, these club-equipped stomatopods have been known to break the glass walls of their tank. Patek, who studies communication in crustaceans and related organisms, has...
A picture is worth a thousand miles not traveled to measure the fossil of an ancient sea creature
...re common today while brachiopods, which look like clams
but have a different biology, were most common in ancient oceans. Both types of organism have been around for over 500 million years and still exist today, which makes them good subjects for an assessment of long-term body size trends. Changes in bod...
Philippines: Park expansion creates nation's largest contiguous protected area
...ich in endangered species like whale sharks, giant clams
and sea turtles. "The Peablanca expansion is a huge conservation achievement for this nation," said DENR Secretary Elisea Gozun. "But when one takes into account that this new area is in the heart of the Sierra Madre Biodiversity Corridor one of th...
Stepping way out: Scripps scientists watch clam feet elongate far from the shell
...up aquarium tanks with sediment to investigate how clams
that require chemicals differ from those that do n...hane. The Nature paper explains that the symbiotic clams
in the Thyasiridae family elongate their feet to burrow extensive mines in an effort to reach the su...
Are walruses right-handed?
...part of the clam, and discard the empty shells. As clams
can be buried up to 40 cm deep, the walruses must remove sediment to find them. The videos showed that the walruses had four different types of foraging behaviour. They removed sediment by beating their right flipper, beating their left flipper, or ...
Research shows little effect from Arctic offshore oil drilling
...n extensive. "We analyzed several species of fish, clams
and amphipods," said Trefry. "We also studied the water, ice and mud to check for potential pollution."What Trefry's team and their colleagues from Battelle Ocean Sciences, Kinnetics Laboratories, Applied Marine Sciences and the University of Texas M...
Live seafood trade linked to species invasions
...n temperature changes. Two of the species (Manilla clams
and Pacific oysters) are already established in Pa... (89% vs. 90% and 100%, for ocean quahogs, Manilla clams
and Pacific oysters, respectively). "If released, [ocean quahogs] could potentially spawn and become...
...fore and after the arrival of the crabs, examining clams
from multiple sites along Maine's coast. Whitlow ...According to Whitlow, the results suggest that the clams
may have burrowed deeper to evade predation or that crabs may have eaten clams
at shallower depths. ...
Is being big clam on the block a factor in species success?
...scallops, and brachiopods, which appear similar to clams
but have a fundamentally different anatomy, are easily compared because "there is a really good fossil record for both groups," says Krause. The scope of the project is huge. The researchers want to measure what has happened all over the world and ov...
Japanese shore crabs invade Penobscot Bay, Maine
...sanguineus ), which feast voraciously on mussels, clams
and other shellfish, were found at Crescent Beach in Owl's Head by Robin Hadlock Seeley, a marine biologist and an associate curator of Cornell's Malacology Collection, and Erin McDonald, a Cornell junior from New Hartford, N.Y. Last summer Seeley wa...
Vogel's new book is meaty
...s covered in his book, including that facts that clams
pump a ton of water to get an ounce of food forty percent of the human body is muscle the Greeks and Romans built marvelously Light-weight chariots but because they hadn't figured how to harness horses properly, needed four animals to pull them, an...
A little larceny comes naturally to Northwestern crows
...crabs and snails. Larger prey such as sand lances, clams
and crabs cannot be quickly consumed, and crows that catch them often become the targets of their thieving neighbors. "Finding that chance to steal food is a very uniform strategy among these birds," said Renee Ha. "They are not like the crows in ...
Magazine article by Rutgers researcher details revival of life after deep-sea volcanic eruption
... Many of the creatures, such as giant tube worms, clams
and fish, were instantly incinerated by lava. In the article, Lutz details how he led a series of return trips over a nine-year period that shocked the scientific world: Not only did the researchers find new geological formations that scientists had...