Jewish Wisdom on Friendship
Jewish literature offers many insights into the nature of friendship, the rewards it offers, and the efforts one should make to sustain a friendship.
The following selections represent contributions to the understanding and appreciation of friendship. They are taken from a medieval midrash, a Hasidic tale, and the writing of a contemporary rabbi.
There were two close friends who had been parted by war so that they lived in different kingdoms. Once one of them came to visit his friend, and because he came from the city of the king's enemy, he was imprisoned and sentenced to be executed as a spy.
No amount of pleas would save him, so he begged the king for one kindness.
"Your Majesty," he said, "let me have just one month to return to my land and put my affairs in order so my family will be cared for after my death. At the end of the month I will return to pay the penalty."
"How can I believe you will return?" answered the king. "What security can you offer?"
"My friend will be my security," said the man. "He will pay for my life with his if I do not return."
The king called in the man's friend, and to his amazement, the friend agreed to the conditions.
On the last day of the month, the sun was setting, and the man had not yet returned. The king ordered his friend killed in his stead. As the sword was about to descend, the man returned and quickly placed the sword on his own neck. But his friend stopped him.
"Let me die for you," he pleaded.
The king was deeply moved. He ordered the sword taken away and pardoned them both.
"Since there is such great love and friendship between the two of you," he said, "I entreat you to let me join you as a third." And from that day on they became the king's companions.
And it was in this spirit that our sages of blessed memory said, "Get yourself a companion" [Mishnah Avot 1:6].
-- This translation of a legend, from the collection of minor midrashic works, Bet Ha-midrash, assembled by the Viennese scholar Adolf Jellinek (1820-1893), appears in Francine Klagsbrun, Voices of Wisdom (Pantheon Books).
Learning to Love a Fellow Human Being
Rabbi Moshe Leib [of Sassov, a late 18th-century Ukrainian Hasidic master] told this story:
"How to love men [i.e., other persons] is something I learned from a peasant. He was sitting in an inn with other peasants, drinking. For a long time he was as silent as all the rest, but when he was moved by wine, he asked one of the men seated beside him, 'Tell me, do you love me or don't you love me?'
"The other peasant replied, 'I love you very much’.