Utah is located in Western United States. It shares its borders with Arizona on the south, Colorado on the east, Wyoming on the northeast, Idaho on the north and Nevada on the west.How did Utah get its name?
Utah is named after the Ute tribe. It means "people of the mountains" in Ute language.
Salt Lake City is the capital of Utah. Founded by Brigham Young in 1847, it is among the two major urban areas in the Great Basin. It is also known as the "Crossroads of the West". It is situated in the northeast region of the Salt Lake Valley.How big is Utah?
Utah is the 13th largest state in the United States. It covers an area of 84,899 square miles. It has an estimated population of 2,763,885, 34th largest in the country.Which is the largest city of Utah?
The capital of Utah, Salt Lake City, is the largest city in Utah. Salt Lake City metropolitan area is the largest metropolitan area in the state. The city covers an area of 110.4 square miles and has an estimated population of 186,440. Less than 50% of the population in the city is Mormon.What is the nickname of Utah?
Beehive is the nickname of Utah. It is related to the qualities of thrift and perseverance. On March 4, 1959, it became the official state emblem and was the seal of the state when Utah became a state in 1896.What is the official language of Utah?
The official language of Utah is English.What is the religion of Utah?
Majority of the population in Utah are members of The Church of Latter-day Saints. The church in the state has a strong regional influence on politics. Other religious denominations in the state are Islam, Hinduism, Buddhism, Judaism, and Jehovah's Witnesses.
The government of Utah is divided into three branches: executive, legislative, and judicial. Gary Richard Herbert, a Republican, is the current and the 17th Governor of Utah. He assumed office on August 11, 2009. Gary S. Bell, a Republican, is the current and the seventh Lieutenant Governor of Utah. He assumed office on September 1, 2009.When did Utah achieve statehood?
By signing the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo, Utah officially became a US territory on February 2,1848.With the Compromise of 1850, Utah territory was created. It finally became the 45th state of United States and was granted statehood on January 4, 1896.What are some of the famous places in Utah?
Goblin Valley State Park, Goosenecks State Park, Bryce Canyon National Park, Zion National Park, Arches National Park, Museum of Peoples and Cultures, "the Mittens" of Monument Valley, Alta Ski Area, Notch Peak, and Antelope Island State Park are some of the important places in Utah.What is the economy of Utah like?
In 2010, the gross state product of Utah was $114.5 billion, while the per capita income was $41,750. Tourism is an important sector of the economy. Major industries in the state are mining, cattle ranching, government services, and salt production. Major agricultural outputs include hay, corn, livestock products, poultry, and barley. Mining is another important sector of Utah's economy. Minerals mined in the state are copper, gold, silver, molybdenum, zinc, lead, and beryllium.