Her Highness Denise asked a question that I didn’t answer. I hope to recover now. At post 1612 she asked why people are not as they were ‘way back then’ when unconditional respect existed between the sexes. Referring to the present, she asks, “What exactly led to people disrespecting themselves and one another?”
It began a century ago but intensified over the last half-century. Americans have been purposely fractionated by friends of Big Government and enemies of private property, family as primary social unit, religion, Judeo-Christian values, capitalism, energy independence, economic prosperity, peacefulness in society, the Declaration of Independence, the Constitution of the United States, and every other value that unified us as uniquely American. Revolutionaries, radicals, feminists and leftist followers developed and spread a multitude of political movements designed to dis-unify Americans so that governments could grow with little or no effective supervision by We the People. One such movement, Feminism, aimed to split men and women, and it worked.
Advocates and followers picked up the feminist torch, ignited their imaginations, and found innumerable ways that men are no darned good. Treat anyone as no darned good and you produce two effects. You lose respect for them, and they lose respect for you.
Joining up with other radicals, feminists spread their opinions universally, and men responded with diminished respect of women generally and less respect for individuals that advocate the feminist spirit. When men lack respect for the female gender, male dominance instinctively magnifies its intensity and enhances patriarchy, which further weakens unconditional respect of one sex for the other.
The consequence of Feminism now stirs families in many wrong ways. Because of shortcomings in wifely respect, husbands react by dominating the home. From lack of husbandly respect, wives suffer loss of the natural order of mating up. They lose the privilege/power/ability of ruling the rooster. Wives fight back with in-his-face directness that exhibits even less respect. They seek to restore their natural role of dominating the home, but mutual respect sinks further, separation or divorce follows, and mutual respect of the genders weakens still further.
The consequence of Feminism also makes single women suffer under the unpredictability/undependability/irresponsibility of men scorned so long by the feminist fever.
Once on the downhill slide, respect between the sexes worsens because of this natural phenomenon. Individuals question their own self-respect when they receive less respect from the other sex than they think they deserve. As self-respect declines, the ability to show respect for others follows. Peering at one step beyond individuals, inter-gender respect also declines and in reaction further erodes unconditional respect between individuals.
We’ve been conditioned this way. There’s no end to how we unwittingly or voluntarily fractionalize ourselves and divide society into antagonistic groups. All done in the name of democracy, compassion, or whatever, we learn that other Americans are too different to be respected unconditionally. We learn to find some reason to dislike or not respect others in some way or another.
Another natural phenomenon exacerbates the process: We respect those in our group more than those outside it. When the American motto of e pluribus unum prevailed—out of many, one—the importance of interest groupings were minimized. We were all Americans and unconditional respect of others flooded society.
Now, revolutionaries, radicals, and political activists have killed e pluribus unum, aka the Melting Pot, and we identify ourselves not as Americans but as belonging to various groups in competition with others. Such as, Black vs. White vs. Hispanic vs. Native Americans vs. Asians, taxed vs. untaxed, environmentalists vs. wealth creators, poor vs. rich, citizens vs. non-citizens, hunters vs. anti-gunners, farmers vs. environmentalists, children vs. adults, blue collar vs. white collar, Protestant denominations vs. each other, Catholics vs. Protestants, Other Christians vs. Mormons, globalists vs. nationalists, union spending vs. dues-payer interests, anarchist gangs vs. civilized order, lawyers vs. tort reformers, ethnic groups vs. each other, politicians vs. free speech, teachers vs. parents, judicial activism vs. We the People who know better, commuters vs. rapid transit advocates, conscience-bound vs. those who aren’t, religious vs. secularists, Congress vs. the public, bureaucrats vs. threats to government power, professors vs. students that disagree, husbands vs. wives that expect better masculine responsibility, administrators vs. teachers, girls that put out vs. those that won’t, wives vs. women luring husbands for sex. The list never ends, because the political class finds usefulness in pitting one group against another.
Many of those competitions rise naturally, but unfortunately for America’s future, all are exploited by the power-seeking political class plus others they can stir to rely on emotions rather than logic, reason, truth, and common sense.
This summarizes the big picture. The American Trinity*—Liberty, In God We Trust, and e pluribus unum—are purposely being made to fade away by anti-American movements such as Feminism, multiculturalism, and many other -isms. We lack unconditional respect for one another, because e pluribus unum has been effectively destroyed. We’re losing In God We Trust that helps reassure us that other Americans are good people. We’re losing our liberty that’s so vital for unifying We the People and making government work for us. Thus, unconditional respect for fellow Americans has been vaporized by purposeful radicals, opportunistic mavericks, and follow-the-crowd activists that seek to change the fundamental structure of the American political system.
The political malignancy induced by Feminism and radical leftism is deeper and now spreads faster than we suspect. UnAmerican values metastasize and eat away unconditional respect, which keeps Americans divided. It will continue until we elect new representatives who then hire new administrators that also seek to restore America as we knew it growing up, that seek to fill the gaps of diminished self-respect and respect for others, that seek to restore unconditional female respect of men who will respond by restoring unconditional male respect of women.
It will all continue until Womanhood rises against it.
As women go, so goes society. Only women have the interest, energy to fight, and common sense to defeat the multitude of political movements that seek to destroy America as we once knew it. Men don’t naturally need morality, and so they aren’t as likely to strenuously defend it as women can and do. Only women need and, therefore, only they can restore the female-defending, character-building, and respect-earning morality of earlier America. The kind of morality they wish for men so that husbands and children interface with a respected wife and mother.
That’s how people came to disrespecting themselves and one another, and that’s why women can and should lead the way to fixing it.
*Dennis Prager coined the term. American Trinity stands for Liberty, In God We Trust, and e pluribus unum, all of which appear on the penny.
P.S. To paraphrase Blaise Pascal in 1657, I did not have enough time to shorten it.