Kindergarten Test Study System (KTSS) provides optimal and trusted* preparation for the OLSAT®, CogAT®, Naglieri (NNAT®), TAG, and GATE tests, which are commonly administered to children for admission to gifted and talented programs. KTSS also develops skills assessed by the WPPSI® and Stanford-Binet® assessments.
Here's how KTSS works:
With Thinking Skills for Tests,
children learn 9 critical thinking skills and apply them to a practice
test format. First, children learn basic skills (such as the
process of elimination). Next, they use their newly acquired
skills to solve more complex problems.
KTSS materials are published by the Critical
Thinking Company, which provides the #1 selling products for
potentially gifted and talented children used by public and private
gifted and talented programs. Their products are recommended by Mensa,
Learning, The Well Trained Mind, Dr. Toy, and
which appears to be a simple series of charts, is actually an
award-winning** deductive reasoning tool used for practice in the basic yet critically
important reasoning that underlies all of testing.
Can You Find Me?
helps children listen carefully to questions as they are read aloud,
which is how tests are administered to young children. This
makes listening a key skill to practice. Presented in an
engaging, fun format, children receive specialized
practice in listening carefully and thinking about concepts assessed in
The entire system is $51.96 and takes about seven 30-minute sessions to complete.
*To assure adherence to guidelines of the American Psychological Association and the National Council on Measurement in Education, KTSS (the original Thinking Skills for Tests) was developed in consultation with members of those organizations' ethics committees. KTSS was also shared with the publisher of the OLSAT®, the NNAT®, and the WPPSI® to ensure security of those assessments. In keeping with ethical guidelines, KTSS allows optimal performance without misrepresenting a child's ability.
**Mind Benders® has received the Creative Child Preferred Choice Award, the Practical Homeschooling Logic Award, and the Cathy Duffy Top 100 Award.
OLSAT®, NNAT® and WPPSI® are registered trademarks of NCS Pearson Inc.; CogAT® and Stanford-Binet® are registered trademarks of Riverside Publishing Co., and these companies do not endorse KTSS.