Standard of Living
A societyís standard of living increases with the rise of technology. One thousand years ago, society was technologically incapable and the only individuals who had a better life were those born into a good life; there was little chance of advancement for the common man.
The Industrial Revolution is one of the most important events in history, but many African countries and portions of Asia and South America have yet to enter the age of industrialization.
With technology advancing every day the standard of living is increasing. Right? This is not exactly true in all cases such as in Africa where technology has yet to be introduced into the common citizenís everyday life. In Niger, a country located in Africa, everyday citizens are forced to walk to a water well and hand-draw water out of the well because they do not own the luxury of water and a pipe infrastructure in their home. They are considered lucky or privileged if they even own a home. They are forced to walk the streets to their destination because they do not have money to pay for cars or taxis, which are readily available in first world countries. Africa lacks a few elements that would keep it up to pace with other countries such as higher public education which in turn increases productivity and makes them eligible for industrialization. Africa has been left behind in the age of industrialization.
If education was readily available then citizens would have an urge to achieve more than anybody in their family or even town ever could. This type of reaction would seem expected. With education the citizens would like to excel more in their lifetime than was previously thought possible, and they would look for alternatives to their current lifestyle and look to increase their standard of living.
With enough people who have a better education everybody would be looking for a better job, but these jobs are not readily available. With these conditions, industrialization would begin and the society as a whole would slowly begin to boom. With unlimited resources these types of countries are capable of accomplishing anything.
There are many differences between an industrialized nation and an unindustrialized nation. For example, on a broad scale typical belongings for a household in an industrialized nation include a television, electricity, water, a toilet, and multiple bedrooms. For a household in an unindustrialized nation they would be lucky to fit the whole family into their one-roomed house; there would be no electricity, no water, and no toilet. Industrialized nations take the simple things such as shoes, combs, and toothbrushes for granted while unindustrialized nations would die for these items.Goto the top of this page.