king of Scotland (died in 1057)
The Tragedy of Macbeth is among the most famous of William Shakespeare's plays, as well as his shortest tragedy. It is frequently performed at professional and community theatres around the world.
Macbeth (also known as The Tragedy of Macbeth) is a 1971 film directed by Roman Polanski, based on William Shakespeare's play of the same name, concerning the Scottish lord who becomes the king through deceit, treachery and murder. It stars Jon Finch as Macbeth and Francesca Annis as Lady Macbeth. Because of the transition from play to movie, some passages from the original play had to be cut out for time constraints, and some soliloquies have been changed to inner monologues for the sake of realism.
Macbeth is a Laibach album released in 1990. Like Baptism it is the soundtrack to a play, this time Shakespeare's Macbeth.
Macbeth is an opera in four acts by Giuseppe Verdi to an Italian libretto by Francesco Maria Piave with additions by Andrea Maffei, based on Shakespeare's play of the same name.
Macbeth is a 1948 film adaptation of William Shakespeare's tragedy Macbeth made by Orson Welles.
Macbeth is a fictional character from the Disney animated television series Gargoyles, voiced by John Rhys-Davies. Macbeth is one of several characters in the show based on characters from plays by William Shakespeare (in this case he is based on the eponymous protagonist from Macbeth), though in fact his backstory is more closely related to the historical story of Macbeth of Scotland.
Macbeth is an Italian gothic metal band.
Macbeth (also known as M) is a 2006 Australian film version of the William Shakespeare classic, Macbeth. It was directed by Geoffrey Wright and features an ensemble cast including Sam Worthington, Victoria Hill and Lachy Hulme. Macbeth was filmed in Melbourne, Australia and was released in Australia on 21 September 2006.
The main character in William Shakespeare’s The Tragedy of Macbeth shows dramatic changes throughout the course of the play. He starts off as a valiant General in the Scottish army praised by King Duncan for his bravery, loyalty and heroism. As the play progresses however, he demonstrates more unethical characteristics which eventually lead to his ultimate demise.