CHEROKEE, N.C. — Morgan Hensley's little chunk of roasted dirt may not look like much to the untrained eye, but she's pretty proud of it.
Hensley, a senior at Pisgah High School in Canton, N.C., is one of several dozen students who are getting a little history, heritage and culture under their fingernails this summer at an archaeological excavation site in the Great Smoky Mountains National Park.
Hensley's find is a pottery shard, a half-dollar-size piece of decorated and fired clay about 3/8ths of an inch thick. And the young woman is not unaware that the find links her — and in some ways all residents of East Tennessee — directly back to those who hunted, cultivated and inhabited these hills long before European eyes ever gazed upon them.
The dig site, being overseen by representatives of both the University of Tennessee Archaeological Research Laboratory and the National Park Service, is in a small plot of flat bottomland beside U.S. Highway 441 near the park's Oconaluftee Visitors Center.
Across the road flows the gentle Oconaluftee River, the water source for the Native American Cherokees when they inhabited the tract as far back as the time of the birth of Christ.
Erik Kreusch, park service senior archaeologist, said the tract, not surprisingly, was in constant habitation for centuries because of its natural attractions — water, flat land for cultivation and hills on a couple of sides that presumably afforded some protection, an uncommon combination in the Smokies.
Kreusch describes the plot as something of a "suburb" for a larger Cherokee settlement nearby known as Nununyi. At the suburb site, Kreusch said, evidence of Cherokee habitation has been scientifically documented from about the year 1350 and at another site the year 1720.
The dates, he said, are pinpointed by carbon dating performed at the University of Illinois. But archaeologists also note that at the 1350 site there are no artifacts that can be identified as of European origin. At the 1720 site, he said, Italian glass beads and "brass tinglers" were found. The items were worn on leggings and were obtained by trade.
Photo by J. Miles Cary // Buy this photo
The high schoolers are part of a field program started in 2007 that's designed to provide young people with an interesting summer vocation that might spur them to pursue a career in archaeology. They receive a stipend for their work, Kreusch said.
Morgan Hensley would be one of those. She found her shard Tuesday as she sifted soil through screens. The dirt is more or less shaved from the surface of the ground and then poured into a sifting device that allows the soil to pass through but retains any artifacts that might be in there.
That's how Hensley found hers. Based on the circumference, the piece of pottery was a large vessel, and on the outside was a pattern of indented lines that were for decoration.
Melissa Crisp, a student coordinator for the project, said the lines likely were applied by wrapping the pottery with a cord, imprinting the pattern before the vessel was fired.
As pottery shards go, this one is "pretty big," she said.
Most are much smaller, having been broken down by nature or broken up by plows, Crisp said.
Hensley said her participation in the field program has provided "me with knowledge of the Cherokee," a people within which she believes she has no ancestry.
But many other students on hand have deep historical and ancestral roots in the Cherokee people, coming from several high schools in western North Carolina.
The dig is approved by the Eastern Band of the Cherokee.
Michael G. Angst, senior archaeologist for UT, calls the site "very significant" and says the excavation is being carefully done within environmental guidelines.
It is funded by $15,000 in grants and a healthy infusion of human and financial resources from the park service, he said.
The site's archaeological significance was identified, Kreusch said, when it was surveyed in 2006 during a project to place water and sewer lines along the road there to serve the town of Cherokee down the highway a couple of miles.
"This is not just about finding cool stuff," he said. "It connects us to the tribe and the tribe to the park."