|Search Results (19 videos found)|
|STS-48 Landing with FCR Highlights, segment 08 of 9
Mission control guides the Discovery shuttle to a successful landing. The mission took place from September 12-18, 1991 and released the Upper Atmosphere Research Satellite.
Keywords: NASA;Discover;landing;space;shuttle;mission control;
Popularity (downloads): 1092
|Snap together visualization
Information visualizations with multiple coordinated views enable users to rapidly explore complex data and discover relationships. However, it is usually difficult for users to find or create the coordinated set...
Popularity (downloads): 1099
|Wrestling with Uncertainty, segment 04 of 16
Geologists develop a history for the outer shell of the Earth
Keywords: Oil and Gas;
Popularity (downloads): 504
|ACM CHI 2000 - Designing storytelling technologies to encourage collaoration between young children
They describe the iterative design of two collaborative storytelling technologies for young children, KidPad and the Klump. They focus on the idea of designing interfaces to subtly encourage collaboration so...
Keywords: CHI; children; computer supported collaborative learning (CSCL); computer supported cooperative work (CSCW); education; single display groupware (SDG) ;
Popularity (downloads): 614
|The Voyage of the Lee, segment 13 of 21
Operation Deep Sweep continues, and new discoveries are made
Popularity (downloads): 432
|The Voyage of the Lee, segment 07 of 21
Dredging and sampling are a good part of the crew's work
Popularity (downloads): 422
|America\'s New Frontier, segment 10 of 11
Scientists discuss the significance of data obtained from GLORIA
Popularity (downloads): 441
|The Voyage of the Lee, segment 08 of 21
A replacement crew prepares to go to Antarctica
Popularity (downloads): 370
|NASA Connect - Geometry of Exploration: Water Below the Surface of Mars
NASA Connect Video containing six segments as described below. NASA Connect Segment involving students participating in an activity to measure and calculate ellipses. The activity explains ellipses and their...
Keywords: NASA Connect; Mars; Geometry; Pythagoras Theorem; Ellipses; Mars Millenium Project; Mars Microprobe; Orbits; calculate; Student Activity; Johannes Kepler; Mars Microprobe; Mars Navigation; Water; NASA Online Activity; Life On Mars; Navigation to Mars; Spacecraft; NASA Viking Mission; Geometry in Navigation; Pythagoras; Pythagoras Theorem; Right Triangle;
Popularity (downloads): 4447
|NASA Connect - Having A Solar Blast
NASA Connect Video containing five segments as described below. NASA Connect segment exploring solar flares and how NASA scientists study these events. The video explains the goal of the HESSI...
Keywords: NASA Connect; Sun; Atmosphere; HESSI Satellite; Earth; Solar Flares; Sun; X-Ray; Gamma Ray; Radiation; Magnetic Energy; Charged Particles; Electrons; Protons; Ions; Magnetic Field Mines; Radio Waves; Hydrogen; M-class Flares; Graph; Problem Solving; Solar Cycles; Student Activity; Solar Storms; Electromagnetic Radiation; Electromagnetic Spectrum; Radio Waves; Infrared Waves; Visible Waves; Ultra-Violet Waves; SOHO Satellite; Ace Satellite; Image Satellite; Solar Wind Speed; Ring Currents; Plasmasphere; Solar System; Sunspot; Nuclear Fussion; Energy; Hydrogen; Star; Galileo; Telescope; Temperature; Photosphere; Corona; Atomic Bomb; Corona Mass Ejection; Solar Weather; Web Activity; Solar Eclipse; Remote Solar Telescopes;
Popularity (downloads): 2588