An excerpt from www.HouseOfNames.com archives copyright © 2000 - 2013
Where did the English Sackrison family come from? What is the English Sackrison family crest and coat of arms? When did the Sackrison family first arrive in the United States? Where did the various branches of the family go? What is the Sackrison family history?
It is only in the last few hundred years that the English language has been standardized. For that reason, early Anglo-Saxon surnames like Sackrison are characterized by many spelling variations. As the English language changed and incorporated elements of other European languages, even literate people changed the spelling of their names. Scribes and monks in the Middle Ages spelled names they sounded, so it is common to find several variations that refer to a single person. The variations of the name Sackrison include: Sacker, Saker, Sakker and others.
First found in London where they held a family seat as Lords of the Manor. The Saxon influence of English history diminished after the Battle of Hastings in 1066. The language of the courts was French for the next three centuries and the Norman ambience prevailed. But Saxon surnames survived and the family name was first referenced in the 13th century when they held estates in that city.
This web page shows only a small excerpt of our Sackrison research. Another 185 words(13 lines of text) covering the years 1307, 1455, and 1487 are included under the topic Early Sackrison History in all our PDF Extended History products.
More information is included under the topic Early Sackrison Notables in all our PDF Extended History products.
Many English families tired of political and religious strife left Britain for the new colonies in North America. Although the trip itself offered no relief - conditions on the ships were extremely cramped, and many travelers arrived diseased, starving, and destitute - these immigrants believed the opportunities that awaited them were worth the risks. Once in the colonies, many of the families did indeed prosper and, in turn, made significant contributions to the culture and economies of the growing colonies. An inquiry into the early roots of North American families has revealed a number of immigrants bearing the name Sackrison or a variant listed above: the name represented in many forms and recorded from the mid 17th century in the great migration from Europe. Migrants settled in the eastern seaboard from Newfoundland, to Maine, to Virginia, the Carolinas, and to the islands..
The Sackrison Family Crest was acquired from the Houseofnames.com archives. The Sackrison Family Crest was drawn according to heraldic standards based on published blazons. We generally include the oldest published family crest once associated with each surname.
This page was last modified on 22 November 2011 at 07:12.
houseofnames.com is an internet property owned by Swyrich Corporation.