Health Awareness: Introduction to Basic First Aid
Author: Ann Marie Fundador Bacolod City
Author: Renee Ross Tayhon Bacolod City
DescriptionThis Webquest will teach students on how to perform first aid to a sick or injured person,until professional medical care is available.Certain self-limiting illnesses or minor injuries may not require further medical care past the first aid intervention. It generally consists of a series of simple and in some cases, potentially life-saving techniques that an individual can be trained to perform with minimal equipment.
Grade Level College / Adult
Curriculum Health / PE
How Can We Perform First Aid?And Save Lives?The person giving first aid, the first-alder, deals with the whole situation, the injured person, and the injury or illness. He knows what not to do as well as what to do; he avoids errors that are frequently made by untrained persons through well-meant but misguided efforts. He knows, too, that his first aid knowledge and skill can mean the difference between life and death, between temporary and permanent disability, and between rapid recovery and long hospitalization.First aid is the immediate care given to a person who has been injured or suddenly taken ill. It includes self-help and home care if medical assistance is not available or is delayed. It also includes well-selected words of encouragement, evidence of willingness to help, and promotion of confidence by demonstration of competence.In this Webquest, the learner will be able to: 1. Find the different types of injuries.2. The learner will also know the importance of first aid.3. They will also be able to perform different strategies. 4. They will find the value of first aid training.5. They will know the cause,effect,and prevention I will provide some video links to help them know more about first aid.This WebQuest is made to give First aid training, not only provides you with knowledge and skill to give life support and other emergency care but also helps you to develop safety awareness and habits that promote safety at home, at work, during recreation, and on the streets and highways.
From the links provided, the student is to find:1. The definitions of CPR and AED.2. Some cause, effect, and prevention of Accidents.3. A way on how to perform first aid to an injured or sick person.4. Some things that can be used for first aid.The students should:1. Conduct a seminar regarding what they had learned from this WebQuest.2. They should be grouped and each group will think of one way to increase positive awareness for First Aid. a. Make a video or post one of the videos in Facebook and in their groups and probably they can compile the comments of people. (The teacher can definitely make adjustments and other suggestions.) - Watch the videos together, then choose one (vote) to post on Facebook. - One person could compile the significant comments of people - Two people could make a paper about the video and comments. - One person could do the editing of the paper. *This group can be composed of four people. b. Advocate about this in their school, to one whole class or a group of people. - One would be the emcee. - Two or three people would speak about different topics regarding first aid including how we can help contribute or support the people in the community. - Two people would prepare the presentations - They will all help to do the materials, and get permissions (especially the emcee). *This group can be composed of five to seven people (or more). c. They could also make different posters giving knowledge about this topic and encouraging people,and then post it in different areas of the school. - Two people could work together about the drawings on the poster/s. (digital or manual) - Another one or two people could put the color into it. (digital or manual) - Two or more person could design a logo or a campaign slogan for each of the posters."Saving the lives of Others" *This group can be composed of five or six people.3. Make a paper on what they have learned from this Webquest (specially from what they are supposed to know or find out). *more is given about this in the process
1. Friendship Papera. Watch these (below):· #13-16 video:How to perform CPR and other first aid· #18 link: Dealing with chokingb. Identify a different techniques of first aid.c. During the process, consider the things helpful to your daily life.d. Write a paper about your experience.2. Video and Write-upA. Choice 1a. Choose one of these videos or the previous videos to post on your Facebook accounts and groups.b. Encourage others to watch it, like it, and comment on it.c. Make a paper about it. All Videos: Youtube videos (below)ORB. Choice 2a. Plan for an advocate or a lecture about First Aid. b. Do the plan to a class, the whole high school department of one year level is preferable, depending on the amount of students. c. Make a paper about your experienceORC. Choice 3a. In a group, make three (3) posters that shows the basic first aid. - One person could make drawings on a poster. - Another could put the color into it. - One or more person could design a logo or a campaign slogan for each of the posters. "Saving the Lives of Others" b. Make a paper that could quote comments of people and reactions about it.In order to do Choice 2 or 3, you need to have an idea about first aid, so you have to check out the links as well.3. Learning Papera. The student is to check out the links provided and make a paper about it. b. The paper should include the definition of First Aid, causes of Accident,Prevention and effects and also what the community or they can do for the people during emergencies.c. They can mention about community integration and inclusion.Links: All links provided can be used. From the sources given, you are now to do the task! You don't have to limit yourself with the sources I have given, check Google out. Enjoy!
So, what have you learned so far? Were you able to do the tasks: make a friend, make a learning paper, and be an advocate for First Aid.Was this a learning experience for you? Did this change some of your perspectives in life,especially to those who are in need during emergencies.That's all the time we have for this topic, but if you want to know more about it you can search more on Google, and Youtube.
The students should:1. Make a paper about their experience after two weeks . They can put the thoughts they had, how they were influenced by their friend or maybe what they want to do for the person.2. They should be grouped and each group will think of one way to increase positive awareness for people who needs help, specifically those on emergencies. They could (choose): a. Make a video or post one of the videos in Facebook and in their groups and probably they can compile the comments of people. (The teacher can definitely make adjustments and other suggestions.) b. Advocate about this in their school, to one whole class or a group of people. (Suggestion: Do this inside the school) c. They could also make different posters giving knowledge about this topic and then post it in different areas of the school.*You can choose one of these for the fourth rubric as additional or real part of their grade. I suggest that you be the one to make the choice which one they're going to do depending on the time you have because the weight of work is not the same.3. They should also make a paper on what they have learned from this Webquest (specially from what they are supposed to know or find out).*You can modify this the way you want to do it, whatever you think is best. This is our first time to do a Webquest, hope you find this useful! :)) God bless you!