American Heritage® Dictionary of the English Language, Fourth Edition
- A city of northwest Venezuela south of the Gulf of Venezuela at the outlet of Lake Maracaibo, the largest lake of South America. Founded in 1571, it is a major port on a dredged channel allowing access for oceangoing vessels and the largest city in the country. Population: 1,600,000.
- n. A city in the northwest of Venezuela.
- n. a port city in northwestern Venezuela; a major oil center
“Thursday: vs. Argentina in Maracaibo, 8: 45 p.m. July 2: vs. Paraguay in Barinas, 6: 30 p.m. July 5: vs. Colombia in Barquisimeto, 6: 30 p.m. Elimination play begins July 7: Top two in each group and two best of three third-place teams advance”
“They found a harbor called Maracaibo, and twenty-seven Spaniards at the earnest request of the natives were entertained as guests among the inland villages for nine days.”
“The list does not include the papers favorable to Chavez who predate him such as Maracaibo's Panorama and, up to a point, Ultimas Noticias.”
“Stephan Talty does an excellent job of revealing the life of Captain Henry Morgan, going into detail on his major raids on Granada, Portobelo, Maracaibo, and finally Panama.”
“The Empire of Blue Water: Captain Morgan’s Great Pirate Army, The Epic Battle For the Americas, And the Catastrophe That Ended the Outlaw’s Bloody Reign” by Stephen Talty (Crown, 2007) « The BookBanter Blog
“The FARC commander recounted to his colleagues Gen. Alcala's offer of obtaining shoulder-fired surface-to-air missiles and shipping the arms to the guerrillas through the port of Maracaibo, which he would soon control.”
“In the same email, Mr. Figueroa suggested to the FARC commander that weapons to the guerrillas could be piggybacked through Maracaibo aboard shipments of weapons the Venezuelan government was acquiring from Russia.”
“There was a time when I'd have said any city with an exotic or evocative name would do -- Maracaibo, Samarkand, Macau, Marrakesh -- but most of them are not terribly exciting or exotic once you're been there.”
“Even as Maracaibo residents wonder what has befallen their beloved Catatumbo Lightning, across the country in Caracas local residents have also been befuddled.”
“Some areas, including Maracaibo — Venezula's second-largest city after the capital, Caracas — still face unexpected blackouts.”
“Reuters Police conduct a random search during a power outage in the city of Maracaibo on Tuesday.”
Looking for tweets for Maracaibo.