Follow this step by step crochet tutorial to create a baby cap part 7/13.
Tags:How to Crochet a Baby Cap Part 7/13,crochet baby cap part 7,crochet do it yourself,crochet ideas,crochet inspiration,crochet instructions,crochet lessons,crocheting a baby cap,handicraft,mikeyssmail
Grab video code:
So, this is where your pen and paper come in handy. You are now done all your lines where you’re going to actually have to half double crochet like doubles into individual spots. So basically, what we are going to do is we’re going to continue to work on a circle and it’s half double crochet into every single stitch now. And what you need to do is get your little paper out and every time you do a circle, you got to make a check mark and you need to do six circles around so you need to go around six times. And every time you get to the starting point, I would recommend that you’d check it off so you’d remember.
So, what we do is we chain up two. I’m going into the very next stitch. And what we’re going to do is we’re going to half double crochet into every single stitch. See, I’m kind of grabbing a wrong stitch there because I just don’t think. I just don’t want any abnormal gaps which is where I’m kind of worried about so we’re going to half double crochet. Okay so, we’re going to half double crochet into every single stitch going around the circle.
There is no more tricks left in your sleeve until we get further down the road because what we need to do is we need to create that brim and the flip at the top just like you see there, that is a special way of doing that because it’s the way that you crochet it to make the fold a permanent one so I'm going to click one to stay.
So, we’re half double crocheting as I’m talking to you into every stitch going around. And you know what I can already tell that this hat is going to be smaller than the one that you see in the background and obviously what matters is the size of your material. But you know what if I was a baby, I’d probably want a soft hat like you see in the background versus one of the easy ones. But I guess as long as it’s warm, who cares right?
So, what happens now is because we’re not adding anymore double stitches into anyone of these spots, you’re actually creating the flatness. You’re actually creating the flatness all the way around so basically you’re making the total width actually permanent, does that make any sense? Like your hat won’t get any bigger because we’re not adding anymore double stitches anywhere.
Okay, it’s your last one. And what we are going to do is we’re going to slip stitch. So, let’s take it in the top bring the material through and through the other hole. So, there is your next one done and take your pen and your paper like so and mark off that you actually did one more around so you got to do six at the same round.