An excerpt from www.HouseOfNames.com archives copyright © 2000 - 2013
Origins Available: English, French, Irish
Where did the English Mallin family come from? What is the English Mallin family crest and coat of arms? When did the Mallin family first arrive in the United States? Where did the various branches of the family go? What is the Mallin family history?
The English language only became standardized in the last few centuries; therefore, spelling variations are common among early Anglo-Saxon names. As the form of the English language changed, even the spelling of literate people's names evolved. Mallin has been recorded under many different variations, including Malins, Malin, Mallin, Malynes, Malle and others.
First found in Warwickshire where they held a family seat as Lords of the Manor. The Saxon influence of English history diminished after the Battle of Hastings in 1066. The language of the courts was French for the next three centuries and the Norman ambience prevailed. But Saxon surnames survived and the family name was first referenced in the year 1212 when John Malynes held lands.
This web page shows only a small excerpt of our Mallin research. Another 160 words(11 lines of text) covering the years 1455 and 1487 are included under the topic Early Mallin History in all our PDF Extended History products.
More information is included under the topic Early Mallin Notables in all our PDF Extended History products.
For many English families, the political and religious disarray that shrouded England made the far away New World an attractive prospect. On cramped disease-ridden ships, thousands migrated to those British colonies that would eventually become Canada and the United States. Those hardy settlers that survived the journey often went on to make important contributions to the emerging nations in which they landed. Analysis of immigration records indicates that some of the first North American immigrants bore the name Mallin or a variant listed above:
Mallin Settlers in the United States in the 17th Century
Mallin Settlers in the United States in the 19th Century
The motto was originally a war cry or slogan. Mottoes first began to be shown with arms in the 14th and 15th centuries, but were not in general use until the 17th century. Thus the oldest coats of arms generally do not include a motto. Mottoes seldom form part of the grant of arms: Under most heraldic authorities, a motto is an optional component of the coat of arms, and can be added to or changed at will; many families have chosen not to display a motto.
Motto: Post proelia praemia
Motto Translation: After the battles come the rewards
The Mallin Family Crest was acquired from the Houseofnames.com archives. The Mallin Family Crest was drawn according to heraldic standards based on published blazons. We generally include the oldest published family crest once associated with each surname.
This page was last modified on 23 September 2010 at 15:36.
houseofnames.com is an internet property owned by Swyrich Corporation.