The Ivy Room for Genealogy and Local History is located in the Oconee County Library in Watkinsville. This room houses materials related to the history of Watkinsville/Oconee County in particular, and of Georgia in general. The Ivy Room seeks to provide resources on local history and genealogy for any individual conducting research, and to foster both research skills and interest in family history by offering basic genealogy courses. Download the Ivy Room brochure for more information.
The Ivy Room is open during normal library hours and is available for anyone researching local history and genealogy. Materials are neither circulated nor available through Interlibrary Loan; however, the Oconee County Library provides photocopiers for public use at the cost of ten cents per page. Resource materials are made available in a variety of formats, including microform, software programs, and Internet access. Printing from the microfilm reader costs fifty cents per page. Computer usage is limited to two hours per person. Printing from computers costs ten cents per page for b/w copies and fifty cents per page for color copies.
The vast majority of our materials are catalogued and can be located by first searching our online computers for the call number. Materials are filed according to the Dewey Decimal classification.
Local and Census Material
These popular materials have been marked with colored spine labels to aid in browsing. The local history items are marked with a pink "Local" spine label; these items feature the seven counties of Barrow, Clarke, Jackson, Madison, Oconee, Oglethorpe, and Wilkes. Items dealing with federal census records and indices are marked with a yellow "Census" spine label.
The Oconee County Library endeavors to keep up with new genealogical materials and with new issues of previously published materials. New items are displayed on top of the magazine shelves in the center of the room.
Microfilm Materials (uncatalogued)
Other Uncatalogued materials
Genealogy 101: The Basics
Topics include vital records, family charts, research checklists, and standard formats for recording information. There are no class pre-requisites. There are no class pre-requisites. Limited to twelve participants.
Genealogy 102: Census Records Online
Ancestry Library Edition and HeritageQuest Online, two reputable internet resources for family research, are covered. Both sites are accessible only through GALILEO. Class pre-requisites: both Genealogy 101 (or similar experience) and computer skills. Limited to four participants.
Searching After Sunset
A four-hour workshop for beginners. Genealogists-to-be can learn how to conduct family research, spend time researching their families, and meet others interested in genealogy. The program is held annually each January.
Resources for the Beginning Genealogist - A bibliography listing research basics, Georgia resources, online databases, area genealogical societies, and more.
Reproducible Forms - A notebook of family history charts, research checklists, and each U.S. census record, all available for photocopying.
As the Oconee County Library employs no official genealogist nor other personnel devoted solely to the Ivy Room, the library staff is limited in its ability to assist with genealogical research. However, staff may search indexed material for specific names in a specific record. The fee for photocopies and postage is $2.50 per name per record, payable by cash or check to the Oconee County Library.