LED Streetlight Installation
Scottsdale was the first city in the valley to install energy-efficient LED streetlight fixtures on a wide scale. Approximately 25 percent of the city’s streetlights are being converted to LED lighting. The majority of the installations will be in neighborhoods and at major intersections with traffic signals.
LED technology has been available to consumers for several years but has just recently become available for use in street lights. LED technology uses significantly less energy than conventional lighting, is expected to reduce the city’s energy costs and last up to 15 years or longer without any needed maintenance.
Since 1997, Scottsdale has used LED technology in its red, yellow and green traffic signals and has substantially reduced energy, maintenance and repair costs.
Funding was made available through an ARRA grant for “green” or energy-efficient projects. Stipulations in the grant state the old street lights cannot be reused and must be disposed of in accordance with EPA procedures.
The new streetlights will look different than a typical street light. The LEDs will cast light out in a more uniform pattern that will be whiter and crisper than traditional street lights. Special optics in each LED allows the light to be cast out in a more uniform and focused pattern, so little or no light is wasted or misdirected.
Reducing Energy Costs
Once this wide-scale installation is complete, it is anticipated these new fixtures will reduce energy consumption by approximately 42%. That reduced energy usage equates to about 853 metric tons of greenhouse gas emissions being removed from the environment, according to the EPA’s greenhouse gas conversion calculator.
Currently, these fixtures are being tested at the intersection of 92nd Street and Mountain View Road. The installation work will begin in the south part of Scottsdale at traffic signal intersections and will continue into neighborhoods throughout the city where the street lights are owned and maintained by the city.