Film genres are usually divided into two main categories – documentary and fiction. But moreover film genres may be divided into several different ways. They can be categorized according to setting, mood and format. According to the setting, there are a few film genres – crime, film noir, historical, science fiction, sports, war, and westerns.
As for format, animation, biographical, documentary, experimental, musical, narrative and short film genres are known. Moreover, there are films for children, family films and films for adults.
The most common way of classification of film genres is according to mood:
Action films comprise a lot of actions, such as fights, pursuits, property breaking. This film genre involves an interaction between the hero and the opponent. The most prominent action films are films about James Bond.
Adventure film genre is very similar to action genre. Some people consider it to be a sub-genre of adventure genre. Adventure films usually show some exciting stories. The main features of adventure films are journeys and discovering.
Comedy film genre is, of course, based on humor. It is one of the most popular film genres nowadays. Usually comedies have happy-endings. They are designed to make people’s mood better. “There's Something about Mary” is a good example of a comedy.
Drama is the largest genre and has many subgenres. Drama films usually show the character development in society. Films of this genre are more often nominated for Oscar than other film genre. “Frida”, “Ali”, “8 Mile” are well-known dramas around the world.
One of the most enjoyable film genres for many people is horror genre. Such films try to scare us and show the supernatural, diseases, viruses, scenes of violence and many other unpleasant scenes. Horror films have many tense articles to build the right atmosphere. Nowadays horror remakes are popular, for example, “The Hills Have Eyes” and “2001 Maniacs”.
Crime films are usually focused on the lives of criminals or gangsters. This genre is often confused with detective-mystery or action films, because all these forms of cinematography have murders, violence and shooting. “The Godfather” is one of the most prominent crime films.
Among the other film genres, musical, war movies, thrillers and western films, etc. are distinguished. Some outstanding films combine the features of different genres. For example, “Forest Gump” successfully blends characteristics of drama, historic and comedy film genres.