Hey! Hi there! My name is Max, and I am SO excited to tell you all about me and my breed and why we labs make the best dogs! So you might already know this about me and my friends because it's something we're sort of known for, but we have a LOT of energy! I love spending time outside, running around, and playing, and I love it even more when you play outside with me. I really like to go for walks every day, and I behave much better if you help me get my energy out in good ways instead of letting it build up. Sometimes when I have too much energy and I'm not getting enough exercise I get super bored. And then I start doing stuff I know I'm not supposed to - like chewing on things or barking and whining. I try hard not to, but it's just so hard because my energy has to come out somehow or else I'll explode!

I love going on hikes - I would go for a hike every day if I could! I like swimming too, so anytime you want to take me somewhere where I can get in the water is a perfect day in my book. I'm usually in a good mood and I mostly just want to spend time with my people - I would love to go to work with you or lay at your feet all day if you work from home. I really like kids too - they are so FUN to play with! Sometimes I have to be careful because I'm bigger than them and I might accidentally knock them over. I get so excited that it makes me wiggle around and jump and that's too much for some little kids. You might have to help me by reminding me to be gentle with them. Thank you so much. I really just want to make you happy but it's so hard sometimes because I get distracted when I'm excited. 

I don't want to brag but I'm also pretty smart. I can learn lots of tricks and I'm actually happier when you give me rules to obey and teach me how to do new things. I love making new friends - I would make new friends every day if I could. Making new friends might be my favorite thing ever! So you don't have to worry about me being mean to new people or anything like that. Do you have a lot of people at your house? That would be so cool if I got to hang out with your friends all the time. Or maybe you can take me with you when you go places? I don't exactly like being left at home all the time...I might get bored, kind of like I mentioned before. But I listen very well, so you can just take me with you wherever you go!
