Saturn has bizarre warm pole
A swirl of warm air at Saturn's south pole marks the first warm polar cap ever discovered in the solar system, astronomers say.
They found not only a warm "polar vortex" but also a spot that measures the warmest place on the planet.
But "warm" is a relative term.
Temperatures increase toward the pole abruptly near 70 degrees latitude from -185°C to -184°C and then to -182°C right at the pole.
Near 70 degrees latitude, the stratospheric temperature increases even more abruptly from -127°C to -123°C and then again to -122°C right at the pole.
A polar vortex is a large-scale weather pattern, comparable to Earth's jet stream in the upper atmosphere. Such vortices on Earth, Jupiter, Mars and Venus are colder than their surroundings. Saturn's warm pole, and the even warmer, compact region at the pole itself are unusual, the scientists say.
"There is nothing like this compact warm 'cap' in the Earth's atmosphere," says Dr Glenn Orton, senior research scientist at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California and lead author of the paper.
"Meteorologists have detected sudden warming of the pole, but on Earth this effect is very short-term. This phenomenon on Saturn is longer-lived because we've been seeing hints of it in our data for at least two years."
Pole basks in sunlight
It's not surprising that Saturn's south pole is warm, the astronomers say, since it's been exposed to 15 years of continuous sunlight. The puzzle comes from the hot "tip" of the vortex right at the pole.
The sharp temperature changes may be caused as sunlight-absorbing particles trap heat in Saturn's upper atmosphere. That would explain why the hot spot appears dark in visible light and contains the hottest temperatures on Saturn.
But it wouldn't explain why the hot temperatures are contained in one spot at the south pole.
It's possible, the scientists say, that dry air is downwelling to the pole, which is also consistent with deeper clouds observed at the southern pole. Researchers plan more observations to check that.
In fact, the Cassini spacecraft, currently orbiting Saturn, will be directed to inspect the warm south pole, as well as the cold north pole, which isn't visible from Earth.
"One of the obvious questions is whether Saturn's north pole is abnormally cold and whether a cold polar vortex has been established there. That's something we can't see from Earth, and Cassini's instruments will be in a unique position to observe it," says Orton.