Few Seattle construction projects have caused more headaches these last few years than the vital but weak Alaskan Way Viaduct. But go back a few decades, and we suffered the weight of a much larger concrete beast — one that tore up neighborhoods and split the city — quite literally — in two.
So what was Seattle’s most disruptive construction project?
This question has a history, and Leonard Garfield of Seattle’s Museum of History and Industry has the answer in our 14th installment of Ask MOHAI:
(Got a question for next time? Send it here.)
Here comes the Interstate
The Everett-Seattle-Tacoma Superhighway — better known as I-5 — had been in the works since 1951. But it wasn’t until 1956, when President Dwight D. Eisenhower signed the National Interstate Defense and Highways Act, that the money became available to build it.
The construction of the 20-mile portion through Seattle displaced businesses, homes and even neighborhoods like Cascade — now South Lake Union — one of the city’s oldest blue-collar areas. Opposition came mostly from people concerned about their property. The First Hill Improvement Club mounted an organized protest to delay the project, but it didn’t work; the city went on as planned.
In 1957, more than seven blocks of residences and retail businesses on the east side of Eastlake were razed to make way for the Interstate. The freeway eliminated the bottom portion of the Republican Street Hillclimb, a stairway leading from Cascade to Capitol Hill built in 1910. Seattle’s earlier pedestrian culture lost to modern cars and traffic.
I-5 opened in 1967. The fact that it left a big gash through Seattle — a concern to only a few citizens — was rectified with the construction of Freeway Park in 1976. What lingers unresolved is the suggestion made by First Hill residents before construction began, that the freeway plan should include a comprehensive plan for mass transit adjacent to I-5. The concern is still a hotbed issue in Seattle city politics today.
– Leonard Garfield
Learn more about Seattle’s Museum of History and Industry at seattlehistory.org. If you’re a history nut, check out their quiz nights Mondays, Tuesdays and Wednesdays around Seattle. Links credited to HistoryLink.org
P.S. Our news partner KOMO-TV has footage of the construction. Check out mark -2:59 in the video below:
More Ask MOHAI:
Who started Seattle’s Christmas Ship Festival — and why?
WTO: What other civil unrest has marked Seattle’s history?
What was the first legal drinking age in Washington?
What was the first book ever checked out of a Seattle public library?
Looking back: How Seattle handled another flu outbreak
What’s the oldest public art in Seattle?
Why is it called “grunge”?
Who was Seattle’s most popular mayor?
Why is a Seattle community garden called a ‘P-Patch?’
Why are there so many motels on Aurora Avenue?
What’s the weirdest thing that’s happened to the Space Needle?
How long has Seattle supported gay rights?
Why are cars allowed to drive on Pike Place?