March 1, 2011 > Are you America's top young scientist?
Are you America's top young scientist?
Submitted By Toby Nelson
Do you have what it takes to be America's Top Young Scientist? Discovery Education and 3M are looking for students in grades 5-8 who are enthusiastic about science. The top 10 students will receive an all-expense paid trip to the 3M Innovation Center in St. Paul, Minnesota.
In order to enter, students in grades 5 through 8 must submit a video entry online. Students will be challenged to create a one- to two-minute video about a specific scientific concept which they will select from a list of concepts provided by YSC judges.
Video entries must demonstrate the student's understanding of the scientific concept explained and should also exhibit his or her comfort level discussing science in general.
Videos do not need to be "produced" or have high production value. Judges are not evaluating production skills. Videos may be recorded on cell phones or simple digital cameras, for example. In addition, local libraries and schools may be able to loan cameras to students.
Videos will be screened to determine whether they meet all entry requirements and will then be presented to a panel of online judges. Video entries will be due on April 15. To apply go to http://www.youngscientistchallenge.com/. Judges will review the video submissions and choose 10 finalists and up to 51 merit winners: one from each state and the District of Columbia.
The 10 finalists will be paired with 3M scientists to complete a summer assignment having to do with innovation. Together they will work virtually through pre-assigned objectives with resources and support provided by Discovery Education.
In the fall, 10 finalists will receive an all-expense-paid trip to St. Paul, Minnesota, during which they will present their completed 'innovation' to a panel of judges.
Finalists will be judged on their scientific problem solving and communication skills.
At the end of the competition, America's Top Young Scientist will be awarded $25,000 and other finalists will receive exciting prizes.
For information or to submit an entry visit: http://www.youngscientistchallenge.com/.