Dr. Dongkwang Shin
In this presentation, two topics will be introduced to the audience. The first topic is collocations. In particular, the speech will include what collocations are, how collocations can be extracted from a corpus, and how collocations can be taught. The second topic is about making one's own graded word lists. The speech will introduce a method for making word lists, and how to add them to the RANGE program in order to better analyze students' writing drafts.
Dongkwang Shin received his PhD under the tutelage of Paul Nation in Applied Linguistics in 2007 from Victoria University of Wellington, New Zealand. His expertise is in vocabulary learning and teaching, corpus linguistics, and language testing. He is currently working for the Korean Institute for Curriculum and Evaluation.
Teaching ideas for the new semester
Kyoto JALT is happy to announce that the popular MyShare event will return at the end of this month. MyShare is an opportunity for teachers to present on a wide range of classroom activities to an audience looking for fresh ideas for the new academic year. MyShare is a flexible style of presentation where teachers can present on anything from single activity to a successful concept.
1:45-2:15 p.m.James Rogers
Kansai Gaidai University
Many consider extensive reading to be a viable method to increase student's language abilities, but what of extensive listening? This presentation will discuss various methods which help keep students on task during television/film viewing, thus increasing the potential for learning to occur.
1:25~3:05 p.m.Kevin Stein
Clark Memorial International High School, Osaka Campus
Students are often fixated on a word-by-word reading when interacting with a text in reading class. This presentation takes participants through a step-by-step process designed to help students build a full, "mental representation of a story," (Masuhara. H, 2003) in order to engage with it on a deeper level.
3:25~3:55 p.m.Daniel J. Mills
Teachers in Japan need to focus on the use of visual images and shorter presentation formats to gain learners' attention and hold it. The following presentation will demonstrate how video can be used as prompts to develop communication skills based on Bloom's Taxonomy.
4:05-4:45 p.m.Michael Sullivan
Nippon Steel & Sumikin-Intercom, Inc.
This presentation will outline a versatile instructional technique called Cubing. This technique, which is linked to Bloom's Taxonomy and the theory of Multiple Intelligences, allows instructors to both plan different kinds of activities for different types of learners and cover key cognitive skills on a particular topic.
Printable flyer for this event avaliable on our Facebook page.
First Kyoto JALT Event of the New Year
Dr. Iida will give two talks -- a workshop looking at university writing classes, and a presentation discussing the challenges for non-native speakers of English to publish in English language scholarly journals. The second presentation will be of particular interest to the Japanese members of our teaching community.
Writing for communicative purposes: Application of genre-based approaches to ESP courses
In this workshop, the presenter will describe some issues and challenges of second language (L2) writing at the tertiary level in Japan and discuss how writing teachers can use genre-based approaches in the English classroom. Specifically, he will focus on one particular genre - descriptive writing- and demonstrate a lesson for freshman (and sophomore) engineering students.
Writing for academic publication: Challenges for multilingual scholars
This presentation aims to discuss global issues of scholarly writing and to provide a practical guideline for academic publication. The presenter - a teacher and researcher of second language writing - will share his personal experience of publishing in peer-reviewed English journals. He will also describe a case study which investigates issues faced by an NNES researcher in the process of publishing articles in four journals: two international journals based in Asia, and two based in the United States. By examining the editors' written feedback, the presenter will provide suggestions for how multilingual scholars can overcome potential obstacles to bring their manuscripts to publication.
近年、教育者や研究者の間で、英語で学術論文を出版することが富みに求められている。大学をはじめとする多くの研究機関では、「英語で論文を出版するこ と」が専任職の獲得および昇進の１つの重要な基準となっている,しかしながら、英語を母国語としない研究者にとって、査読審査のある国際学術誌に応募し, 論文が出版に至ることは極めて困難であるのが現状である。出版までの過程の中で、英語を母国語としない研究者はどのような問題に直面しているのであろう か。
本発表の目的は、学術論文を出版するために配慮すべき点を提示し、それらの論文が出版に至る可能性を模索することである。講演者は、自身が学術論文を出版 する際に経験した数々の問題点を紹介し、英語を母国語としない研究者が論文を出版にするにあたり、直面しうる問題にどのように対処していけばよいかを提案 する。Biodata
Atsushi Iida is Assistant Professor in the University Education Center at Gunma University where he has taught first-year and second-year English courses. He was awarded his Ph.D. in English (Composition and TESOL) at Indiana University of Pennsylvania, PA, USA. His research interests include poetry writing in a second language, literature in second language education, scholarly publication in a second language, and English for Specific Purposes (ESP).
A JALT Kyoto, Osaka, Kobe Chapter Co-sponsored Event
This year the baton for hosting the Kansai JALT end-of-year event has been passed on to Kyoto Chapter and it is to be held in the informal surroundings of Tadg's restaurant and bar in downtown Kyoto.
With a wide selection of food and drink available, as well as wonderful views of Gion and the eastern mountains, we're looking forward to a great chance to watch an eclectic mix of informative and entertaining presentations, and meet up with old colleagues and new people from around the Kansai JALT community.
Kyoto JALT is looking forward to welcoming you on December 15th!
Call for Presentations
Following previous events in Nishinomiya, we welcome proposals for Pecha Kucha style presentations -- 20 slides, 20 seconds per slide, giving a total of 6 minutes and 40 seconds per presentation.
We hope to provide a wide variety of topics that include, but not limited to, the following themes:
Teaching & learning, personal & professional development, classroom successes of 2012, and arts, culture & travel.
Please send proposals to KyotoJALT by November 25th with the following information:
Tadg's is a short walk from Keihan Sanjo station, and about 10 minutes from Hankyu Kawaramachi station, so it is easily accessible from Kobe, Nara, and Osaka. From Keihan Sanjo/Kyoto Subway Sanjo Station: Take Exit #7, walk across the bridge, take the the first right onto Kiyamachi Dori. Walk for about 100 metres, Tadg's is on your right on the 8th floor of the Empire building.
Map to venue
JALT Four Corners Tour is coming to Kyoto!
JALT 2012 Four Corners Tour
Since 1988, JALT has sponsored teachers and researchers from a wide variety of Asian countries to visit Japan and speak at the annual international conference. During their visit the Asian Scholar is invited to speak at different locations around Japan as part of the Four Corners Tour
This year's speaker is Inggy Yuliani Pribady from Indonesia. The title of her presentation is Genre pedagogy to lead students to a high stake of learning: Students' voice and critical thinking about environment issues through news item writing.Abstract
Genre pedagogies have drawn on Systemic Functional Linguistic theory, which views language as a social semiotic system, i.e. a resource for making meaning in social context (Eggins & Martin 2002). It is the idea that the grammar of the English Language is a system to facilitate certain kinds of social and interpersonal interaction, represent ideas about the world and connect these ideas and interaction into meaningful text and make them relevant to their context (Halliday, 1978:12).
This paper aims to describe ways in which appropriate scaffolding teaching and learning activities in genre pedagogy can be provided to guide students to shape their ideas critically to the issues of the environment in their writing.The scaffolding takes the form of a particular sequence of activities known as teaching and learning cycle which are building knowledge of the field, modeling of the text, join construction and independent construction.
Inggy Yuliani Pribady holds a Master of English Education degree from Indonesia University of Education. She is an English teacher at 2 Junior High Schools in Bandung, Indonesia. Her research interests include language learning strategies and sociocultural factors in foreign language acquisition.
As the summer sets in take the opportunity to escape the heat and join our air conditioned event looking at the hot topic of how corpora can be used in the classroom. We are very pleased to announce that Laurence Anthony, the developer of the widely used concordancing tool AntConc, will be will be giving a workshop titled Applications of Corpus Linguistics in Language Teaching and Research.
Laurence Anthony is a Professor in the Faculty of Science and Engineering at Waseda University, where he serves as coordinator of the Center for English Language Education (CELESE) technical English program. His research interests include corpus linguistics, educational technology, and natural language processing (NLP).
Collocational knowledge is vital to language fluency. It helps learners sound more native-like and process language efficiency. But are we truly aiding students in obtaining collocational fluency? A presentation by James Rogers will answer these questions and demonstrate a methodology utilizing corpora to help identify useful collocations.
James Rogers is an assistant professor at Kansai Gaidai University. He is currently pursuing a PhD in applied linguistics examining the high frequency collocations of English.
Please note the change of location. It is not the usual venue Kyoto JALT uses for its meetings
In April, to kick off the new academic year, Kyoto JALT will be collaborating with the Learner Development SIG to bring you a day of stimulating workshops and discussions for language teachers of learners from elementary school age to adults. Presenters will explore aspects of learner development and autonomy in a variety of contexts. There will also be the chance to win copies of the LD SIG book More Autonomy You Ask.
Following the presentations, weather permitting, everyone is invited to take a short walk to the banks of the Kamo River to enjoy the cherry blossoms and reflect on the day. Bring your own beverages and snacks to better help with the reflections.
This presentation will look at some of the spontaneous learner strategies employed by children and the role they play in supporting communication in the language classroom. In the quest for maintaining a willingness to communicate, an argument will be made for maintaining and nurturing these communicative behaviors not only in preschool and elementary school English programs but through to young adult language learning environments as well.Biodata
Ann Mayeda lectures at Konan Women's University. She is involved in pre- and in-service teacher-training programs for young learners and currently conducts workshops for several public elementary schools in the Osaka and Nara area. She also has a keen interest in learner development and issues in autonomy as it applies to children and young adult learners.
How do we learn and remember new words? What vocabulary learning strategies do we use? This workshop encourages participants to reflect on their own vocabulary learning and teaching experiences. Then together, we will explore these questions and further consider the value of vocabulary learning strategies instruction in teaching and learning English as a foreign/second language.
Following Rubin, Chamot, Harris & Anderson (2007), a systematic four-stage approach for strategies based instruction (i.e. learner training) will be illustrated, and four fundamental vocabulary learning strategies highlighted: word cards, dictionary usage, word parts, and record-keeping (Nation, 2008). Drawing predominantly upon experiences in university contexts, this workshop will demonstrate how vocabulary learning strategies instruction can be made more effective in practice and not only promote learners' understanding and experimentation with strategies, but also lead to their active uptake.
Last but not least, participants will also be invited to explore and discuss the use or potential for vocabulary learning strategies instruction in their own contexts.Biodata
Phil has been teaching in a range of contexts in Japan since 2001 and is currently a Lecturer and Learning Advisor at Konan Women's University, an MA TEFL/SL tutor for the University of Birmingham, and a founding member of MASH Collaboration. Phil's main interests are vocabulary, learner and teacher autonomy and development, content-based instruction and global issues.
The importance and effectiveness of reflection in professional development is widely recognized in the field of teacher education. According to Hacker and Barkhuizen (2008), teachers modify and develop their personal theories by constantly reflecting on their own practice. However, some teachers may wonder how they can engage in constant reflection in their busy lives. This workshop explores what we reflect on, how we reflect, and why we reflect. The participants will be given opportunities to engage in reflection on their own practice and to share their reflections with others.Biodata
Akiko Takagi is an Associate Professor at Aoyama Gakuin University. She completed her EdD in TESOL at the University of Exeter. She is involved in pre-service teacher training programs. Her research interests include professional development and learner and teacher autonomy.
All are invited to take a short walk to the banks of the Kamo River to enjoy the cherry blossoms! Bring your own beverages and snacks to better help your reflections on the days presentations.
Many teachers consider continuing education in part-time Master's, doctoral, or graduate certificate programs essential to personal and professional advancement. However, these courses require significant time and financial commitments, and the balance of benefits to costs may be questionable.
This event will bring together current and former continuing education students from both distance and traditional programs to share and compare their experiences in a moderated panel discussion. The audience will also be welcome to ask questions and share their own concerns. Materials covering a range of different programs will also be available.
Kyoto JALT will be teaming up with the Kobe, Nara, and Osaka chapters for a exciting year-end event -- Pecha Kucha Night Volume #11. There will be 12 presentations which follow this year's theme of Teaching and Learning as a Social Process, and it promises to be both an informative and entertaining evening.
Kyoto JALT members are welcome to the Annual General Meeting! Find out more about what has been happening with the Kyoto chapter and what's in store for 2012. The AGM is followed by a joint event between Gender Awareness in Language Education (GALE) SIG and Kyoto JALT.
View revised 2011 Kyoto Chapter constitution here.
The Masculine Structure of Desire: Power and English acquisition in a pre-departure EAP program
10:20 – 11:00
Within mainstream L2 motivation research the relationship between gender and the reasons why individuals decide to learn an L2 and how they maintain the motivation to continue has yet to be adequately addressed. This is particularly troubling since in the past five years interest in identity has been the most highly written about topics in the field, and gender is seldom mentioned as being part of the L2 self.
This paper represents part of the author's project intended to remedy this shortcoming by introducing an alternative approach to gender and the desire to acquire an L2 that is based in psychoanalysis and Marxist theory. In particular, this paper will consider how within the praxis of a discussion task a masculine motivation is negotiated and co-constructed.
Data from a discussion between three men is introduced and discussed to highlight the ways in which they construct their masculinity in regard to the acquisition of English and how they form a nucleus of solidarity based upon an orthodox masculinity where the acquisition of English is figured a means of empowerment.
How can movies be used in the EFL and/or Gender Studies classroom most effectively to enhance critical thinking and language skills?
11:10 – 11:40
How can movies be used in the EFL and/or Gender Studies classroom most effectively to enhance critical thinking and language skills?
In this presentation, I will introduce the basic principles involved in my approach to materials development and course design, based on my experience teaching four types of classes: undergraduate EFL, two undergraduate seminars (Introduction to Gender Studies and Introduction to Peace Studies), and a graduate seminar (Language, Culture and Gender). Specific pedagogical issues will include effective combination of audio, video and captured stills; employment of mass media reviews as well as online user reviews; instruction in the textual analysis of scripts; listening exercises; and role playing, debate and composition activities.Visit the GALE SIG website to learn more about this JALT Special Interest Group.
All Kyoto JALT members are eligible to vote for the five elected chapter officers: President, Program Chair, Treasurer, Membership Chair and Publicity Chair.
Details on candidates sitting for the 2011-2012 election can be found here. Nominations for any position are still being accepted.
Electronic voting will close at 22:00 on October 29, 2011. You also have the option to vote in person at the Annual General Meeting.
Want to help out with the chapter events? There are a number of appointed positions available. Please contact Catherine Kinoshita for more information.
Kyoto JALT is pleased to announce the schedule for our July event. Project based teaching has the potential for bringing the best out of students, both higher- and lower levels. It is an excellent way to get students motivated and work with their English in a productive and fun way.
This day will bring together several teachers who practice project based teaching.Go here to view the schedule, full abstracts and bio data for each presenter.
Combining two current trends in language education, project based teaching and content based teaching, allows teachers to take the focus away from learning English as a subject, and shift it to learning "in" English. This presentation will show how a classroom project can do exactly this.
Kyoto Sangyo University / Kyoto University of Foreign Languages / Konan University
By reinventing the traditional class notebook, the digital portfolio is an online platform where students can widen the scope and depth of their understanding of class content, present their ideas in unique and dynamic ways, and collaborate and interact with peers.
This presentation demonstrates three different online platforms for hosting digital portfolios, outlines the advantages of this form of project-based learning, and shows concrete examples of first and second year university student's digital portfolios from three distinctly different ESL courses.
This presentation introduces the Project-based English Program in the College of Sports and Health Science of Ritsumeikan University and to report how it has worked, by showing several videos of the students' presentations and their writings, with comments based on experience of teaching in the course year and a half.
This presentation will introduce the 3 week process of how to teach the Position! Place! Shape! Story Project. This project has been a part of a curriculum at Seika University for the past 10 years in which students learn English while visualizing and combining drawing and English expression. The presentation will also introduce student works in order to demonstrate the results of the teaching process.
The Tohoku Earthquake fundraiser will take place following the above presentation. All funds raised at this event will be donated via NPO JALT National to be distributed on a proportional basis to approved Japan-based relief groups.
Time to get ready for the new academic year! Why not get some tips and ideas from fellow teachers?
This was an event open to all teachers, from experienced to newbie! It was an excellent opportunity for instructors to get some advice or offer suggestions on language teaching and learning.
Three excellent teachers shared some of their experiences (see details below). Members came, joined, listened, and learned!
Asking questions to one's interlocutor is a key part of any kind of naturalistic conversation. For many Japanese students of English, this area causes a multitude of problems. The grammar of question formation, lack of vocabulary and concerns about politeness and appropriateness often inhibit students in developing adequate questioning skills. Many students stick to well-rehearsed, generic questions that are basically transactional in nature, and the overall result is that many so-called 'conversations' more closely resemble interviews or interrogations.
This presentation will detail ways in which students have been lead to a more naturalistic style of questioning through repeated practice of certain strategic and discourse patterns, such as strategizing around linguistic shortcomings by exemplification, signaling the phatic nature of the questions by personalizing and use of discourse markers.
The presenter will detail classroom implementation of this approach, and provide handouts and worksheets as used in actual classes.Download:
Students find L2 reading materials difficult. Examples of the reasons are that they are unfamiliar with the topic and that the texts include too many words they do not know / understand. In the latter case, students spend a lot of time using their dictionary, word for word to check the meaning. This makes it difficult for them to grasp the ideas of the content.
Covering the reading text in four stages and incorporating some pair work and group work, explained in this activity, enable students, especially in a class with both relatively weak and relatively strong students, to grasp and to understand the content.
The four stages include: context setting, pre-teaching vocabulary, skimming and reading for details. Students' comprehensions of the reading are checked by comprehension questions within the activity.
Reflecting on what has been learned is an important and integral part of the learning process for several reasons. It allows the learner to reflect and to deepen the understanding of the skills and knowledge that they have acquired. In addition, the portfolio can become a record for the student to keep of what they have taken away from the class.
For the instructor it can be a measure for the progress of the class and as a feedback tool to have the instructor understand what the learner thought was important. It can also be utilized as a testing device to test students speaking ability as well as a peer to peer reviewing exercise where students are able to compare and contrast with classmates.
This presentation will explain how I successfully integrated this learning device in a communications course with students at Kansai University.Download:
The power of visual images to convey messages, send affective signals and to stimulate the imagination is undeniable. We now have available infinite resources for accessing, storing and retrieving digitally generated images.
In EFL teaching images can be used to illustrate or present language points, to offer systematic practice or to stimulate creative and imaginative spin-offs.
The presenter, Ms. Healy, (Penny S. was away) introduced simple yet effective ways of enriching the visual landscape of the classroom through the use of images. Ms. Healy demonstrated how images can be used to engage, stir up curiosity, provide inspiration and motivation for writing and speaking and generally enhance learners' classroom experience.
The importance of involving learners in resourcing visual materials for themselves was emphasized and examples of student-made visuals were included.
The Kyoto Chapter in association with the Osaka and Kobe Chapters co-sponsored a Pecha Kucha Night (PKN) style event at Konan University, Hirao School of Management (CUBE) in Nishinomiya (just south of Hankyu Nishinomiya Kita-guchi station). A year-end party (bonenkai) was also held at the Busy Bee Cafe from 6:30 p.m. Good food and good times were had by everyone. Admission was free.
This was the second attempt at moving our annual potpourri meeting to a Pecha Kucha Night format (20 slides x 20 seconds each). Last year's (2009) event was a big success and it was even more this year. More information about PKN is available here.
This presentation looked at a set of questions that teachers can use to check if the vocabulary component of their language course is adequate or not. The questions included what vocabulary is focused on, how it is focused on, how it is sequenced, and how it is taught and learned. These questions covered the important parts of the curriculum design process. The presentation also described how these important aspects of teaching and learning vocabulary can be included in a course.
Paul Nation is Professor in Applied Linguistics at the School of Linguistics and Applied Language Studies (LALS) at Victoria University of Wellington, New Zealand. He supervises MA and PhD research on vocabulary. He has taught in Indonesia, Thailand, the United States, Finland and Japan. Paul has published extensively and his books include Teaching and Learning Vocabulary (Heinle and Heinle, 1990), New Ways in Teaching Vocabulary (TESOL, 1994), Learning Vocabulary in Another Language (Cambridge University Press, 2001) and Focus on Vocabulary (with Peter Gu) (Macmillan Australia, 2007).
His publications include articles and books on teaching and learning vocabulary, language teaching methodology, and curriculum design. Paul Nation's most recent book on vocabulary is called Teaching Vocabulary: Strategies and Techniques (2008) Heinle Cengage Learning, Boston.
There are three highly recommended books from Routledge Teaching ESL/EFL Listening and Speaking (with Jonathan Newton), and Teaching ESL/EFL Reading and Writing, and Language Curriculum Design (with John Macalister)
In recent years, research in the field of Computer Assisted Language Learning (CALL) has shown that technology can be used to increase students' willingness to communicate and decrease foreign language anxiety. Yet, few studies have examined whether these positive effects will "carry-over" when students return to a face-to-face communication environment.
The proposed case study, which will attempt to examine the long term effects of CMC in relation to affective factors, will be conducted over a 15-week period with an intact class of Japanese University students. Students will alternate between task-based conversation activities in both f2f and CMC environments. Data collection pertaining to foreign language anxiety and willingness to communicate will be collected using the Foreign Language Classroom Anxiety Scale and length of utterance and turns taken during conversation activities respectively. CMC activities will be conducted using the Language Education Chat System developed by Kanto Gakuin University.
The presenter focused on methods of analyzing gendered language through the process of a university English seminar. Participants learned ways in which the text Womansword, a collection of Japanese expressions relating to women, can be used as a springboard to engage university students in analysis of attitudes and assumptions about gender in Japan, and shed light on the ways these change over time.
The use of films within language classrooms has steadily increased as they have been shown to be motivational for learners; for example, students mention they want to understand Hollywood films without subtitles. Thus, teachers are creating entire classes centered around feature-length films and a multitude of activities have been created by teachers hoping to utilize this motivational tool while students learn a variety of skills and content: listening comprehension, grammar, pronunciation and intonation, culture, etc.
While whole films can be a good source of course material, this presentation shares insights gained from using a variety of short film excerpts within a semester to demonstrate a variety of language features as well as conversational situations. Two communication courses were taught intermittently with the use of short, unit appropriate film clips under a variety of circumstances, i.e. with or without English or Japanese subtitles, with the intent of discovering an effective method to increase student listening comprehension as well as understanding of situational discourse.
The students were given quizzes following the clip to check for comprehension and surveyed at the end of the course to assess the value of the clips within the course, the film clips' affect on student motivation and the effectiveness of video clips as a teaching tool.
Garr Reynolds, is the author of award-winning and international best-selling books Presentation Zen and Presentation Zen Design. In this presentation, Garr introduced a few fundamental design principles and spoke in depth with examples and before/after samples. The lessons in this talk were not about dressing up presentations or decorating slides, they were about understanding and embracing concrete design principles that will help make your presentations clear, powerful, and memorable.
Garr Reynolds is currently Associate Professor of Management at Kansai Gaidai University where he teaches Marketing, Global Marketing and Multimedia Presentation Design. Garr is active in the Japanese community and can often be found presenting on subjects concerning design, branding, and effective corporate communications.
Co-sponsored by JALT Gender Awareness in Language Education SIG
The two presenters provided a much-needed focus on gender-related issues in the EFL classroom.
Ms. Abass addressed gender stereotypes and exploring ways to encourage students to develop the critical intelligence necessary to move beyond culturally inherited stereotypes. Mr. Ó’Móchain discussed representations of masculinities on Japanese television and how his observations can be reported in EFL classrooms as part of a gender-awareness syllabus. Discussion circles followed for opinion and idea exchange.
Folake Abass is an English lecturer at Kyoto Sangyo University. Her research interests language and advertising especially as it applies to gender.
Robert Ó’Móchain has completed both M. Ed and Ed. D. programs at Temple University Japan. Research interests include linguistic creativity in humorous communication and gender and sexuality in educational contexts.
In this presentation, veteran English instructor and author of seven books and several newspaper columns for Japanese learners of English, David Barker, argued for a renewed focus on 'old-fashioned' approaches that have served language teachers and learners well for centuries.
"The history of English Language Teaching has been characterized by a stream of ever-changing fashions and trends. Proponents of new methodologies have urged teachers and learners to abandon all their old tools and techniques and embrace the new dogma, and all too often teachers have been willing to follow unquestioningly. Barker argued that an obsession with 'communicative' activities and educational materials can be detrimental to both teachers and learners."
Barker outlined what he considers to be the most important 'basic principles' of language learning, and presented 'basic principles' of language learning and discuss how these can be applied to classroom methodology.
In the second half of his presentation, Barker introduced some of his books and explained how it relates to his principles of teaching.
Note: This presentation, a semi-commercial event, was awarded Best of JALT 2009, Best Presentation of 2008 by Toyohashi JALT, and also well-received by Hokkaido JALT at their annual conference.
This was an event open to all teachers, from experienced to newbie! The event was an excellent opportunity for instructors to get some advice or offer suggestions on language teaching and learning.
Abstract: In this presentation, Pigott suggested techniques for teaching large classes in high school and university. He focused on social aspects of learning and teaching such as teacher-student rapport, group-cohesion, classroom management, and the Japanese context. Finally, he presented examples of lessons he feels that work particularly well.
Abstract: All students have cell phones, and use them with great enthusiasm, every day, all day. Evans outlined the work he has done on cell phone use in the EFL classroom. He shared his vision for where and how he thinks it can be carried further, and explained his ideas for how other people might join him.
Abstract: Unsatisfied with group work in your classes? Bonnah explained the methods for getting the most from group activities. Based on experience in university and junior and senior high classes, this presentation was for all teachers grappling with large class sizes, demanding syllabi, and evaluation requirements.
Many teachers use textbooks containing written texts. Most classroom manipulation of those texts ends with follow-up exercises outlined in the text itself. In this presentation, Nommensen introduceds two classroom activities in which students enthusiastically engage with a written text in review, developing familiarity and productive competence with the vocabulary, while practicing syntax, writing, speaking, and listening, and having fun.
Digital artist and English teacher, Gary McLeod, presented PRIVILEGE, a photography project that bridges artistic and academic practices. Having photographed and interviewed 97 English teachers around Japan, McLeod presented his collection of photographs and read aloud samples of his participants' words. This was followed by Q&A / discussion.
This event is for veteran techies and newbies alike! Matthew Walsh of Momoyama Gakuin High School and Craig Hagerman of Osaka Jogakuin University will lead a cutting-edge session on using iPods and iPhones in your ELT classroom. Learn the basics, discover ELT related applications, and participate in a hands-on model lesson workshop!
Winners of Kyoto Chapter’s first annual Professional Development Scholarship Fund will present about their experiences at the 35th Annual JALT International Conference on Language Teaching and Learning & Educational Materials Exposition. A sandwich luncheon to follow presentations.
Come and meet the Kyoto Chapter Officers for 2009-2010!
To view list of the newly elected chapter officers, go here!
Kyoto JALT is proud to announce the winners of the 2009 Kyoto Professional Development Scholarships to the 35th Annual JALT International Conference on Language Teaching and Learning & Educational Materials Expo at the Granship, Shizuoka.
Congratulations to Paul Evans & Glen Cochrane! Both winners will be reporting on how the conference helped them with their professional development.
Kyoto JALT Business Meeting and 2009-2010 Chapter Officer Elections
Presenting at the JALT National conference this year? Need an audience to practice in front of? Want valuable feedback and helpful advice from your fellow peers?
The conference is fast approaching, and now is the time to prepare! Try out your presentation or just come out and be a part of the audience! Send your presentation abstract along with your name and contact info to KyotoJALT by September 27th.
Presentations and feedback time will be followed by a brief chapter business meeting with 2009/2010 chapter elections - your vote counts! Interested in joining our team of officers? Contact the Kyoto chapter president for more information.
of Kyoto Sangyo University
As teachers, we are always looking for ways to motivate and engage our learners, particularly at university level in Japan. One way to do this is through the use of drama and drama-related activities.
Amanda Gillis-Furutaka and Sandra Healy discussed practical ways in which to introduce drama into the classroom.
Sandra Healy described approaches using Shakespeare’s “Romeo and Juliet” with lower level students. Amanda Gillis-Furutaka described an elective course, which follows a task-based approach, for 3rd year English majors.
Linda Ohama, a filmmaker and visual artist, showed her international award-winning film, Obaachan's Garden (with Japanese subtitles). This is the story of a remarkable journey of strength, love and determination of one woman`s life of over 100 years.
It was a moving film about the life of Asayo Imamoto Murakami, who was born in Onomichi, Hiroshima, and who was sent to Canada in 1923. She was the last picture bride living in Canada when she passed away just short of her 105th birthday.
Ohama, the granddaughter of the film’s heroine, shared some behind-the-scenes experiences of the making of this film and also spoke of her work on her next film.
Linda Ohama, a third-generation Japanese Canadian, is a filmmaker, an accomplished visual artist, an educator, and an active citizen, strongly committed to preserving cultural heritage and promoting educational and cultural exchange.
Her artwork and films have received numerous international awards. She is currently in Japan working on her next project.
Co-sponsored by: Kyoto JALT, Osaka JALT, Osaka Gakuin University and SIETAR Kansai.
Brain Studies and the Science of Learning
The focus of this keynote presentation was on brain-based teaching and learning-centered activities.
Marcos Benevides, Curtis Kelly, Steven Herder, Fergus O'Dwyer and others.
The aim of this presentation was to give teachers a set of practical activities that can be used to create a positive group dynamic in a language class. The activities were focused on the following objectives:
During the presentation participants actively engaged in these activities and also took time to discuss the ideas underlying them. The audience began with very basic name learning techniques, progressing to more challenging teamwork exercises. Finally, the floor was opened to give participants a chance to share their favorite group building activities with each other.
This presentation involved lots of movement and interaction.Handout for this presentation can be found here.
Warren Decker is an English teacher at Momoyama Gakuin University in Osaka. In the classroom, his interests include group building and encouraging students’ creativity and confidence. Outside of the classroom, he likes to go camping with his family, bake bread, and grow vegetables.
The DREAM Management workshop introduced a thought provoking alternative model of management designed for the ELT context. DREAM, an acronym, suggests policies that will help keep quality teaching and learning as the core value of the institution.
The workshop introduced the DREAM principles while at the same time causing reflection on current coordinating and management practices. Through the sharing of the DREAM principles and each other’s experiences, participants left with ideas on how to improve as managers, to bring the best out of themselves and their staff.
John Honisz-Greens is a Associate Lecturer of English in the School of Policy Studies at Kwansei Gakuin University. He has been living in Japan for 12 years and his academic interests also include Socio-linguistics, EAP Writing, and Vocabulary acquisition.
"On behalf of the organizers of MASH and Kyoto JALT, we would like to express our thanks and gratitude to all of you who spent so much time and effort into making the KYOTO JALT MASH '09 more than just a fantastic event, but a HUGE success!"
All participants commented enthusiastically on the many impressive presentations throughout the day, exchanging exciting ideas and helpful advice. The room was buzzing with conversation right up until the end of the day. Discussion continued at the after-event party held at The Hill of Tara, helped along with good food and drink, good music and great company.View pictures of event!
Thank you for making MASH '09 a success!