Medical Terminology with Human Anatomy
Welcome to the online study guide, designed to accompany
Medical Terminology with Human Anatomy, 5/E by Jane Rice. This website is a free auxillary to the textbook, providing students and instructors with an interactive teaching and learning tool. Here you will find review exercises based on the content of this exciting text. This web site features Chapter Objectives, True or False, Multiple Choice, Essay, and Fill-in-the-Blanks type questions, and a link to Prentice Hall's Drug Updates. Audioglossaries by chapter are also included, as well as a link to our Health Professions news feed feature updated daily by the New York Times.
At the completion of each True or False, Multiple Choice, or Fill in the Blanks section you may submit your answers to receive an instant score of your results. Moreover, instructors may assign these quizzes and exercises as homework, and ask you to route your answers to them using the Email Results function. You may also click on the Hint option, where available, that follows each question, which will help you navigate your search for the correct answer.
This site also features a Syllabus Manager that enables instructors to create and maintain a class syllabus online while also allowing you access to the syllabus at any time from any computer on the Internet.
To get started, simply select a chapter from the menu bar on the top left of the page, or click on one of the chapters titles below.
Chapter 1: Fundamental Word Structure
Chapter 2: The Organization of the Body
Chapter 3: The Integumentary System
Chapter 4: The Skeletal System
Chapter 5: The Muscular System
Chapter 6: The Digestive System
Chapter 7: The Cardiovascular System
Chapter 8: Blood and the Lymphatic System
Chapter 9: The Respiratory System
Chapter 10: The Urinary System
Chapter 11: The Endocrine System
Chapter 12: The Nervous System
Chapter 13: The Ear
Chapter 14: The Eye
Chapter 15: The Female Reproductive System
Chapter 16: The Male Reproductive System
Chapter 17: Oncology
Chapter 18: Radiology and Nuclear Medicine
Please select a chapter above to begin.
Instructors: Click on the link below to access downloadable instructor resources. The resources are access code protected. If you do not have an access code for Prentice Hall's Instructor Resource Center, you can register online or contact your Prentice Hall representative.
Please note that not all instructor resources for a title may be available for download.
Access the online instructor resources for this title
Find your Prentice Hall Sales Representative