Debates in Science Education
Edited by Mike Watts
To Be Published October 23rd 2013 by Routledge – 264 pages
Series: Debates in Subject Teaching
Debates in Science Education explores and highlights the key issues and debates important in science teaching and which trainee, induction-year and early-career teachers will need to address throughout their professional lives. The debates presented will encourage such teachers to consider and reflect on issues relevant to science education in order to reach their own informed judgements, so that they can better understand the field and can situate their own professional work within a broader context.
A team of international authors locate their positions in debates by reference to, or interrogation of, counter arguments, and by providing commentaries on further relevant reading in selective, but carefully annotated, bibliographies. Key issues considered include:
Each chapter is supported by reference to further reading and other material to encourage deeper exploration any of the issues, while reflective questions at the end of each chapter will help the reader to engage in the debates presented. This book will be a valuable resource for any student or practising teacher engaged in initial teacher training, continuing professional development and Masters level study.
Introduction 1. Introducing the debates Mike Watts Section 1: Policy debates 2. 'Science for all’ or Science education for the good of all? Keith S. Taber 3. Government Policy: Can short-term strategies bring long-term change? Chris Lloyd-Staples 4. Girls in Science: Who puts up the barriers? Joanne Cole 5. Improving Primary to Secondary Transition: ‘Now let’s teach them properly’ Mick Allen 6. The Secondary Science Curriculum: A grey and dreary landscape? Rob Toplis Section 2: Classroom debates 7. Online Gaming and Digital Fantasy for Scientific Literacy Nic Crowe 8. Language and Communication in the Science Classroom Susan Rodrigues 9. Questions and Inquiry in Science, ‘No questions, no learning?’ Helena Pedrosa-de-Jesus and Sara Leite 10. Explanations and Explaining in Science: You can’t force people to understand Mike Watts 11. Science Education through Contexts: Is it worth the effort? John K. Gilbert Section 3: Subject debates 12. Are Science Teachers Immune to Reflective Practice? Richard Malthouse and Jodi Roffey-Barentsen 13. School Science and Technology David Barlex and Marion Rutland 14. Sex Education and Science Neil Taylor, Frances Quinn and Judy Miller 15. The mystery of the body and the laboratory Steve Alsop 16. World Science, local science Peeranut Kanhadilok Section 4: Postscript 17. Decisions and time to take sides Mike Watts
Mike Watts is Professor of Education in the School of Sport and Education, Brunel University, responsible for developing teaching, research and consultancy, with particular emphasis on developing professional skills within the educational workforce. His own areas of research interest lie in Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics Education, the learning and teaching of science, in schools and beyond.