3. Antibiotics for mild-to-moderate sinus infections.
American Academy of Family Physicians, American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology
Despite physician awareness campaigns about the overuse of antibiotics for sinus infections, the drugs are prescribed in more than 80 percent of cases, according to the American Academy of Family Physicians. More than 90 percent of sinus infections are caused by viruses — and the drugs only work against bacterial infections.
Dangers: The widespread overuse of antibiotics is behind the spread of increasingly virulent strains of drug-resistant bacteria.
Exceptions: If symptoms last more than seven days or worsen after initially improving. Some people develop a secondary bacterial infection and then antibiotics may be needed.
4. NSAID painkillers for people with high blood pressure, heart failure and any chronic kidney disease.
American Society of Nephrology
Many people use Advil, Motrin (ibuprofen) or prescriptions such as Celebrex and Voltaren for everything from arthritis to headaches. But these common painkillers can be dangerous, especially for people with high blood pressure or kidney disease. (These medications can raise blood pressure, cause fluid retention and interfere with kidney function.) Tylenol (acetaminophen), tramadol, or short-term use of narcotic painkillers may be safer than NSAIDs, according to the nephrologists.
Dangers: These drugs are linked to stomach bleeding and increased risk of heart and kidney problems.
5. X-ray, CT scan or MRI for low back pain.
American College of Physicians, American Academy of Family Physicians
About 80 percent of Americans will suffer from back pain. Low back pain is the fifth most common cause for all doctor's visits. "The vast majority of people with nonspecific low back pain simply get better … within four to six weeks, with or without a physician's intervention," says Patrick Alguire, M.D., an official with the American College of Physicians. If older people get an image, experts say the results will almost always show an innocent abnormality that has nothing to do with the back pain.
Dangers: Some tests expose people to unnecessary radiation and can lead to expensive back surgery.
Exceptions: When the doctor suspects serious underlying conditions or if the pain isn't better in six weeks.