Hurricane Sandy was the largest hurricane ever observed in the northeastern United States. Just last year, we got socked to the tune of $15.6 billion in damages by Hurricane Irene. Hurricanes, like heat waves and droughts, are becoming more frequent and more extreme. This is what climatologists have been warning us will happen if we keep burning fossil fuels.
Every 24 hours, humans pump 91 million tons of carbon dioxide into the atmosphere. CO2 lingers in the atmosphere for over 100 years. As a result, the CO2 concentration has jumped from an average of 280 parts per million to today's 393 parts per million. That's a very sudden jump of 113 parts per million!
The more CO2 in the atmosphere, the hotter the atmosphere gets. The hotter the atmosphere gets, the more moisture it holds. The more moisture it holds, the bigger and more frequent the storms get. As the atmosphere gets hotter, it causes severe storms and flooding in some areas and heat waves cause severe droughts and wildfires in other areas.
Politicians and fossil fuel industry people say it will hurt the economy to change to clean green energy. But, you know what? Switching to clean energy will boost our economy and create jobs. How many Katrinas, Irenes, and Sandys do we have to pay damages for before we figure it out?
But, the most baffling consideration is, if we don't stop burning fossil fuels right now, when we hit the wall, the economy will be a moot point.
Richard Whiteford|environmental communications consultant, Downingtown
Letter writer Mark Stockhausen's misguided attempt to defend former Erie schools Superintendent Jim Barker while belittling current Superintendent Jay Badams is ludicrous (Erie Times-News, Oct. 23).
First, Badams is not raising money. He is stopping the hemorrhaging captained by Barker.
Second, the "politics as usual" mentality never thrived quite like it did during the Barker regime. Big pair of shoes indeed.
Help out streets bureau, please
Well, Hurricane Sandy was some storm of the century. I only have one question on the days after she hit: Why can't people in our city get out and clean off the storm sewers in their neighborhoods?
While driving down our streets, I'm annoyed by the number of leaf-covered sewer drains. I'm a recent widow, 57 years of age, and I am out there in the drizzle and rain keeping the storm sewer by my home clean of leaves. No, not my leaves, but why would that matter?
We need to step it up as residents of this city and help out our streets department. What does it take? Such a little time and effort. Come on, people, think about it. In addition, thanks a bunch Anne and Ray. You're the best neighbors.
Public housing project criticized
The article titled "Building up Erie" should have been titled "Tearing down America" (Erie Times-News, Oct. 29). The 36-unit, $8.6 million project near East 19th and Parade and German streets is a math problem that shows government's financial illiteracy. It comes out to $238,888 per unit.
The public financing rewards investors of the project. Many of our government bonds are purchased by China. The tenants probably receive subsidized housing because it is for low- or moderate-income tenants. They are probably subsidized through Section 8 Housing (more federal taxes).
Publicly subsidized housing has failed this country. Do the math.
Joseph T. Fries|Erie
Raises, Capitol renovations hit
As I was reading the newspaper recently, I came across some disturbing news. In the middle of a global recession that has cost the livelihood of many millions of people worldwide, Gov. Tom Corbett gave four of his aides $10,000 raises (Erie Times-News, Oct. 22).
In addition, in February, Corbett also proposed $55 million in renovations to the state capital. If you are Corbett, these are two uses for state money that you don't even attempt to discuss, considering our current economic situation.
It is easy to write a letter about how or why this money is misspent, but the key is to figure out how this money can be spent better.
As of September 2012, Pennsylvania's unemployment rate was 8.2 percent, which is tied for 20th worst in the country. Obviously, there are a lot of people looking for work. If the money that is being used for raises and Capitol renovations were used correctly, this unemployment problem can start to be alleviated.
This money can be much better used to supply job training for workers who need education to get better jobs or a job. The $55 million used for the Capitol renovations alone can supply a lot of training needed to put Pennsylvanians back to work and keep them working and allow this economy to turn around.
This money can also be used to help lessen the debt that college students have to pay. The prospect of these debts keep many students from achieving a college education.
The money that has been misspent by Corbett can be better used to supply more grants to perspective college students and to allow college graduates to not have such a big debt hole to dig out of. How about money to fund programs for senior citizens? These are people who have worked their entire lives and deserve to live comfortably in their golden years.
Liquor store closings wrong
This is why Pennsylvania needs to have privately owned liquor stores. We closed all stores statewide at 3 p.m. on Oct. 29 because of winds and high water in eastern Pennsylvania.
We were under a hurricane warning for Sandy. So the state does what it wants all over the whole state. We have no problems in Erie or surrounding areas other than rain and winds. Please, give me a break!
One can tell where the consumer stands -- at the mercy of the government. Privatize!
Thomas J. Doyle|Erie
Mural art tributes Little Italy
For the past several months, as I've passed the corner of West 18th and Cherry streets, I've been quite awed by the mural being painted on the Cherry Street side of Arnone's Bakery.
My many thanks to the young artists in the Sisters of Saint Joseph Neighborhood Network program for their outstanding replica of "old Italy." They have put their talents to work for the populace to enjoy a scene from the past.
Thank you, and may you continue your careers in art.