Coloring fun and fascinating facts about the most amazing creatures to ever walk the earth. Kit includes: Dinosaurs of the Cretaceous Era Coloring Book, Dinosaurs of the Jurassic Era Coloring Book, Dinosaurs of the Triassic Era Coloring Book, Dinosaurs Stained Glass Coloring B... read more
See Sample Pages! Click here to look inside this book.
Customers who bought this book also bought:
Our Editors also recommend:
Dinosaurs! Coloring Book by Jan Sovak Based on the most up-to-date information available, this awe-inspiring collection features 30 highly detailed drawings of the Tyrannosaurus Rex, Triceratops, Velociraptor, Iguanodon, Diplodocus, Carnotaurus, Oviraptor, Gastonia, Troodon, and others, all set in their natural habitats.
Shiny Dinosaurs Stickers by Cathy Beylon Twelve glistening creatures from the prehistoric past, including a menacing T. Rex. Ideal for adding a dazzling metallic touch to home and school projects.
Dinosaur Activity Kit by Dover Twenty tattoos; 36 stickers; 2 big coloring books with 80 realistic drawings; an easy how-to-draw guide; an 11 x 17 full-color mini poster; plus stencils, masks, and more.
Trains Discovery Kit by Dover, A. G. Smith Famous TrainsColoring Book, Railroad Engines from Around the World Coloring Book, Antique Locomotives Coloring Book, 12 stickers, 11 x 16 Color Your Own poster, cut & assemble steam-driven passenger train, crayons.
Shakespeare Discovery Kit by Dover, A. G. Smith Ten Tales from Shakespeare — enthralling prose retellings for young readers — 2 paper dolls with costumes, Great Scenes from Shakespeare's Plays Coloring Book, A Midsummer Night's Dream Stained Glass Coloring Book, 12 bookmarks, Color Your Own poster, crayons.
Great African Americans Discovery Kit by Dover Sixteen paper dolls, Great African Americans Coloring Book, Famous African-American Women Coloring Book, The Story of the Underground Railroad Coloring Book, History of the Civil Rights Movement Coloring Book, The Story of the Amistad by Emma Gelders Sterne, Color Your Own poster, crayons.
See-Thru Dinosaur Stickers by Chuck Whelon Like modern-day chameleons, these ancient reptiles take on the colors of their background. Ten see-through stickers of the most popular dinosaurs include playful images of a triceratops and T. rex.
Dinosaurs of the Triassic Era by Jan Sovak Based on the latest scientific information, this coloring book by an expert naturalist features dinosaurs of 200 million years ago. Thirty dynamic illustrations depict the Staurikosaurus, Aliwalia, Eoraptor, Gojirasaurus, and more.
Dover Coloring Box -- Dinosaurs by Dover, Jan Sovak Dinosaurs! Coloring Book, Dinosaurs of the Jurassic Era, 11 x 16 two-sided Color Your Own poster, and crayons.
Dinosaurs of the Cretaceous Era by Jan Sovak Meticulously researched and illustrated, this book is alive with 30 dinosaurs from 65 million to 145 million years ago — the carnivorous Tyrannosaurus rex, the plant-eating Triceratops, and other beasts.
World War II Discovery Kit by Dover Story of WWII Coloring Book,World War II Warships Coloring Book,Airplanes of the Second World War Coloring Book, GI paper doll, 16 art stickers, 24 postcards, 11 x 17 Rosie the Riveter poster, crayons.
Ancient Greece Discovery Kit by Dover, Arkady Roytman Favorite Greek Myths, Greek Gods and Goddesses Coloring Book, Life in Ancient Greece Coloring Book, Adventures of Hercules Coloring Book, The Adventures of Ulysses Coloring Book, Greek and Roman Gods Stained Glass Coloring Book, poster, crayons.
The Wild West Discovery Kit by Dover, Gary Zaboly 5 coloring books — Cowboys of the Old West, Horses of the Old West, Legendary Outlaws and Lawmen of the Old West, Western Pioneers, Story of the California Gold Rush — over 40 stickers, 4 tattoos, Color Your Own poster.
The Revolutionary War Discovery Kit by Dover 5 coloring books — George Washington, Uniforms of the American Revolution,Story of the American Revolution,Heroes and Heroines of the American Revolution,Life in Colonial America — 28 stickers, 2 posters, crayons.
Legends of Baseball Discovery Kit by Dover Story of Baseball Coloring Book, Legendary Baseball Stars Paper Dolls in Full Color, nearly 200 classic baseball cards, 11 x 17 Color Your Own poster, crayons.
Dinosaur Skeleton Rampage Stickers by Claude Thivierge The dinosaurs are on a rampage! Watch as the skeletons of these prehistoric creatures wage a raging battle of the reptiles. Includes 16 dinosaur stickers, ready to add a dramatic touch to books and birthday cards.
Abraham Lincoln Discovery Kit by Dover, A. G. Smith Abraham Lincoln Coloring Book, 19 stickers, paper doll with 30 costume stickers, over 40 different puzzles, "Concentration"-style memory game, "Gettysburg Address" poster, 11 x 17 Color Your Own poster, crayons.
The Civil War Discovery Kit by Dover Three different coloring books, The Red Badge of Courage by Stephen Crane, Union and Confederate Soldier paper dolls with uniforms, weapons, and equipment, 100 Union and Confederate Soldiers paper toys, crayons.
Samurai Discovery Kit by Dover Samurai Arms and Armor Coloring Book, Life in Old Japan Coloring Book, Samurai Warriors Coloring Book, 8 stand-up samurai figures, 20 stickers, 4 art tattoos, 11 x 17 Color Your Own poster, crayons.
I Can Draw Dinosaurs by Barbara Soloff Levy With simple circles, ovals, and other common shapes, aspiring artists easily create a tyrannosaurus rex, dimetrodon, megalosaurus, triceratops, ankylosaurus, and other prehistoric favorites. Features blank practice pages plus pencil, eraser, and sharpener.
Jurassic Dinosaurs Sticker Activity Book by A. G. Smith Prehistoric swamp scene with 21 realistic stickers — long-necked, whip-tailed dinosaurs, crested dinosaurs, dinosaurs with "armor-plated" skin, other fantastic creatures. Full-color scene on inside covers.
Cretaceous Dinosaurs Tattoos by Ruth Soffer Ten totally awesome tattoos of creatures from the Cretaceous period include triceratops, iguanodon, velociraptor, and tyrannosaurus.
Jurassic Dinosaur Stickers by Ruth Soffer Add prehistoric pizzazz to a variety of flat surfaces with realistic renderings of apatosaurus, brachiosaurus, stegosaurus, and 17 other earth-shakers from the past.
Dinosaur Mazes by Patricia J. Wynne Transport back to the Age of Reptiles with 46 challenging mazes featuring such Mesozoic monsters as the long-necked Apatosaurus, the flying Archaeopteryx, and the sea-dwelling Aspidorhynchus as well as other dinosaurs.Includes brief captions and solutions.
Dinosaur ABC Coloring Book by Llyn Hunter Dramatic renderings of 29 prehistoric beasts, including the herbivorous Brachiosaurus and "helmeted" Corythosaurus — shown in alphabetical order. Background information, coloring suggestions.
The Days of the Dinosaur Coloring Book by Matthew Kalmenoff Here are 39 accurately rendered prehistoric creatures set in their natural habitats. Tyrannosaurus, brontosaurus, stegosaurus, and many other Mesozoic monsters are shown grazing, stalking prey, flying, fighting, and more.
The Dinosaur Coloring Book by Anthony Rao Forty-five drawings, superbly rendered for coloring, of Archaeopteryx, Stegosaurus, Archelon, Tyrannosaurus, and more. In all, 32 dinosaurs, 6 non-dinosaurian archosaurs, 1 fossil bird, and 1 ancient sea turtle.
Coloring fun and fascinating facts about the most amazing creatures to ever walk the earth. Kit includes: Dinosaurs of the Cretaceous Era Coloring Book, Dinosaurs of the Jurassic Era Coloring Book, Dinosaurs of the Triassic Era Coloring Book, Dinosaurs Stained Glass Coloring Book, Before the Dinosaurs Coloring Book, 4 large tattoos, 11 x 16 two-sided Color Your Own activity poster, and crayons.
This book was printed in the United States of America.
Dover books are made to last a lifetime. Our US book-manufacturing partners produce the highest quality books in the world and they create jobs for our fellow citizens. Manufacturing in the United States also ensures that our books are printed in an environmentally friendly fashion, on paper sourced from responsibly managed forests.