Scientists discover insulin 'handshake'
- From: AAP
- January 10, 2013
AUSTRALIAN scientists have unravelled a 20-year mystery that could lead to the development of new insulin medications without the need for injections for diabetics.
A research team, led by the Walter and Eliza Hall Institute (WEHI) in Melbourne, has discovered how the insulin hormone binds to the insulin receptor, a process that scientists have been trying to solve for two decades.
Associate Professor Mike Lawrence from WEHI said the new generation of insulin products developed for diabetics had been limited by a lack of understanding of how insulin docks into its receptor.
Assoc Prof Lawrence said the new discovery could lead to new ways to deliver insulin to diabetics other than by injection, or the development of insulin products that were more effective and longer-lasting.
He said understanding how insulin binds to its receptor was essential to achieve this.
"What we have done is to come up with that first 3D picture of how insulin interacts with its receptor," Assoc Prof Lawrence told AAP.
The insulin receptor is a large protein on the surface of cells that the insulin hormone binds to.
The binding is necessary for cells to take sugar from the blood as energy.
Insulin controls the levels of glucose in the body but this process breaks down in people with type 1 and type 2 diabetes.
In people with type 1 diabetes, the pancreas fails to produce insulin, resulting in high blood pressure and the need for daily insulin injections, while in type 2 diabetes, the cells fail to respond properly to insulin, leading to high blood sugar levels.
The researchers found that insulin and its receptor rearrange when they come into contact.
A piece of insulin folds out while key pieces of the receptor move to engage the insulin hormone.
"You might call it a 'molecular handshake'," Assoc Prof Lawrence said.
The WEHI team, led by Assoc Prof Lawrence, Dr Colin Ward and Dr John Menting, worked with international researchers from the United States, the United Kingdom and Prague on the study, published on Thursday in the journal Nature.
The three-dimensional molecular structure of the insulin hormone and receptor was analysed using the Australian Synchrotron.
About one million Australians have diabetes with around 100,000 new diagnoses each year.
A recent report on the global disease burden in The Lancet found diabetes was the 10th biggest contributor to years of life lost in Australia and New Zealand, compared to 19th globally.