Opening up the Natural History Heritage for Europeana
OpenUp! project offers virtual access to over one million items of the world’s biodiversity heritage. This includes high quality specimen images, sounds, videos, as well as natural history artwork.
Information provided through OpenUp! will be checked by scientists and made freely accessible through the Europeana portal (www.europeana.eu). The inclusion of culturally-significant multimedia content from European natural history collections will enhance the scientific dimension of Europeana by adding substantial information about the natural world in addition to the existing material primarily focusing on arts and humanities. The users of Europeana will have direct online access to famous examples of natural and cultural heritage information that is kept in far-flung institutions preserving Europe’s natural history and that would be arduous to visit in person. Also, and due to the history of Europe and its colonial past, a lot of this multimedia information is of high interest to countries outside of Europe and it will play an important role in the repatriation of information on items kept in European repositories to their countries of origin.
The second objective of the OpenUp! project is to present to general public the role and the work carried out in natural history institutions beyond what is exposed in exhibition rooms.
The OpenUp! project is a Best Practice Network, co-funded by the European Commission under the CIP ICT PSP Programme. The project is coordinated by the Botanic Garden and Botanical Museum Berlin-Dahlem. The members of consortium are 23 scientific institutions from 12 different European countries.
OpenUp! at the Museum für Naturkunde
The Museum für Naturkunde will provide about 10,000 animal sound files from the Animal Sound Archive at MfN (http://www.tierstimmenarchiv.de/) and about 20,000 high quality specimen images until the end of the project in February 2014.
Here you can browse already available multimedia content of the Museum für Naturkunde in Europeana:
Furthermore, MfN is coordinating the OpenUp! Work Package 4 - "Zoological Community Content Provision, Metadata Catalogue and Quality Control".