What is Disobedience?
Disobedience is defined as the failure to obey. While every animal deserves the right to free will, when your sofa is being torn to shreds or your animal is putting its life in danger, obedience and listening to commands becomes very important.
Training your animal when they are young (still a puppy or kitten) gives you the best chance of success, however it is often easier said, than done. Even puppies and kittens can stretch your patience to the limit! Training older dogs, while still possible, is usually a much harder task.
What Causes Disobedience?
An animal that routinely disobeys should undergo a full check up by a veterinarian to rule out any physical problem (loss of hearing for example) that may be responsible for the ‘naughty’ temperament such as excessive barking, excitability, and aggression.
Your vet may also prescribe medications that help to calm your pet, long enough for them to be receptive to learning. However, keep in mind that these medications may also have side effects, and it may be difficult in the future to wean your pet off these prescribed drugs.
Help for Disobedience
There are a wide variety of natural ingredients used to help support the animal brain and help pet’s become more amenable to learning, without doing harm. Herbal and homeopathic remedies can provide the perfect accompaniment to training or behavior modification.
Herbs such as Scutellaria laterifolia and Hypericum perforatum can help treat animal anxiety and other nervous disorders, thus providing tonic benefits for the entire nervous system. Belladonna, Cantharis and Nux vom are homeopathic ingredients used to alleviate high levels of irritability, aggression and defiance (all of which may make ‘teaching an old dog new tricks’ nearly impossible!).
More Information on Disobedience
Tips related to disobedience:
- Before inadvertently setting any bad habits in place, consult with a behaviorist or trainer that can help you with the ‘ground rules’ of training and give you helpful tips for teaching your animal.
- Never shout or hit your pet – this is likely to set up a pattern of bad behavior for negative attention. (Negative attention is still attention from you as owner)
- Try using a spray bottle to deter bad behavior, or withhold attention until your animal settles down.
- Consult with a behaviorist that has professional expertise and experience with your specific breed.