Ask a question about 'Communist Party of Slovakia'
Start a new discussion about 'Communist Party of Slovakia'
Answer questions from other users
The Communist Party of Slovakia
is a communist party
A political party described as a Communist party includes those that advocate the application of the social principles of communism through a communist form of government...
The Slovak Republic is a landlocked state in Central Europe. It has a population of over five million and an area of about . Slovakia is bordered by the Czech Republic and Austria to the west, Poland to the north, Ukraine to the east and Hungary to the south...
, formed in 1992, through the merger of the Communist Party of Slovakia – 91 and the Communist League of Slovakia
The Communist League of Slovakia was as a communist party in Slovakia.It was formed in 1991 by orthodox elements of the original Communist Party of Slovakia , which opposed the mutation of KSS into the Party of the Democratic Left. In 1992 ZKS and KSS '91 merged to form the new Communist Party of...
According to Luboš Blaha
Luboš Blaha is a Slovak philosopher, political scientist and politician. He works for the former Speaker of the National Council of the Slovak Republic Pavol Paška ....
the KSS supported the government of Robert Fico
Robert Fico served as the Prime Minister of Slovakia from July 4, 2006 to July 8, 2010.He is the leader of the left-wing party Direction – Social Democracy . The party won the parliamentary elections in 2006, receiving approximately 30 percent of the cast votes...
The party is observer of the Party of the European Left
The Party of the European Left, commonly abbreviated to just the European Left, is a political party at European level and an association of democratic socialist and communist political parties in the European Union and other European countries. It was formed in January 2004 for the purposes of...
although it criticizes the Political Theses for the 1st Congress of European Left.
|Results since 1998
(year links to election page)
||Type of Election
The 1998 parliamentary elections in Slovakia took place on 25 and 26 September 1998. Elections are regarded as a pivotal point in Slovak history after the fall of communism by bringing the government of Vladimír Mečiar to end.- Results :...
The 2002 parliamentary elections in Slovakia took place on September 20 and September 21, 2002.-Results:70,07 % of voters participated in the election. The results are in the following table :...
The European Parliament election of 2004 in Slovakia was the election of MEP representing Slovakia constituency for the 2004-2009 term of the European Parliament. It was part of the wider 2004 European election. The vote took place on June 13. The turnout was lowest of any country in the European...
| European Parliament
The 2006 parliamentary elections in Slovakia took place on Saturday June 17, 2006. The voters selected 150 representatives for the National Council of the Slovak Republic. The highest number of seats, 50, was won by left-wing party Direction - Social Democracy led by Robert Fico. In total, six...
The European Parliament election of 2009 in Slovakia was the election of the delegation from Slovakia to the European Parliament in 2009.The turnout, although increased compared to the previous election, was 19.63%, the lowest of any nation involved in the election.-Division of Seats:The system of...
| European Parliament
A parliamentary election took place in Slovakia on 12 June 2010. The elections were contested by eighteen parties, six of which passed the 5% threshold for sitting in parliament...
- Communist Party of Slovakia (1939)
The Communist Party of Slovakia was a communist party in Slovakia. It was formed in March 1939, when the Slovak Republic was created, as the Slovak branches of the Communist Party of Czechoslovakia were separated from the mother party...
- Communist Party of Czechoslovakia
The Communist Party of Czechoslovakia, in Czech and in Slovak: Komunistická strana Československa was a Communist and Marxist-Leninist political party in Czechoslovakia that existed between 1921 and 1992....
- Communist Party of Bohemia and Moravia
The Communist Party of Bohemia and Moravia , abbreviated to KSČM, is a political party in the Czech Republic. It has a membership of 82,994 and is a member party of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left bloc in the European Parliament...
- Politics of Slovakia
Politics of Slovakia takes place in a framework of a parliamentary representative democratic republic, with a multi-party system. Legislative power is vested in the parliament and it can be exerced in some cases also by the government or directly by citizens. Executive power is exercised by the...
- List of political parties in Slovakia