Too Much Fructose Sweetener Tied to Heart Risks in Teens
Study finds high consumption associated with early signs of diabetes, other health issues
FRIDAY, Jan. 27 (HealthDay News) -- Teens who consume large amounts of the food and beverage sweetener fructose show evidence of cardiovascular disease and diabetes risk in their blood, a new study finds.
Fructose is found in fruits, while a form of fructose -- high-fructose corn syrup -- is widely used in processed foods and beverages. It's believed that adolescents' growing bodies crave the strong sweetener and food and beverage companies' advertising often targets young consumers, according to the Medical College of Georgia researchers.
Their study of 559 teens aged 14 to 18 found that diets high in fructose were associated with higher blood pressure; diabetes-related measures such as higher fasting glucose and insulin resistance; and inflammatory factors that contribute to heart and vascular disease.
Teens who consumed large amounts of fructose also tended to have lower levels of cardiovascular protectors such as HDL ("good") cholesterol and the protein adiponectin.
The connection between consuming lots of fructose and cardiovascular risk factors was even more pronounced in kids with excess belly fat, which is another known risk factor for cardiovascular disease and diabetes, said the study in the February issue of the Journal of Nutrition.
"It is so very important to provide a healthy balance of high-quality food to our children and to really pay close attention to the fructose and sucrose they are consuming at their home or anyone else's," study co-first author Dr. Vanessa Bundy, a pediatric resident, said in a college news release.
"The nutrition that caregivers provide their children will either contribute to their overall health and development or potentially contribute to cardiovascular disease at an early age," she added.
The best way for parents and caregivers to encourage healthy nutrition among teens is to be good role models, Bundy said.
The American Academy of Pediatrics has more about teens' nutritional needs.Robert Preidt SOURCE: Medical College of Georgia, news release, Jan. 24, 2012 Related Articles
- Health Tip: Make Healthy Foods Taste Better
May 22, 2013
- Children Who Have CT Scans May Face Higher Cancer Risk
May 22, 2013
Learn More About Sharp
Sharp HealthCare is San Diego's health care leader with seven hospitals, two medical groups and a health plan. Learn more about our San Diego hospitals, choose a Sharp-affiliated San Diego doctor or browse our comprehensive medical services.
Copyright © 2012 HealthDay. All rights reserved.