2.11 Further exercises
Number systems and the rules for combining numbers can be daunting. This unit will help you to understand the detail of rational and real numbers, complex numbers and integers. You will also be introduced to modular arithmetic and the concept of a relation between elements of a set.
4.1 Scientific approaches
Hibernation is an ingenious adaptation that some animals employ to survive difficult conditions in winter. This unit examines the differences between hibernation and torpor, and discusses the characteristic signs of hibernation behaviour. It explores the triggers that bring on hibernation, and whether internal signals or external season cues are predominant. It also examines the physiological adaptations that occur in hibernating animals. This unit builds on and develops ideas introduced in the
NASA CONNECT The Venus Transit
In NASA CONNECT Venus Transit, students will learn about the importance of using scale models to represent the size and distance of objects in the solar system and beyond. They will be introduced to the astronomical unit (AU), the baseline distance from the Earth to the Sun, which astronomers use to determine the relative distances from the Earth to other planets, stars, asteroids, and objects in space. They will also discover fascinating facts about the Venus Transit, a celestial and historical
Pathway 2 Information: Citing References
The citing and referencing module is part of a wider online tutorial designed to teach a range of information skills to undergraduate students. The module aims to provide an introductory guide to why referencing and citing is important and how to reference particular types of material according to different referencing styles. This skill is required by students throughout their degree courses and backs up more traditional face-to-face teaching in this area. The module uses an interactive approa
The effect of hunger on children and graphing
Following are a series of activities in which students apply various math skills to better understand the problems of world hunger and what steps are being taken to reduce the number of people without enough to eat. This activity examines the effect of hunger on children and the connection with child mortality, which is another MDG Hunger Target: Halve, between 1990 and 2015, the proportion of people who suffer from hunger. Child Mortality Target: Reduce by two-thirds, between 1990 and 2015, the
Quantitative Skills Assessment of Geoscience Courses
The importance of quantitative skills in earth science education is the primary subject addressed by this website. This website is not a quantitative course, however this document does provide numerous useful techniques that can be employed in a variety of other coursework to advance the quantitative skills of the student. The first section of this website presents a checklist that can be used to develop exercises which will focus on specific quantitative applications and evaluations. Skills add
Perspectives for Universities in the Global South: A Brazilian Point of View
In this presentation the following aspects will be addressed: an overview of academic and scientific institutions in Brazil, the academic and scientific status of Brazil today, main characteristics of the Federal University of Bahia, historical aspects of international academic cooperation in Brazil, a brief review on the main types of international academic cooperation, political aspects related to international academic cooperation, main characteristics of the exchange of knowledge betw
Baker, Clinton L.
Description not set
Rollins College Lectures
Description not set
Why critique research?
Why published research needs to be appraised by readers.
Tissue Fluid Formation
This RLO describes the distribution of fluids within the body and describes the forces involved in the circulation of fluids between the capillary and tissue compartments.
Site Libre Savoirs: Télécom ParisTech : présentation
Télécom ParisTech 46, rue Barrault 75634 Paris Cedex 13 Tel 01 45 81 77 77 Fax 01 45 88 11 14 www.telecom-paristech.fr Contact administratif : Directeur de la formation initiale : Jean-Pascal Jullien, firstname.lastname@example.org Contact pédagogique : Directeur des études et programmes : Dominique Kremmer, email@example.com Létablissement / Les grands domaines de compétence : Etablissement public denseignement supérie
Simon Says Big Amplitude, Small Wavelength!
In this activity, students play the game Simon Says to make the amplitudes and wavelengths defined by the teacher. First they play alone, and then they play with a partner using a piece of rope.
Manufacturing Technologies: Making a Picture Frame
The goal of this activity is to demonstrate the basic processes involved in a manufacturing system while producing your own picture frame.
MRI Safety Grand Challenge
This module was written for a first year accelerated or AP physics class. It is intended to provide hands on activities to teach end of the year electricity and magnetism topics including the magnetic force, magnetic moments and torque, the Biot-Savart law, Ampere's Law, and Faraday's Law. During the module, students utilize these scientific concepts to solve the following problem: A nearby hospital has just installed a new Magnetic Resonance Imaging facility, which has the capacity to make a th
The Visual Datasets text module discusses the concept of visual learning and presents some suggestions for ways to design learning environments that support students in developing visual literacy skills. Three visual datasets that can be used for problem solving activities in evolution, classification, development, and botany are included: Caminacules: A dataset of imaginary animals that can be used as the basis for a variety of problem-posing and problem-solving activities in evolution, classi
Module 5: Selecting Payment Methods
Select appropriate methods, terms, and currency of payment to agents, sales representatives, distributors, suppliers, and international joint ventures. MSU Global has teamed with experts in the international finance field to create resources to help increase international skills in the business community. These materials address the need of the international trade practitioner for knowledge and information that is specific to trade finance by providing a means for educators and business practit
Robin Hood and Sherwood Forest
This online exhibition highlights resources for the study of Robin Hood in the collections held by Manuscripts and Special Collections at the University of Nottingham. It includes examples from printed versions of the Robin Hood story in collections of traditional ballad literature, in popular chap books and in stories for children. It also features documents which can be used for the study of the historical Sherwood Forest and its laws.
Individualized Reading Instruction in the Elementary Grades, Winter 2008
Explores techniques for assessment of reading and writing skills and for development of individualized instruction in classroom settings; develops strategies for meeting the needs of individual students through the evaluation, utilization, and adaptation of commercial reading materials and through the formation of principles and techniques for producing effective teacher-prepared materials.
US History II
Upon completion of this course you will: Demonstrate comprehension of a broad body of historical knowledge; Express ideas clearly in writing; Work with classmates to research an historical issue; Interpret and apply data from original documents; Identify underrepresented historical viewpoints; Write to persuade with evidence; Compare and contrast alternate interpretations of an historical figure, event, or trend; Explain how an historical event connects to or causes a larger trend or theme; Deve