Planet Earth - Spring 2010
Planet Earth is a free magazine aimed at non-specialists with an interest in environmental science.
Government austerity measures mean that, along with many other public sector organisations, we have to make some savings. So we will not be producing a print version of Planet Earth magazine for the time being. We hope to resume printing in the future.
Alternatively, PDF documents of each article (or the entire magazine) are available to download below.
Download as PDF
* Unless specified, all articles are less than 2MB in size.
Planet Earth - Spring 2010 (4·5MB) Whole magazine. Individual articles are available below.
Leader Beyond climate change.
News Mongoose teamwork, how the butterfly got its spots, dinosaur colours revealed and other stories in brief.
Finding Solomon's gold? Precipitates from hot springs could lead us to a gold mine beneath.
Watching water dry New satellite data and sophisticated computer models are transforming our understanding of the water cycle.
Survival of the fattest There are 1031 viruses in our oceans. Yet we know surprisingly little about what they do.
Groundwater - returning to the sources Going back to old science can help bring clean water to more people in Africa.
Corals in a changing world Scientists are revisiting fundamental questions in coral research to understand how corals will fare in the future.
(Cover story) Gardening for greenhouse gases Setting up experimental plots to find out how different kinds of plants determine the fate of peatland carbon.
A mighty wind Finding out how Greenland's extraordinary weather patterns affect the climate worldwide.
Volcanic secrets in the ice How is a sprinkling of ash connected to the climate of the last warm interglacial period?
Finding the wisdom in teeth The analysis of isotopes is shedding new light on the origins of archaeological finds and human migration.
High and dry in the Andes Climate change is threatening water supplies in the highlands of Peru.
Getting to the bottom of biodiversity How marine science is helping in the search for a general theory of biodiversity.
Measuring the changing environment from space New developments in satellite technology mean we can monitor the Earth in more detail than ever before.