Cooking VegPeople try to avoid eating vegetables simply because of their bland taste. Parents keep running after their children trying to convince them into consuming vegetables that are supposed to be nutritious and essential for growth. But kids keep running because boiled or raw vegetables just don't agree with their taste buds.
Vegetables are indeed an important source of nutrition. To consume these foods without having to deal with a tasteless meal, two things need to be done. The first, selecting an appropriate way for cooking these vegetables and the second, adding seasoning for flavor.
It has been said that before you start cooking, vegetables cultivated over ground must be used through cold water while vegetables cultivated underneath the ground must be boiled at first.
Read Also - Undercooked Chicken and Its Health Dangers
Here are a few cooking tips for seasoning and preparing good tasting vegetables.
Cabbages are usually boiled in water as a part of their cooking method. Even in olden times, cabbages were cooked in water forming a broth that was consumed so relentlessly. An easier and much quicker alternative to boiling is braising the cabbage in vegetable oil, making it delicious to eat.
By volume, cut the cabbage into 3 parts along with one part of white onion. Heat some vegetable oil using a big pot and add the chopped cabbage together with onion. Add some flavor by sprinkling a dash of salt and some black pepper that's freshly ground. Using a wooden spatula, stir the mixture periodically while cooking for seven to eight minutes.
When you see the cabbage softening, turn off the heat and put in some cilantro that's freshly chopped and feel a burst of exciting new flavors gushing through your mouth.
Read Also - Crock Pot Cooking - An Overview
Mashed potatoes tend to be moist and bland. While frying this vegetable can make it tasty and succulent, mashing it can also turn out as a wise option with the addition of a few common ingredients found in the kitchen. Always be careful of not dicing the potatoes too small because they'll soak up excess water, leaving you with a mushy resultant.
Cut up the potatoes into chunks measuring up to half an inch and place them inside a pot containing cold water. Add salt and boil. Bubble the potatoes for 20 to 25 minutes before turning off the heat. Make sure that they're soft enough to mash.
After boiling, drain the excess water let them steam out for a few minutes. This is an important process because letting the potatoes steam out will get rid of any excess liquid that can affect the moistness of the mash. You can then add some butter or horseradish sauce (depending on your choice of taste). Horseradish can provide some tanginess to the mash. Remember to mash the potatoes with your hands instead of an electronic mixer because these equipment are designed to puree rather than mash.
You could season the potato mash by means of white pepper so that there aren't any visible unattractive specks of black pepper.
Read More From QuickEasyfit