Castles and Palaces of Poland
Poland, historically a big country between two aggressive neighbors Germany and Russia, has through its geographical situation a dramatic past. Poland’s anthem starts with words: "Poland did not perish as long as we live…". Indeed, though most of its historical castles are now in neighbor countries, many more remained in Poland’s borders and they are certainly worthy a visit. They will document its heroic past, richness of culture and history. You will also find in Poland many castles of the Teutonic Order of Holy Mary in Jerusalem, a knight’s order limited to the German aristocracy, built to threaten and to repress the Polish population. The most unique – Malbork, is probably the biggest mediaeval castle on earth.
Warsaw - Warszawa
The capital of Poland and a very fast growing metropolitan area, Warsaw becomes the most important city between Berlin and Moscow. In early middle ages just a small fishing village, since the end of the XVI century the capital of the whole Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth. Today Warsaw is an attractive city with rich cultural life and many historical monuments worth visiting.
A central region in Poland around Warsaw. It’s flat, open landscape has always been difficult to defend against the invaders. Therefore during Poland’s turbulent history, already in early Middle Ages, many castles had to be built here. Today several of these castles and palaces, often in a near proximity of Warsaw, are worth visiting.
An agricultural region to the South East of Warsaw with an old town of Lublin as the main city.
As in 1945 Poland lost its eastern regions to the Soviet Union, Lublin became the most important town in the east of the Poland, with interesting historical monuments, several universities and rich cultural life.
- Baranów Sandomierski
A region to the South West of Warsaw with Łódź, a modern city built in the XIX century as the region’s capital.
Old mountains region ca 200 km to the south of Warsaw. Ruins or just small remains of many castles testify to the Polish history. Splendid views, richness of nature, good areas for walks.
An important industrial area to the west of Warsaw, with Poznań as the most important town. In the XIX century in the hands of Prussia and later united Germany. An ambition to resist German influence left interesting monuments in Wielkopolskie.
Old capital of Poland spared by wars, Krakow is an old city of unique character. Vibrant with cultural life, with several amazing museums and many interesting monuments, Krakow is the city you should not miss.
Małopolskie and Podkarpacie
Two regions united by the history, and of prime importance for Poland during the centuries, in the vicinity of Krakow. Many old monuments of rich Polish history. Mountains of Karpaty from the South, with beautiful mountain range of Pieniny and the Dunajec river below. Several castles built on tops of the mountains to guard the passages. Traditional tourist area of Poland, with many attractions as winter sports and interesting excursions possibilities into this picturesque area.
- Pieskowa Skała
Silesia and Opolskie
Silesia is traditionally industrial and rich region of Poland; therefore, it has always been an object of Poland’s struggle with its neighbours. Through centuries slowly taken by powerful Germany. Several Polish castles testify about an effort of the generations of Poles to defend their Homeland against much more powerful neighbour.
- Kamieniec Ząbkowicki
Warmińsko – Mazurskie
The Teutonic Order Of Holy Mary In Jerusalem, created during the crusades, had been sent in 1225 by the Pope for another crusade to this region. The result was a creation of Prussia, a German state taking its name from the previous inhabitants of these lands, completely exterminated. After the WWII all these territories were in whole returned to Poland. Now a great tourist region with more than 500 lakes, forests and many Teutonic castles to visit.
- Lidzbark Warmiński
A Northern region of Poland with the river Vistula flowing into the Baltic sea in the centre and big harbour cities of Gdynia and Gdansk at the North. Good beaches, fantastic forests and lakes especially in the Kaszuby area, many historical monuments of the region’s rich history.
The princedom of Pomerania, which in the middle of the XVII century through the succession went to the Hohenzollern family. For centuries after, a part of Germany, after the WWII West Pomerania returned to Poland. Today a very attractive tourist area with resorts at the Baltic Sea.