Moles are generally thought to be small, brownish blemishes on the skin which are painless and harmless. Nearly everyone has moles to some extent and they generally do not need to be removed unless the patient is self-conscious about them or if they are rubbing against clothes and becoming irritated – the typical reason sited for mole removal. Moles come in all shapes and sizes and it’s important to know your moles and monitor them for any changes.
This is the most common type of mole on the skin. They are small in diameter, round and fairly flat. Although some babies are born with this sort of moles already, most develop as people get older, most commonly in the first 30 years of life. Moles can appear anywhere on the body and they are more common in people with fair skin than in people with darker skin.
This is the second most common types of mole found. They are generally more raised and bumpy than the first sort of moles and can also be hairy. It is also important to state that most people have a combination of many different sorts of moles on their body and don’t have just one type or the other. The dermal melanocytic naevi mole is often lighter in color and can be light enough as to be skin colored. They can occur anywhere on the body and people with this sort of mole on the face often wish to have them removed as many consider them to be unsightly, or feel embarrassed about having them.
Halo naevi moles are a standard mole surrounded a circle of white, which makes the halo. They are caused when the white blood cells in the body attack the mole. The cause of them is unknown, and this sort of mole is more common in people who suffer from problems with the pigment in their skin, such as vitiligo. As a larger area of the skin is affected than with a standard mole, there may be a greater demand to have them removed.
Atypical is another way of saying not normal, and these sorts of moles are ones which are showing pre-cancerous changes. People with these sorts of moles do not have cancer and should not be concerned. It does mean though that their moles have a higher chance of changing into malignant melanomas than moles which are not showing the changes such as an irregular outline, so it is vital that if these sorts of moles are identified on the body they should be monitored closely and reported to a doctor. The doctor may well want to take photographs so that accurate comparisons can be made over time and any further changes can be picked up quickly. Although immediate removal is not always required, depending on the number and location of the moles it may be advisable to have the mole removed before any further changes take place.
Apart from having moles in the first place, regular sun exposure is a major factor in whether or not a patient will develop skin cancer. Always use a high factor sunscreen and avoid getting sunburned. Covering up during the hottest parts of the day when the sun is at its highest is also recommended. Sun beds should be avoided, as should be lying on a sun lounger trying to get a sun tan. Use fake tanning products or creams if you want to get the sun kissed look without risking further damage to your skin.