by Robert Knopf
Ages 10 - Adult
As the debate between evolution, creation and intelligent design garners headlines across the country, many do not know the scientific facts. According to Robert Knopf, author of the new book, The Truth About Creation & Evolution, if you believe in evolution you have probably been brainwashed. In this thought-provoking, 64 page book, featuring 45 photos and illustrations, Knopf cites more than 75 ways science disproves evolutionary theory and supports biblical creation and intelligent design.
Knopf believes that since neither evolution nor creation lend themselves to the scientific method, i.e. are repeatable, observable and measurable, both are religions. Knopf is quick to state, however, that scientific evidence more greatly supports creation and intelligent design than evolution.
In his book, evidence is presented which indicates the earth is only about 6,000 years old, that dinosaurs lived with man, that the fossil record indicates a worldwide flood 4,400 years ago, that cavemen never existed, and that todays geological features formed quickly, not over millions of years.
Knopf also discusses how belief in evolution has led to racial prejudice and human persecution. He states, Its sad that those who believe in evolution believe humankind originated as a mistake, an accident, and that we are merely a descendant from primordial slime. Conversely, those of us who believe in creation believe we are the miraculously planned children of an Almighty God, made in Gods image. Our viewpoint on creation or evolution affects our total world outlook and determines how we interact with others in our daily lives.
- Table of Contents -
Section I: The Truth About Creation and Evolution
Chapter 1: Brainwashed by Evolution
Chapter 2: The Creation Story
Chapter 3: Two Opposing World Views
Chapter 4: Evolution Spawned Human Persecution and Racial Prejudice
Chapter 5: Five Key Factors Disprove Evolution
Section II: Science Supports Creation Creation Proofs and Evolution Problems
Chapter 6: Not All Science is Science
Chapter 7: Earth Evidence Supports Creation
Chapter 8: The Universe Supports Creation
Chapter 9: Mt. St. Helens Evidence Supports Creation
Chapter 10: Ocean Evidence Supports Creation
Chapter 11: Fossil Evidence Supports Creation
Chapter 12: Radiocarbon Dating Has Limitations
Chapter 13: Animal Anatomy Supports Creation
Chapter 14: Dinosaur and Animal Evidence Supports Creation
Chapter 15: Human Evidence Supports Creation
Section III: Life After Death
Chapter 16: Life After Death
Chapter 17: What Can God-Believing People Do?
- Reviews -
I recommend Bob Knopf's book, The Truth About Creation & Evolution, to any person regardless of their belief in creation, intelligent design or evolution. This book provides a springboard from which anyone can delve into how our universe and man came into existence. - Dr. Kent Hovind, Creation Science Evangelism
Bob Knopf's book, The Truth About Creation & Evolution, is clear, concise, not a big, boring blur. It offers compelling and provocative evidence against evolutionism, and is compact so people dont have to dig through tons of scientific jargon to get the facts. You have done an admirable job of condensing creation arguments into a readable and absorbable format. - Dr. Dennis Swift, Director, The Dinosaur Institute
The scientific evidence presented in Bob Knopf's book, The Truth About Creation & Evolution, is staggering and shows evolution is not a credible theory. Only God creating the heavens, earth, and everything in them explains scientific findings. This book is a must read for all thoughtful, open-minded individuals. Pastor Glenn Morrisey