The new partnership is a return to GLOBIO’s origins where flagship species form the basis for engaging children in exploring and discussing the world, and the factors threatening species health and survival. GLOBIO, working with the rich content being created by Great Ape Diaries, will look to develop a range of web-based resources that enable educators to access existing learning materials that use great apes as an opportunity to help children understand complex global environmental issues. Some of these resources will utilize the growing body of photos, video and audio being created by the Great Ape Diaries team over the next three years.
Througout GLOBIO's history we have searched for opportunities to directly and indirectly excite kids about exploring our planet and despite the endless waves of technologies and approaches the one constant is educators - women and men who excite curiosity in children with hands-on learning. With that in mind GLOBIO in 2013 is renewing its support of Environmetal Education learning and workshops around the world. Grants for EE workshops and project technical support have been made in the USA, India and Indonesia. Look for greater EE expansion and new project announcements in Fall 2013.
Glossopedia is GLOBIO’s solution to a critical need: the overwhelming lack of child-specific, child-friendly, learning content on the internet. Glossopedia, is our multimedia online interactive encyclopedia, connecting kids to the world by supporting discovery of nature, animals, science, and culture. No other resource like it exists, primarily because GLOBIO owns or has long-term rights to all the content explored in Glossopedia. Read more
Glossopedia is a first of its kind resource, but its real advantage is in the depth of its visually exciting, rich multi-media content, including photos and video of rare plants and endangered species from wildlife reserves and environments across the globe. Each Glossopedia article contains text, video clips, audio files (vocabulary pronunciation guides, recorded animal sounds, etc.), photo galleries, maps, interactive features, and content-related vocabulary lessons. Children explore Glossopedia content by using one of four search and discovery tools: a text search; “GeoSearch,” a geography-based graphic interface; and a photo image search and a current events “In The News” search. Glossopedia also includes a Fast Facts section, and an email tool so children can submit questions.
Bring-A-Book is an international effort to foster literacy and inspire children’s self-confidence through books. Your support of Bring-A-Book hands a child the first book he or she may have ever owned, putting the world within their grasp. Read more
Many children around the world have never had a book of their own. With the help of people like you, inspired by the desire to increase literacy world-wide, GLOBIO’s Bring-A-Book is changing the future for children around the globe. Change starts with travelers like you deciding to make the small effort of packing a book with you on your next trip. This simple act can make a huge difference in the life of a child. Bring-A-Book has already helped deliver thousands of books to children in Africa, Asia and South America.
Bring-A-Book is made possible by the generous support from hundreds of people like you and by a gift from the Chrysalis Foundation and ongoing support from the Classic Escapes Conservation Fund.
Our focus is on books because they are vital seeds in the growth of life-long learning. Bring-A-Book makes the process of gift-giving one of the most rewarding parts of travel and one of the best opportunities to engage with the locals.Books can be shared by many, last for years and are easily transported.
Our goal is not only to increase literacy but to plant seeds of stewardship for local environments. This, in turn, creates a new generation of earth-conscious global citizens. Because of this, many of our recommended books are nature and science based.
Not traveling but still eager to make a difference? Make a donation and GLOBIO will make the delivery. Your tax-deductible donation to Bring-A-Book will guarantee the purchase and delivery of age-appropriate, culturally sensitive books or a Library Launch Box.The Bring-A-Book project is run with minimal overhead and volunteer help to insure donations from people like you return the greatest reward. Support the Bring-A-Book project by buying a book or donating now.
The fun and easy part is buying books. To purchase a book(s) begin by exploring GLOBIO’s Recommended BAB List, full of readable and fun books about culture, wildlife, and places for kids chosen by our advisory group of teachers, librarians and authors. Then choose one of three ways to Bring-A-Book:
If you choose option 2 or 3 please send us an email and let us know if you would like books to be delivered to a school in a country we choose or a country you choose (see list below).
Donate $250 and launch a starter library with the BAB Library Launch Box—tailored to each school’s need, inside an insect proof box it may include local and world maps, nature and wildlife books, and an assortment of appropriate cultural titles.
Looking for a great way to teach your students about the value of literacy and a chance to involve them in changing the world? Help raise money for books – then let them choose from our online list – or a BAB Library Launch Box and we’ll get them delivered. We’ll also send you a collection of photos showing where books were delivered, the kids and class you are supporting and a few thank you letters or drawings from the kids you helped. For more information contact us at BAB@globio.org
Bring-A-Book was first launched in Kenya by Marcia Gordon of Classic Escapes as a way to get books into the hands of children in developing countries. She felt that there was a window of opportunity to “excite” kids on the magic of reading before other media took over. Marcia recognized that many of her clients would love to have the joy of personally delivering books to schools; travelers could be the perfect cost-effective vehicle for getting books to children. Many visitors wanted to help the schools financially, so a partnership with GLOBIO was created to ensure the books and money reached the schools and continues to be used wisely. Since 2000 Classic Escapes has supported BAB with time, energy and money helping deliver over $100,000 worth of books and supplies to children around the world.
Together, we can increase literacy and education opportunities for countless children.
Have questions or need additional information please contact us at BAB@globio.org
Don't have any plans to visit a BAB country? Donate money for a book or Library Launch Box and GLOBIO will deliver it for you!
GLOBIO is a 501 (C)(3) Nonprofit #93-1320592