This RLO describes the concept of concentration gradients in biological systems through analogy with gradients found in everyday life, and outlines passive and active transport across cell membranes.
Descriptive statistics for interval and ratio scale data
Describing the use of measures of central tendency - mean, mode, median - and dispersion - range, Standard Deviation.
Probability associated with inferential statistics
An introduction to probability, and the probability of sample errors affecting research results.
Action of drugs that target carriers
This learning resource introduces carriers as a target for drug action and describes how carriers function and how drugs utilise these carriers.
"Introduction to MATLAB, Spring 2008"
"This course was offered as a non-credit program during the Independent Activities Period (IAP), which is a special 4-week term at MIT that runs from the first week of January until the end of the month. The course, intended for students with no programming experience, provides the foundations of programming in MATLAB®. Variables, arrays, conditional statements, loops, functions, and plots are explained. At the end of the course, students should be able to use MATLAB in their own work, and be p
Remains of a Libyan compound
June 20 - Libyan officials say at least 15 civilians were killed when NATO airstrikes hit a compound owned by a top Gaddafi aide. Deborah Lutterbeck reports.
Protests amid peace talks in Syria
June 20 - Protests gather pace across Syria as demonstrators reject reform plans by President Bashar al-Assad. Deborah Lutterbeck reports.
Right Triangles and Trigonometric Functions
In this video, the instructor talks about trigonometric functions as they relate to right triangles. He defines each function and how to find it using the different sides of right triangles. Then, he does example problems using the definitions of the trigonometric functions defined at the beginning. There is a buzzing sound in the background of this video, but the instructor is still able to be heard well.
Changes in Today's World: Statistics Show a New World Emerging
A three minute video that shows how the world is truly becoming global in terms of jobs and some startling facts that ALL students need to see. Remarkable collection of data.
Weather: Report or Predict it
An animation with a great many decisions to be made. Students get immediate feedback. There are some parts that are not well explained, but a teacher can provide the missing elements in most cases.
Buckalope Elementary - Talented Song
Buckalope Elementary is a 12-episode Puppet Educational Series (K-4) that promotes social, emotional, and academic development, and gets kids excited about learning. (02:19)
The Next Evolution of Man
This amateur video is about evolution as a gradual change to a more complex and better society. The narrator talks about "mind awareness" and "foster presence and stillness in life." This is a scholarly philosophical narration. Mr. Scott discusses the oneness of the world.
See how to correctly perform this strength building lift. Along with the "right way" instruction you also see some examples of what not to do. On screen text summarizes the steps in the lift. run time 0:59
Calendars in the Night Sky
This video explores the use of constellations as a calendar in the night sky. Astronomers have used them in this way for a long time (From "The Universe" series.) Run time 09:48.
Harriet Tubman Documentary
In this edited documentary of Harriet Tubman, aimed at milddle-school and high school students, Harriet Tubman and her contributions to history are presented. (08:22)
B.B. King on Ralph Gleason's Jazz Casual 1968 Part 2
This video shows B.B. King playing live on B.B. King on Ralph Gleason's Jazz Casual 1968
B.B. King - guitar
Sonny Freeman - drums
James Toney - organ
Mose Thomas - trumpet
Lee Gatling - sax
Julius Erving – Inspirational Basketball Champion
Basketball Player: Julius Erving - Julius Erving, otherwise known as Doctor J, lead a successful basketball career and provides an inspiration to us all to this day. These clips are from older footage, so the image quality could be better.(01:33)
Tornado Documentary Part 1/4
Learn about Tornadoes! How do they form? Where to they affect? What can you do to prepare?
Teachers Demonstrate Effective Descriptive Feedback to Their Class Using Moon Journals-Part 1 of 2
Using appropriate and respectful vocabulary, two teachers share their own moon journals and give each other feedback. Students deepen their appreciation of the value of descriptive feedback and gain insight into how to give and receive descriptive feedback. They reflect on the demonstration and co-create success criteria for effective feedback sessions. This is a great teaching resource to enhance a writing curriculum and to create a literacy rich environment. The teachers provide