|How the Petromax works|
On January 2nd, 1866, master plumber Albert Graetz (1831-1901), together with the distributor Emil Ehrich, founded the "Lampen-Fabrik Erich and Graetz OHG" (Erich and Graetz Lamp Factory, Unlimited), on Dresdener St. in Berlin. Albert Graetz felt compelled to end the "dark times" of what he referred to as "Rueboelfunzein" (vegetable oil lamps), through the introduction of improved lamp designs. Thus, Ehrich and Graetz manufactured and sold, quite successfully, air-draft kerosene lamps under the brand names "Akaria", Matador", and "Iris". In 1889, Albert Graetz handed over management of the company to his sons Adolf (1860-1909) and Max (1861-1937), Emil Ehrich having left the company some time earlier.
Kommerzienrat Max Graetz
Max Graetz was the driving force behind the technical design and development of new products. In 1905 the "Graetzin-Gasanzuender" (Graetz gas igniter) was developed, an impulse ignition system which eliminated the necessity for manual ignition of coal-gas street lamps.
In 1908, an electric light bulb was introduced, under the brand name "Esso". In 1909, a coal-gas fueled incandescent (Welsbach mantel) lamp was developed, named the "Graetzin-Licht" (Graetz- Light). Along with the already commonplace alcohol-fueled incandescent mantel lamps, the "Graetzin-Licht" design helped provide the inspiration for a completely new type of light developed in 1910.
For this, a portable lantern, Graetz used liquid kerosene as a fuel, instead of coal-gas. In a similar manner to the earlier "Graetzin-Licht", vaporized fuel was mixed with a measured amount of air, and ignited to produce a hot and clean blue flame, which in turn heated an attached mantle to the point of strong incandescence (light emission). Compressed air in an attached fuel tank was used to force the liquid kerosene up into a vertical "vaporizer" (or "generator", as it is sometimes called) located very close to the superheated mantle. At this location the kerosene was heated to the point of vaporization, thus providing the gaseous fuel necessary for the lantern's continued operation. The new design proved to be reliable, safe, and easily portable. Depending on the actual size and configuration of the individual unit, effective light output levels from 200 to 1000 candlepower were possible.
Max Graetz was nicknamed "Petrol-Max" by his friends, singer/musician Paul Lincke and the locally celebrated composer Eugen d'Albert, both of Berlin. In turn, it was Paul Lincke who proposed that the new lantern design be called the
instead of "Graetzin-Licht".
On Nov. 5th, 1920, the "Petromax" name was registered as a trademark. Later, on April 9th, 1921, Max Graetz applied for the patent to a refined lantern design using a vertical vaporizer. Thus was born the "Petromax" lantern in the form we are familiar with today. From the outset, the "Petromax" was manufactured in various configurations and sizes, with maximum possible light output varying accordingly. The design was a great success, becoming a worldwide bestseller and boasting production running well into the millions of units. As a side note of interest, in providing a surface treatment for their lanterns, the Graetz company pioneered the modern chromium/nickel plating process, still in use today.
Following Germany's surrender at the end of World War One, the company's foreign factories were lost, and the Ehrich and Graetz Company had to fight for economic survival. However, these hard times were overcome and in the 1920's, new factories were built in Lunzenau/Rochlitz (Saxonia), and in the Austrian Bregenz at the Bodensee.
On May 20th, 1922, the "Ehrich und Graetz AG" (Erich and Graetz Corporation) was created. The principal shareholders were Max Graetz, his sons Erich, Fritz, Hans, and Rudolf Graetz, and son-in-law Hans Pahl. Max's sons Erich and Fritz had joined the company earlier, in 1910, and once again the cooperation between engineering design and sales/distribution carried the company forward. Erich Graetz helped to further the development of electrical products for the company. Beginning in 1913, different types of electrical appliances, such as clothes irons, hot-water kettles, and portable space heaters under the brand name of "Graetzor" were introduced. It was also Erich Graetz who introduced the famous Graetz radios of the thirties, following years of experimentation and refinement. The 1930's were doubtlessly the golden years for the "Petromax" lantern, and the Graetz company along with it. On May 9, 1935, a patent was applied for the design of the now familiar kerosene preheater "blowtorch" mounted on the lantern's side. This final configuration was trademarked under the name "Petromax Rapid" on Feb. 13, 1936, and effectively completed the lantern design and gave the distinctive appearance which it retains to this day.
In 1942, the "Ehrich und Graetz AG" name was changed to simply "Graetz AG". This occurred at presumably the same time that the "AIDA, Gesellschaft fur Beleuchtung und Heizung AG" (AIDA Company for Heating and Lights), up till then a part of the competitor company "Jacob Hirschhorn AG", was acquired by the Greatz corporation. Pressure lamps and lanterns continued to be produced and distributed under the brand name of "AIDA", however. By this time, the Graetz corporation effectively ruled the world market for kerosene-fueled pressure lamps and lanterns, controlling a market share of 80%.
Graetz plant in Berlin Treptow
Fritz Graetz and Erich Graetz
Meanwhile, the original "Graetz AG" company, expropriated by the Soviets, continued to operate in East Germany. In 1945, following the formal end of World War 2, production of the Petromax lantern was continued in the old Berlin plant, this time under communist management, headed by a former pipelayer and staffed by a greatly reduced workforce of only 40 laborers. By February 8, 1948, the old Berlin factories were renamed "VEB Graetz Werk" (People's Enterprise Graetz Factory), and again on February 4, 1950, the name was changed to "VEB Fernmeldetechnik Treptow" (People's Enterprise Communications Factory Treptow), reflecting the manufacturing plant's shift to a primary emphasis in telecommunications equipment. All production of the Petromax lantern in East Berlin ceased shortly thereafter.
Back in West Germany, however, "Graetz KG" managed a remarkable comeback throughout the 1950's and 1960's. Following the manufacture of their first new Petromax lantern in the fall of 1949, production rates rose to the hundreds-of – thousands in early 1950's, and into the millions thereafter. 99% of this production was exported abroad, while the remainder was sold to the German Federal Railways, the German Federal Postal Administration, and in-country construction companies. The growth of the Graetz company led to the creation of several new factories in Altena, with branches in Bochum, Dortmund, Letmathe, Duderstadt, and Geroldsgruen, along with a compliment of 5000 laborers. By this time, however, the Graetz company had evolved into a firm that was primarily concerned with electronics, and in which the Petromax lantern and related products played only a very small part. During the 1950's, the "Petromax" brand name (trademark) was held by the "Graetz AG" of Hamburg in West Germany, a non-manufacturing successor company to the old Berlin "Graetz AG", until 1959 when the brand name rights were acquired by "Graetz KG". Also in 1959, the "AIDA Company for Heating and Lighting" was combined wholly with the "Graetz KG", and thus ceased to exist as an independent company.
Graetz plant in Altena/Westfalen
The days of the famous "Petromax" seem to be numbered. It's a pity.
Thanks to John Baldessari and all the other kind helpers for this translation!
Copyright Jürgen Breidenstein email@example.com | All rights reserved. Images: Graetz-Nachrichten
|How the Petromax works|