Here are some general reasons you can give to your manager on why you won't be able to work next Thursday and Friday.

1) Medical or Health-related reasons
The legitimacy of medical or health-related issues is rarely questioned, especially in the workplace where Federal HIPAA laws surrounding health information privacy may allow you to outright refuse to disclose specific reasons to your manager. Also, medical or health issues are often valid reasons to avoid work and overall is a sensitive topic. It may be seen as tactless if follow-up questions from your manager are repeatedly asked surrounding absences caused by medical or health issues. 

2) Urgent family reasons
Missing work due to family-related issues is another possible reason to provide your manager. The severity of the family-related reason(s) can vary widely from simple daycare substitute duties to death, however, you should emphasize that the emergency was unanticipated. Most people can relate to familial emergencies disrupting the normal flow of their personal life. Keep in mind, it would be important to remember any details you inform your manager of your family going forward. For example, if you say that you had to miss work to babysit your nephew, but mention a few weeks later that you have no aunts or uncles, you may be seen as dishonest and future genuine requests to take time off from work may be scrutinized. 

3) Car-related issues
Car-related issues may also support your upcoming absence when you talk with your manager. This general reason is also relatable to those who have experience owning a car. Unexpected issues with your car may prevent you from commuting to work, and since you plan to only be off for two days, which is a reasonable amount of time to get most car issues remediated, this type of reason may be valid to provide. You should also be mindful of any personal details your manager might know (or will know in the future) that may conflict with this reason. For example, if you told your manager that you sold your car last month, then this reason will be revealed to be a lie and you may face disciplinary action from your manager.
