It is the simple things that can make human behavior science projects interesting project for middle school kids in particular
Human behavior science projects can be fun to do. It can be a popular choice for kids to explore for their science fair. It goes a different direction than just doing a science experiment where you test how long it takes ice to melt, what kind of paper towel is strongest or how the sun really affects plant growth.
The tricky part is getting enough test subjects, but it can be a fun way to meet lots of people and practice your “explaining” skills and just have some fun. There are lots of simple behavioral projects that would be perfect for kids to explore, that once you get the kind of thing we are talking about, your biggest problem might be choosing which one to do! Fun, easy science fair projects always make life easier for parent, kids and teachers too.
Here’s a list of five simple ideas for human behavior science projects.
- Are more people visual learners or auditory learners?
This can be done so simply. Show a phone number to half the people and tell a phone number to the other half, and see which one has a better memorizing rate.
- Is yawning really contagious?
Watch a group of people before and after their group leader yawns. You might have to video, to get an accurate count!
- Is it faster to memorize a poem with music?
Set the words to a simple, yet unfamiliar poem to music or and on other similar to music. Which one had a better memorizing rate.
- Are younger children more inclined to like their teachers than older students?
Rate the popularity of teachers that teach different ages of kids.
- Are two ears or one better at localizing a sound?
Hide an object, and time how long individuals take to find it.
Howard Gardner’s work on multiple intelligences will give you other ideas to compare different types of learning styles
No one needs to know a lot about human behavior to know that students will be wanting to come up with their own ideas, which will be more clever than what we come up with! Get the brain waves going and come up with your own human behavior science project!
Need other ideas for middle school science fair projects besides some human behavior science projects? We have kid tested and teacher approved science projects that can be started today and finished tomorrow with this link.