Apples, once the darling of nutrition, have become genetically modified (GMO) to increase production, sales and profits. The once formidable addition to our diets has become a shadow of its former self because apples no longer have the nutritional value of their chemical-free predecessors.
Some scientists opine that GMO apples have 76% less nutritional value than the chemical-free, organic version of the same food. A chemical-free, natural organic apple has significantly higher levels of all 21 nutrients analyzed compared with genetically modified fruits including vitamin C (27% more), magnesium (29% more), iron (21% more) and phosphorous (14% more).
The apple seed is split with the virus so that a pesticide gene can be inserted to kill insects. The pesticide causes the stomachs of insects to explode.
The Cauliflower Mosaic Virus is used because it is a powerful virus that cannot be destroyed during gene splitting. It is a retro-virus that alters the RNA, that causes changes in the DNA, resulting in similar viruses that ultimately become HIV, Leukemia Virus and hepatitis B. This is a very dangerous virus. Industry scientists ignore the axiom, “If you play with fire, you get burned.”
The virus is found in every cell of the DNA and RNA of the GMO apple and the residue in the apples stays in your gut and leads to Crohn’s disease, IBD and IBS.
Dr. Daniel C. Dantini, a noted expert on the topic of food allergies and intolerance, opines that, “Any virus, bacteria, parasite, or yeast can inflame the intestine.” This will lead to immune problems within the body, inflammation and even include delayed food allergies.
It also produces “more virulent new virus diseases . . . CaMV viruses may also incorporate genes from the host plant creating virulent new diseases”. Professor Joe Cummins made it clear that there is still a statistical risk involved for the creation of a dangerous virus. Much like a sci-fi film, it is another “mad scientist” playing with fire. From Frankenstein to Swamp Thing, films and literature are filled with these types of experiments gone bad.
According to author and expert, Jeffrey M. Smith, “This means that long after we stop eating GMOs [apples], we may still have potentially harmful GM proteins produced continuously inside of us.”
Sadly, genetically modified apples are further contaminated by the need for the farmer to use multiple applications of pesticides. More than 400 chemical pesticides are regularly used in genetic farming to kill weeds, insects and other pests. If that number frightens you, consider this: non-organic apples are routinely sprayed up to 16 times with 36 different pesticides before being picked. Then the apples are sprayed with ethylene and covered with wax to make them look prettier.
In addition, Big Food scientists even field tested chicken genes in apples. Chicken genes? What were they trying to do? Get the apples to sprout wings and fly to the market to save shipping costs? Make no mistake about it, these are not the apples your grandparents ate every day. Nor the “one a day keeps the doctor away” apples that doctors recommend.
As a result, Americans are eating an abnormal, adulterated copies of natural organic apples (modified by a “mad scientist” in a lab) soaked in pesticides and sprayed with chemicals. Do you really want to feed an adulterated apple to your child?
If you feed your child an apple a day, it will not keep the doctor away. On the contrary, a child will be exposed to more viruses, the possibility of childhood illness and disease, weight gain and obesity. Adults fare no better eating a genetically modified chemically soaked apple a day.
For expectant mothers, these are the types of foods that lead to chemically altering the DNA of a fetus and/or starting that fetus down the road to childhood diseases. Just look at the growing statistics on childhood illnesses to validate the problem. Is this what we want in our society – chemical garbage instead of the “real thing”? Do we really want to make our children chemical dump sites for Big Food?
Johnny Appleseed lived by the Golden Rule as he planted the seeds of apples in the United States. He remained connected to nature and mankind through his deeply religious values. He was known to have no fear of man or beast.
One can only wonder how sad he would be to realize that the beast within man could destroy those beautiful seeds and have no conscious about harming others. What ever happened to that Golden Rule? Johnny Appleseed must be turning over in his grave.
This is why the nutritional value of GMO apples are negligible. Anything that increases the number of harmful chemicals in your body should be avoided. Any fruit that can alter your DNA and RNA and leave bacterias and viruses in your intestines should be banned from public consumption.
The food industry scientists are rolling the dice with peoples’ lives. If they roll the dice long enough, society will lose. That loss is already measured by the increase in diabetes, cancer, kidney and liver failure and the long line of Americans waiting for kidney and liver transplants.
None of this happened before scientists created genetically modified foods and more than 9,000 addictive chemicals now used in our food supply.
Sounds scary, doesn’t it? The food industry has been trying to get the FDA to approve GMO apples for some time now. When I first wrote this blog, it seemed like the GMO apples were about to be approved. They are not on the market yet but will be soon unless Americans stand up and object to their entry into our food chain.