The talks that are meant to fix the world's climate resume on Monday for a two-week meeting in Cancún, Mexico's top beach resort. Almost 200 national governments are participating, and their objective is to agree a successor to the 1997 Kyoto protocol, which limits emissions of greenhouse gases from most industrialised countries except the US, and runs out at the end of 2012. But no one thinks this will happen. Diplomats are still bruised after their high-profile failure to reach agreement last December in Copenhagen. While governments argue, however, time is running out.
Could there be a deal this time?
Almost certainly not. There will be no Cancún protocol. With confidence shattered after Copenhagen, the best hope is for a deal at next year's climate summit in Durban, South Africa. But that would be a perilous delay: investment in renewable energy and carbon-offset projects is already being cut back because nobody knows what the rules on emissions will be in future.
A further factor is the weakness of the US. President Barack Obama, who favours an ambitious deal, is much less powerful than he was a year ago. His much-vaunted climate legislation – aimed at cutting emissions by 17 per cent of 2005 levels by 2020 – is effectively dead, following Republican gains in Congress after the recent midterm elections.
Without firm and believable US commitments, China and many other nations will probably sit on their hands. Finally, the economic recession has doused the enthusiasm of the European Union, formerly the banner-carrier for firm action.
But hasn't the economic slowdown bought us some time?
No. Emissions last year were slightly lower than the year before, because of the economic downturn in the west, but they were still the second highest ever. Much of the slack was picked up by developing countries, many of which are still growing fast: China's carbon dioxide emissions rose 8 per cent, for instance. Because a lot of technology and industry in developing countries makes inefficient use of energy, most such countries emit more carbon for every dollar of their GDP than industrialised nations, so improvements in the "carbon intensity" of the world economy are stalling.
The biggest effect of recession, however, may be to slow investment in the low-carbon energy technologies we desperately need.
But hasn't the warming stopped?
No. Depending on how you do the stats, you could argue that it has slowed a bit in the past decade. Those who claim warming has stalled usually take as their start point the highly anomalous year of 1998: then, a strong El Niño – a weather pattern that always causes warmer-than-average years – gave the world a heatwave.
This year is on course to be in the top three hottest ever recorded, with 1998 and 2005 – even though some natural cycles have led to short-term cooling, including low solar activity and changes in the distribution of heat between the oceans and atmosphere.
Some researchers argue that this last effect has been moderating the warming caused by greenhouses gases for the past decade. If so, we may soon see hyper-warming as human and natural effects come back into sync.
The bottom line is that whatever the natural fluctuations, the physics of how greenhouse gases like CO2 and methane trap heat is unassailable – and we have continued to add to the atmosphere's load.
So if the need remains urgent, what will come out of Cancún?
There will probably be steps towards an overall agreement, including perhaps a deal on funds to help poor nations adapt to climate change. Many hope Cancún will agree the small print on REDD (Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation in Developing Countries), an initiative to compensate countries that slow or halt deforestation.
Like burning fossil fuels, deforestation transfers carbon from trees and soil into the atmosphere, and stopping it is one of the cheapest ways to fight climate change. Everyone can be a winner with REDD. Rich nations find a cost-effective way of keeping carbon out of the atmosphere, with plenty of potential for "carbon offsets": they can invest in forest conservation as a cheap alternative to reducing their own emissions. Poor forested nations in the tropics can rake in billions of dollars for committing to conservation. Conservationists, meanwhile, get new allies and new funds for saving rainforests and protecting biodiversity. But of course a deal will only come into effect if the wider agreement on a replacement for Kyoto is completed.
What if it all goes belly-up?
However badly it goes, nobody will declare the final failure of the talks until the Durban meeting next year. But if the worst comes to the worst in Durban, many countries may simply register with the United Nations commitments on emissions that they have already made: Europe has promised a 20 per cent cut by 2020, and China has agreed to reduce the carbon intensity of its economy by 40 to 45 per cent by 2020, regardless of any global deal.
If you would like to reuse any content from New Scientist, either in print or online, please contact the syndication department first for permission. New Scientist does not own rights to photos, but there are a variety of licensing options available for use of articles and graphics we own the copyright to.
Have your say
Only subscribers may leave comments on this article. Please log in.
Only personal subscribers may leave comments on this article
Why Do It?
Mon Nov 29 15:24:32 GMT 2010 by Mike Davidson
If there is a vanishingly small chance of reaching agreement, why are all these ecologically aware people jetting to a luxury resort to talk?
Surely this could have been a tele conference?
All comments should respect the New Scientist House Rules. If you think a particular comment breaks these rules then please use the "Report" link in that comment to report it to us.
If you are having a technical problem posting a comment, please contact technical support.