To find books, search the SCOTTY catalog. Click on the following subject headings to execute a SCOTTY search:
Also try a Keyword Search (Advanced)
Search on the·name of the discipline,·with the subdivision·"study and teaching,"·in the·subject field, then add "writing" or "reading" in the next search window as a keyword search, as in the example below:·
Find articles by searching the following databases:
ERIC·(via Cambridge Scientific Abstracts)
Try the following as search terms in ERIC:
- Content Area Reading
- Content Area Writing
- Interdisciplinary Approach
- Writing Across the Curriculum
Education Full Text, Wilson's··
Try the following as search terms in Education Full Text:
- English language/Composition/Correlation with other subjects
- Reading/Correlation with other subjects
- Reading/Correlation with other subjects/Research
Guides to Writing an Annotated Bibliography
Annotated Bibliographies from the Purdue University Online Writing Lab
Annotated Bibliographies from the University of Wisconsin Madison Writing Center
Writing an Annotated Bibliography from New College Writing Centre
········ -this web site has a helpful list of verbs·for use in·annotated bibliographies.
APA Citation Style
Learning APA Style from the American Psychological Association
-- Corrections to the 1st printing of the 6th edition
Cite Your Sources from the UCR Library
APA Formatting and Style Guide from the Purdue University Online Writing Lab
APA Exposed online tutorial from the Gutman Library at Harvard University
MLA Citation Style
Informational Children's Books for the Content Areas
The Robert F. Sibert Informational Book Medal is awarded annually since 2001 by the Association for Library Service to Children to the most distinguished informational book published in English during the preceding year. Information books are defined as those written and illustrated to present, organize, and interpret documentable, factual material for children.
The Orbis Pictus Nonfiction Award, presented annually by the National Council for Teachers of English (NCTE), promotes and recognizes excellence in nonfiction writing for children. Along with the award winner, up to 5 honor books may be named annually, and a list of recommended books.
The National Science Teacher's Association and the Children's Book Council collaborate in selecting the books for this annual bibliography.· From 1973-2001, the list primarily featured titles for K-8.· Since 2002, the list has also included secondary level titles.
Awarded annually by the American Institute of Physics for effective science communication in either print and broadcast media.· Award winners should improve the general public's understanding of physics, astronomy, and allied fields.
Awarded annually to a children's science picture book whose illustrations work in harmony with the text to tell the story. Plant science books are heavily represented. Awarded by the 15 Degree Laboratory, which performs research on visual cognition in biology, visual approaches to learning biology, and the graphic represention of biological knowledge.
The National Council for the Social Studies and the Children's Book Council collaborate to produce this annual bibiography of books useful for teaching history and related social studies content.· The list has been published since 1972.
The California Library Association's John and Patricia Beatty Award honors the author of a distinguished book for children or young adults that best promotes an awareness of California and its people...was Patricia Beatty's hope that the Award will encourage the writing of quality children's books that bring us an awareness of California, its heritage or its future.
This award is given annually to the author or illustrator of the book for children or young adults that most authentically reflects the Mexican American experience. The award is given by the Texas State University - San Marcos in honor of it's most distinguished alumnus, Tomas Rivera, who went on to become the first Hispanic chancellor of the University of California Riverside.
The American Library Association awards the Coretta Scott King Book Awards to African American authors and illustrators for outstanding and inspirational contributions to children's literature.
Awarded by the Asian/Pacific American Librarians Association to books related to the Asian/Pacific American heritage.