Your response to light touch, pressure,
temperature, and vibration, particularly in your feet and legs. Simple tests
can be used to screen for loss of sensation. The doctor may touch the end of
your toe with a cotton wisp or a thin plastic fiber (called a monofilament
test) to assess whether you sense light touch or pressure. To evaluate your
sensation of temperature, a cold metal tuning fork may be held to your leg; a
vibrating tuning fork may be touched to your foot to assess your sensation of
vibration. These tests should be done on both feet.
Your reflexes, especially those in your ankles and
Your blood pressure and pulse and how they change when you
are in certain positions (lying down, sitting, standing).
During every visit, your doctor needs to examine your feet for
cracked or peeling skin, excessive or reduced sweating, blisters, calluses,
ulcers, signs of infection, bone and joint abnormalities, and other problems.
You should have a complete foot exam at least once a year.
When you have diabetes, you know you have to pay special attention to your feet.
Diabetic nerve damage, or neuropathy, can lessen your ability to feel pain -- especially in your feet. That's why it's important to inspect your feet daily and choose your shoes wisely. You can get a corn, blister, callus, or foot injury and not be aware of it. Any of those foot problems can develop into open sores, called foot ulcers. Wearing well-fitting, comfortable shoes can prevent potentially serious problems...
Get the latest Diabetes newsletter delivered to your inbox!
Your level is currently
If the level is below 70 and you are experiencing symptoms such as shaking, sweating or difficulty thinking, you will need to raise the number immediately. A quick solution is to eat a few pieces of hard candy or 1 tablespoon of sugar or honey. Recheck your numbers again in 15 minutes to see if the number has gone up. If not, repeat the steps above or call your doctor.
People who experience hypoglycemia several times in a week should call their health care provider. It's important to monitor your levels each day so you can make sure your numbers are within the range. If you are pregnant always consult with your health care provider.
Congratulations on taking steps to manage your health.
However, it's important to continue to track your numbers so that you can make lifestyle changes if needed. If you are pregnant always consult with your physician.
Your level is high if this reading was taken before eating. Aim for 70-130 before meals and less than 180 two hours after meals.
Even if your number is high, it's not too late for you to take control of your health and lower your blood sugar.
One of the first steps is to monitor your levels each day. If you are pregnant always consult with your physician.
Thank you for signing up for the WebMD Diabetes Newsletter!
You'll find tips and tricks as well as the latest news and research on Diabetes.
Did You Know Your Lifestyle Choices
Affect Your Blood Sugar?
Use the Blood Glucose Tracker to monitor
how well you manage your blood sugar over time.