Marathi literatureArticle Free Pass
With Bengali literature, Marathi literature is the oldest of the Indo-Aryan literatures, dating to about 1000 ce. In the 13th century, two Brahmanical sects arose, the Mahanubhava and the Varakari Panth, that both shaped Marathi literature significantly. The latter sect was perhaps the more productive, for it became associated with bhakti movements, particularly with the popular cult of Vitthoba at Pandharpur. It was out of this tradition that the great names of early Marathi literature came: Jnaneshvara, in the 13th century; Namdev, his younger contemporary, some of whose devotional songs are included in the holy book of the Sikhs, the Adi Granth; and the 16th-century writer Eknath, whose best-known work is a Marathi version of the 11th book of the Bhagavata-purana. Among the bhakti poets of Maharashtra, the most famous is Tukaram, who wrote in the 16th century. A unique contribution of Marathi is the tradition of povadas, heroic stories popular among a martial people. This tradition was particularly vital during the 17th century, when Shivaji, the great Maratha king, led his armies against the might of the Mughal emperor Aurangzeb.
The modern period in Marathi poetry began with Kesavasut and was influenced by 19th-century British Romanticism and liberalism, European nationalism, and the greatness of the history of Maharashtra. Kesavasut declared a revolt against traditional Marathi poetry and started a school, lasting until 1920, which emphasized home and nature, the glorious past, and pure lyricism. After that, the period was dominated by a group of poets called the Ravikiran Mandal, who proclaimed that poetry was not for the erudite and sensitive but was instead a part of everyday life. After 1945 Marathi poetry sought to explore human life in all its variety; it was subjective and personal and used colloquial language.
Among modern dramatists, S.K. Kolhatkar and R.G. Gadkari were notable. Realism was first brought to the stage in the 20th century by Mama Varerkar, who addressed many social issues.
The Madhali Sthiti (1885; “Middle State”) by Hari Narayan Apte initiated the tradition of the Marathi novel; his message was that of social reform. A high place is held by V.M. Joshi, who explored the education and evolution of a woman (Sushila-cha Diva, 1930) and the relationship between art and morals (Indu Kale va Sarala Bhole, 1935). Important after 1925 were N.S. Phadke, who advocated “art for art’s sake,” and Jnanpith Award winner V.S. Khandekar, who countered the former with an idealistic “art for life’s sake.” Other noteworthy writers are S.N. Pendse, Kusumagraj (pen name of V.V. Shirwadkar), G.N. Dandekar, Ranjit Desai, and Vinda Karandikar.
What made you want to look up "Marathi literature"? Please share what surprised you most...