The Mystery of Hegel
His thought was hugely influential and hugely difficult. The philosopher Bertrand Russell once described him as the single most difficult philosopher to understand. He was Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel. Though he enjoyed relative fame during his lifetime, in the decades after his death in 1831, according to one writer, Hegel's ideas were treated with "a mixture of contempt, horror and indifference."
But something happened during the 20th century that brought Hegel back into sight for philosophers and thinkers. This week on The Philosopher's Zone find out what that was.
Alan Saunders: There is one big philosophical thinker we have never fully touched on in The Philosopher's Zone. And I'll be honest with you, it's largely because I find him a little intimidating. I'm relieved to say I'm not alone. The philosopher Bertrand Russell once described him as 'the single most difficult philosopher to understand.'
So this week on The Philosopher's Zone, with me, Alan Saunders, Georg Wilhelm Freidrich Hegel.
He was born in 1770 in Germany, and died in 1831 at the age of 61.
Though he enjoyed relatively fame during his lifetime, in the decades after his death, according to the philosopher Terry Pinkard, Hegel's ideas were treated with a mixture of contempt, horror and indifference.
But something happened during the 20th century that brought Hegel back into sight for philosophers and thinkers, and today we're going to find out what that was. What did Hegel offer the world when he was alive, and what does he offer our world at the beginning of the 21st century?
Robert M. Wallace is a philosopher who was trained at Oxford and Cornell Universities, and is best-known for his book Hegel's Philosophy of Reality, Freedom and God. And he's in Australia for a conference on Hegel and God.
But before we get down to basics, and our conversation about Hegel, here is Bob Wallace reading a short essay he's written for us on 'Inner Freedom and Metaphysics in Plato and Hegel'.
Robert M. Wallace: I wrote this little essay because I think that the very helpful way to get into Hegel is starting with Plato. Some of the simplest ideas in Plato are also fundamental in Hegel and are not widely understood, either by commentators on Plato or Hegel perhaps because they're so simple. So metaphysics, understood as a doctrine about the soul or God, or platonic forms, has had a bad reputation for a couple of centuries now; as Alan mentioned Hegel has had a bad reputation for a significant amount of the time since his death. The great challenges to metaphysics came especially from David Hume, the 18th-century Scottish writer, and Immanuel Kant in Germany later in the same century.
Hume consigned to the flames, as he put it, all reasoning that wasn't experimental or empirical and Kant described his predecessors in metaphysics as dogmatic. Today we usually assume that the way to learn about reality is through empirical science. So Stephen Hawking, for example, speaks with an authority that theologians and metaphysicians are generally assumed to lack.
However I believe that the metaphysical tradition from Plato through Hegel, provides a very cogent reply to Hume and Kant. Plato's and Hegel's reply starts from the phenomenon of inner freedom. By inner freedom I mean our apparent ability to question our initial urges and opinions, and seek some more rationally authoritative source of guidance .
Plato's example of this process of questioning in Republic Book 5 is a debate about what's really good. There, Plato makes his spokesman, Socrates, say that some say the good is pleasure and others say it's knowledge. But beneath this disagreement, Socrates points out, everyone agrees that they want for themselves whatever it is that's really good, and not just what they currently feel drawn to or currently believe is good. This is why the debate about what the real good is, whether it's pleasure or knowledge or something else, is important to everyone.
But the important thing to see is that this effort, which we all share, to be guided by what's really good, expresses or bring into being a unique kind of reality, namely the reality of something that to some extent determines itself, rather than being determined by whatever external inputs have caused it to have the opinions or the urges that it started out with.
To be guided by one's understanding of the good, rather than merely by external influences, is to be more self-governing, and thus more oneself than one would otherwise be. Thus, inner freedom of this kind generates a fuller kind of reality, the reality of what's real as itself, and not just as a product of what's around it, and this fuller kind of reality is in fact what Plato and Hegel called the soul, the divine and spirit. Hume and Kant described the soul and God as essentially alien and unknowable to us. But Plato and Hegel show that the soul and God are in fact deeply familiar to, us at least in part, through our everyday experience of seeking to know what's really good and thus to be ourselves rather than mere products of our surroundings.
This experience is what we call soul, and an extension of it into what's most ourselves or most himself is what we call God.
So metaphysics, the knowledge of the soul and God, as Plato and Hegel develop it, is deeply grounded in everyday experience. Metaphysics isn't science in the usual sense, because science deals with how things depend upon each other, and not with how they can be themselves, in other words, freedom. But metaphysics is just as deeply grounded in experience as anything can be, because it's grounded in our experience of freedom, or trying to be ourselves through thought.
Alan Saunders: Well Bob Wallace, welcome to The Philosopher's Zone.
Robert M. Wallace: Thank you, Alan.
Alan Saunders: Just a bit of a personal question to begin with: do you remember when you first read Hegel?
Robert M. Wallace: When I first read Hegel, I probably glanced into him in the library in Oxford when I was an undergraduate. And I was so confused that I didn't get beyond the first page of the Phenomenology of Spiritt.
Alan Saunders: But at some period subsequent to that, you suddenly clearly became enraptured.
Robert M. Wallace: Essentially, you can put it that way, yes. I encountered a teacher, two teachers, at Cornell, Alan Wood, who taught me Hegel, and Terry Irwin, who taught me Plato. And it was a combination of their teaching which was extremely sensitive to the details of what these people were saying, and my own experience of the dawning of some kind of a degree of inner freedom, that made me take Plato and Hegel seriously, finally, and this was in my early '40s. So better late than never, right?
Alan Saunders: Now according to the English philosopher, Roger Scruton, who's a relatively sympathetic observer, Hegel was influenced by three separate intellectual movements. So let's look at them.
The first is Immanuel Kant, whom you've already mentioned, the great 18th century German philosopher, and post-Kantian idealism. So what's the role of Kant in Hegel's thought?
Robert M. Wallace: Well this is somewhat paradoxical. Kant is such a paradoxical figure, because I started out by connecting Hegel with Plato for you. Much of this happened by way of Kant. Kant is in effect in an important way, a Platonist in that he agrees with Plato that empiricism is not the last word. Sense experience is not the last word, and that human freedom is a really absolutely central concern, which philosophy has to focus on and try to clarify. And so in those ways Kant is completely in tune with Plato, and Hegel is as well in tune with Kant. So however, Kant also in developing these themes, falls into shall we say an unfortunate duality, so that natural science, the science of the experienced world, for him, has no relationship that we can hope to understand to freedom. They are simply two different domains: one of them is a domain of pure reason, the other is the domain of practical reason, and we can claim knowledge in the former domain of nature, we cannot claim knowledge in the domain of practical reason.
So in this respect Kant is very much out of tune with Plato, who sees knowledge and freedom as inseparable from one another, and Hegel is trying to re-establish that kind of inseparable connection over against Kant's dualism.
Alan Saunders: Then, according to Scruton, there's Christianity and particularly an engagement with the New Testament.
Robert M. Wallace: Absolutely. Which was both a negative engagement and a positive one. Hegel in his early years, struggled with the phenomenon of Christianity, was very critical in some of his earliest writings of what he took to be a kind of authoritarianism in Christian civilization. He called it positivity. These were diktats you had to accept. And in the spirit of Kantian freedom, Hegel argued that, one, we should not simply accept every diktat, and consequently he and his friends were very attracted to the Greeks as opposed to Christianity because they saw this freedom as getting proper appreciation among the Greeks. However in his later work, Hegel expands his sympathies to include Christianity as he understand it, and presents himself as a Lutheran, and he does this by emphasizing the theme of freedom in Jesus' teaching. So this is a long story, how he does that, but that's essentially his effort in his mature work is to show how what's true and valuable in Greek thought and what's true and valuable in the phenomenon of Christianity and the phenomenon of Jesus are not only compatible but mutually supportive.
Alan Saunders: Then finally, there's the literature of German Romanticism.
Robert M. Wallace: Indeed. And one of, for example in particular and maybe above all, are the great German poet Holderlin, who unhappily fell into a madness in his middle years, but was a friend of Hegel's in secondary school, so that Hegel was present with and friends with and intimately involved with German Romantic poetry and thinking. Holderlin was a brilliant philosopher in his own right in his early years, although he didn't publish anything, but Hegel probably learned a lot from him, philosophically, and in particular he probably learned - I picture them as reading Plato together. There's no question about it that Holderlin's greatest source of inspiration was Greek philosopher and poetry, and Hegel shared those.
Alan Saunders: On ABC Radio National., you're listening to The Philosopher's Zone, and I'm talking to the philosopher, Robert Wallace about the philosophical giant, GWF Hegel.
Bob, you mentioned Plato in your little introductory talk, and Plato has frequently come up in what you've had to say. But you'd say, wouldn't you, that in his response to scepticism, Hegel belongs to the great tradition of Western metaphysics, not just Plato but Aristotle, Plotinus, Thomas Aquinas, Descartes, Spinoza?
Robert M. Wallace: Very, very true. Absolutely. When I speak as though Hegel's main colleague and antecedent as Plato, it's for simplicitys sake of course. The other people you mention are including, Aristotle, are all students of Plato, and Aristotle in fact agrees with Plato on the nature and importance and centrality of metaphysics as I described it. They have a minor disagreement about the nature of form, which of course has been blown up and Aristotle is made to look in some commentaries, as though he's an empiricist in opposition to Plato. But in fact Aristotle's notion of the relation between matter and form is very Platonic. So that Aristotle was simply, it seems to me, giving an alternative formulation of what Plato was up to. Similarly, Hegel doesn't preach 'the forms', in the way that Plato does for a while, but that doesn't prevent him from being very much a student of Plato.
Alan Saunders: In the 18th century as you've said, Hume and Kant would accuse Hegel, had they lived, of being dogmatic. So in the 20th century, did Bertrand Russell. And he thought that Hegel was a mouthpiece of the Prussian State, and he also said that Hegel's philosophy is so odd that 'one would not have expected him to be able to get sane men to accept it.' But he did. He set it out with so much obscurity that people thought it must be profound.
Robert M. Wallace: Oh dear. This was the later Russell, Russell's later attitude. In his early years Russell thought of himself as a Hegelian. He imbibed ideas at Cambridge that were presented as Hegelian by Bradley, and Russell spoke of them, wrote of them with considerable sympathy even in his middle years. He referred to something that he called 'Mysticism' with great admiration and respect. But of course he was also a great polemicist, so when he intellectually went over to positions more in tune with Hume and less in tune with Kant and Plato, Russell coined all sorts of brilliant critical descriptions of all of those characters.
Alan Saunders: Let's look at the challenge to metaphysics from the Sceptics and the Materialists, such as Russell later became, and let's get to Hegel as you do by way of Plato. Now Plato wants to meet their challenge, doesn't he, with his conception of freedom, and freedom of thought in particular, but how does this address scepticism, and how does it address materialism?
Robert M. Wallace: Well scepticism and materialism are both products of thought, right? Scepticism is very much an endeavour to think responsibly, to not be hoodwinked into anything but to continue thinking to the best of one's ability. There are dramatic forms of scepticism would simply say, 'Forget about it, you can never know anything, and let me tell you, this is the one thing you need to know. You cannot know anything'. That's obviously not a consistent scepticism; a consistent scepticism has to say 'I am seeking knowledge, but I fear I have not yet found it.' And so it doesn't claim to possess the knowledge that there is no knowledge. And that would be the scepticism of Socrates himself for example, and it's also the scepticism of Plato and Hegel. Both Plato and Hegel seek to do full justice to the process of doubt, of inquiry. They don't want to bring it to any premature conclusion, but what they say is that when we look at this process of inquiry itself, we can't doubt that we're engaged in it. This is also Descartes' response: 'I think, I think, I can't doubt that I'm thinking. I can doubt everything else but I can't doubt that.' And so Plato, Descartes and Hegel all conclude that the one reality that we are justified in believing we have knowledge of, is the reality of thought. And then their next step and their final step is to try to elaborate what that reality might be, and that, as I suggested, they take to be the reality of the soul and the reality of the divine, that the divine and the soul are thought. And that it's reasonable to think of these realities, if indeed they are real, as the most real because they contrast with whatever other candidate realities there might be by being self-determining. If anything is capable of self-determination, it's through thought. It's not through being bombarded by influences that it doesn't understand.
Alan Saunders: And Hegel would suggest, would he, that sceptics like Hume and Kant in fact presupposed this kind of reality when they try to determine what it is that we can rely on?
Robert M. Wallace: Exactly. You hit the nail on the head. They are engaged in the kind of thought that is reality, but they don't recognize that connection, that implication of what they do.
Alan Saunders: Hume, though. would have said that - famously he did say - that there isn't a self. He said he was aware at any given moment of the impressions that he was getting of the ideas that might be in his head, but he could not find any self in which all these ideas and impressions were inhering. There was nothing holding them together.
Robert M. Wallace: Well he was looking for, as it were, a sensation or an image of an idea, as he would put it, that would be the self, and what he was missing in his search was his own activity of looking, his own activity of searching. He starts out with a conception of what the self ought to be and the way, the kind of access that he ought to have to it, which is built on the experience of vision, of having sense impressions through vision and other sense organs, and then he says, 'My access to the self ought to be something like that, or I can't trust it, or I don't have it.' But this is simply a dogma, right. to say that this is the only kind of access that I can trust?
Alan Saunders: Hegel talks a lot about spirit. Now a spirit could be a ghost or it could be something you drink, but what did he mean by spirit?
Robert M. Wallace: Well a ghost might be a related phenomenon. In fact the spirits that we drink are related too, but the main source of the word for him, of this word, is Christian theology, it's the Holy Spirit. And he uses this word because he sees in the Christian theology of the Trinity, a reflection or a version of what he takes to be fundamentally the deepest kind of reality. Why not the Father, why not the Son, why instead the Holy Spirit? The reason is that the Holy Spirit in some way unifies or reconciles the Father and the Son. The Father is the abstract remote godhead, the Son is the God on earth in human, tactile, physical form and the Spirit is the resurrected form of that human, tactile God, Jesus, so it combines the qualities of both, the Father and the Son. It's abstract, it goes beyond the physical world, but it is also physical, it's also fully present in the physical world. And that's what Hegel wanted to emphasise with his perception of Spirit, that the soul and the divine, though they go beyond the physical world, are fully present in it. That's why the choice of the word.
Alan Saunders: And what does the Spirit, to put it crudely, what does it do?
Robert M. Wallace: It thinks, it loves, it acts. We are infused with this spirit insofar as we have any freedom.
Alan Saunders: And what are shapes of spirit?
Robert M. Wallace: These are ways in which the spirit appears in our experience. So Hegel is always preoccupied with the various ways in which thought influences us from the most primitive beginnings to the most sophisticated and ethereal, if you like. And preoccupied with showing the connections between them without reducing them to one another. In other words he doesn't want to reduce religious experience, for example, to a matter of hormones, but there is a connection. There is a connection. There is a continuous variety of forms of experience, forms of freedom, forms of thought, forms of experience, such that there is never an absolute dividing line, God on one hand, physical world on the other. There are always intervening forms, and so a form of spirit, such as he discusses a great variety of them in The Phenomenology of Spirit, is always somewhere in the ladder, so to speak, that leads from the physical world to the divine.
Alan Saunders: But my own individual consciousness, this is not a form of spirit, or is it?
Robert M. Wallace: Your own individual consciousness, insofar as you are engaged in the effort to do your own thinking, Alan, which you are, you are an example of the form of spirit which is modern individualism, which is a prominent feature in Hegel's social theory, so you are participating in a foreign spirit, absolutely.
Alan Saunders: Well Bob Wallace, thank you very much for that insight into the spirit of Hegel.
Robert M. Wallace: Thank you, Alan, it's my pleasure.
Alan Saunders: For more of Robert Wallace's work on Hegel, check out his website. You'll find a link to it on our website at abc.net.au/rn/philosopherszone, which is also the place to go if you want to share with us and your fellow listeners, your thoughts about this week's show.
And the show is produced by Kyla Slaven, Charlie McKune is the sound engineer, I'm Alan Saunders and I'll be back next week with Robert Wallace and Hegel's God.
- Robert M. Wallace
- Alan Saunders
- Kyla Slaven