Definition of Arabidopsis
1. Noun. A genus of the mustard family having white or yellow or purplish flowers; closely related to genus Arabis.
Generic synonyms: Dilleniid Dicot Genus
Group relationships: Brassicaceae, Cruciferae, Family Brassicaceae, Family Cruciferae, Mustard Family
Medical Definition of Arabidopsis
1. A genus of flowering plants found in north temperate regions. The species a. Thaliana is used for experiments in classical plant genetics as well as molecular genetic studies in plant physiology, biochemistry, and development. (12 Dec 1998)
Click the following link to bring up a new window with an automated collection of images related to the term: Arabidopsis Images
Lexicographical Neighbors of Arabidopsis
Literary usage of Arabidopsis
Below you will find example usage of this term as found in modern and/or classical literature:
1. Ending the War Metaphor: The Changing Agenda for Unraveling the Host-Microbe by Forum on Microbial Threats, Institute of Medicine (U.S.) (2006)
"Within each group, related bacterial, fungal, viral, and nematode pathogens cause diseases in both rice and arabidopsis. Scanning electron micrographs ..."
2. Transposable Elements in Plants: Sponsored CRIS/ICAR Projects and Bibliography by Andrew Kalinski (1995)
"These results demonstrated that arabidopsis contains all of the host ... We discuss our data in relation to the behavior of Ac in arabidopsis, maize, ..."
3. Computational Biology: Hearing Before the Committee on Commerce, Science edited by Conrad Burns (1996)
"arabidopsis thaliana Genome Sequencing Project An interagency program that is particularly important is the arabidopsis thaliana Genome Sequencing Program. ..."
4. Gene Expression in Field Crops: Bibliography January 1991-November 1992 edited by Janet Saunders, Robert D. Warmbrodt (1995)
"In consequence, phyA and phyB transcripts are equally abundant in fully green tissue. Since arabidopsis phyB mRNA levels are also unaffected by light, ..."
5. Biotechnology: Ti-Plasmids and Other Plan Vectors: Bibliography January 1993 by Raymond Dobert (1996)
"186 NAL Call No: 442.8 G28 Transposition pattern of the maize element Ds in arabidopsis thaliana. Bancroft, I.; Dean, C. Baltimore, Md. : Genetics Society ..."
6. Biotechnology in a Global Economy by DIANE Publishing Company (1992)
"arabidopsis is a small plant with a small genome (about 10 percent that of the human ... In addition, DNA can be transferred into arabidopsis plants using ..."
7. Molecular Markers in Plant Genome Analysis: Sponsored CRIS/ICAR Projects and by Andrew Kalinski (1995)
"CC: F200; F600 AB: We have previously isolated and characterized over 90 recessive mutants of arabidopsis thaliana defective in embryo development. ..."