The Evolution Deceit
The sand scorpions living in deserts are one of the most dangerous enemies for small animals. The eyes of these scorpions are almost blind. In spite of this, they are able to determine the location of their prey at night with a great mastery.
Scientists have encountered a great system looking for an answer to “How does the scorpion achieve this flawless determination of location“?
He is Allah – the Creator, the Maker, the Giver of Form. To Him belong the Most Beautiful Names. Everything in the heavens and earth glorifies Him. He is the Almighty, the All-Wise. (Surat al-Hashr, 24)
In a computer network, the central computer determines the source and distance of waves according to incoming data. Then it informs each computer in the network what to do. A scorpion uses this system as well, which can be compared to that of equipped computers, in order to determine the location of its prey. The central computer system of a scorpion determines the location of the prey easily by using vibration and rayleigh waves (Surface waves produced on the air-ground interface are known as rayleigh waves) spread by its prey. For this system of perception, the Almighty Allah has created a very special system in the scorpion.
Now let's analyze this superior system of perception, which was created by our Almighty Allah. This system is evidence of the unique art of Creation.
How does a scorpion determine the direction of its prey?
Cleft-styled excellent sensors are located on the 8 feet of the scorpion.
These sensors are so sensitive that they are even able to determine movements causing vibrations, which are smaller than a millionth of a millimeter. Well, how do these sensors work and how does the scorpion find its prey's location?
1- The hunting's distance is being determined...
Let's imagine a butterfly has landed on a place near the scorpion.
The butterfly, landing on the ground, generates two types of vibration waves.
The first one is defined by forwarding volume waves with a speed of 150 meters per second. The second one is defined by waves called rayleigh waves, which are spread with a speed of 50 meters per second parallel to the surface. The distance to the prey is determined by the difference between these two waves' arriving time at the scorpion. Of course, it is not an accurate determination to know how far away the prey is.
Because of this, it is required to know the target's direction.
2- The hunting's direction is being determined...
The legs of a scorpion step on the ground on an approximately 5 centimeter diameter circle. Thus, the difference between the arriving of the prey's spread waves at the scorpion's nearest leg to the prey and the arriving at the farthest sensor is 5 milliseconds (one over two-hundredth of a second).
As soon as one of the sensors determines the rayleigh wave, nerve cells send a signal to the center of the scorpion's nervous system. This stimulating signal is also transmitted to the nerve, which perceives the delayed arriving waves of the three feet on the other side. Merely the waves coming from these three legs are pressed; therefore it is not transmitted to the center of the nervous system immediately. In this way, the foot generating the source for the signal, which comes early each time and the position of the feet on the other side are assessed. With this positional assessment the direction of the wave's source is determined.
3- The “Take action“ order is coming...
If the difference between stimulating signal and the arriving of pressed signals at the sensors in the feet is one over five-hundredth of a second, the central nervous system perceives both signals at the same time without delay. This is interpreted by the scorpion as a “take action and use your excellently created arms for the attack“ command.
The 8 nerve cells, which process the signals coming from the feet, are assembled like a committee and determine the direction of the prey each time with a common decision. How does this determination come true? Are the nerve cells assembled for this in order to make a situation assessment? Do they decide among themselves and have results? This is impossible by all means. Nerve cells are microscopical extensions merely consisting of protein, fat and water. They don't possess reason, consciousness and ability to judge.
The possessor of this superior system in the scorpion is the Almighty Allah to Whom belong all worlds. The scorpion is a miracle showing the Almighty Allah’s flawless creation. Our Almighty Allah invites people to contemplate concerning this truth in the Qur'an as follows:
Mankind! an example has been made, so listen to it carefully. Those whom you call upon besides Allah are not even able to create a single fly, even if they were to join together to do it. And if a fly steals something from them, they cannot get it back. How feeble are both the seeker and the sought! (Surat al Hajj, 73 )
Scorpions have been determining the location of their prey with the same method for millions of years
The mechanism of former scorpions is equal to those living today since being created. It is a misbelief of evolutionists that this mechanism developed by coincidence in the course of time or was added later.
Neither the former scorpions had a more primitive mechanism of perception, nor today's scorpions have a more complex mechanism of perception. The system nowadays is exactly of the same complexity as the system of scorpions lived millions of years ago. The reason for this is that a superior knowledge-possessing, single Creator has created both the scorpion and his mechanism.
This knowledge of flawless systems belongs to Allah Who has created everything flawlessly.
A very important point has to be reminded by all means. For the scorpion, its feature is only means to survive. Human beings are the only entities who are able to see the complex structure and miraculous nature of this system. Some human beings are only able to receive the given message and direct themselves to the Creator, realizing these facts.
This fact is revealed in the Qu'ran as follows:
“And such are the Parables We set forth for mankind, but only those understand them who have knowledge.“ (Surat al Ankabut, 43)