Ceramic materials have proven increasingly important in industry and in the fields of electronics, communications, optics, transportation, medicine, energy conversion and pollution control, aerospace, construction, and recreation. Professionals in these fields often require an improved understanding of the specific ceramics materials they are using.
Modern Ceramic Engineering, Third Edition helps provide this by introducing the interrelationships between the structure, properties, processing, design concepts, and applications of advanced ceramics. This student-friendly textbook effectively links fundamentals and fabrication requirements to a wide range of interesting engineering application examples.
A follow-up to our best-selling second edition, the new edition now includes the latest and most important technological advances in the field. The author emphasizes how ceramics differ from metals and organics and encourages the application of this knowledge for optimal materials selection and design. New topics discuss the definition of ceramics, the combinations of properties fulfilled by ceramics, the evolution of ceramics applications, and their importance in modern civilization. A new chapter provides a well-illustrated review of the latest applications using ceramics and discusses the design requirements that the ceramics must satisfy for each application. The book also updates its chapter on ceramic matrix composites and adds a new section on statistical process control to the chapter on quality assurance.
Modern Ceramic Engineering, Third Edition offers a complete and authoritative introduction and reference to the definition, history, structure, processing, and design of ceramics for students and engineers using ceramics in a wide array of industries.
CERAMICS AS ENGINEERING MATERIALS
What is a Ceramic?
History of Ceramics
Applications: Engineering with Ceramics
STRUCTURE AND PROPERTIES
Atomic Bonding and Crystal Structure
Crystal Chemistry and Specific Crystal Structures
Phase Equilibria and Phase Equilibrium Diagrams
Physical and Thermal Behavior
Mechanical Behavior and Measurement
Time, Temperature, and Environmental Effects on Properties
Dielectric, Magnetic, and Optical Behavior
PROCESSING OF CERAMICS
DESIGN WITH CERAMICS
Toughening of Ceramics
Appendix A: Glossary
Appendix B: Effective Ionic Radii for Cations and Anions
Appendix C: Periodic Table