Type of Camera Should I Buy?
There are four basic
types of consumer cameras:
Point-&-Shoot, 35mm Point-&-Shoot, SLR Cameras, and Digital Cameras
Photo System) cameras and film are an alternative to traditional 35mm
film cameras. They are perfect for the snapshot photographer who desires
the smallest, lightest and easiest type of camera. However, beyond zoom
lenses and special flash modes, most offer few creative options.
Advantages of APS Point-&-Shoot
1. These cameras are usually smaller than their 35mm counterparts.
2. True drop-in film loading (you never see or touch the actual film).
3. Three different print formats can be selected on most cameras, including
4. Switch film mid-roll, insert another, then reload the original without
missing a frame (if your camera allows Mid-Roll Change capability).
6.Index prints show every shot on the roll, with crop marks indicating
the chosen format for each image.
A transparent magnetic layer records information that helps the photofinisher
prints; as well as recording shooting data and other information that
can be backprinted on
the photographic print.
Disadvantages: Fewer film and camera choices. Prices
for film and cameras are usually more expensive than 35mm. Point-&-shoot
cameras have creative limitations when compared to their SLR counterparts.
Traditional 35mm point-&-shoot cameras have advanced by leaps and
the past few years, and far outshine the versions from a decade ago.
This type of camera is a good choice for the snapshot photographer who
desires the most economical camera, the largest choice of models and
features, and a full range of film types. However, beyond zoom lenses
and special flash modes, most offer few creative options.
Advantages of 35mm Point-&-Shoot Cameras:
The greater selection of camera models makes it easier to find a 35mm
camera with the
exact features you are looking for.
More films to choose from, including color print, slide, black-and-white
and specialty films. l
More economical- most 35mm cameras cost less than their comparable APS
model. This is
true for film and processing as well.
Industry-wide design improvements have created a generation of 35mm
cameras that rival
APS in ease-of-use..
Point-&-shoot cameras have many creative limitations when compared
to their SLR counterparts.
SLR (single-lens-reflex) cameras are the choice of most avid amateur
professional photographers, but they are an excellent choice for anyone
who thinks they may one day want to pursue "serious" photography.
Most can be used in point-&-shoot Program mode, or switched to advanced
shooting modes for the ultimate creative control.
of Most SLR Cameras:
1. TTL (through-the-lens) photography means there is virtually no difference
between what is seen through the viewfinder and what ends up on film,
even with close-ups.
2. Interchangeable lenses give you incredible creative control over
your image, from "fisheye" wide-angles, to super telephotos
for sports and wildlife, or close-up lenses for a unique look at the
3. Aperture and shutter speed control opens up a host of specialized
including panning, selective focus and ethereal blurs of waterfalls.
4.Great accessories include high-powered flash units, filters and more.
5.Point-&-shoot simplicity is still possible in Program mode.
SLR cameras tend to be bigger, heavier and more expensive than point-&-shoot
Digital (filmless) cameras are the hot, new, "must-have" product.
Save the picture in the
camera's memory or a memory card; transfer it to a computer; erase the
memory in the camera or card; then shoot again. They range in price
from under $50 for e-mail-quality pictures to many thousands of dollars
for professional models. Anyone who has a computer will enjoy e-mailing,
manipulating, and printing digital pictures. Instant gratification and
film/processing savings means you'll have more fun shooting. Also, there
are many business applications that will benefit from digital cameras,
including real estate and insurance..
of Most Mid-Range Digital Cameras:
1. Save film and processing fees (as well as time) because the camera
doesn't use film. l
Models with LCD monitors provide instant gratification through playback
that lets you know
you "got the shot," as well as sharing it with your friends.
2. Removable Memory Cards allows the photographer to "change film"
and keep shooting
before they need to download pictures.
Disadvantages: The initial purchase price of digital cameras and memory
cards tend to be more expensive than their film counterparts (but remember,
you'll never have to buy film again!). On some cameras, image processing
can take several seconds (especially at high resolutions), so you might
have to wait before you can continue shooting.