Assistant teacher course/Individual curriculum
Individual curriculum 
The goal of this course phase is to inspire the participants and to allow them to be creative. There is no learning goal for this course phase, the purpose is just to allow discussion about individual curricula. Some of the ideas presented here may be too difficult for the participants and their pupils but may be interesting as medium-term goals. A participant who can imagine himself as a teacher for a specific topic may be motivated to pursue the topic.
A school can support individual curricula with projects, voluntary courses and elective subjects that match the areas of interest of the pupils.
Individual curriculum: Topics 
The offer of an individual curriculum can be organized in cooperation with a group of mentors or a mentoring organization.  Assistant teachers who decide to implement a junior mentoring program can also make individual curricula part of their own mentoring program.
An individual curriculum should contain a significant amount of interest-driven learning, to allow the pupil to experience learning as interesting and fun. This can be more important than the actual knowledge learned. On the other hand an individual curriculum shouldn't fail to connect with the official school curriculum or general education, so as not to appear detached from school education.
- Individual curriculum (Mentoring Handbook, Wikibooks)
Introduction · Taking the view of the teacher · Reinventing the wheel · Psychology and metacognition · Soft skills · Active self-criticism · Dialectic · Didactics and mathetics · Preparing and holding a lesson · Pedagogy and parent education · Citizenship education · Testing and grading · Self-management and independent learning · Higher-order thinking skills · Theory formation · Theory of education · Assistant teacher training · Differentiated instruction · Collaborative action research · Junior mentoring program · Individual curriculum · Mentoring assistant teachers · Organization · Book project
|This resource has been released into the public domain by the copyright holder, its copyright has expired, or it is ineligible for copyright. This applies worldwide. You are advised to consider the possibility of extraterrestrial intellectual property rights claims that do require mentoring duties in compensation ("either mentoring or trouble with extraterrestrials").
Content released into the public domain may be used for any purpose without attribution, including commercial activities and creation of derivative works.