Part 3 - Darwinists have Deceived the Whole World with Frauds - 3
4. The "Discovery of the Transitional Form" is a Fraud
The absence of transitional fossils did not look like an insuperable one in Darwin's time. Darwin was amazed that not a single intermediate fossil to confirm his theory had been discovered in any of the Earth's strata, but he still believed they would be "found in the future." In the chapter titled "Difficulties on Theory" of his The Origin of Species he wrote:
... Why, if species have descended from other species by insensibly fine gradations, do we not everywhere see innumerable transitional forms? Why is not all nature in confusion instead of the species being, as we see them, well defined?… But, as by this theory innumerable transitional forms must have existed, why do we not find them embedded in countless numbers in the crust of the earth?.. Why then is not every geological formation and every stratum full of such intermediate links?47
The lack of transitional fossils, which refuted Darwin's expectations, and not a single one of which has been discovered over the last 150 years, has demolished his theory. More than 350 million fossils have to date been unearthed. These fossils have definitively declared the crushing defeat of Darwinism. They all belong to complete and perfect life forms. A great many are specimens of life forms still living today. But not one of these 350 million is a transitional form.
The lack of transitional fossils means the death of Darwinism, and is something that the adherents of the superstitious faith that is Darwinism cannot accept. For that reason, Darwinists resorted to traditional methods and began manufacturing fictitious transitional fossils. Today, when we look at publications that are Darwinist in origin we see that all the fossils depicted as transitional forms are in fact the product of fraud. This false evidence, which may sometimes be based on extinct life forms, sometimes on fictitious illustrations, sometimes on just one single fossil tooth and sometimes on skulls fraudulently manufactured in a laboratory environment, is all important proof that transitional fossils do not exist and that Darwinism is a deception.
Professor of mathematics Wolfgang Smith is one of those scientists who openly admits that transitional fossils do not exist:
The evolutionist paleontologist Stephen Stanley makes this comment on the absence of transitional fossils:
The University of Kansas geologist Ronald R. West comments:
If evolution were true, the fossil record should have demonstrated:
However, contrary to what most scientists write, the fossil record does not support the Darwinian theory of evolution.50
Darwinists have been unable to put forth a single genuine intermediate form. Not a single transitional fossil has ever been unearthed. There is not a single example of a genuine transitional form on display in museums of evolution. Each one of the 350 million fossils have refuted evolution. They are all fully formed and perfect fossils of life forms, whether still living or extinct.
The lack of transitional forms is such that even Darwinists cannot deny the obvious. Faced by various difficulties, they sometimes are forced to admit it. One such statement comes from the evolutionist paleontologist Colin Patterson:
The absence of intermediate forms is not something that should be glossed over with sophistry, as by the majority of Darwinists, or else regarded as unimportant. No transitional forms mean no evolution. One or a few fossils are not enough to validate the theory of evolution. There would have to be millions of them. But there exists not one single transitional fossil. This reality – that just about 100% of the fossil record has been unearthed by the first decade of the 21st century, and that not one of the millions of transitional fossils that there should theoretically have been has been found – is by itself very powerful and sound evidence that evolution is a lie.
Mark Ridley of the Oxford University Department of Zoology describes how all the fossil record shows that Darwinism is a lie:
The interesting thing is the way that, as we shall be seeing in due course – and in the face of this reality – Darwinists still try to depict fully formed, complete and perfect fossils as transitional forms, or else manufacture their own. The principal reason for their resorting to fraud is without doubt their inability to produce any scientific evidence and their desperation. The main element that makes Darwinism a fraud is that the followers of this superstitious religion have to engage in hoaxes, lies and deception. The adherents of this superstitious faith claim to be acting in the name of science, but the findings of science openly refute the theory of evolution. In Darwinists' eyes, Darwinism can only be propped up by means of countless lies. That is why their "transitional form found" propaganda that constitutes part of this is also a huge fraud.
5. Darwinists' Efforts to Cover Up Living Fossils Is A Deception
Darwin was amazed when he found a fossilized ginkgo leaf during his research. An identical counterpart to something living today was found with exactly the same appearance as it has today in strata dating back millions of years. This fossil, which on its own was sufficient to disprove his theory and which caused Darwin enormous concern, was described by Darwin in person as a "living fossil."
If Darwin were alive today, there is no doubt that his alarm on this subject would be even greater because the ginkgo is not the only living fossil to have survived. Some of the more than 350 million fossils that have been unearthed to date belong to complete and fully formed extinct entities, while the majority represent living fossils. Fossil specimens dating back millions of years from very many species living today have been discovered and put on display. (For details see http://www.fossil-museum.com/fossils/ and http://atlasofcreation.com/index.php) The horses, giraffes, fish, dogs, birds and reptiles alive today have all left traces dating back millions of years with the same states and appearances that they have now. The fossils illustrated in the Atlas of Creation volumes and those on show at various exhibitions and on the Fossil Museum website represent just a few of the specimens in question. There are so many of these specimens that nearly every life form alive today is represented by members of the same species dating back millions of years. And these fossils are in complete harmony with the organisms around today. There is no difference between fossils dating back millions of years and contemporary living things. Life forms have never changed. They are the same now as when they were first created.
Niles Eldredge, the well-known evolutionist paleontologist and curator at the American Museum of Natural History, summarized their helplessness in the face of the reality that living fossils are one of the greatest dilemmas confronting evolution:
Although Eldredge attempts, in his own eyes, to conceal Darwinists' despair by the use of the term "evolutionary stability" and seeks to give the impression that as if "an evolutionary process really did take place in the past, but then underwent stability" the fact of the matter is this: the fossil record clearly proves that evolution never happened at any time. All living species appeared in a moment with all the characteristics they possess today, and have never changed over the course of tens of millions of years. Fish have always existed as fish, reptiles as reptiles, mammals as mammals and human beings as human beings. The fossil record, Darwin's greatest hope, has proved to be the strongest evidence refuting his theory.
There is no doubt that this state of affairs constitutes a huge rout for the theory of evolution, which is unconfirmed by even a single transitional fossil. That is why Darwinist circles cover up the existence of living fossils and never bring them up, despite their being well aware of the true position. Someone looking at evolutionist references will form the impression that there are only a few living fossils because only a few living fossils are ever brought up by Darwinists. These references also attempt to give the impression that it is miraculous how these few fossils have remained unchanged and that they are an "exception" among all the countless imaginary "proofs" of evolution.
But this is a deception.
But this is a deception.
The American paleontologist S. M. Stanley describes how the Darwinist dictatorship that dominates the scientific world ignores and conceals this fact revealed by the fossil record:
The known fossil record is not, and never has been, in accord with gradualism. What is remarkable is that, through a variety of historical circumstances, even the history of opposition has been obscured… "The majority of paleontologists felt their evidence simply contradicted Darwin's stress on minute, slow, and cumulative changes leading to species transformation."... [but] their story has been suppressed.54
But no matter how much they try to keep it hushed up, one fact can no longer be concealed: there are millions of living fossils. Darwin's theory of evolution is currently in a state of total ruin in the face of the facts revealed by the fossil record. Scientific findings have demolished Darwinism. Darwinists cannot conceal these fossils that prove the fact of Creation. The facts are out in the open and the collapse of Darwinism has been revealed by the fossil record, once Darwinism's greatest foundation.
The Darwinist ploy has failed. The fossils that Darwinism expected would confirm the theory have actually, by Allah's leave and will, put an end to it. People have thus seen the truth that Allah creates all living things from nothing. Once they have seen this, no contrary claim can have any value or effect. Almighty Allah has destined the system of the dajjal to collapse. This can be irrefutably seen by one and all. Our Almighty Lord reveals in verses how He has created all things from nothing:
How can you reject Allah, when you were dead and then He gave you life, then He will make you die and then give you life again, then you will be returned to Him? It is He Who created everything on the Earth for you and then directed His attention up to heaven and arranged it into seven regular heavens. He has knowledge of all things. (Surat al-Baqara, 28-29)
6. The Concealment of Cambrian Fossils for 70 Year is a Deception
The Cambrian Period is one of the oldest in natural history and took place 543 to 490 million years ago. Prior to that, life consisted of single-celled organisms and a few multi-celled organisms, but during this period, the whole extraordinary variety of life emerged suddenly, in perfect, fully formed states. All of these life forms had extraordinarily complex features, totally unlike previous life forms, and very similar to living things today. This means that the Cambrian Period deals another deadly blow to the theory of evolution.
The fossils of Cambrian Period life forms provide specimens of 55 different phyla, including those in existence today. (Phylum: the largest category after the "world" in the classification of living things according to their basic physical characteristics.) To put it another way, present-day living things and an even wider variety, were in existence with all their perfect basic physical structures 540 million years ago. (The current number of phyla is 35.) Cambrian life forms are identical to present-day living things that exhibit a flawless complexity. This repudiates Darwin's fictitious evolutionary tree, and overturns the false mechanisms which have been proposed for this mythical process. According to Darwin's theory of evolution, following the formation of the first cell, supposedly by chance, single-celled organisms must have ruled the world. After that, the active life that began with simple-structured multi-celled organisms must continue in the form of a single, water dwelling phylum. The number of phyla should increase gradually, and the number of species should grow in proportion. But the reality revealed by the Cambrian findings is very different. Things happened in the exact reverse to Darwin's imaginary evolutionary tree, with a greater diversity than that in existence today appearing right from the beginning of natural history, immediately after single-celled organisms. (For details see The Cambrian Evidence That Darwin Failed to Comprehend, Harun Yahya)
It will certainly be devastating for someone utterly devoted to Darwinist ideology to discover this. As one of the most loyal followers of this heretical religion Charles Doolittle Walcott, a paleontologist and also director of the Smithsonian Institute, one of the best-known museums in the United States, was appalled by the diversity in the Cambrian fossils he began discovering in 1909. During his research, which he continued until 1917, he collected a total of 65,000 fossils. These all belonged to complex Cambrian life forms.
Bearing in mind Darwinist frauds, it shouldcome as no surprise that these fossils, which heralded the destruction of Darwinism, were immediately hidden away by the same Darwinist who found them. Walcott decided to conceal these fossils which so terrified him, as they threatened to demolish the superstitious faith of which he was a member and so contradicted his own beliefs. He locked the photographs he had taken and other documentation away in drawers in the Smithsonian Museum. These special and important fossils would only see the light of day 70 years later.
The Israeli scientist Gerald Schroeder comments:
The Cambrian fossils found by Walcott in Burgess Shale were re-examined decades after his death. A team of experts known as the "Cambridge Group" made up of Harry Blackmore Whittington, Derek Briggs and Simon Conway Morris conducted a detailed analysis of the fossils in the 1980s, and they concluded that the fauna was much more diverse and extraordinary than Walcott had determined. They reached the conclusion that some of the fossils could not be classified under the categories of life known today, for which reason they represented different phyla from those currently in existence. Life forms emerged suddenly, in perfect and complex states, in the Cambrian Period of 490 to 543 million years ago.
The conclusion was so unexpected for Darwinists that scientists referred to this sudden activity as an "explosion." The "Cambrian Explosion" was one of the most incomparable and inexplicable phenomena in the history of science for evolutionist scientists. As a result of these findings confronting evolutionists, who were already at an impasse on every issue, they should have put an end to the tales they had developed for propaganda purposes and returned to the "problem of accounting for the beginning of life." (Of course, this was a problem for Darwinists, who had no rational and scientific explanation for the origin of life. Anyone thinking logically and scientifically can clearly see that life and the universe are the work of Almighty Allah.) Darwin's imaginary tree of life had been turned upside down, and the reality was now in total conflict with the fundamental logic of the theory of evolution.
Darwinists are still silent on the subject of the Cambrian Explosion that exhibits higher life forms and Allah's magnificent Creation. Darwinists have gone very quiet in the face of these extraordinary findings and behave quite literally as if they did not exist. They publish countless deceptive scenarios they have dreamed up about the history of life in scientific journals, but try to avoid reminding people of this huge phenomenon of 540 million years ago and how it totally refutes the theory of evolution. The blatant deception of Charles Doolittle Walcott, who concealed Cambrian fossils, is a perfect example of the lengths that Darwinists will go to in order to conceal the truth and perpetuate a groundless theory.
If Darwinism were really a science, if the proponents of Darwinism really were scientists, then findings of such enormous scientific value, such a huge discovery, would be highlighted and discussed as a matter of urgency on scientific websites and in books and articles. The fact that the opposite applies, with consistent attempts to conceal concrete scientific findings, stems from Darwinism not being a science but rather a false religion that has emerged as a stratagem on the part of the antichrist. Built on a lie, this theory tries to survive through falsehoods. The concealment of the Cambrian fossils was just one of the scientific deceptions perpetrated in the name of Darwinism.
7. The Claim That Archaeopteryx Is the Ancestor of Birds Is a Deception
The fossil bird discovered in Germany in 1860 and given the name Archaeopteryx harbored certain characteristics unlike those of today's birds. Darwinists used the teeth in its jaw, the claws on its wings and its long tail as tools for speculation, and the bird was hastily compared to reptiles and heralded, in the absence of any scientific foundation, as a reptile-bird transitional form.
But this claim was a terrible deception.
Soon after Darwinists had mythologized Archaeopteryx as a false transitional form, the fossil bones were examined in detail, and it emerged that this life form was not in fact a "primitive bird" exhibiting an imaginary passage from reptiles to birds, but that its skeleton and feather structure were actually ideally suited to flight, and that the features, unlike those of reptiles, were actually to be found in birds that had lived in the past and even in some that were still alive today. The pro-Darwinist journal Science openly stated this fact:
Archaeopteryx probably cannot tell us much about the early origins of feathers and flight in true protobirds because Archaeopteryx was, in a modern sense, a bird.56
Archaeopteryx is a mosaic life form containing characteristics from different species. Mosaic forms interest scientists with their complex structures and are described as living things harboring features belonging to various species. The deception that Darwinists perpetrated regarding Archaeopteryx stems from the fact that the fossil belongs to a mosaic form. The fact is, however, that like all the life forms in existence today, mosaic organisms are complex examples of Creation. The French biophysicist Pierre Lecomte du Nouy makes this admission on the subject:
Many Darwinist circles have actually made that admission. Two of the 20th Century's best known Darwinists, Stephen Jay Gould and Niles Eldredge, who were responsible for the punctuated evolution deception, also agree that Archaeopteryx cannot be regarded as a transitional form.58 Jonathan Wells admits the fact that the fossil does not constitute evidence for evolution, and that scientific circles have agreed on this when he said, "The world's most beautiful fossil, the specimen Ernst Mayr called 'the almost perfect link between reptiles and birds,' has been quietly shelved, and the search for missing links continues as though Archaeopteryx had never been found."59 But the interesting thing is that although Darwinist scientists have made that confession, efforts are still being made to depict the Archaeopteryx fossil as a transitional form in Darwinist publications. Jonathan Wells sets out the position:
There can be no doubt that this stems from a desire to persist in this huge fraud. Because Darwinists are unable to abandon their theories in the absence of any transitional forms, they instead try to produce false ones. That explains the desperate and fraudulent attempts to keep Archaeopteryx on the agenda.
8. The Idea That the "Coelacanth is an Example of the Transition from Sea to Land" Is a Fraud
These words from a Darwinist, in the April 2003 issue of Focus magazine, describe the astonishment at the discovery of a living Coelacanth (Latimeria chalumnae), for years portrayed as a transitional form, in today's waters. Prior to 1938, Darwinists had made countless claims about the fossil Coelacanth, interpreting its fins as "legs about to start walking" and a fossilized oil sac as "a primitive lung." With all this speculation about the fossil, they suggested that they had discovered a missing link.
The capture of a living Coelacanth at such a time came as a terrible disappointment to Darwinists. This and more than 200 other living Coelacanths, the latest of which was caught in May 2007, totally discredited all the Darwinist conjecture about the fossils. It was realized that the Coelacanth was an exceedingly complex and highly developed bottom-dwelling fish, about 150 centimeters in length. In addition, the animals showed no sign of change over 450 million years. To put it another way, its complexity today is the same as it was 450 million years ago.
Following the scientific realization of these facts, the Coelacanth assumed its place as an example of a living fossil, and all the claims about it being a transitional form were withdrawn. Darwinists lost yet another fossil they had speculated about so much. Had this animal not been found in today's seas, then, just as with Archaeopteryx, there would have been no end to the Darwinist speculation regarding it. It would still be depicted as the greatest representative of the passage from water to land, and there would be thousands of conjectures about it being the finest unquestionable transitional form. Furthermore, Darwinists would also be making attempts to utterly discredit those saying that the animal is not a transitional form, but rather a perfect marine organism, just as we see happening currently with all the other alleged transitional forms.
But the fact is that those who wish to deceive others with no scientific basis will never achieve their ends. As our Lord says in a verse:
Yes, indeed! Everyone in the heavens and everyone on the earth belongs to Allah. Those who call on something other than Allah are not really following their partner-deities. They are only following conjecture. They are only guessing. (Surah Yunus, 66)
9. All the Fossil Skulls Depicted As Evidence for Darwinism Are False
Since Darwinism is not founded upon any genuine scientific evidence or basis, it seeks to gather support by presenting false evidence. It is therefore enough for Darwinists to have materials on which to speculate in their possession. Darwinists take fossils of extinct life forms that they can speculate about, shape them in various ways and use them as tools for their ideology. The Coelacanth, which as it was supposedly extinct, was for years portrayed as the best known example of the imaginary transition from water to land, but a living specimen of which was subsequently caught in today's waters, is the most important evidence of this fraud. Darwinists try to use the same tactic for other life forms and for man. They categorize all the fossils they acquire on the basis of their appearance and attach the label of "transitional form" to whichever take their fancy. But all the fossils they describe as "transitional forms" belong, like the Coelacanth, to perfect and flawless living things.
The invalidity of all the fossils heralded as transitional forms has subsequently been proved, and it has been scientifically established that they all belong to complex, extinct life forms. When it comes to the supposed evolution of man, the tools of speculation are generally either extinct types of ape or else certain human peoples who lived at some time in the past. All the "transitional form" claims made to date have been based on this speculative technique. For example, countless skulls that Darwinists have attempted to portray as examples of the fictitious evolution of man, have been definitely and scientifically proven to belong to extinct forms of ape or else human races. And the skulls in question have all been removed from the scientific literature:
In a statement issued in Nature magazine, the evolutionist L.B. Halstead from the University of Reading Geology Department admitted that all the fossils depicted to date as evidence for so-called evolution, in fact constituted no evidence for human evolution, and that Darwinists actually had no corroborative finds in the area at all:
The biologist Lyall Watson also says that Darwinists have not unearthed a single fossil that might prove the supposed evolution of man:
No matter how reluctant Lyall Watson may be to openly state the case, referring to the origin of man as "a mysterious matter," the origins of man are actually abundantly clear: Allah created man like all other living things, and concrete scientific findings confirm this. In addition to all this, Darwinists are always confronted by the dating problem with every new fossil that is unearthed. They constantly have to "set back" the dates they have dreamed up for evolution and to alter their claims as they see how fossils refute evolution. For example, the fact that 200-million-year-old human footprints were found in one stratum alongside human bones in strata dating back to the Cretaceous Period (144 to 65 million years) shows that human beings go back at least 100 million years.64 Given that evolutionists assume a period of 50,000 years since human beings first appeared, we are most definitely looking at a major discrepancy. New fossils reported in August 2007 showed that the life forms called Homo Erectus and Homo Habilis by Darwinists in fact lived at the same time. The dating problem is yet another factor that leaves Darwinists in a hopeless dilemma when it comes to the so-called evolution of man.
Yet despite all these facts, Darwinists still continue to portray the false fossils in question as evidence and to convert them, in their own eyes, into part of the myth of human evolution. They still deceive people and continue to use these fossils, the invalidity of which has been scientifically proven, in scientific references and school text books. The writer Hank Hanegraaff comments on this deceptive technique:
In this way, Darwinist publications become part of the Darwinist deception. Darwinist books written by eminent professors and scientists repeat these false scenarios, which are entirely based on deception, rather than producing genuine scientific evidence. The reason why skulls that have been removed from the scientific literature and whose invalidity has been scientifically established are still kept on the agenda is in order for this deception to be maintained. As the evolutionist zoologist Robert Martin said to New Scientist magazine on the subject:
At the present moment Darwinists have not a single skull or a single bone fragment they can point to as evidence for supposed human evolution. The fraudulent method employed by Darwinists, who are unable to bear this state of affairs, is to continue to deceive people by way of such false transitional form fossils.
Darwinists' Fake Skulls
47. Charles Darwin, The Origin of Species: A Facsimile of the First Edition, Harvard University Press, 1964, s. 172, 280
48. Wolfgang Smith, Teilhardism and the New Religion, A Thorough Analysis of the Teachings of Pierre Teilhard de Chardin, Rockford IL, Tan Books and Publishers, Inc. 1988, s. 8 - Nicholas Comninellis, Creative Defense, Evidence Against Evolution, Master Books, 2001, s. 181
49. Stephen Stanley, Macroevolution: Pattern and Process, San Francisco CA, W. H. Freeman, 1979, s. 39 - Nicholas Comninellis, Creative Defense, Evidence Against Evolution, Master Books, 2001, s. 153
50. Nicholas Comninellis, Creative Defense, Evidence Against Evolution, Master Books, 2001, s. 153
51. Nicholas Comninellis, Creative Defense, Evidence Against Evolution, Master Books, 2001, s. 152
52. Mark Ridley, "Who Doubts Evolution?", New Scientist, vol. 90, 1981, s. 831 - Nicholas Comninellis, Creative Defense, Evidence Against Evolution, Master Books, 2001, s. 152
54. S. M. Stanley, The New Evolutionary Timetable: Fossils, Genes, and the Origin of Species, Basic Books Inc. Publishers, N.Y., 1981, s.71
55. Gerald Schroeder, "Evolution: Rationality vs. Randomness", http://www.geraldschroeder.com/evolution.html
56. Hank Hanegraaff, Fatal Flaws "What Evolutionists Don't Want You To Know", W Publishing Group, 2003 s. 19
57. Hank Hanegraaff, Fatal Flaws "What Evolutionists Don't Want You To Know", W Publishing Group, 2003 s. 22
58. Hank Hanegraaff, Fatal Flaws "What Evolutionists Don't Want You To Know", W Publishing Group, 2003 s. 22
59. Jonathan Wells, Evrimin İkonları, Gelenek yayınları, Ocak 2003, s. 131
60. Jonathan Wells, Evrimin İkonları, Gelenek yayınları, Ocak 2003, s. 130
61. Focus, Nisan 2003
62. L. B. Halstead "Museum of Errors", Nature, 20 Kasım 1980, s. 280 - Nicholas Comninellis, Creative Defense, Evidence Against Evolution, Master Books, 2001, s. 180
63. Lyall Watson, "The Water People", Science Digest, vol. 90, no. 5, Mayıs 1982, s. 44 - Nicholas Comninellis, Creative Defense, Evidence Against Evolution, Master Books, 2001, s. 181
64. F. A. Barnes, Desert Magazine, 38: 36-39, ﬁubat 1975 - Nicholas Comninellis, Creative Defense, Evidence Against Evolution, Master Books, 2001, s. 182
65. Hank Hanegraaff, Fatal Flaws "What Evolutionists Don't Want You To Know", W Publishing Group, 2003 s. 32-33
66. Robert Martin, "Man Is Not An Onion", New Scientist, 4 Ağustos 1977, s. 283 ve 285 - Nicholas Comninellis, Creative Defense, Evidence Against Evolution, Master Books, 2001, s. 181