At first, the president of a packaging company seems an unlikely environmental activist.
But mild-mannered Robert Pocius turns positively outraged at what he sees as a failure on the part of packaging manufacturers to do something about the scraps of paper and plastic rapidly filling dumps.
“Our rainforest is disappearing the size of Greece each year,” he said.
After a long career selling packaging to various companies, he started Grayrock Packaging in the GTA in 1997. Gradually, more customers were asking for a biodegradable packaging product, particularly those in the coffee and organic foods industries.
“People started asking for biodegradable packaging so I started trying to find it,” he said.
He established TekPak Solutions in 2007 in Hamilton — a company he says is dedicated to manufacturing truly biodegradable packaging.
So began the re-education of Robert Pocius.
He pored through journals, talked to scientists, attended conferences, anything to find a solid alternative to existing practice.
He came to gradually discard the most popular of the biodegradable or compostable technologies — one needed six hours of direct sunlight to truly degrade, while the other — which was supposed to be commercially compostable — took vast amounts of oil to process, thereby negating the truly environmental benefits. Besides, it didn’t degrade all that well either.
“I tried all of them (as a packaging film) and they failed,” he said.
Then he came across some research by a team of scientists in Ohio who were trying to create a better fishing lure but, by accident, discovered a compound that dissolves in water.
Pocius was hooked. He struck a deal to develop the finding.
“I started making films. The coffee packaging companies are all over this so I made a lining for a coffee bag made of paper,” he said. “I thought if I make the biodegradable lining and the paper itself is biodegradable, we’ll start with that.”
After $1 million in research and development, Pocius has what he argues is an “omni-degradable” packaging product.
The TekPak additive works in a completely different way from other biodegradable materials. When it is stretched, the organic compound — the details are proprietary — blends into plastics.
The scientists had discovered that the compound attracts microbes, micro-organisms which can break down organic material. The microbes attach themselves to the organic compound which then creates an enzyme (like an acid) and breaks down the plastic molecules into smaller pieces. The microbes consume these smaller molecules.
It even works on thicker plastics and bottles — all because of the microbes’ attraction to the compound.
The additive won him a regional innovative technology award from the Canadian Manufacturers and Exporters last fall.
He’s in the midst of building a new office on Ditton Drive on the Mountain with an expected completion date of April, hiring about five new staff, establishing a supply chain and securing patents for his new line.
Coffee company Melitta and The Edge Food Energy were among the first to jump on the TekPak bandwagon. Organic companies are now among those most interested in the product.
Then in early February, the global trade journal Packaging Digest ran a piece about his new technology.
“I’ve been swamped ever since. I need to hire people but I hardly have time to do the interviews,” he said. “I knew it was going to do well but I didn’t know how well.”
Pocius is cagey when asked about his age. He got a new kidney from his daughter and a new lease on life.
“If I tell you how old I am people will think I’m just out to sell this company,” he said. “I’m in this thing. If I won the $50-million lottery would I quit? No.
“It’s really big. It’s something of a game changer.”