Imagine a 35-foot school bus converted into a mobile greenhouse. Help us take it to local schools to teach kids about urban gardening.
Our mission is to demonstrate the creative possibility of urban agriculture by promoting local gardening, healthy eating, and sustainability.The Green Urban Lunch Box visits local schools, farmers markets, outdoor concerts, festivals, and wherever groups of people, especially children, gather. Our intent is to create a fun, hands-on approach to gardening. When we visit schools, we teach 1st-3rd graders about plants, backyard gardens, and the importance of eating fruits and vegetables. We provide garden access to students who might not otherwise have the opportunity to learn and experience what it is like to grow vegetables. We help kids and parents see that they can garden anywhere and open their eyes to the possibilities and joy of growing their own food. We give each child who comes in to the bus seeds and other gardening tools. The participants must promise to grow at least one plant that they can eat at home. In 2011, The Green Urban Lunch Box had over 1,000 visitors, about 75% of whom were children. In the fall of 2012 we are aiming to visit all of the 25 schools in the Salt Lake City school district helping us educate over 3,000 kids.
In addition to The Green Urban Lunch Box, we have started a program that links elderly people and people with disabilities with volunteers in their neighborhood to share a community garden, called a back-farm. Under the direction of our staff, local volunteers will help convert the participant's backyard into a garden in exchange for a share of the produce. Approximately 1/3 of the produce will go to the participant, 1/3 to the volunteer, 1/3 to The Green Urban Lunch Box. The share that goes to The Green Urban Lunch Box will be sold at local farmers' markets in order to offset the costs of converting even more backyards into community gardens.
While this bus is a creative teaching tool, there is still work to be done. We want the bus to help people learn about all sorts of different forms of creative agriculture. To do this we will need to make some improvements to the bus. We need to install steps so people can exit the back of the bus, helping us get more people in and out of the bus safely. We want to add a gravity feed watering system to the top of the bus. Our aquaponics system (a symbiotic cultivation of plants and aquatic animals in a recirculating environment) needs some tweaking so that it functions more smoothly. This requires the addition of edible fish and a heater to keep the water flowing in the winter. Better insulation and a solar powered heating system would allow us to grow salad greens year-round. The addition of this heating system would allow us to visit schools year-round, thus reaching more students and members of the community. Other additions will include a small roof top garden, a vertical garden in the bus, and a coffee ground mushroom bed. Lastly, we plan to install interpretive signage throughout the bus, so that it becomes an even more effective educational tool.
We plan to visit over 3,000 school children this year and we want each of them to plant and grow one vegetable plant. This means that 3,000 families will be growing some of their own food. As a result, there will be 3,000 new plants in Salt Lake City. To do this we need to buy supplies like dirt, seeds, and pots. In addition to all this, the bus is in need of a new paint job thanks to some local graffiti artists.
This is where we need your help. This is a labor of loved funded last year by our founder, Shawn Peterson. Last year over 1,500 volunteer hours were donated by friends and community members. Currently, Shawn is a 30 hour a week volunteer on this project and most of the funding for the project so far has come out of his pockets.
If we raise at least $5,000 dollars with this campaign, we will be able to do the following: Purchase the need supplies for our school visits, add solar power to the bus so we can heat it year-round, add the gravity feed watering system, install the stairs, and repaint the bus. If we raise $6,500 we will be able to finish the aquaponics system, start growing pink and blue oyster mushrooms, add a roof top garden, and vertical garden to the bus. For $7,500 we can complete all the tasks listed above, no matter what, any donations will be put to good use. Thank you for your help.
For helping us out we have some cool stuff like shirts, hats, lunch boxes, and the best prize of all, fresh veggies. Or if you are feeling more altruistic send the bus to a school or have us convert a yard for a senior citizen in your neighborhood. Check out the rewards on the side.
Have a question? If the info above doesn't help, you can ask the project creator directly.
pledged of $5,000 goal
seconds to go
May 15, 2012 - Jun 19, 2012 (35 days)
Pledge $1 or more
Thank you for your donation. With every dollar another child will learn about the importance of growing their own food and healthy eating.Estimated delivery: Jul 2012
Pledge $10 or more
Thanks for helping us bring the bus to a school in the Salt Lake City area. Your contribution will fund up to ten kids learning about gardening and healthy eating. To say thanks, we will send you a handmade thank you letter that doubles as a garden starter seed pack.Estimated delivery: Jul 2012
Pledge $25 or more
A bag of fresh, no spray veggies from our garden. If you live in the Salt Lake City area, we will coordinate a place for pickup. If you don't live in the Salt Lake City Area, why not think about the $30 reward?Estimated delivery: Jul 2012
Pledge $30 or more
Be the coolest kid on the block with The Green Urban Lunch Box signature hat. Don't worry This hat is made from organic cotton.Estimated delivery: Jul 2012
Pledge $40 or more
The Green Urban Lunch Box t-shirt. This sustainably sourced shirt will let every one know you support urban agriculture as way to make the world a better place.Estimated delivery: Jul 2012
Pledge $50 or more
The Green Urban Lunch Box lunch box stuffed full of fresh veggies (if you live in the Salt Lake City area) or enough seed packets to grow a bus full of veggies (if you live elsewhere).Estimated delivery: Sep 2012
Pledge $60 or more
Classroom visit. We will take The Green Urban Lunch Box to the class of your choice in the Salt Lake City School District. If you don't have a preference then we are happy to choose one for you. We will also throw in a hat as our way of saying thanks.Estimated delivery: Jun 2012
Pledge $75 or more
Veggie basket and your choice of a shirt, hat or lunch box. We will deliver a basket of locally-grown, no-spray veggies from our own garden to your house in the Salt Lake City area. If you live outside of the Salt Lake City area, we will get you a whole bunch of seed packets. We will also send you, your choice of a hat, t-shirt, or lunch box.Estimated delivery: Jul 2012
Pledge $100 or more
Garden starter kit. Seeds, a hand trowel, a hose and The Green Urban Lunch Box signature hat. Now get growing.Estimated delivery: Jul 2012
Pledge $200 or more
2 backers Limited (28 of 30 left)
School visit. We will bring The Green Urban Lunch Box to one of the Salt Lake City Schools (Let us know if you have a preference for which school - Our lessons are geared towards 2nd and 3rd graders). We will provide lessons and garden supplies to six classes. Thanks for educating some kids. In addition you will be decked out in a Green Urban Lunch Box hat and shirt.Estimated delivery: Sep 2012
Pledge $300 or more
0 backers Limited (10 of 10 left)
We will give you a basket of fresh veggies, a hat,a shirt. On top of all that, we will convert part of a Salt Lake City senior citizen's yard into a garden, providing them with fresh vegetables all summer long.Estimated delivery: Jul 2012
Pledge $500 or more
1 backer Limited (4 of 5 left)
We will convert 350 square feet of your yard in Salt Lake City area to an amazing vegetable garden. If you don't live in the Salt Lake City area, we will convert two senior citizen yards into vegetable gardens. For good measure we will throw in The Green Urban Lunch Box hat and shirt.Estimated delivery: Jun 2012
Pledge $1,000 or more
0 backers Limited (3 of 3 left)
All of the prizes mentioned above (hat, t-shirt, lunch box, garden starter kit, veggie bag or more seeds) and your name on The Green Urban Lunch Box. This Green House Bus is Powered By (Your Name Here)Estimated delivery: Jun 2012