Telecommunications is the electronic transmission of information in the form of voice, sound, data, facsimile, picture, or video across a distance from a sender to receiver in a usable and understandable format using either analog or digital techniques. Instant availability of current and pertinent information is the goal of Telecommunications. Every business, organization, and individual has a need for telecommunications professionals.
The program has the following eight areas of focus: general telecommunications, telephony and data communications, wireless technologies, emerging technologies, networking, Internet and intranet technologies, computer information systems, and general education. Voice and data communication, local and wide area network administration, switching systems, computer/telephony integration, Windows, UNIX and LINUX operating systems, broadband, Internetworking, wireless technology, and transport protocols are covered in detail. Project management is also a key part of the Telecommunications program. All core courses include a hands-on lab to maximize the educational experience. Students learn how to integrate the various aspects of telecommunications into practical solutions for today’s business and professional environment.
The program also includes business and management courses to prepare students for the growth challenges that will face them in their careers. Students are given the opportunity to explore areas of interest through the requirement of technical and general education electives.
Telecommunications Technology is designed for those students interested in computer hardware, establishing and maintaining network systems, and telephony and data communications.
Graduates are prepared for careers such as network administrator, telecommunications systems analyst and manager, information manager, and network and traffic engineer, LAN/WAN administrator, voice/data analyst, traffic engineer, wireless communications specialist, telephone wiring specialist, data processing specialist, information service administrator, router engineer, project manager and other related fields.