American Heritage® Dictionary of the English Language, Fourth Edition
- adj. Music Of or using only five tones, usually the first, second, third, fifth, and sixth tones of a diatonic scale.
Century Dictionary and Cyclopedia
- In music, consisting of five tones; especially, pertaining to a pentatonic scale (which see, under scale).
- adj. music Based on five tones.
- adj. relating to a pentatonic scale
“There is no doubt that the pentatonic is the musical scale of all Malaysia, and probably of all China; and none also that the diatonic, almost universal in Europe, is the musical scale of portions of India.”
“Goethe has there suggested; and we shall find it can be arranged in what I may call a pentatonic scale of culture.”
“* 2: That means the pentatonic is the (I, II, III, V, VI)”
“* 2: That means the pentatonic is the (I, III, IV, V, VII)”
“Williams says that Simon created the five notes of steel drum music, known as the pentatonic scale.”
“The Sudanese music is based on the so called pentatonic scale: scale with 5 notes to the octave, like the black notes in the piano (in contrast to an heptatonic,7 notes, scale like the gypsy or Egyptian scale.”
“She hit her high point early on with a powerful reading of "Siboney" that used minor and pentatonic modes to reference Middle-Eastern music and even traveled momentarily through a reggae beat.”
“In his experience, orchestral works by composers of Chinese or Japanese origin just featured a lot of "the stereotypical sounds of that region," such as a pentatonic melody with a parallel harmony in fifths classical European music favors parallelisms in thirds or sixths or the insertion of gongs or bamboo flutes.”
“The combination of African rhythms and the pentatonic scale and European instrumentation and arrangement.”
“In 1976, Stephen Sondheim used the pentatonic scale to create his score for Pacific Overtures.”
These user-created lists contain the word ‘pentatonic’.
Words only (I left out the expressions) from Geza Kerenyi's EN-HU interpreters' dictionary. Most of them pose some difficulty when interpreted between HU and EN in either or both directions.
With focus on non-classical styles, but not excluding terms of the latter.
notes in a musical scale; relating to music; muscles
five; having five
Various terms, common and uncommon, relating to musical scores.
A novel by Peter Høeg.
Looking for tweets for pentatonic.