Note: This message is displayed if (1) your browser is not standards-compliant or (2) you have you disabled CSS. Read our Policies for more information.
The Medical Monitoring Project
Have you heard about the Medical Monitoring Project (MMP)? It’s a survey of the needs and experiences of people living with HIV Disease in the United States. The MMP is supported by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), the National Institutes of Health (NIH), the Health Resources and Services Administration (HRSA), and state or local health departments. The MMP will help answer important questions about people living with HIV Disease, such as:
The MMP is unique because the information collected will represent the experiences of people who receive care for HIV Disease. No project has been able to do this before. The MMP opens the door for the opportunity to provide information that will be useful to community planning groups, Ryan White CARE Act advisory and planning councils, and providers of HIV Disease care. If a person participates, the experiences could help guide decisions that may improve the lives and the quality of care for people living with HIV Disease.
How does the MMP work?
First, providers who care for patients with HIV Disease will be invited to participate. Then, the patients of participating providers will be selected. Patients cannot volunteer for the MMP. Each year, a different group of patients will be selected to participate. All personal information will be kept strictly confidential, and participants will be compensated for their time. For the information collected through MMP to be most useful, it is essential that as many of the selected patients participate.
What can you do to help make the MMP a success?
For more information, go to http://www.cdc.gov/hiv/treatment.htm or contact your state or local health department.
Maximum provider and patient participation will increase the likelihood of obtaining information that is truly representative of patients in care for HIV Disease. The success of MMP depends on the selected providers and patients' participation. Providers and patients not selected to participate in the project can still help by encouraging others to participate.