We are currently using a set of lectionary readings in worship that
is called the narrative lectionary.
The narrative lectionary was designed by several Luther Seminary
professors, and is a set of readings, which moves through the
overarching biblical story in a nine-month period.
The narrative lectionary respects the traditional Christian
church year, with its principal festivals and seasons -- Advent,
Christmas, Lent, Easter, and Pentecost. It also respects the
rhythms of the school year or program year, which influence the
program lives of many congregations.
the fall of each year, the narrative lectionary moves
rapidly through the Old Testament story -- beginning in
Genesis around the start of September and culminating with
the promise of the Messiah during December (Advent).
In the winter of each year, the narrative lectionary moves
in order through one Gospel -- tracing the story of Jesus in
canonical order from birth, through ministry, passion, and
culminating with the story of the resurrection at Easter.
In the spring of each year, the narrative lectionary
engages part of the story of the early church, as told in
Acts and other New Testament writings.
What makes the narrative
This lectionary is not simply a series of
stories; rather, it is a series of stories that facilitate an
understanding of and appreciation for the broader biblical
story. It is different than the Revised Common Lectionary in
several ways. First, the narrative lectionary seeks to tell the
biblical story in the order in which they are found in the
Bible, in a nine-month cycle. The lectionary also features
mainly narrative passages.
Second, the narrative lectionary has only one "assigned" reading
each week. Congregations are free, however, to continue to read
other lessons in addition to the assigned reading -- especially
to read a Gospel lesson and a psalm all year.
Because the lectionary is shaped this way, the church calendar
is not abandoned -- the birth of Christ Jesus is still
celebrated at Christmas, the resurrection of Christ is still
celebrated at Easter. The time of Advent is kept by focusing on
the promise of the Messiah. Appropriate readings have been
chosen for church commemorations, such as Reformation, All
Saints, and Ash Wednesday.
Why the Narrative Lectionary?
But why try the narrative lectionary? The
shortest answer is simply this: Because knowledge of the
biblical story is crucial to mature Christian faith.
The narrative lectionary seeks to be one part of an approach
that seeks to equip people to know God's story -- to find
themselves in God's story and to find in that story the love of
the God in Christ.
In summary, the narrative lectionary will allow us to follow the
story of salvation from the Old Testament through the New, and
hear some significant stories we dont usually hear in worship.
I hope you find this a wonderful way to explore Scripture in its
fullness. If it goes well, we can use the Narrative Lectionary
for up to 4 years. Through its use, we hope and pray it will
help broaden your understanding and faith as we hear the story
of salvation from the beginning.
When you attend worship at
Family of God, you take your place among the people of
God gathered around Word and Sacrament. The
worship format is grounded in our liturgical heritage
and combined with the best of musical expression and new
and cross-cultural resources. Both worship hours
are alike--a sign of the unity of the body of Christ and
an opportunity for all to worship with the best of the
old and the new.
Children are welcome in worship and
encouraged to come forward for the Young Person's
message. Rainbow activity bags are available for
little ones. The nursery is also available for
infants and toddlers, staffed by regular caregivers from
September to May and by volunteer adult and youth
members in summer.
Young Person's Message
Communion All baptized persons are welcome who believe Christ comes
to us in the bread and the wine to bring forgiveness, life, and
salvation. Children not yet communing come forward for a blessing.
Children receive instruction and usually have First Communion in Fifth
grade. We receive the sacrament standing. Grape juice is
Lighted Globe at the back of the sanctuary is for the lighting of a
votive candle by anyone wishing to express a particular prayer or hope
in this symbolic way. Candles remain lit after all have gone, a
visible sign of the prayers of our community of faith "for the whole
people of God, and for all people according to their needs."