AS and A Level
What do I need to know or be able to do before taking this course?
You do not need to have studied Economics at GCSE in order to take the course. It is important that you have an interest in economic affairs and a desire to explore why and how the study of Economics contributes to an understanding of the modern world.
What will I learn on this course?
How to develop an understanding of economic concepts and theories through critical consideration of current economic issues, problems and institutions that affect everyday life.
How to apply economic concepts and theories in a range of contexts and to appreciate their value and limitations in explaining real world phenomena.
How to analyse, explain and evaluate the strengths and weaknesses of the market economy and the role of the government within it.
How to participate effectively in society as a citizen, producer and consumer.
What kind of student is this course suitable for
Students must have a B grade in English and a B in Maths at GCSE.
This course will appeal to students who:
Wish to pursue a career in an economics related profession;
Enjoy studying a subject that affects their own everyday lives;
Want to keep their options open- Economics can be combined with a wide range of social sciences and humanities subjects.
What do I get at the end of my course?
Students with AS or A level Economics have access to a wide range of possible career and university opportunities. You learn and use a variety of transferable skills throughout the course, such as:
- Collecting and analysing economic information from different sources;
- Development of written communication skills
- Development of problem solving and evaluation skills.
The skills and knowledge gained on the course are recognised by employers, universities and colleges as being of great value. Economics can lead to university courses in such areas as Law, Business, Accounting, Politics and, of course Economics.
Unit 1: Competitive Markets-How they work and why they fail.
An introduction into the nature of economics and examines how the price mechanism allocates resources. It analyses the nature of market failure, its causes and possible policy remedies.
Unit 2: Managing the Economy
Key measures of economic performance and the main objectives and instruments of economic policy. Students should be able to use basic Aggregate Demand and Supply analysis to develop an understanding of the Macro economy.
Unit 3: Business Economics and Economic Efficiency
Examines how the pricing and nature of competition between firms is affected by the number and size of market participants.
Unit 4: The Global Economy
Trends and developments in the global economy over the last ten years.
For a detailed look at the subject content go to www.edexcel.org.uk