Burr Oak State Park and Rim Of The World Scenic Route 78 Hiking Trail Pictures Movie
Burr Oak State Park has many miles of hiking trails within an immense forest surrounding the lake.
Nature of the Area
Burr Oak State Park epitomizes the wilderness character of southeast Ohio. Miles of forested ridges and hollows comprise these foothills of the Appalachian Mountains. The woodlands support a variety of wildlife including white-tailed deer, ruffed grouse, box turtles and the elusive wild turkey. The lake's shore is inhabited by the industrious beaver and various waterfowl species.
The forest is comprised of numerous hardwoods but is dominated by stately oaks and hickories. In autumn, the forest displays spectacular fall colors as leaves turn to deep reds, brilliant yellows and burnt oranges. Woodland wildflowers are equally as impressive in the spring when violets, Dutchman's breeches, trillium, rare orchids, bloodroot and hepatica are in bloom.
History of the Area
Situated in the valley of Sunday Creek, the Burr Oak area was inhabited by Indians and, later, by settlers who found an abundance of game animals and the resources necessary for survival in the Ohio wilderness.
Coal, one of Ohio's most important mineral resources, was mined here for many years. As mining operations expanded, mining towns grew and prospered. Few of these mining towns were as notorious as the village of Santoy.
Many colorful tales were told of life in Santoy. In the true spirit of frontier life, so the story goes, a gunfight was once held over a $20 debt. The street was cleared as the two participants met for a showdown. The ensuing battle left both men lying in the street--one dead and the other critically wounded. The "Old West" came to life in Ohio when the coal company payroll was robbed by bandits who made a horse-mounted getaway through the town.
Countless other tales live on, but Santoy could not. A fire in 1924 destroyed the coal tipple and several businesses. The loss was so devastating that just three years later the second mine shaft shut down. In November 1931, the nineteen remaining voters decided to abandon the town. Today, only the church, the town's first building, still stands as a reminder of days gone by.
In 1950 Burr Oak Lake was created by the construction of the Tom Jenkins Dam across the east branch of Sunday Creek. Two years later, Burr Oak was dedicated as a state park.
A portion of Wayne National Forest borders the park near the dam. The U.S. Forest Service operates a 19-unit family camp at Burr Oak Cove, off S.R. 13. Wildcat Hollow Backpack Trail, located on Morgan County Road 58, is also operated by the U.S. Forest Service and can be accessed by the park's backpack trail to extend the route. Sunday Creek Wildlife Area, consisting of fifteen separate areas, borders the park as well. Two other state wildlife areas are located nearby--Trimble, six miles west and Wolf Creek, six miles east. Strouds Run State Park, on U.S. 50 east of Athens, provides facilities for fishing, camping, picnicking, hiking and boating.
State Route 78 between Glouster and McConnelsville earns its nickname "Rim of the World" as one of the most scenic drives in the state.
Located in southeast Ohio, quiet and remote Burr Oak State Park has a rustic country charm in its scenery of wooded hills and valley farms. As one of Ohio's resort parks, Burr Oak offers a wide array of overnight accommodations with its lodge, cottages and campground. Burr Oak blends modern conveniences with the wilderness spirit of Ohio.
Burr Oak Lodge, overlooking the lake from the east, offers sixty guest rooms, five meeting rooms, a dining room, full-service lounge and gift shop. Facilities for lodge and cottage guests include a swimming beach, tennis courts, playground equipment, boat launch ramp and an indoor swimming pool.
Cottages There are 30 family cottages with air conditioning and cable tv situated near the lodge in the wooded hills overlooking the lake. Each cottage sleeps six people, has a bath with a shower, living room, complete kitchen, dining area and screened porch. Linens, towels and cooking and eating utensils are furnished.
There are 100 non-electric campsites to accommodate campers. The campground offers showers, flush toilets and a dump station. Thirteen primitive sites are offered at Dock #2 and eight primitive sites at Dock #3. Pet camping is permitted on designated sites.
A ten horsepower limit for boats is in effect on Burr Oak Lake. Five launch ramps provide access to the lake. Boat rentals, fuel and seasonal dock rentals are offered at the marina.
Fishing and Hunting
The lake is well known for its catches of largemouth bass, crappie, bluegill and catfish. Hunting is permitted in designated areas of the park and in the adjacent Wayne National Forest and wildlife areas. A valid Ohio hunting and/or fishing license is required.
A public swimming beach offers enjoyment for swimmers and sunbathers. A bathhouse, showers, changing booths and a snack bar are provided. An indoor pool is available for lodge and cottage guests only.
Burr Oak State Park 5250 Beach Road Glouster, OH 45732
Burr Oak Resort & Conference Center Route 2, Box 159, Glouster, OH 45732-9536
Park Office (740) 767-3570 Lodge Front Desk (740) 767-2112 Lodge Front Desk Fax (740) 767-4878 Lodge/Cottage Reservations (800) 282-7275
Visit website hikingohioparks.com for more information about Burr Oak State Park and many other hiking Ohio park trails.
The hikingohioparks.com LINKS(ADAMS COUNTY PARKS)
Edge of the Appalachia Preserve
(ASHLAND COUNTY PARKS)
Mohican State Park
(CUYAHOGA COUNTY PARKS)
Euclid Creek Reservation
North Chagrin Reservation
Rocky River Reservation
South Chagrin Reservation
(GEAUGA COUNTY PARKS)
Big Creek Park
Swine Creek Reservation
The West Woods
(GUERNSEY COUNTY PARKS)
Salt Fork State Park
(HOCKING COUNTY PARKS)
Picture Movie-Hocking Hills State Park-Cantwell Cliffs- Ash Cave-Hocking State Forest-Cedar Falls-Conkle's Hollow-Rock House-Lake Logan
Old Man's Cave Pictures Movie
(LAKE COUNTY PARKS) Chapin Forest Reservation
Headland Dunes State Nature Preserve
Hidden Valley Park
Hogback Ridge Park
Indian Point Park
Mentor Marsh State Nature Preserve
Penitentiary Glen Reservation
(LORAIN COUNTY PARKS)
Elyria's Cascade and Elywoods Parks
Vermilion River Reservation
(MAHONING COUNTY PARKS)
Mill Creek Park
(MEDIA COUNTY PARKS)
Alderfer-Oenslager Wildlife Sanctuary
Chippewa Inlet Trail Buckeye Woods Schleman Nature Preserve
(MORGAN COUNTY PARKS)
Burr Oak State Park - Scenic Route 78 - Rim of the World
(NOBLE COUNTY PARKS)
(PORTAGE COUNTY PARKS)
Nelson Ledges State Park
West Branch State Park
(ROSS COUNTY PARKS)
Scioto Trail State Forest Park
Great Seal State Park
(STARK COUNTY PARKS)
Quail Hollow State Park
Sippo Lake Park
The Wilderness Center
(SUMMIT COUNTY PARKS)
MAPS Air Show Akron Fulton Airport
Adell Durbin Park and Arboretum
Great Blue Heron Nesting
Cascade Valley Metropark: Chuckery Trail
Cuyahoga Valley National Park Canal Lock Trail
Cuyahoga Valley National Park Virginia Kendall Park
F.A. Seiberling Naturealm
Hampton Hills Metropark
Portage Lakes State Park
The Gorge Metropark
The Gorge Glens Trail
(WAYNE COUNTY PARKS)
Johnson Woods Park
Wooster Memorial Park
Pennsylvania Grand Canyon Pine Creek Gorge
Ohiopyle State Park
Red River Gorge Natural Bridge State Park