home > sections > Focus Central America >
Focus Central America
Potentially undescribed species of the genus Archocentrus
By Michi Tobler, 2006.
last updated on 07-Jul-2006
Get the full color PDF of this classic now out of print book!
Enjoying Cichlids (2nd edition)
The ultimate guide for successfully keeping and breeding cichlids
Central American heroin cichlids, a phylogenetic approach
Probably the most updated phylogenetic view of Central American cichlids to publication date
The fishes of Gallinas River
The wonderful fish fauna of one of the most beautiful mexican rivers
All species in the genus Archcentrus with a wider distrubution show a considerable amount of geographic variation in terms of body shape as well as coloration (especially A. nigrofasciatus and A. spilurus). Geographic variation in these species, however, is poorly studied and it is not known at all, how different environmental characteristics (lacustrine vs. riverine habitats, clear vs. turbid water, high vs. low predation) might account for this variation. Further taxonomic studies are needed to reveal if some very distinct geographic variants are in fact separate species.
Fish collected in the Lago Yojoa (Honduras) and apparently related to A. spilurus were repeatedly named A. sp. "Lago Yojoá" or A. sp. "Yojoa". These population was also named A. cutteri , which is currently considered as a synonym of A. spilurus. It needs to be clarified if a) the A. spilurus from Honduras are a distinct species which would justify the regocnition of A. cutteri as a valid name and b) if the fish from the Lago Yojoá are indeed identical with the form that can be found in the Rio Lancetilla (type locality of C. cutteri). Until then, the fish of the Lago Yojoá should be considered as geographical variant of A. spilurus.
© Copyright 2006 Michi Tobler, all rights reserved
Tobler, Michi. (July 07, 2006). "Potentially undescribed species of the genus Archocentrus". The Cichlid Room Companion. Retrieved on May 18, 2013, from: http://www.cichlidae.com/section.php?id=35.