This image shows the launch of the LJ-1A rocket fondly named "Little Joe". It was launched in 1959 as part of the rocket testing for the Mercury flight. Even with as large of set-backs as the explosion of the Delta 3 and Titan 4 rockets, it is not too hard to see that we have come a long way from the early days of space exploration...
Click on image for full size
Courtesy of NASA
'We have experienced an explosion'
News story originally written on August 27, 1998
The brand-new Delta 3 rocket
, built by Boeing, exploded just a minute after its launch from Cape Canaveral yesterday night. A PanAmSat Galaxy 10 satellite
used for communications was lost in the explosion.
The rocket exploded over the Atlantic Ocean. No one was injured by falling debris. The explosion is a great disappointment though as this was the Delta rocket's maiden voyage.
Investigation is already underway and investigation of the Titan 4 rocket that exploded exactly 2 weeks ago continues...
Shop Windows to the Universe Science Store!
Our online store
on science education, ranging from evolution
, classroom research
, and the need for science and math literacy
You might also be interested in:
The 18-story tall Titan rocket and its payload exploded today less than a minute after take-off. Debris from this $350 million rocket and $1 billion satellite rained down on the Atlantic Ocean. No injuries...more
It was another exciting and frustrating year for the space science program. It seemed that every step forward led to one backwards. Either way, NASA led the way to a great century of discovery. Unfortunately,...more
The Space Shuttle Discovery lifted off from Kennedy Space Center at 2:19 p.m. EST, October 29th. The sky was clear and the weather was great as Discovery took 8 1/2 minutes to reach orbit for the Unitied...more
A moon was discovered orbiting the asteroid, Eugenia. This is only the second time in history that a satellite has been seen circling an asteroid. A special mirror allowed scientists to find the moon...more
Will Russia ever put the service module for the International Space Station in space? NASA officials are demanding an answer from the Russian government. The necessary service module is currently waiting...more
During a period of about two days in early May, 1998, the ACE spacecraft was immersed in plasma associated with a coronal mass ejection (CME). The SWICS instrument on ACE, which determines unambiguously...more
J.S. Maini of the Canadian Forest Service has referred to forests as the "heart and lungs of the world." Forests reduce soil erosion, maintain water quality, contribute to atmospheric humidity and cloud...more