Internet Scavenger Hunt
(This project is worth 30 points.)
Much of the searching done on the Internet is to answer specific
While a handful of sites permit a search for answers based on
written-English questions, most require carefully selected
keywords and ideas.
Selecting keywords, constructing questions, and structuring
Boolean operators take practice.
(Reading about Internet searching techniques is much easier
than actually using them!)
For this project you will use what you have learned about
searching to locate some difficult to find information on
Remember to use search engines as well as looking in specialty
sites and libraries.
Every effort has been made to ensure that the information requested
is in fact available.
But as you know websites change and even go away over time, and
some of the information requested may no longer be available
Should some information no longer be available at the time of
grading this assignment, those questions will not be counted.
Prior to attempting an Application Assignment submission, please practice
You have only ONE submission attempt allowed.
You cannot submit a second attempt so be careful and follow the directions.
Using the same
submission steps as with the practice assignment,
save this file to your computer as
Be sure to save as
, and not
Web page, HTML
or any other type.
Web page, Complete
Enter the following information here:
Student Name: ( replace this text with your name )
For each of the questions below, search the
Internet using what you have learned, until you find the
Since not all published information is accurate, you should try
to check any questionable answers from a second source.
Answer the question.
(As usual, put your answer right after the question.)
If there are multiple parts to a question, for full credit you
must answer all parts; and all answers
MUST come from the same website.
(They may come from different pages on that one site.)
Include as a clickable link
(or hyperlink) the URL where you found the
You will not receive full credit unless you can show from where
you obtained your answers!
Using the same
file saving steps as with the practice assignment,
save the edited file as
Return to MyHCC, and follow the directions to select, upload and
submit the completed file to the correct drop-box.
Note that improperly completed and/or improperly identified mail
WILL NOT be graded.
For full credit. you must locate and answer correctly at least 20
of the items below, including the required links.
When is the next U.S. unmanned rocket launch scheduled?
What names will be used this year for Atlantic hurricanes
starting with R and T?
Where is the telephone number 202-456-1414 and to whom is it listed
(DO NOT CALL THIS NUMBER TO ANSWER THE QUESTION)?
Who pitched a no-hitter in the 1956 World Series?
What company developed "SQL"?
What was the name of the original SQL prototype developed in 1974?
What movie is currently ranked fifth in gross box office
sales worldwide for all time (not just for
their opening week)?
Who played Sara in the movie "Sweet November"
(Hint: there is more than one version of this movie)?
What resort sits at the extreme northeast corner of
Grand Cayman Island?
Name one of the original main hosts of "The Screen Savers"
At what university is the "Computer Emergency Response Team
Coordination Center" (CERT/CC) located?
Locate the CERT/CC "Current Activity Archive" website;
What is the date of the most recent "Current Activity"?
Now find the most recent "Weekly Vulnerability Summary Bulletin" on that site.
How many of those items are related to Microsoft, to Linux, to Apple, or to
How many people named John Doe (really!)
- and with a Social Security Number -
have died in the United States since records were computerized?
How many of them lived in Arizona when they died?
What is the average number of "albums" recording artist
Eithne Ní Bhraonáin (her real name) currently sells each day?
How many current arrest warrants exist in Hillsborough County for white
females named Smith?
Who is the last on the list?
How many sexual predators live in the zip code 33614?
Who is the founder of the World Wide Web?
Where does he/she work today?
What is his/her e-mail address?
How many Shriners Children's Hospitals are there in the
Where is the closest one?
Where is the show "Phantom of the Opera" appearing on Broadway
Broadway is a street in New York City where many
theaters are located)?
How much are orchestra tickets for the next available evening
show there, that isn't sold out?
active domain names are estimated to exist
in the world today?
In the traditional song Greensleeves, what two word phrase
is repeated in each of the last four verses (verses 4-7,
be careful not to count the chorus)?
What company operated by the Central Intelligence Agency provides cash
to new technology companies?
Name at least one company they have funded.
What cruise line sails to "Castaway Cay" in the Bahamas?
What is the minimum cost of an "outside" stateroom for a
three-night cruise, for two adults, for the next available cruise?
What are the names of the U.S. senators who serve the people living
in zip code 33614-7810?
How did they vote on the most recent vote that passed the Senate?
What is a "GoogleWhack"?
Provide one example.
Where on-line can you find a recording of
The Alligator Song
from the Green Corn Dance?
The Green Corn Dance is a spiritual ritual of purification and thanksgiving
held each spring by the Seminole Indians of Florida.)
Copyright ©2011 by Wayne Pollock
(Last Revision: July 20 2012)