A straight wind without apparent cyclonic tendency, usually accompanied with rain and often destructive, common in the prairie regions of the United States.
(Pronounced day-RAY-cho), a widespread and usually fast-moving windstorm associated with convection. Derechos include any family of downburst clusters produced by an extratropical MCS, and can produce damaging straight-line winds over areas hundreds of miles long and more than 100 miles across.
any family of downburst clusters produced by an extratropical mesoscale convective system
a damaging, straight-line windstorm that arises from a line of thunderstorms
a fast-moving windstorm that is made up of thunderstorms that repeatedly develop along the leading edge
a long-lived and widespread convective wind storm, typically in the form of a large, bow-shaped squall line
a widespread and long-lived windstorm that is associated with a fast-moving band of severe thunderstorm s
a widespread convective windstorm that forms from a complex of thunderstorms
A squall line may be labeled a derecho if it is followed by an extended area of damaging winds.
Long line of convective wind gusts originating from evaporationally cooled high momentum air aloft that accelerates to the surface due to negative buoyancy.
a straight or inline windstorm caused by severe thunderstorms. A derecho has a windspeed greater than 58 mph (93.3 kph) and causes damage along a path at least 280 miles (450 km) in length.
Very fast moving line of storms that produce considerable damage, often associated with LEWPS and bows. The word is of Spanish origin meaning “straight ahead.
A line of intense, widespread, and fast-moving thunderstorms that moves across a great distance. They are characterized by damaging straight-line winds over hundreds of miles. Spanish for straight.
A derecho is a widespread and long-lived, violent convectively induced windstorm that is associated with a fast-moving band of severe thunderstorms usually taking the form of a bow echo. Derechos are usually not associated with a cold front, but a stationary front within a highly buoyant, warm airmass. A warm weather phenomenon, derechos occur mostly in summer, especially July (in the northern hemisphere), but can occur at any time of the year and occur as frequently at night as in the daylight hours.