The FAA recommends that a child weighing less than 20 pounds use a rear-facing child restraint system. A forward facing child safety seat should be used for children weighing between 20 and 40 pounds. The FAA has also approved one harness-type device for children weighing between 22 to 44 pounds.
"The AAP strongly recommends that children should always ride properly restrained on every trip, on the ground and in the air. For this reason, we are pleased to support the FAA's efforts to educate parents on safe airplane travel,” said Robert W. Block, MD, FAAP, president, American Academy of Pediatrics. “The safest place for a child under two on an airplane is in a child safety seat, not on a parent’s lap. Whenever possible, parents should travel with a safety seat for use before, during and after a plane ride.”
In December 2010, a group of aviation stakeholders known as the Future of Aviation Advisory Committee (FAAC) delivered 23 recommendations to the Secretary and FAA Administrator on workforce development, competition and viability, financing of aviation systems, environmental concerns, and safety. Based on some of those recommendations, the FAA is stepping up efforts to educate parents about the importance of using a child restraint for air travel.
Today’s announcement is just one way the Department of Transportation is celebrating National Transportation Week (May 14-20). Over the next seven days, the Department is highlighting its commitment to ensuring the safety of America’s transportation systems this week and all 52 weeks of the year. Investment in our nation’s infrastructure is critical for maintaining and improving safety. Through TIGER grants, discretionary funds and other programs, DOT is working to enhance, expand and modernize American infrastructure, but Congress needs to act. A bipartisan long-term transportation bill is necessary to move our country into the future.
Visit the FAA’s new child safety website at http://www.faa.gov/passengers/fly_children/
The device provides upper torso restraint for young children who lack the upper body strength to brace themselves during turbulence or other incidents.
The Federal Aviation Administration had considered making safety seats mandatory on planes for small children. That would require parents to buy extra plane tickets, which they don't now have to...
The Cares device, produced by Phoenix-based AmSafe Aviation, involves a belt and shoulder harness that goes around the adult seat back and attaches to the adult passenger lap belt for improved upper...
The new CARES product is a small, light-weight device -- under one pound -- created by a grandmother to give parents traveling with small children a more convenient alternative to flying with a 15...