To: All Employees (employeewideemail@carcompany.com)
From: Allen Trust (a.trust@carcompany.com)
Subject: Important Email (Please read)

Good Morning Car Company Employees,

It is with a heavy heart that I am emailing you all today. Effectively tomorrow, May 26, 2023, at 1400 hours, all employees working the line at our Detroit factory will be let go. I understand some of you have already heard the rumors; this email is now a formal notification to all 1,500 of you who will be affected.

As you know, the Car Company has prided itself on leading the industry in the manufacture of affordable green vehicles in the world. In the past few years, we've overcome a multitude of obstacles, such as a pandemic and neverending supply-chain issues. Now, we are reaching a point in our country where the economy is approaching a recession. It would appear no company is safe from this impending economic downturn, including our Car Company. 

As a result, the Car Company has had to make the unenviable decision to stop production of our green cars at our largest facility, the Detroit factory. The Detroit factory has been the leader in car production year after year for the past 8 years; the employees who work the line at this factory are, in my opinion, the hardest-working, amenable, self-sacrificing group of people I have ever met during my time as CEO with this company. I truly consider you all to be a part of my family; most, if not all, of you I've had the chance to break bread with and to talk with you about your families, your interests and your dreams and aspirations.

To those of you who are affected by this decision, I am truly sorry. Please understand that as someone in this company who can make decisions for this company, this is one decision that was unavoidable and that I didn't have to make. In return for your excellent service to this company, I would like to provide you each with two weeks' pay. I will also be attempting to relocate those who I can into areas of the company that are short-staffed and could use your services. Keep in mind that this may involve relocating, but if you're willing to do it I be more than happy to keep you employed.

More to come.

- Allen Trust
