"It's the beach!" Koizumi shouted as she and the other three arrived at the beach in the summer heat.

Kirishima smacked her on the head, saying, "Stop yelling, stupid. This isn't some anime."

"Hehe. Okay, okay. You boys get everything set up while us girls go change," Koizumi said with a big grin before leaving.

"Hey, Kai-kun."

"Yes, Kirishima-kun."

"Are you prepared to see heaven, Kai-kun?"

"If by heaven you mean Sanae-san in her swimsuit, I could die happy after seeing it, I think."

"Man, I'm so lucky to be friends with Koizumi-san," Kirishima said. 

"I'm glad you aren't fawning after my girl."

"It does us no good to get in each other's way, so this is for the best. No rivals, but allies of love!" 

The two clasped hands together in solidarity before laughing. They set up the umbrella, chairs, and towels just in time to see the girls returning. Koizumi wore a revealing two-piece without any bells and whistles, showing off her athletic body. Sanae, by comparison, wore a frilly, light blue two-piece and a jacket over this. The boys sent a silent prayer thanking the heavens for blessing them with such a wonderful sight. "What do you think?" Koizumi asked Kai quietly.

Kai took careful glances at Sanae, unable to keep his eyes off her long legs and trim waist. "If I died right now, I'd be happy," he reiterated quietly.

"Aren't you glad I set all this up for us now?"

Kai nodded vigorously. Koizumi shoved him forward, saying, "Great, but don't tell me that. Go tell her."

Kai stumbled forward, catching himself before crashing into Sanae. "Ahh...Kai-kun," Sanae said in her soft voice, blushing lightly as she avoided his eyes. "Do I look...weird?"

Kai swallowed hard, took a deep breath to calm his heart, and replied, "No, not at all. I think that swimsuit really suits you..."

"Kai-kun, too. You're very...toned," Sanae replied, taking furtive glances at his defined abs and pecks.

The pair blushed and stood, awkwardly basking in the glow of each other. Koizumi and Kirishima cut in, saying, "All right, enough of that!"

"Yeah. It's time to swim!"
