If ever he could have only one thing, it would be the gift of knowing what lay beyond that hill. For all his life, Bridger had been planted in the shade of that hill shoeing horses, mending fences, and watching the seasons pass. It was not that Bridger was physically incapable of making the climb, thus keeping him below the ridge; it was because his parents—and their parents—spread warnings of the evil that waits on the other side. For in their mind, the hill was their protector; for Bridger, the hill was his captor. Today, Bridger was escaping.

Finishing up his evening chores, Bridger snuck off from the stable and made his way into the woods where he stashed an overnight bag in some brush. The contents of his bag were slim, but he only planned to be gone until morning anyway. If he could catch a glimpse of whatever the sun would shine upon for him, he would be content. Content enough to put some time between this journey and the next, at least.

Scrambling near the top of the hill, Bridger began to rely on all four of his limbs to carry his weight up the ridge. The brush became prickly and sharp, almost as if it were barbed wire placed atop a prison yard’s fence. One of the branches caught his backpack and tore it open, leaving what little he brought spilled over the hillside. Bridger dropped his shredded backpack and continued upward. A faint light began to glow in the low clouds. Bridger was close. A few more steps and the view he has dreamed of would present itself to him. Finally, cresting the rocky top of the hill, Bridger could nearly cast his gaze down upon the other side of the hill. Questions began spinning in his mind: Are there people down there? Do they know we exist nearby? What if my family was right? The final question surprised Bridger. He thought for sure he had purged their worries from his mine, but there it was. Ignoring the sudden doubt, Bridger could see the other side.

Bridger never returned to the stables. His family went searching for him and found his torn open backpack—but nothing else. The family knew where he had gone—and they knew who had found him.
