1. Appliances and equipment 
Although there is no single cause that leads to an accidental house fire, there are some common factors that can lead to the accidental eruption of a fire. Appliances and other electrical equipment are some of the leading causes of house fires. Any device that generates heat such as a stove, clothes dryer, or a space heater, or one that will heat up after extended use such as a computer, is a potential fire hazard for your home. Additionally, any cooking vessels left unattended are another frequent cause of house fires. 

2. Candles 
Every candle will have a warning label that states "A burning candle should never be left unsupervised". However many people will light a scented candle and forget about it until they start to burn uncontrollably. Candle fires are most likely to occur on Christmas Day, New Year's Day, and Christmas Eve. 

3. Holiday decor 
Candles are not the only culprit that can lead to a tragic fire during the holiday season. Christmas tree lights and other decorations are also to blame. Live trees that are not watered properly and left to dry out are another easy target for a fire caused by the hot lights wrapped around them. 

4. Electrical systems and devices 
Any device you own that uses electric power can start a fire and overheated lighting equipment is at the very top of that list. Questionable electrical work within a home, poorly connected circuits, loose wires, and improper grounding all pose a serious threat to homeowners. 

5. Smoking 
Another common cause of house fire is due to negligence while smoking. People will often fall asleep while smoking cigarettes, and by doing so they can set their chairs, bed, or couch on fire. This can easily result in a fatality and cause the entire house to burn down. Another avoidable issue related to smoking is caused by discarding ashes that are still hot into the trash where they could ignite. 

6. Chemicals and gasses 
Home fires can also be caused by sources of propane gas and natural gas. A sudden spark combined with a small leak could create a combustible situation. Improperly mixed household chemicals can also trigger combustion, which is why it's important to conduct this form of activity outside the home. 

7. Lightning 
Lightning fires will most commonly occur during the summer months when afternoon or early evening storms are at their highest. Homes that are in heavily wooded areas are extremely vulnerable to lightning strikes and could set the surrounding area on fire as well.
