Once two girls lived in a small rural village in China. They would happily play together every day, picking flowers and weaving them in their hair.

Then one night when one of the girls was stolen away by a fearsome dragon who lived in the nearby mountain. The remaining girl, whose name was Yin, was devastated that her best friend had gone missing. Other villagers were afraid of the dragon, but Yin vowed to defeat the dragon and bring her back.

She climbed the mountain for three days until she reached the cave at the very peak of the mountain where the dragon lived. "Where is my friend?" she demanded. "Why have you taken her?" 

The dragon's deep rumbling voice replied from deep inside the cave. "Somebody has stolen my precious pearl. I will take a child from the humans every week until my pearl is returned."

Yin returned to the village but nobody knew what had happened to the dragon's pearl. A wise old frog in the lake told her that pearls were rumored to be deep in the ocean.

Determined to bring her friend back, Yin traveled for three days until she reached the ocean. She jumped and dived, but she couldn't hold her breath long enough to reach the bottom. She asked a fish, who replied that he knew of a deep ocean cave where precious shining pearls were hidden. Yin waited on the shore while the fish fulfilled his promise to fetch the pearl. Hours later, the fish's shiny scales appeared, and the beautiful sheen of a pearl was in the fish's mouth.

Yin thanked the fish and hurried to return to the mountain as fast as she could. "I have found your pearl!" she shouted into the cave where the dragon lived.

"My pearl?!" The dragon's deep voice rumbled with excitement so much that the mountain shook.

"Nobody stole your pearl," Yin told the dragon. "You dropped it into the ocean. Now leave the people of my village alone." Yin placed the pearl on the dragon's long tongue, and her friend, now freed, ran out to embrace her. They returned to the village and happily played together among the forest and the flowers, no longer afraid of the dragon upon the mountaintop.
