Here is a list of unusual places to visit in the North Island of New Zealand where you can take some impressive photos:

1. Waitomo Glowworm Caves (Waitomo, Waikato): Unique cave system where you can go tubing, abseiling, and ziplining under the bioluminescence of glowworms. A mix of adventure and nature, the glowworm caves are unlike anywhere else on the North Island!

2. Velocity Valley (Rotorua, Bay of Plenty): Experience the thrill of racing in a monorail capsule on an undulating course. These pedal-powered capsules are finished in shiny chrome and are both unique and unusual.

3. Toothbrush Fence (Te Pahu, Waikato): Interesting, if a little gross, you can visit a fence decorated with used toothbrushes, including ones from famous personalities such as a past Prime Minister and Flight of the Conchords stars. New Zealand has a tradition of adorning fences with collections of things - but this is certainly something else.

4. Claphams National Clock Museum (Whangarei, Northland): If you have time in Northland, the Clock Museum offers access to the largest clock collection in the southern hemisphere. The collection includes unique and rare clocks and is located conveniently near good restaurants, too.

5. Zealong Tea Estate (Gordonton, Hamilton, Waikato): The only tea plantation in New Zealand, Zealong offers the chance to sit and watch the tea grow and enjoy a refreshing beverage. The Estate also offers high tea and various refreshments in a picturesque setting.

6. Stonehenge Aotearoa (Ahiaruhe, Wairarapa, Wellington): See a replica of Stonehenge and learn about ancient astronomical techniques at New Zealand's only open-air observatory.

7. Tongariro National Trout Centre (Turangi, Waikato): Discover a center dedicated to trout fishing, featuring a museum, freshwater aquarium, kids' fishing pond, and blue duck conservation center. Taupo is famous for its trout fly fishing, and this is an unusual but interesting part of Turangi.

8. Ohakune Carrot Adventure Park (Ohakune, Manawatu-Whanganui): Playing on New Zealand’s habit of making outsized fruit and vegetables, you can stand next to a giant carrot and explore a vegetable-themed playground in Ohakune, the self-proclaimed carrot capital of the world.

9. Whanganui Journey (Taumarunui to Pipiriki, Manawatu-Whanganui): Experience a canoe journey along the Whanganui River, known as the only river in the world with the status of a living entity. You can’t take a selfie with a river anywhere else in the world - definitely unusual!

10. Hobbiton Movie Set (Matamata, Waikato): While the set itself is not unusual, you can take the opportunity to knock on a Hobbit’s door, and take pictures in the pub.
