"Don't fulfill their requirements... half an inch, if that..." Sir Nicholas muttered under his breath forlornly. 

"Hello, Nick," came a voice behind him, causing him to start. He turned to see Harry Potter watching him, not looking particularly happy.

"You look troubled, young Potter," remarked Sir Nicholas, folding his letter and placing it inside of his doublet.

"So do you," replied Harry astutely. He was right.

"Ah," Sir Nicholas said, feeling rather uncomfortable. He waved an elegant hand, "A matter of no importance... It's not as though I really wanted to join... Thought I'd apply, but apparently I 'don't fulfill requirements'..."

He tried to sound airy, but it was difficult due to his own disappointment. He found himself pulling the letter back out his pocket, adding, "But you would think, wouldn't you, that getting hit forty-five times in the neck with a blunt axe would qualify you to join the Headless Hunt?"

"Oh yes," Harry agreed. Sir Nicholas was encouraged by the agreement.

"I mean, nobody wishes more than I do that it had all been quick and clean, and my head had come off properly, I mean, it would have saved me a great deal of pain and ridicule. However... 'We can only accept huntsmen whose heads have parted company with their bodies. You will appreciate that it would be impossible otherwise for members to participate in hunt activities such as Horseback Head-Juggling and Head Polo. It is with the greatest regret, therefore, that I must inform you that you do not fulfill our requirements. With very best wishes, Sir Patrick Delaney-Podmore.'"

His anger boiling over again, Sir Nicholas tucked the letter away.

"Half an inch of skin and sinew holding my neck on, Harry! Most people would think that's good and beheaded, but oh, no, it's not enough for Sir Properly Decapitated-Podmore."

Harry didn't respond, and Sir Nicholas remembered that he, too, had looked troubled. He took a deep breath to calm himself before asking, "So - what's bothering you? Anything I can do?"
