10,000 steps a day is often reported to be an arbitrary goal. Depending on your lifestyle and activity levels, 10,000 steps may not be attainable for you. However, by striving to reach this number, you can reap the many health benefits associated with walking.

In this article, we include a list of benefits to hitting a step goal of 10,000 steps per day. 

Remember, we are not medical professionals or doctors. Although many health benefits are associated with walking, the direct links between some of these benefits and walking may be unclear. Additionally, results may vary from person to person based on your unique health conditions. Before starting any exercise program, including a daily walking regime, you should consult your doctor to see if it makes a healthy option for your scenario.

1. Walking increases your cardiovascular fitness levels and improves your heart health.
2. Walking increases blood flow to the lungs which improves your pulmonary function and increases lung capacity.
3. Walking can relieve muscle pain and stiffness caused by sedentary lifestyles.
4. Walking can reduce hypertension, high blood pressure, and stress.
5. Going outside for a walk allows you to get fresh air and experience new surroundings.
6. Walking regularly keeps your bones strong and improves your balance.
7. By walking daily, you increase your muscle strength, endurance, and stamina.
8. Walking is a great fat-burning exercise that reduces your stored body fat.
9. Walking reduces the risks of developing dementia with age.
10. Going for walks is a mood booster that can sometimes provide a runner's high.
11. Reaching your step goal improves your overall immunity.
12. Speeds up metabolism and allows for faster digestion, making it a great choice after a filling meal.
13. Studies have shown that people who regularly meet their walking goals have higher self-esteem.
14. Getting cardio exercise during the day by walking 10,000 steps can help you sleep better at night and wake up feeling more rested.
15. Walking can improve your concentration levels and memory retention.

If you weren't already convinced, these 15 reasons make good arguments for why you should be striving to walk 10,000 steps per day! Remember, if this goal is unattainable for you, set a lower goal to start and work to increase it as your body adapts to these new, healthy habits.
