D&D games are a blast. Here are twenty fantasy races I came up with:

1. Lorens. Short people with pale, mottled skin who live deep inside caverns and have weak eyesight.
2. Rexians. Tall, elegant people who are mostly female and wear robes in colors adjacent to their ages.
3. Kari. People with spindly fingers and large black eyes who have practiced light magic for millions of years.
4. Olithians. Solemn, humble people who live longer than anyone can imagine and have a small population of a few hundred civilians.
5. Kahlesses. Reclusive people less than three feet tall with greenish skin and greasy black hair who live in mountain ranges.
6. Marus. Money-hoarding people who communicate telepathically with dragons, helping them guard their treasure in exchange for protection.
7. Lensies. Tiny species of aquatic people who make pearls inside of clam shells.
8. Polins. People almost indistinguishable from humans aside from their bright red eyes and a language indecipherable to anyone but them.
9. Jurexians. Giant race with skin made from a sticky, clay-like substance who live in arid climates.
10. Mesrians. Insect-like people who reproduce quickly and live for only three hours, which feels like a hundred years to them.
11. Turans. People with transparent skin who move so quickly and silently that others think they can teleport.
12. Freji. Tall people covered in glittering gold scales with heavy, dragon-like tails.
13. Verintacles. Fur-covered people who live in huts and manipulate energy in basic, subtle ways.
14. Vervas. People who sleep for eighteen hours a day and believe that true life resides in their dreams, often connecting telepathically with each other.
15. Casurns. Tiny species who are hard to see with the naked eye but practically indestructible.
16. Perogogians. People with long fingernails and useless dragonfly-like wings that are slowly shrinking as they evolve.
17. Orians. Gemstone miners who can polish rocks with their saliva.
18. Yuons. Race with glowing pale yellow skin who hums instead of speaking any distinguishable language.
19. Jesians. People with soft, papery skin and four toes on each foot who own some of the world's most impressive libraries.
20. Oli. Humanlike people who play ethereal music on magical harps.

Have fun with your campaign!
