Here are ten possible adventure hooks for your D&D campaign:

1. Rumors of Hidden Power: A powerful artifact is hidden in a remote location. The powers it's rumored to have are relevant to at least one of the player characters, prompting them to go and find it.
2. Odd Villagers: The villagers in a local town are acting strangely. Something is wrong, and some investigation will be needed to find out what's going on.
3. Strange Dreams: The player characters are plagued by strange dreams sent by an unknown entity. To be rid of these dreams, they'll need to find a wizard or oracle to help them track down their source.
4. Theft: Something precious to the player characters has been stolen! This is sure to put the players on the warpath to find the culprit.
5. Kidnapped Pets: Someone or something has been kidnapping everyone's pets in a local town. Finding out who, how, and why will likely get most players interested in investigating the situation.
6. Curing an Illness: The local populace has contracted a magical disease with only one cure, which is rumored to be found in a nearby ruin. Player characters who contract the disease themselves will have all the more incentive to go.
7. Finding a Stronghold: A local castle has long been left vacant, but is now overtaken by monsters. By royal decree, anyone who clears it out can claim it as their own.
8. Flying Castle: A flying castle has appeared at various times in the region. Someone has found a valuable jeweled medallion that they say fell from it. There's likely more inside for those who can find/access it.
9. Odd Statuettes: People in a local town have been having strange dreams and bouts of madness. Each of them has purchased a certain type of statuette. Who sells these and why is a mystery.
10. Comatose King: A nearby regent has fallen into a coma, but occasionally mutters a certain name. The court wizard suspects his comatose state has a magical source connected to the name.

Hopefully at least one of these ideas sparks your players' interest! Let me know if you need these developed further or want more inspiration.
