Bill stared down at the instructions. "Is this even a human language?" It looked vaguely German, or Dutch, but also...Icelandic? Is that a language? Most of the setup for the home theater system was just common sense. Plug the right cords into the right things, and you're done. But there were all kinds of small pieces he had never seen before. The diagrams did their job though, and most of the work was easy, if slow-going. He'd been able to ignore the written instructions until now, but there was nothing left unattached -- it should work, but...it just didn't. The blue light from the TV glared out into the dimly light room. Maybe he had put some of the smaller pieces in the wrong places...

"Well, heya!" A booming voice announced itself, startling Bill and sending him stumbling back into a heap on the couch. "Seems like you're having a problem with something. Is everything okay?" An exaggerated cartoon-like face was looking out at him from the TV screen now. 

"What...so it's working now. Cool." He got up, looking at the instructions again. "Weird."

"It's not nice to ignore someone who's talking to you, you know." The face now seemed a bit aggravated. A cartoon hand knocked on the screen or seemed to. "Hello?" 

Bill blinked. Wait...was it talking to him? 

"Yes, I'm talking to you. Sheesh." 

Wait. Had he said that out loud? Wasn't that just in his head? 

"Yes, it was in your head, and yes, I heard it anyway. That's one of the many features of the Farzone 5000 Entertainment System!" 

The...what?? "Wait, whoa whoa whoa," Bill stammered. "Are you alive?" 

The face rolled its eyes. "Are any of us alive, man? Anyway, are you okay? If you need help you can contact customer service at," and the face rattled off a series of thirty-something numbers. "Should I connect you? The time delay from Earth to Proxima is about 30 seconds, but I can simulate most of the conversation to ease things along."

"Uh...sure." He had no idea what was happening or how he got this. Was it a prank? Did he somehow get a secret cutting-edge prototype? Either way, he needed this fixed by nine if he was going to catch the Bulls game tonight.
