The Enneagram is a popular tool used to test, classify, and analyze personality types, as well as their interpersonal dynamics. There are 9 personality types within the Enneagram and they are often referred to by their numbers rather than names. 

Type 1 is called “The Reformer,” describing someone who is idealistic but rational, a perfectionist, and sometimes a bit self-righteous. Type 2 is labeled “The Helper,” describing someone who is generous, caring, and finds their worth through helping others with a tendency toward people-pleasing. Type 3 is “The Achiever,” describing someone who is goal-oriented, driven, and craves success because they know it will impress others. Type 4 is called “The Individualist,” describing someone who is sensitive, dramatic, romantic, and often moody. Type 5 is “The Investigator,” describing someone who is perceptive, innovative, independent, and cerebral. Type 6 is called “The Loyalist,” or sometimes “The Skeptic,” describing someone who is responsible, safety-oriented, vigilant, and committed but often distrustful. Type 7 is dubbed “The Enthusiast,” describing someone who is extroverted, spontaneous, optimistic, and easily distractible. Type 8 is “The Challenger,” describing someone who is assertive, self-reliant, protective, and sometimes controlling. Type 9 is known as “The Peacemaker,” describing someone who is relaxed, optimistic, conflict-avoidant, and sometimes modest to a fault. 

These are simplified explanations and there is room for a great deal of diversity in the personalities found within each type. After testing, each type is given guidance on its strengths and weaknesses, a defining fear and motivation, and areas for potential growth. There are also some who believe that certain enneagram types pair well with others as partners, whereas some other type pairings are automatically ill-fated. However, the Enneagram, like all personality categorizing tests, is a highly subjective pseudoscience that provides diagnoses and advice in a manner that is often vague, allowing any willing audience to project their own identities onto the given information.
