Literature: "Chains" by Laurie Halse Anderson
This site provides biographical information about Laurie Halse Anderson, a “Chains” book discussion guide, and articles about lives of slaves and indentured servants. Included are eThemes resources on slavery slave trade and the Revolutionary War.
Official Laurie Halse Anderson website
This site provides complete information about Laurie Halse Anderson, her books, and links to writing and censorship issues.
"Chains" discussion guide
This link provides a complete discussion guide for "Chains" by Laurie Halse Anderson. NOTE: This site contains ads.
Laurie Halse Anderson biographical information
This site provides information about author Laurie Halse Anderson. NOTE: This site contains ads.
The Clues Within These Walls: Explore a Home During 1777-1789
This site provides interactive activities involving a family and home during the Revolutionary War.
Almost Chattel: Lives of Indentured Servants
This site provides a lengthy article on how indentured servants both White and African Americans were treated by their owners.
Venture Smith Frees Himself and his Family
This site provides an article about the life of a slave and his subsequent life of freedom.
Boston King: Story of a Free African American
This site provides an article about a 16 year-old African American who ran away from his master to fight with the Loyalists.
After the American Revolution: Free African Americans in the North
This site provides a lesson plan to study African Americans in the North after the Revolutionary War. Biographical information and primary source information is given to enhance student research.
The Price of Freedom: America at War
This site provides brief articles and history of American Revolutionary artifacts.
eThemes Resource: Revolutionary War: Biographies
This is a collection of biographies on the men and women involved in the Revolutionary War. Learn about George Washington, Benjamin Franklin, King George III, Samuel Adams, Benedict Arnold, Crispus Attucks, Nathan Hale, Ethan Allen, and more. Includes portraits, some videos, and letters from spies. There are links to eThemes Resources on Paul Revere and the Revolutionary War.
eThemes Resource: Slavery: Slave Trade
These sites provide information on the slave trade that involved the United States and Africa. See maps of the sailing routes and read first-hand accounts of slave life. Take part in a simulated slave auction. There are links to eThemes Resources on slavery during the Civil War, the Emancipation Proclamation, and the Underground Railroad.
eThemes Resource: Revolutionary War: Middle School
These sites are about the Revolutionary War and the various causes. The reading level is for middle school students. Includes paintings and examples of political cartoons from the Revolutionary period to the present. There is interactive role-playing and other games. Included are several other eThemes on the Revolutionary War, political cartoons, and the Declaration of Independence