What is the difference between a User and a Schema in Oracle?
From Ask Tom
You should consider a schema to be the user account and collection of all objects therein as a schema for all intents and purposes.
SCOTT is a schema that includes the EMP, DEPT and BONUS tables with various grants, and other stuff.
SYS is a schema that includes tons of tables, views, grants, etc etc etc.
SYSTEM is a schema.....
Technically -- A schema is the set of metadata (data dictionary) used by the database, typically generated using DDL. A schema defines attributes of the database, such as tables, columns, and properties. A database schema is a description of the data in a database.
I believe the problem is that Oracle uses the term schema slightly differently from what it generally means.
Schema in sense 2. is similar, but not the same as schema in sense 1. E.g. for an application that uses several DB accounts, a schema in sense 2 might consist of several Oracle schemas :-).
Plus schema can also mean a bunch of other, fairly unrelated things in other contexts (e.g. in mathematics).
Oracle should just have used a term like "userarea" or "accountobjects", instead of overloadin "schema"...
Think of a user as you normally do (username/password with access to log in and access some objects in the system) and a schema as the database version of a user's home directory. User "foo" generally creates things under schema "foo" for example, if user "foo" creates or refers to table "bar" then Oracle will assume that the user means "foo.bar".
Furthermore, a user can access objects in schemas other than their own, if they have permission to do so.
My information below does not define the difference between an owner and schema. However, I think it adds to the discussion.
In my little world of thinking: I have struggled with the idea that I create N number of users....where I want each of these users to "consume" (aka, use) a single schema.
This guy (url below) shows how to do this (have N number of users...and each of these users will be "redirected" to a single schema.
I will paste his code as well, on the off-chance the URL link dies in the future.
He has a second "synonym" approach (not listed here). I am only pasting the CURRENT_SCHEMA version (one of his approaches). AGAIN, I take NO credit for this. I just hate when someone says "your answer is at this link" and BOOM, the link is dead. :<
This method uses the CURRENT_SCHEMA session attribute to automatically point application users to the correct schema.
First, we create the schema owner and an application user.
Notice that the application user can connect, but does not have any tablespace quotas or privileges to create objects.
Next, we create some roles to allow read-write and read-only access.
We want to give our application user read-write access to the schema objects, so we grant the relevant role.
We need to make sure the application user has its default schema pointing to the schema owner, so we create an AFTER LOGON trigger to do this for us.
Now we are ready to create an object in the schema owner.
Notice how the privileges are granted to the relevant roles. Without this, the objects would not be visible to the application user. We now have a functioning schema owner and application user.
This method is ideal where the application user is simply an alternative entry point to the main schema, requiring no objects of its own.
A schema and database users are same but if schema has owned database objects and they can do anything their object but user just access the objects, They can't DO any DDL operations until schema user give you the proper privileges.
It's very simple.
A User may be given access to Schema Objects owned by different Users.
I hope it clears your doubt about the difference between both.