The marine transportation infrastructure revolves around ports ? typically found at the edge of an ocean, sea, river, or lake ? which receive ships and transport cargo. Most passenger sea travel occurs on ferries and cruise ships, although recreational marine vehicles are also increasing in popularity. Ferries can also account for a significant part of an area's public transportation system, as can be seen around Washington state and in New York City. The majority of cargo on inland routes is carried by barges, rafted together and propelled by tugboats. In the U.S., the inland commercial waterway system covers more than 12,000 miles, connecting 38 states and moving over 1.2 billion tons of cargo each year.
Marine vessels emit both nitrogen oxides and particulate matter which contributes to air pollution. Scientists estimate that within 25 years, the marine transport sector could be responsible for doubling the amount of smog-forming pollution in the United States. To address the problem, recent regulations have mandated drastic cuts in the sulfur level of marine diesel fuel and in the emissions of nitrogen oxide and fine particulate matter.
The majority of waste from marine transport is sludge-like: sewage, graywater, and bilge water, although the sector also produces its share of solid and hazardous waste. Graywater carries with it a variety of chemicals and residues, while bilge water can contain oil, cleaning agents, paint, or metal from routine ship operations. Although many believe that these wastes are greatly diluted when emptied into water, they can still have an effect on mammal and marine life, water quality, and the overall health of the marine ecosystem. Oil spills are rare - spills from marine vessels account for only a small percent of oil in the ocean ? but they can also have long-lasting effects on marine organisms, introduce toxics into the food chain, and degrade beaches and coastal areas. Finally, the release of ballast water taken in by ships in order to help stabilize the vessels can introduce new and invasive species into areas where they do not naturally occur.
The Federal Water Pollution Control Act of 1972, which is frequently updated, set the basic structure for regulating discharges of pollutants to waters of the United States. Among other pollution controls, the Act requires that vessels, including house boats and large pleasure craft, not discharge contaminated liquids while they are in the navigable waters of the United States. It also requires use of contaminated holding tanks for sewage that must either be pumped into a land-based sewage treatment system, or held until the vessel is beyond U.S. navigable waters before being discharged thereby exercising the premise of ?solution by dilution.?
Similar to automobiles, research and development on alternative fuels for watercraft, including biodiesel and hydrogen fuel cells, is a major thrust. Future advancement in these alternatives, along with more targeted Federal regulations and regional collaboration, will help assist the marine sector in reducing its environmental impact while allowing for additional expansion.
Resource Management Issues: Cruise Ships The Monterey Bay National Marine Sanctuary details the environmental effects of cruise ships and discusses cruise line industry initiatives to reduce waste and pollution in this 2005 article.
Smog Alert: How Commercial Shipping is Polluting Our Air Environmental Defense, an advocacy organization, explains the effects of air pollution from ships, including where the largest port polluters are in the U.S. and where smog plagued cities are located in relation to shipping ports.
LAWS & TREATIES
Nonroad Engines, Equipment, and Vehicles EPA has adopted emission standards for nearly all types of nonroad engines, equipment, and vehicles. Click the different ?Engine Categories? to access background information on the standards for aircraft, marine vessels, and rail.
Federal Water Pollution Control Act of 1972 Popularly known as the Clean Water Act, the act set standards and enforcement mechanisms in place that limit the discharge of pollutants (including sewage from vessels) into U.S. waters.
Oil Pollution Act of 1990 The passage of the Oil Pollution Act of 1990 strengthened the EPA's ability to prevent and respond to catastrophic oil spills, and, along with other maritime regulation, resulted in the double-hull tanker becoming the industry standard.
FOR THE CLASSROOM
Tox Town The National Library of Medicine provides this interactive website introducing students to the chemicals and environmental health risks in everyday places, including ports.
Ballast & Stability The first activity in this set by the Minerals Management Service illustrates how ballasts work to minimize the effect of the up and down motion of waves on boats.
Cleaning up an Oil Spill In this NASA exercise, students learn how difficult it is to control and clean up an oil spill in the ocean.