NATURE OF WORK
This is skilled work in the maintenance and repair of advanced mechanical equipment such as telescopic passenger loading bridges, escalators, elevators and hydraulic equipment at Port Everglades.
Work involves removing, replacing, and adjusting limit switches; testing, removing, installing A/C motors; troubleshooting complex circuits. Employee in this class replaces pumps, motors, flow control valves, directional control valves, and adjusts pressure systems. Employee makes up replacement hydraulic hose assemblies; troubleshoots hydraulic systems; removes and replaces tires and wheels, drive chains, bearing assemblies, and weather seals. Work also includes troubleshooting mechanical systems; sheet metal cutting, bending, and fabrication of small replacement parts, floor, roof, wall, and ceiling panels.
This specialized work requires knowledge of safety measures and efficient work methods as well as ability to perform work under hazardous conditions. Work is performed with some independence under the general supervision of a superior. Work is reviewed in progress and upon completion.
Performs the more difficult tasks in bridge maintenance and renovation; maintain and repair electric motors and components; scrapes and cleans parts; drills new steel and fabricates small replacement parts as required.
Removes and replaces limit switches and positioning devices.
Removes and replaces tires and wheels, drive chains, bearing assemblies, and weather seals.
Loads and unloads materials and tools; operates pumps, electric drills, saws, and other tools and related equipment.
Repairs hydraulic pumps, cylinders, valves and motors; disassembles, cleans, and replaces worn parts.
Applies lubrication to various mechanical parts of bridge with gun, can, spray, spatula, and brush as appropriate.
Troubleshoots complex electrical circuits, hydraulic circuits, and mechanical systems; makes replacement hydraulic hose assemblies.
Starts up and operates loading bridges; interfaces with programmable logic controllers.
Performs all general and preventative maintenance including lubrication, changing filters and oil, miscellaneous metal repairs including surface preparation and painting.
Assists in the preparation of blueprints and sketches for new construction projects.
Maintains various records including time records and daily activity log; prepares labor and material estimates, requisitions, work orders, reports, and drawings as required.
Performs related work as required.
KNOWLEDGE, ABILITIES AND SKILLS
Knowledge of the materials, equipment, and labor methods commonly employed in repairing, renovating, or reconstructing mechanical, electrical, and hydraulic equipment.
Knowledge of welding, electrical circuits, motor control circuits, programmable logic controllers, carpentry, complex hydraulic systems, mechanical systems, painting and sheet metal fabrication.
Knowledge of the necessary precautions in rigging and in working at high elevations.
Knowledge of the methods, materials, tools, and practices used in the painting of structural steel surfaces.
Ability to understand and carry out oral and written instructions.
Ability to perform heavy manual labor for extended periods in all weather conditions.
Ability to serve the public and fellow employees with honesty and integrity in full accord with the letter and spirit of Broward County's Ethics and Conflict of Interest policies.
Ability to establish and maintain effective working relationships with the general public, co-workers, elected and appointed officials and members of diverse cultural and linguistic backgrounds, regardless of race, color, religion, gender, national origin, age, marital status, political affiliation, familial status, disability, sexual orientation, pregnancy, or gender identity and expression.
Skill in the use of tools and equipment used in the maintenance and renovation of advanced mechanical equipment.
REQUIRED EXPERIENCE AND TRAINING
Graduation from high school or equivalent recognized certification with vocational training/ apprenticeship in electrical, hydraulic, electronic controls and systems; five (5) years’ experience in repair and maintenance of hydraulic equipment, industrial, plant, electrical power, lighting systems, welding, and troubleshoot programmable logic controls; or any equivalent combination of relevant training and experience.
NECESSARY SPECIAL REQUIREMENT
Possession of a valid Florida Driver's License at time of appointment.
Bargaining Unit: Unrepresented
FLSA Status: Non-Exempt
Financial Disclosure Required: No
Class Spec. Estab./Revised: E 11/1994 R 10/2012