GUELPH – The threat posed by genetically modified organisms (GMOs) to organic seed, feed and food producers is growing at an alarming rate, and could get much worse.
A seminar at the 32nd Annual Guelph Organic Conference and Expo heard from organic industry insiders that the contamination of organic crops with GMOs is becoming an unstoppable and out-of-control situation, and a public outcry may be the only thing that can reverse the trends.
“We really need the public to stand up and voice concern about it,” said Ken Roseboro, editor and publisher of The Organic and Non-GMO Report and The Non-GMO Sourcebook.
Dag Falck, organic program manager for organic cereal foods maker Nature’s Path, said the company is seeing a growing intrusion of genetically modified material in the organic grains shipped to its facilities. Its testing processes are turning up increasing GMO levels, he indicated.
Certified organic food can have no more than trace elements (0.9 per cent) of GMOs in it, he told an audience of about 30 at the University of Guelph’s Peter Clark Hall. The seminar brought together a panel of North American organic experts.
As worry mounted that things like cross-pollination would undermine organic crops, companies like Nature’s Path began studying GMO content in organic cereal crops, Falck said.
“No one knew how much contamination is out there,” he said.
The highest risk crops are organic corn and soybean, he said, because genetically modified corn and soybean are ubiquitous. Over the past two years of testing organic grain shipments, Falck said, Nature’s Path has “hardly ever” seen a zero per cent GMO content, and two, five and even seven per cent are normal.
“We are dealing with a problem that we are not able to contain just by doing out best,” he told the audience, adding that the problem appears to be accelerating. “This thing is out of hand. We can’t control it.”
Falck and others, including Lisa Mumm from the Saskatchewan-based Mumm’s Organic Sprouting Seeds, and Roseboro, say neighbouring GMO crops are largely to blame for the contamination.
Mumm said that while GMO alfalfa is approved for growth in Canada, as it is in the U.S., it is not yet being grown in the country largely because farmers don’t see the viability of growing it. But there is still a very real threat, she said, of cross-border contamination. And if that happens, the very fabric of the organic industry will be jeopardized. The producers of organic milk and beef could potentially be ruined.
Mumm said that giant seed and herbicide companies like Monsanto recommend a 900-foot buffer between a GMO crop and an organic one. That isolation distance is said to be enough to protect organics. The statistic caused some in the audience to scoff.
The fact is, said Mumm, Leafcutter bees travel several miles, whether carried by the wind or in search of better blooms. Therefore, contamination is possible over a much greater distance.
America is the largest producer of GMO crops, said Roseboro, and Canada is the fifth largest. There are just four GMO crops grown in Canada — corn, soybeans, canola and white sugar beets. The same crops, as well as cotton, papaya, some squash and alfalfa are grown in the U.S.
Seed and herbicide companies are seeking approval for a host of other GMOs, Roseboro said, particularly crop varieties that are resistant to 2,4-D, a strong herbicide which, he said, is much more toxic than the popular Glyphosate, known by the trade name Roundup.
Roseboro said the problem for herbicide companies is that a growing number of weeds are become tolerant of Roundup, and as Roundup loses its effectiveness stronger herbicides like 2,4-D are needed to control weeds. Roseboro said studies show that in the past two years weed resistance to Roundup has doubled.
The environmental damage from more toxic herbicides, he indicated, could be severe. Iowa was once among the largest grape growing regions in the U.S., but 2,4-D applications decades ago whipped the crop out. Some estimates suggest 2,4-D applications could rise 73-fold in the coming years.
Lucy Sharrat of the Canadian Biotechnology Action Network said the production of GMO crops is largely about selling herbicides.
For many years now, the Canadian government has invested in the biotechnology sector, she added, seeing it as an economic driver. Biotech is framed as a science-based sector, and the government’s official line is if science calls GMOs safe they must be safe. The argument is specifically designed to prevent public scrutiny of, and public consultation on GMOs, Sharrat said.
Falck said organic growers and processors see organic agriculture as the only sustainable way to produce food in the future. Current agricultural practices are simply too damaging to the environment, and destroy biodiversity. Maintaining the integrity of organics, he said, is crucial to fostering a healthier, more sustainable future.