(World AIDS Day is recognized every December 1st. You can see a lesson plan for English Language Learners at ESL Holiday Lessons)
With the announcement earlier this week of a possible breakthrough in finding a vaccine against HIV, I thought I’d put together a quick list of related resources that are accessible to English Language Learners.
This is not by any means exhaustive, and I’m hopeful readers will contribute additional links. They’re not in any particular order. Some of these sites are probably not appropriate for younger students.
Here are my choices for The Best Web Resources For Learning About HIV & AIDS (and are accessible to English Language Learners):
The CBBC Newsround, as usual, has an excellent feature on AIDS that’s very accessible to ELL’s. It’s called What is Aids?
The National Institutes of Health has an excellent interactive tutorial on AIDS and HIV.
Evolution Of AIDS comes from the Canadian newspaper The Globe and Mail.
Students can learn about AIDS (and spelling) from the Avert AIDS game.
AIDS- 25 Years is an Associated Press interactive. This feature, like the one at The Globe and Mail, is a few years old, but still contains a lot of useful information.
The CBC has an interactive map showing the world-wide presence of HIV and AIDS.
Here’s a exercise on AIDS designed for ELL’s.
About HIV and AIDS is a simple animation that provides audio support for the text. It’s from Healthy Roads.
MSNBC has a similar map.
Here’s a simple reading and quiz designed for ELL’s titled Is it Difficult to Catch HIV/AIDS?
HIV: How can I protect myself? is a cloze (gap-fill) exercise for ELL’s.
Patient Voices: AIDS and H.I.V. is from The New York times and shares short interviews with people diagnosed with HIV. It might only be accessible to high Intermediate ELL’s.
The Peace Corps has a simple quiz that is quite good. Click on “Edzi Todo Quiz” on this page (there’s not a direct link).
HIV Epidemic– Vietnam is an interactive from The Wall Street Journal.
Hope: Living and Loving With HIV in Jamaica is an exceptionally touching presentation.
Camp Heartland is a TIME Magazine interactive presentation on a summer camp for HIV-infected children.
National Geographic has an extensive multmedia feature on AIDS in Africa.
The Face Of Aids is a slideshow from MSNBC.
It’s Up To Us is a downloable curriculum on AIDS designed for English Language Learners.
Here’s a Webquest titled It Won’t Happen To Me! that’s designed for ELL’s.
CBS News has an impressive interactive titled AIDS: The Modern Pandemic.
Marking World AIDS Day is a slideshow from The Wall Street Journal.
AIDS In Uganda is a slideshow from The New York Times.
“The Quest For A Vaccine” is a Wall Street Journal interactive timeline of the quest for an HIV vaccine.
“Get Offers New Hope In HIV Fight” is the title of a Wall Street Journal slideshow.
LIFE has published a special feature showing several HIV & AIDS-related slideshows.
The 23rd World AIDS Day is a slideshow from The Wall Street Journal.
World Aids Day 2010 is a series of photos from The Sacramento Bee.
30 years of fighting AIDS is an infographic from The Orange County Register.
Living With AIDS is a Wall Street Journal interactive.
AIDS Treatment: Search For The Elusive Cure is an Associated Press interactive.
The fight against AIDS, 30 years on is a chart from The Economist.
Emory University has introduced AIDSVu, an interactive map that provides a detailed view of the number of people living with an HIV diagnosis in the United States by state and county.
The Centers For Disease Control has a video, with closed-captioning, showing the history of HIV/AIDS from 1981 through 2008.
The Changing Face Of AIDS is an impressively done infographic from GOOD Magazine.
World AIDS Day 2011 is a photo gallery from the Sacramento Bee.
HIV and Aids: interactive timeline of a global crisis is from The Guardian.
The Graying of AIDS is a TIME slideshow.
AIDS treatment: Global leaders recommit to AIDS fight is an interactive from The Associated Press.
The Photo That Changed The Face Of AIDS is from NPR.
Timeline: Key Moments In The Fight Against HIV/AIDS is from NPR.
Track The Spread Of AIDS Across The Globe is an interactive from NPR.
Suggestions are always welcome.