Guest Author - Stephanie Watson
Today more people have sedentary jobs than ever before. This makes it even more important to do something every day to exercise your body. The great thing is, you don't even have to do anything spectacularly hard. You can actually walk your way to weight loss. We even have an entire site devoted to walking for exercise right here on Bellaonline.com.
The benefits of walking are great, and almost anyone can do it. You don't need a lot of space, you can walk your way to weight loss and fitness right in your living room. No need for special equipment, no need for anything other than some shoes, and the will to make moving around each day an important part of your weight loss endeavors.
A few benefits of walking are:
Walking reduces tummy fat -- Stubborn tummy fat, that is most dangerous and signals heart issues can be reduced by simply walking briskly for 20 to 30 minutes each day. Almost anyone can accomplish this feat. Even if you have to start with 5 minutes a day, adding a minute each day until you reach your goal, you'll reduce tummy fat and your heart attack risk factors.
Walking controls glucose levels -- Walking daily for even 20 to 30 minutes a day can greatly reduce glucose levels in people with diabetes. Any type of exercise will burn off extra blood glucose but almost anyone can walk briskly each day.
Walking helps avoid DVT -- Deep vein thrombosis is a blood clot in the deep veins of your thigh or leg. Sometimes they appear in the lower leg. They can happen for a variety of reasons such as clotting disorders but most often happen in people who have sedentary jobs. Getting up and walking briskly just 10 minutes every 90 minutes of desk work can greatly reduce your risks of developing DVT.
Walking helps you meet the neighbors -- Walking around your neighborhood after breakfast, lunch or dinner is a great way to meet your neighbors. Many people walk during these times in neighborhoods with sidewalks. So, get out of the house and get to know your neighbors. You'll feel more connected, feel safer, and improve your health at the same time.
Walking reduces depression -- Everyone needs daily sunshine to avoid a vitamin D shortage which can lead to depression and body pain. These issues cause many people to take medications for depression and fibromyalgia, but you can reduce or even eliminate your need for these medications with regular exercise and walking is a good choice.
Almost anyone can get out and walk for a few minutes each day. Even if you can't get outside you can walk around your living room, or your home until you're ready to get outside. There is no need to join a gym, pay for expensive clothing, or even expensive shoes. A light weight comfortable pair of walking shoes can be purchased at any department store for less than 20 dollars. Try adding just five minutes of walking, adding a minute per day until you're walking an average of 30 minutes per day and you'll see a huge improvement in your health and weight loss.