Deprivation of nutrients during a baby's development in the womb can produce long-lasting changes in organs and metabolism. In adulthood, the changes can make you vulnerable to heart disease and other chronic killers.
This is the "fetal origins" hypothesis championed by Dr. David Barker, a professor who splits his time between Oregon Health & Science University and the University of Southampton in England. And it is the inspiration for an international conference in Portland this week on the Developmental Origins of Health and Disease
Barker discovered the link between low birth weight and risk of death from heart disease more than twenty years ago
. He found that adults with the lowest weights at birth and one year of age also had the highest rates of death from heart disease. Researchers have gone on to identify many environmental exposures during fetal development that appear to set the stage for diseases decades later in life:
Eating too much fat during pregnancy can boost a baby's risk of adult onset diabetes by altering metabolism, according to monkey experiments presented by researchers at Oregon Health & Science University and the University of Colorado.
Kevin Grove, a scientist at OHSU's Oregon National Primate Research Center, and colleagues fed Japanese macaque monkeys a diet as high in fat as the typical American diet. While still in the womb, the offspring began showing a pattern of liver damage similar to what happens in obese people, the researchers reported previously
. The fetal livers accumulated three times the normal load of fat. At one year of age, the offspring had elevated triglycerides and elevated blood sugar despite being fed a healthy diet. The controlled study adds weight to observational research with pregnant women showing that excess weight gain or elevated blood sugar is linked to an increased likelihood of weight gain and diabetes in children
A mother's high-fat diet during pregnancy may make boys more susceptible to prostate cancer as adults, experiments in rats suggest.
University of Adelaide researchers found roughly twice the rate of abnormal prostate cells in the offspring of female rats fed a diet consisting of 23 percent fat during pregnancy. What's more, the male offspring transmitted this tendency to their offspring. The high-fat diet womb environment produced lasting changes in the activity of genes in the male fetuses, the researchers reported.
Exposure in the womb to chemicals in non-stick cookware was linked to a greater risk of excess weight gain in adult women.
Researchers tracked the children of 665 women in Aarhus, Denmark who donated blood samples during their pregnancies in the 1980. Those exposed to the highest levels of the non-stick perfluorooctanoate, as measured in maternal blood samples, were three times as likely to be overweight by age 20. The researchers found no association in male offspring. The observational study fits with experimental evidence in lab animals.
A variety of pollutants appear capable of programming fetal metabolism to increase the risk of adult-onset disorders.
Michael Skinner of Washington State University and colleagues found that fetal exposure to high doses of the widely used fungicide, vinclozolin, produces lasting changes in the way genes are turned on and off in rats. The changes reduced the fertility of male rats. They also made offspring more likely to develop tumors and kidney disease. Affected males passed the changes on to their offspring. Further studies showed that high doses of dioxin, jet fuel, and the plastic chemicals BPA and phthalate induced the same changes in fetal rodents. Skinner said that each agent caused a distinct pattern of changes in genes turned on and off, so distinct that it might prove possible to determine whether a baby was exposed to the substance during development.
* * *
Barker and OHSU colleague Kent Thornburg have expanded the scope of their research to pursue answers to deep questions in biology, such as the reason why human females tend to live so much longer than males
. Soon after conception, as embryos in their mother's wombs, males adopt a risky, fast-growth strategy. And that appears to set a trajectory that makes them more vulnerable than females during fetal development and for the rest of their lives, Barker and Thornburg assert.