Super Earth : Astronomers Discover a Alien Planet
LONG BEACH, Calif. — Just over a week after astronomers boldly announced that they would discover an Earth twin elsewhere in the universe within the year, NASA’s Kepler telescope spotted a pretty good candidate. Unglamorously named KOI 172.02 — KOI stands for Kepler Object of Interest — this planet is the most Earth-like planet astronomers have discovered yet.
With a radius that is just 1.5 times that of Earth, the potential planet is what a so-called “super-Earth,” meaning it is just slightly larger than the Earth. The candidate planet orbits a star similar to the sun at a distance that falls within the “habitable zone” — the region where liquid water could exist on the planet’s surface. Scientists say the planet, if confirmed, could be a prime candidate to host alien life.”This was very exciting because it’s our fist habitable-zone super Earth around a sun-type star,” astronomer Natalie Batalha, a Kepler co-investigator at NASA’s Ames Research Center in Moffett Field, Calif., said Tuesday (Jan. 8) here at the 221st meeting of the American Astronomical Society.The find could be the closest so far to an Earth twin beyond the solar system, she said. The object’s host star is a G-type star just slightly cooler than our own sun.
“It’s orbiting a star that’s very much like our sun,” Batalha added. “Previously the ones we saw were orbiting other types of stars.”The object takes 242 days to orbit its star (compared to Earth’s 365 days) and is about three-quarters of the Earth-sun distance from its parent. The Earth orbits 93 million miles (150 million kilometers) from the sun on average, a distance known as 1 astronomical unit.”It’s a big deal,” astrophysicist Mario Livio, of the Space Telescope Science Institute in Baltimore, told SPACE.com. “It’s definitely a good candidate for life.”
Based on its characteristics, the possible planet may or may not be rocky, but it certainly has the possibility of liquid water.
The possible planet is called KOI 172.02 (KOI stands for Kepler Object of Interest, a designation assigned to all planet candidates found by the telescope until they are confirmed as planets). The discovery was announced at the meeting Monday (Jan. 7) by Christopher Burke of the SETI Institute as part of a batch of 461 new planet candidates found by Kepler.
Kepler launched in 2009 and was recently granted an extended mission until at least 2016. The telescope has detected 2,740 candidate planets thus far. While just 105 of them have been confirmed to date, Kepler scientists estimate that more than 90 percent will end up being the real deal.
“There is no better way to kick off the start of the Kepler extended mission than to discover more possible outposts on the frontier of potentially life-bearing worlds,” Burke said in a statement.
Super Earth : Astronomers Discover a Alien Planet – UFO News|UFOs 2012|Latest UFO Sightings|Alien Pictures|2013 Solar Strom|UFO 2013.