What is Apprenticeship?
Apprenticeship is a relationship between an employer and an employee during which the worker, or apprentice, learns a trade. Training lasts a specified length of time. An apprenticeship covers all aspects of the trade and includes both on-the-job training and related instruction.
What are apprenticeable occupations?
There are more than 800 apprenticeable occupations currently recognized by the United States Department of Labor/Bureau or Apprenticeship and Training (BAT). Apprenticeable occupations can be found in all types of businesses and industries such as electronics, construction, service, metalworking, public administration, and medical and health care. All occupations are listed on the BAT website at
What employers can have an apprenticeship program?
Apprenticeship programs can work for companies of all sizes, not just large ones. A program can be sponsored by a single employer, a group of large or small employers, or a union. Actually, only one apprentice may constitute the establishment of an apprenticeship program.
How will an apprenticeship program help employers?
If employers need trained workers now and in the future, they can benefit from an apprenticeship program.
It is proven that apprentices are more motivated, are learning their jobs faster, are more loyal to an employer who helped provide their training, and are more likely to become supervisors than workers trained in other ways.
The cost of on-the-job training through apprenticeship is lower, because wages are paid in proportion to the skills and abilities of the apprentice. The apprentice begins earning approximately half the wages of workers fully trained in the occupation. Wages usually increase at six-month intervals until training is completed.
What instruction is required for apprenticeship programs?
Training can last from one to five years depending upon the occupation and its requirements. Instruction includes related subjects such as mathematics, blueprint reading, applied English, and technical courses necessary for specific occupations. Instruction can also be provided through traditional classroom presentations or an individual competency-based program that allows apprentices to advance according to their abilities. Instruction is then applied under the supervision of a skilled journey worker through on-the-job training. Apprentices will receive certification of instruction through BAT and any sponsoring postsecondary institution.
What kind of financial assistance can employers receive to establish apprenticeship programs?
State funds are available through the Arkansas Department of Workforce Education for improving and enhancing traditional apprenticeship programs in Arkansas. Two options are available – funds may be awarded for each hour of instruction delivered to a class or for each hour of instruction received by an apprentice.
How can employers get more details about establishing an apprenticeship program?
A representative of the BAT or the State Apprenticeship Office (SAO) will be happy to explain in detail how the apprenticeship program works. They can also help in developing a training program to fit an employer’s specific needs and can act as a liaison to local educational institutions that can provide classroom or related instruction.
Randy Prather, ACE Program CoordinatorDudley Light, Arkansas State Director
Arkansas Department of Career Education
Three Capitol Mall
Little Rock, AR 72201-1083
United States Department of Labor
Bureau of Apprenticeship and Training
Federal Building, Room 3507
700 West Capitol Avenue
Little Rock, AR 72201