Google Doodles Alan Turing, the father of computing
Today, marks the 100th anniversary of Alan Turing, who is universally considered the father of modern day computing. And in true Google, style, the search giant has honored the legend, on it home page with a trademark doodle.
Turing, in particular is a role model for a number of Google engineers and the doodle honoring him is an interactive doodle, which requires users to break a set of six codes and each successful code break adds color to a letter of the greyed out Google logo on the doodle.
The British mathematician laid the foundations for mathematical foundation and limits of computing. He was also a key contributor to the Allied cryptanalysis of the German Enigma cipher during World War II.
He was born on June 23, 1912 in London, England and he graduated with mathematics from King’s College, University of Cambridge in 1934.
He joined the British government’s Code and Cypher School in the second world war and later he was made an officer of the Order of the British Empire for helping break the cryptic messages used by the Germans during the war.
After the second world war the National Physical Laboratory (NPL), where he designed the electronic computer. Eventually, he quit the NPL to head the Computer Machine Laboratory, where he designed the Ferranti Mark I, which was the first electronic digital computer to be commercially available.
Alan Turing was also a pioneer of in the field of Artificial Intelligence (AI) and in 1950 he proposed the Turing test to extrapolate whether a machine can think.
His career went through many ups and downs and he hit a plateau when he was convicted of gross indecency under laws, which banned homosexuality and was sentenced to chemical castration involving a series of injections of female hormones.
After losing his security clearance he was unable to work which lead to committing suicide at the age of 41 in 1954.
The genius of the man cannot be underestimated and frankly but for his work, we perhaps would have been living in a very different world. Google has also dedicated a whole blog post to his work, make sure to check out the link.