Currently we test and support the following browsers:
Please note that this is not intended to be an exhaustive list of browsers that support web standards, nor a test of browser compliance, nor a side-by-side comparison of various manufacturers’ browsers.
Supportive Studies: Psychology : Human papillomavirus
Participants for this study are cancer survivors between 9 and 26 years of age who completed cancer therapy between 12 and 60 months previously. The first phase of this study will involve completion of a questionnaire which asks participants about their knowledge, attitudes, and beliefs regarding human papillomavirus (HPV), in addition to history of HPV vaccination.
Cancer survivors between 9 and 17 years of age will have the questionnaire completed by their parent(s) / guardian(s), whereas young adult participants will personally complete the study questionnaire. Participants who have not yet initiated the HPV vaccine will be asked to participate in the second phase of the study, which will involve the administration of the HPV vaccine.
Genital human papillomavirus (also called HPV) is the most common sexually transmitted infection (STI). There are more than 40 HPV types that can infect the genital areas of males and females. These HPV types can also infect the mouth and throat.
Most people who become infected with HPV do not even know they have it. Studies in healthy people have found that the HPV vaccine can prevent most diseases caused by the four HPV subtypes that the vaccine protects against.
Cancer treatments, such as chemotherapy, radiation, and/or hematopoietic cell transplantation can place cancer survivors at higher risk for experiencing an HPV-related complication than people in the general population. However, no studies to date have reported if the immune systems of cancer survivors are able to mount protective antibody responses to the HPV vaccine that are similar to those known to occur in the general population.
For Questionnaire Phase
For Vaccine Phase
For the current eligibility status of this clinical study, referring physicians must contact St. Jude Children's Research Hospital at 1-866-2ST-JUDE (1-866-278-5833).
James Klosky, PhD
The above information is intended to provide only a basic description about a research protocol that may be currently active at St. Jude. The details made available here may not be the most up-to-date information on protocols used by St. Jude. To receive full details about a protocol and its status and or use at St. Jude, a physician must contact St. Jude directly.