Definition of Cuzco
1. Noun. A town in the Andes in southern Peru; formerly the capital of the Inca empire.
Click the following link to bring up a new window with an automated collection of images related to the term: Cuzco Images
Lexicographical Neighbors of Cuzco
Literary usage of Cuzco
Below you will find example usage of this term as found in modern and/or classical literature:
1. History of the New World Called America by Edward John Payne (1899)
"an inferior class in the population' ; and according to one BOOK II. authority this was the case in cuzco itself, the inhabitants Aboriginal of Hurin cuzco, ..."
2. Works Issued by the Hakluyt Society by Hakluyt Society (1907)
"cuzco and proceed to Chita, in accordance with their proposal. But when Cusí Inca Yupanqui found that his father was determined to leave cuzco, ..."
3. Peru by William Hickling Prescott (1900)
"The ancient city of cuzco, meanwhile, had been gradually advancing in wealth and ... But cuzco was the royal residence, and was adorned with the ample ..."
4. South America: Observations and Impressions by James Bryce Bryce (1912)
"Our way to cuzco lay up a wide lateral valley, enclosed by green hills, well cultivated and studded with populous villages, near one of which can be ..."
5. The Second Part of the Chronicle of Peru by Pedro de Cieza de León, Clements Robert Markham (1883)
"How a tyrant rose up in cuzco, and of the disturbance he caused. ... How ambassadors from the tyrants of Collao came to cuzco, and of the departure of ..."
6. History of the Incas by Pedro Sarmiento de Gamboa, Baltasar de Ocampo (1907)
"cuzco and proceed to Chita, in accordance with their proposal. But when Cusi Inca Yupanqui found that his father was determined to leave cuzco, ..."
7. Reports on the Discovery of Peru by Clements Robert Markham, Francisco de Xerez, Miguel de Estete, Hernando Pizarro, Pedro Sancho (1872)
"There was a brother of his, who came from cuzco, and sisters and wives. The brother brought many vases, jars, and pots of gold, and much silver, ..."
8. Peruvian Antiquities by Mariano Eduardo de Rivero y Ustariz, Johann Jakob von Tschudi (1855)
"These relics we believe to be, as we have already said, anterior to those of cuzco. Among the many remains of antiquity which even yet exist in the city of ..."
Other Resources Relating to: Cuzco