|St. Lucia History|
St. Lucia lies in the Caribbean sea, right next to the Atlantic ocean and forms part of the Lesser Antilles. It is now an area associated with superb natural beauty and therefore attracts many tourists every year. Since the tourism trade hasn't been around for that long, what happened before then and how did the island get by? Let's take a look back through St. Lucia history in order to shed some light on the island's past.
St. Lucia Early Inhabitants
The first inhabitants were the Arawaks who later gave way to the Caribs. The Caribs were a very well respected tribe and were a terrifying opponent, even for the best equipped European armies. They were known for being incredibly fierce in battle and it is alleged that their war canoes could hold 100 men and go just as fast as any other war ship. They gradually drove out the Arawaks who were a much more peaceful group of religious tribes people.
The first European twist to St. Lucia history came when the island was discovered by the Spanish during their Caribbean exploration, led by Christopher Columbus. The island was not claimed by the Spanish and the French, Dutch and British all had a go at establishing some kind of grip upon the island. The Caribs were not an easy bunch to shake off.
The Dutch and British came to the islands but many colonists were killed by disease and the fierce Caribs. It wasn't until 1651 that there was any real settlement on the island and this was achieved by the French who had come from Martinique. The island was claimed from England in 1664 and they brought in 1000 men to help defend the island. This was a strong idea yet disease wiped out all but 89.
The French and the British argued among themselves over this island and a profitable sugar trade was developed. This proved to be a good incentive for a fight and the battle of St. Lucia was carried out on the island. St. Lucia history was certainly broken up between many different nations. The English sent forces to defend their plantations and the French introduced the guillotine. It was clear there was to be no quiet ending to St. Lucia history.
The French ceded the island in 1814 and the slaves were soon to be set free. They were not treated well after their freedom and the land was owned by the British. The slaves were left with nothing of any real value and were forced into working for no pay as part of an apprenticeship scheme for three whole years.
St. Lucia Independence and Economic Development
St. Lucia history moved in its own direction in 1924 when they were allowed their first representative government. After much to and fro, the island gained a status of associated state and thus gained much more in terms of independence. Internal affairs are all managed by themselves but Britain is responsible for all external and defense issues. The titular head of state is therefore Queen Elizabeth II, as it is for all Commonwealth countries.
St. Lucia partners with neighboring West Indian nations in the Caribbean Community and Common market (CARICOM), East Caribbean Common Market (ECCM), and the Organization of Eastern Caribbean States (OECS).