Brain games STOP depression before it STARTS?
Totally not necessary.
[via New Scientist] Brain-training games stop depression before it starts
It may be possible to stave off depression before it even appears using brain-scanning software so simplistic in its design that even the psychologist testing it once bet it wouldn’t work.
Ian Gotlib‘s group at Stanford University, California, studies girls aged 10 to 14 years whose mothers suffer from depression. Such girls are thought to be at higher-than-normal risk of developing the condition themselves, in part because they may inherit their mothers’ tendency to “amplify” unpleasant information. Although none of the girls has yet experienced a depressive episode, Gotlib has found that their brains already overreact to negative emotional stimuli – a pattern they share with their mothers and other depressed people.
Gotlib is studying whether these young subjects can use interactive software and brain-imaging hardware to “rewire” their brains by unlearning this negative bias.
In a pilot experiment, eight girls used a neural feedback display to learn how to control activity in a network of interrelated brain regions that have been linked to depression – these include the dorsal anterior cingulate cortex, anterior insula and dorsolateral prefrontal cortex.
The level of activity in this network was measured using an functional MRI scan and displayed to the girls in the form of a thermometer on a computer screen. The girls were shown sad or negative pictures that might ordinarily raise their “temperature”, and tried to lower that “temperature” by adopting more sanguine mental states. They were then advised to try to recreate that mindset in their daily lives.
A control group unknowingly watched someone else’s scan output instead of their own, so they didn’t actually learn how to control their brain activity.
Accentuate the positive
Another set of girls in the pilot experiment received their training through a simple computer game instead. In this game, a pair of faces appeared on a screen every few seconds: they would be either neutral and sad, or neutral and happy. Then a dot replaced one of the faces, and the “game” was to click on the dot. For the eight girls in the control group, the face replaced by the dot was selected at random, but for eight girls in the experimental group, the dot always replaced the more positive face in the pair. Over a week of playing this game daily, these girls were in effect being trained to avoid looking at the sad faces.
Gotlib himself originally found this concept, called attentional-bias training, so simplistic that he bet Colin MacLeod, a psychologist at the University of Western Australia in Perth who pioneered the technique, that it would not alter psychological symptoms. Gotlib lost his bet.
In his pilot study, both kinds of training significantly reduced stress-related responses – for example, increases in heart rate, blood pressure and cortisol levels – to negative stimuli. These stress responses are a key marker of depression, and they diminished one week after training. The girls in the experimental groups also developed fewer defensive responses to negative faces, such as startled blinking. Control groups showed no such improvement.
Jill Hooley, head of Harvard University’s clinical psychology programme, was impressed by the findings despite the small sample size: “This is highly innovative work,” she said. “Ian is breaking new ground here.”
Gotlib is adding more subjects to the training programme and plans to compare their long-term mental health with a parallel cohort of 200 girls, half of whom have depressed mothers, who aren’t participating in the study.
Not necessary “Cause, why?” You ask.
Introducing: A Glass Full of Awesome!
[via Gizmodo] You know what’s great? Really good scotch whisky. You know what’s not great? Fake scotch whisky. Worry not. Researchers at St. Andrews University have figured out how to test your whisky’s authenticity by shooting it with lasers. Mmm, whisky-lasers…
Here’s how it works. Researchers put a drop of whisky on a chip the that’s about the size of a credit card. They then use a couple of fiber optics (no thicker than human hairs), one of which lights it up, while the other analyzes it. The technique looks at the fluorescence of whisky and the scattering of light when it interacts with various molecules, which is called its Raman signature.
They claim to be able to determine the whisky’s brand, age, and cask. Pretty incredible if it’s true. I wonder how they plan on compiling this database, though. Do they expect distilleries to give them a bottle from every batch? If so, how do I join these guys?
There’s good news and bad news here. The good news is that they only need a single drop of whisky in order to determine its authenticity. Waste more than a single droplet of that golden elixer and you’d have me rioting. The bad news, well, you have get a drop out, which means you need to open the bottle. That in itself means it’s not going to be much use to us consumers, directly. It’s more for distributers or stores who are buying in bulk and want to make sure they’re getting a crate of the real McCoy. Those types won’t mind sacrificing a bottle for the greater good. On the flip side of the coin, you would have to pry that bottle of Lagavulin out of my cold, dead, drunk hands. Indirectly, though, it benefits consumers who buy from distributors and stores, hopefully ensuring we get what we pay for.
Is there ANY type of depression that could stand up against this glass-bound bit of wonderful?
*shakes head, smiling*
I think not.
And although it is understandable that the girls in the first article are far too young to benefit (not to mention) Whisky+Laser?
I, however, am not…
Thank. You. Gawd!
“Bartender, I’ll take a whisky, please. I have my laser at the ready–Bring it on!” Pew, pew-pew pew. “Perfection!”
Why yes *sips*, indeed it is.