Ground cherry, Jerusalem cherry, Chinese lantern, strawberry
HIGHLY TOXIC, MAY BE FATAL
- Perennial herbs, often much branched and spreading at
the top; leaves alternate, simple, smooth margined or irregularly toothed;
flowers axillary, nodding, 5-parted, bell- or funnel-shaped, yellowish;
fruit a globose yellow, red, purple, or blue-black berry surrounded by
a papery sac.
- USA, NC, South America.
- Weedy in disturbed areas, naturalized; forest or natural
area, in thin woodlands and sandy, open areas; landscape in vegetable gardens
and flower gardens as cultivated annual herbaceous plant.
- Unripe berries and leaves.
- Headache, stomach pain, lowered temperature, dilated
pupils, vomiting, diarrhea, circulatory and respiratory depression, loss
of sensation; may be fatal.
- EDIBLE PARTS: Ripe fruits edible and some used to make
jelly, jams, preserves, sauces, or pies. HARVEST TIME: Only collect fruit
from areas you know have NOT been treated with pesticides. Collect during
late July or August. SAFE HANDLING PROCEDURES: Wash cherries thoroughly
with warm water. Do not use dish detergent or any type of sanitizer. These
products can leave a residue on the surface of the cherry. Wild cherries
can be eaten raw or cooked. Use in place of domestic cherries. SOURCE:
Crowhurst, A. 1972. The Weed Cookbook. Lancer Books, Inc. New York, 190
- Solanine and other solanidine alkaloids.
- HIGHLY TOXIC, MAY BE FATAL IF EATEN!
"Poisonous Plants of North Carolina,"
Dr. Alice B. Russell, Department of Horticultural Science; Dr. James
W. Hardin, Botany; Dr. Larry Grand, Plant Pathology; and Dr. Angela Fraser,
Family and Consumer Sciences; North Carolina State University. All
Pictures Copyright @1997Alice B. Russell, James W. Hardin, Larry Grand.
Computer programming, Miguel A. Buendia; graphics, Brad Capel.
Disclaimer: The list of poisonous plants on this web site does
not necessarily include every poisonous plant that is known, or that might
be found in an urban landscape or home. North Carolina State University
does not advise eating any of the plants included in this web site. The
information concerning edibility is taken from the literature, and the
degree of reliability is unknown. We discourage the use of any of these
plants for self medication. In cases of accidental exposure or ingestion,
contact the Poison Control Center 1-800-222-1222.
Previous Species, Home,