OECD Home › Development Co-operation Directorate (DCD-DAC) › Aid statistics › Publications & Documents › Datasets
Aid to the Agriculture, Forestry, Fishing and Rural Development sectors
Aid to water and sanitation has sharply risen since 2001, at an average annual rate of 5% in real terms. In 2009-10, total annual average aid commitments to water and sanitation amounted to USD 8.3 billion, representing 7% of total sector allocable aid. Aid to water and sanitation targeted regions most in need of better access to water and sanitation: Sub-Saharan Africa received 26% of total aid to the sector, and South and Central
The DAC defines aid to education as including education policy and administrative management, education facilities and training, teacher training and educational research, basic education, secondary education and post-secondary education.
The DAC defines aid to Energy generation and supply as including energy sector policy, planning and programmes, and aid to power generation of both renewable and non-renewable sources.
Statistics on bilateral Official Development Assistance (ODA) extended with the purpose of assisting developing countries in the implementation of the three Rio Conventions.
Data on DAC members’ aid targeting gender equality and women’s empowerment are compiled with the help of the gender equality marker in the Creditor Reporting System (CRS).
The OECD Development Assistance Committee (DAC) collects aid flows at activity level based on a standard methodology and agreed definitions. Aid to Health is covered by two main sectors; 1.Aid to Health - General and Basic Health, and, 2. Population Policies/Programmes and Reproductive Health - includes HIV/AIDS.
The International Development Statistics databases cover bilateral and multilateral donors’ aid and other resource flows to developing countries in two separate databases: 1. The DAC annual aggregates database, which provides comprehensive data on the volume, origin and types of aid and other resource flows; 2. The Creditor Reporting System (CRS), which provides detailed information on individual aid activities, such as sectors,
See the latest OECD statistics that show how much aid donor country governments are giving, and to whom. How much goes to the poorest countries? How much to multilateral organisations like the United Nations? Which sectors get the most aid - economic infrastructure or social programmes? These statistics show the first evidence of scaling up aid as promised by donors recently.
A selection of reference DAC Statistical Tables (Deflators - Exchange Rates - long-term ODA data) to supplement the Development Co-operation Report tables.