This image shows some of the cratered terrain of Venus.
Click on image for full size
Venus Cratered Terrain
This is an example of cratered ground on Venus.
Venusian craters are a little unusual in that there is a large amount of melted ground around the crater. This may mean that when something hits the surface of Venus, because Venus is already very hot, the impact can melt the surface near the crater.
The other unusual feature of craters on Venus is that the entire surface of Venus seems to have the same amount of craters as that on the Earth's surface (about 900 craters). Since we know that the Earth has an active and young surface, which wipes out craters before too much time goes by, this piece of evidence about Venus suggests that the surface of Venus is active too.
Shop Windows to the Universe Science Store!
Our online store
includes issues of NESTA's quarterly journal, The Earth Scientist
, full of classroom activities on different topics in Earth and space science, as well as books
on science education!
You might also be interested in:
How did life evolve on Earth? The answer to this question can help us understand our past and prepare for our future. Although evolution provides credible and reliable answers, polls show that many people turn away from science, seeking other explanations with which they are more comfortable....more
Over the course of time there are many things which can cause the surface of a planet to change its appearance. winds, as shown in the example from the Martian surface Monument Valley on Earth is an example...more
Like Mars, there is no plate tectonics on the surface of Venus. The surface of Venus does not *seem* to have changed or moved in billions of years. Unlike the case of Mars, however, careful examination...more
This is a map of the surface of Venus (turned sideways!). As can be seen on the map, the surface of Venus consists of 2 large continents with mountain ranges, and a few large islands. There are many craters,...more
Alpha Regio is an example of what is known as a "Plateau Highland" of Venus. The only volcano known to be found on Alpha Regio is Eve Mons. A Plateau Highland is like a continent, and is different from...more
Aphrodite Terra, the Greek name for the goddess Venus, is about the size of half the continent of Africa, and is to be found along the equator of Venus. Aphrodite Terra is different from Ishtar Terra in...more
Beta Regio is an example of what is known as a volcanic rise, which makes Beta Regio more like an island than a continent. Volcanic rises such as Beta Regio are broad, sloping highlands over 1000 miles...more
Ishtar Terra is one of the Plateau Highlands of Venus, is found near the north pole, and is about the size of the continental United States. Ishtar Terra contains the four main mountain ranges of Venus...more