The weather in the Lake District can change very quickly, particularly on the fells where clear morning skies can rapidly give way to rain, sleet or even snow on the summits, so you'd better be prepared! Appropriate clothing can make all the difference and four items are basic essentials for a day on the fells; boots, base layer, waterproofs and rucksack.
Your walking boots should give grip, comfort and ankle support. They should also keep your feet dry in wet conditions. Take time and advice when buying boots - halfway into a walk is no time to find that they don't fit properly.
The base layer is the next-to-skin garment that should ‘wick' perspiration away from your body, leaving you feeling dry and comfortable. Traditional cotton T shirts are a bad choice for outdoor use, so invest in a good base layer and feel the difference. A mid layer fleece would be useful in cooler conditions.
Go for well-made waterproof jackets and trousers that are really designed to keep out the rain, and look for materials that are both waterproof and breathable.
Your rucksack should hold everything you need and be able to be carried comfortably. Don't carry the weight only on your shoulders - a good pack should have a waist belt that allows the load to be taken by your hips. And don't believe anyone that says a rucksack is waterproof - put everything that must stay dry in a plastic liner, just in case.
Essentials for a day on the fells include hat and gloves, a spare warm layer, enough food and drink, and a first aid kit. A compass, map and the knowledge to use them will stop you getting lost. If you want to learn more about navigation complete a course - basic navigational skills can be learned in just a few hours.
Call the National Park Authority's Weatherline Service 0844 846 2444 or visit http://www.lake-district.gov.uk/weatherline to check the forecast before you leave.
If possible leave details of your route and expected finish time with a buddy. This could be a friend, member of your family or accommodation provider. If you are delayed but it isn't an emergency please contact your buddy to let them know. This will prevent mountain rescue, a team of volunteers, being called out unnecessarily.
If there is an accident or emergency and you need assistance call 999. Ask for Cumbria Police and give as much detail about the situation and your location as possible, an accurate grid reference would be ideal. Please do not contact the emergency services unless it is a real emergency.
Walking in winter brings a whole new set of challenges and you need to be even more prepared. Additional warm clothing will be needed and if you are walking at high altitude you may need an ice axe and crampons and be able to use them! Also make sure you are aware of the number of daylight hours and plan your walking route accordingly.
For more information on climbing, safety and good practice in the outdoors, contact the British Mountaineering Council on www.thebmc.co.uk
If you are new to climbing, or a bit rusty, why not contact an activity provider to book tuition?