|Jacques Cartier Bridge|
|Carries||5 lanes of Route 134|
|Crosses||St. Lawrence River|
|Locale||Longueuil, Quebec and Montreal, Quebec, Canada|
|Maintained by||The Jacques Cartier and Champlain Bridges Incorporated|
|Longest span||334. Route 134 is a highway in the province of Quebec running from Montreal at the intersection of Sherbrooke Street (junction with Quebec Route 138) to Saint Lawrence River (in French: fleuve Saint-Laurent; Kahnawáˀkye in Tuscarora, Kaniatarowanenneh meaning big waterway Montreal, or Montréal in French ( pronounced in French, in English) is the largest city in the Canadian province of Quebec Quebec (kwɨˈbɛk Country to "Dominion of Canada" or "Canadian Federation" or anything else please read the Talk Page A cantilever bridge is a Bridge built using Cantilevers structures that project horizontally into space supported on only one end 35 m|
|Total length||2 687. 42 m|
|Opening date||May 14, 1930|
The Jacques Cartier Bridge (French: pont Jacques-Cartier) is a steel truss cantilever bridge crossing the Saint Lawrence River from Montreal Island, Montreal, Quebec to the south shore at Longueuil, Quebec,Canada. Annual average daily traffic, abbrevated AADT, is a measure used primarily in Transportation planning and transportation engineering. Events 1264 - Battle of Lewes: Henry III of England is captured in France making Simon de Montfort the Year 1930 ( MCMXXX) was a Common year starting on Wednesday (link will display 1930 calendar of the Gregorian calendar. French ( français,) is a Romance language spoken around the world by 118 million people as a native language and by about 180 to 260 million people Steel is an Alloy consisting mostly of Iron, with a Carbon content between 0 In Architecture and Structural engineering, a truss is a structure comprising one or more triangular units constructed with straight slender members whose A cantilever is a beam supported on only one end The beam carries the load to the support where it is resisted by moment and Shear stress. A bridge is a Structure built to span a Gorge, Valley, Road, railroad track, River, Body of water Saint Lawrence River (in French: fleuve Saint-Laurent; Kahnawáˀkye in Tuscarora, Kaniatarowanenneh meaning big waterway Montreal, or Montréal in French ( pronounced in French, in English) is the largest city in the Canadian province of Quebec Quebec (kwɨˈbɛk Country to "Dominion of Canada" or "Canadian Federation" or anything else please read the Talk Page
The Jacques Cartier Bridge was one of the design influences for the Story Bridge, in Brisbane, Australia, which was completed in 1930. The Story Bridge is a Cantilever bridge and the second crossing of the Brisbane River. Brisbane ( is the state capital of Queensland. Brisbane is the third most populous city in Australia and the most populous city of Queensland For a topic outline on this subject see List of basic Australia topics.
Construction was undertaken by the Dominion Bridge Company starting in 1925 and completed in 1930. Dominion Bridge Company Limited was a Canadian Steel Bridge constructor originally based in Lachine Quebec. Year 1925 ( MCMXXV) was a Common year starting on Thursday (link will display the full calendar of the Gregorian calendar. Year 1930 ( MCMXXX) was a Common year starting on Wednesday (link will display 1930 calendar of the Gregorian calendar. It was opened to traffic on May 14th. Originally named the Montreal Harbour Bridge (pont du Havre), it was renamed in 1934 to commemorate the 400th anniversary of Jacques Cartier's first voyage up the St. Year 1934 ( MCMXXXIV) was a Common year starting on Monday (link will display full 1934 calendar of the Gregorian calendar. Jacques Cartier (December 31 1491&ndashSeptember 1 1557 was a French explorer who claimed what is now Canada for France Lawrence River. It was originally designed as a road, tramway, and pedestrian bridge. * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * Before adding any more images to this * * page please do carefully consider * * whether they would be mere decoration * * or actually improve A tram, tramcar, trolley, trolley car, or streetcar is a railborne vehicle, of lighter weight and construction than a Train Tramway Tracks were never installed on the Jacques Cartier Bridge. A parallel empty space was to the right of the roadway in each direction, through which the bridge's girders could be seen. The two sidewalks were outside the bridge proper. The spaces for the tramway tracks were converted to roadways around 1959, adding an extra lane of traffic in each direction. There used to be a toll plaza on the south shore as the Jacques Cartier Bridge and the Victoria Bridge, upstream, were both toll bridges until 1960 or so. Victoria Bridge (Pont Victoria is a bridge over the St Lawrence River, linking Montreal, Quebec, to the south shore city of Saint-Lambert Tokens were issued. It is now a five-lane highway bridge of 3 400 m (11,236 ft) in length including the approach viaducts. There are approximately 43 million vehicle crossings annually, making it the second busiest bridge in Canada, the first being the Champlain Bridge, also in Montreal.
This bridge follows the general design concept of the Quebec Bridge. The Quebec Bridge ( Pont de Québec in French in Canada crosses the lower Saint Lawrence River to the west of Quebec City, and
The bridge crosses Île Sainte-Hélène in the centre of the river, where offramps allow access to the Parc Jean-Drapeau and La Ronde amusement park. Saint Helen's Island (French Île Sainte-Hélène) ( is an Island in the Saint Lawrence River, in the territory of the city of Montreal La Ronde is the largest Amusement park in the province of Quebec and the second largest in Canada after Canada's Wonderland, with about 2
There is an 8-foot wide bike path and sidewalk on the western side of the bridge, and a pedestrian-only sidewalk on the eastern side. The bike path is part of the Route Verte bike path network. The sidewalk has a suicide prevention barrier.
There are four mini, 3 metre high Eiffel Towers at the four high-points of the bridge.
During the construction seasons of 1957 and 1958, the span over the east channel of the St. Lawrence River (the Warren truss) was raised an additional 80 feet (to 120 feet). Saint Lawrence River (in French: fleuve Saint-Laurent; Kahnawáˀkye in Tuscarora, Kaniatarowanenneh meaning big waterway Traffic flow over the bridge was uninterrupted by this construction, through the installation of two Bailey bridges. The Bailey bridge is a portable pre-fabricated Truss Bridge, designed for use by Military engineering units to bridge up to 60 m (200 ft gaps 
The bridge is completely closed to vehicular traffic during the fireworks competition at La Ronde during the summer. L’International des Feux Loto-Québec, also known as the Montreal Fireworks Festival, is an important international Fireworks competition It becomes foot traffic only, sometimes drawing crowds of 50,000+.
The fireworks competition generally runs for about six weeks, from late June to the end of July. Events are held on Wednesday and Saturday nights, commencing just before 10:00 PM. Bridge traffic is closed as of 8:00 PM, and is re-opened when the bridge is cleared of pedestrians (usually between 11:00-11:30 PM).
The Jacques-Cartier Bridge is also closed to vehicular traffic for the Oasis Montreal Marathon which takes start on the bridge every year in early September.
Recently, this bridge has been shut down several times due to several protesters who have individually climbed on the superstructure of the bridge or on a sign in the Longueuil side of the bridge. Two of them were from the Fathers for Justice militant group, while a third claimed he was part of the group. Fathers 4 Justice (or F4J) began as a fathers’ rights organisation in the United Kingdom. Recently, a man wearing a Canadian flag climbed the structure of the bridge. Most of the protests led to massive traffic congestions during rush hour.
Jacques-Cariter Bridge from the Concorde Bridge
View from the bridge