Our immune system consists of glands, tissues, leukocytes, and products
of cells that protect the body against pathogens and other foreign
matter. Our immune system is affected by many factors such as weather,
lifestyle, exercise, nutrition, stress and anxiety.
Get enough physical activity:
Recent studies have shown a link between moderate exercise and a strong
immune system. Moderate physical exercise increases the production of
macrophages, the cells that attack bacteria and viruses. It is believed
that regular, consistent exercise can lead to a significant increase in
immune system health extends over a relatively long time.
Drink 6-8 glasses of water a day:
Our body loose three liters of water every day from sweat, urine and
breath. Less fluid in the body suppresses the effective functioning of
blood and lymphatic system leading to mental fatigue and loss of energy.
Water is also essential for many chemical reactions in the body. It
helps in digestion, assimilation, metabolism and flushing of toxins from
fat cells. Water is also essential to carry nutrients such as oxygen,
vitamins and minerals for the body. Lack of fluid in the body affects
all these responses and, consequently, the immune system. Minimum 6 to 8
glasses of water a day is recommended to keep plenty of fluids in the
Lessen your stress:
studies have shown that stress prevents the immune system. Positive
emotions and stress-free life greatly enhance your immune system.
Identify stressors in your life and try to minimize or eliminate
altogether. You can practice yoga or breathing exercises to reduce the
level of stress in your life.
Enrich your diet with antioxidant vitamins and minerals:
There is a strong relationship between diet, nutrition and immunity.
You can enrich your diet with antioxidants, vitamins and minerals.
Antioxidants, vitamins and minerals enhance the normal immune system.
Includes fresh fruits and leafy vegetables in your diet. Fresh fruits
are rich in vitamins and minerals, and green leafy vegetables such as
broccoli are rich in antioxidants.