Magazines, newspapers, and journals are all types of periodicals;
they are issued periodically or at regular intervals.
How do I find articles in periodicals about a given topic?
The easiest way to find articles over a topic is to search a periodical
index from the library's Web site. Begin by clicking on "Articles
& Databases". Next, either click on General
Databases, or choose a subject from the list of Databases
by Topic. When you look at the table of databases, the far right
column of the table indicates whether full text articles are available
in a specific database.
do I find the full text of an article when it is unavailable
from the periodical index I searched?
If a full text for an article is not available in the database
you searched, try these two other databases:
tells you if a different library database has the full text of the
article you need. Search TDNET using the title of the periodical.
Holdings List tells you two things:
(a) if the article is available through an e-journal subscription,
(b) if we subscribe to the printed version of a periodical. It
also indicates which campus has the periodical and the dates available.
If the periodical you need is at your home campus library,
you can retrieve and photocopy the article yourself. Library staff
will be happy to assist you with this process. You
may also search the Library
Catalog to find this information; use the "Browse Search"
and selecting “journal title” from the search type
How do I request an article if
the periodical I need is available only at another Blinn College
Complete an article request form in the library (or the online
article request form) to have a copy of the article sent to
your home campus. If you need assistance, please ask a librarian.
can I do if the library does not have print or electronic access
to the full text?
Ask a librarian for help. We can show you how to search area
library catalogs for availability of the periodical you need.
We also can request your article from another library through
interlibrary loan. Please keep in mind that materials ordered
through interlibrary loan might take several days to two weeks