I CAN'T tell you when Murillo's depictions of children passed into the bloodstream of Western popular culture, or whether the means of infiltration was the proverbial biscuit tin or chocolate box. What I do know is that they belong to that rarefied category of works of art that have been rendered all but invisible by ubiquitous reproduction. To recover something of their original impact we have try to see them through the eyes of a viewer in mid-17th-century Seville.
|Two Boys Eating Melon and Grapes: Murillo's ragamuffins move the viewer by appealing to his emotions|
For at the time they were painted, Bartolome Esteban Murillo's pictures of flea-bitten urchins and bare-footed delivery boys represented something utterly new in the history of art. Neither portraits nor genre scenes - and yet not quite allegories or religious images either - they contain elements of all four of the hierarchies into which 17th-century theorists divided the subject matter of painting. And the most innovative thing about them is precisely that which the modern viewer has most difficulty in seeing.
These raggedy boys and girls are painted on a life-size scale, and with a surface brilliance, reserved in the baroque era for portraits of royal infantas, or depictions of the baby Jesus. There were of course precedents for depicting peasant children in art, but Murillo's ragamuffins move the viewer by appealing to his emotions - among the first non-religious and apolitical pictures to attempt this.
For the depiction of childhood as a separate state in human development was highly unusual when Murillo was active, from the late 1630s to his death in 1682. He is the link between the representation of children as miniature adults by 16th-century masters such as Titian, and the great 18th-century painters of true childhood such as Reynolds and Gainsborough. And, even more remarkably, Murillo often shows children in pairs or groups - playing games, stuffing their faces, or just messing around. It would be interesting to learn when children were first described as "playing", but that is exactly what they are doing in these pictures, and why they feel so true to life.
For Murillo seems to recognise the modern conception of childhood as a separate, enclosed world from which adults are wholly excluded. I must admit that I didn't fully understand Murillo's children until I had a few of my own. After that I began noticing the accuracy with which he captures the unselfconscious way in which children become totally absorbed in whatever they happen to be doing, their greed, their high spirits, their innocent selfishness.
How do we account for Murillo's unusual interest in this particular subject? To start with the obvious explanation, Murillo himself was one of 14 children, and he became the father of nine of his own, each one a potential model. What I hadn't known until I went to see Dulwich Picture Gallery's new exhibition, Murillo - Scenes of Childhood, is that the artist was also a profoundly religious man, a lay member of the Brotherhood of Charity. In performing his Christian duty to feed the hungry, he must have come into contact with the lowest social classes in Seville.
Once you know this, you begin to see how compassionate these pictures are, how each youngster, including one black boy who was presumably a slave, is accorded the painter's absolute respect as a Christian soul, a child of God. Though some of the pictures are indeed sentimental, in others, such as Invitation to a Game of Argolla, there is nothing pretty about the face of the grinning boy or the bulging cheeks of the child who has stuffed his mouth full of bread.
On the other hand, Murillo's scenes of childhood are nowadays considered saccharine precisely because the urchins in them are not starving and don't look particularly miserable. Their cheerful acceptance of poverty is a Christian virtue, not a 20th-century one. And yet, when trying to evaluate what these images meant to those who first saw them, we should bear in mind that Murillo sold virtually all of the pictures in this exhibition to foreign clients. The obvious explanation is that Spanish collectors found pictures of the local riff-raff anything but picturesque.
But perhaps all this focus on subject matter is a bit of a red herring. Artists from Gainsborough to Manet loved Murillo because of the consummate way in which he handled paint. Just look at the rivulets of creamy white and salmon pink that make up the sleeves and turban of the young girl who poses for Spring as a Flower Girl; look at the wonderful soft brown colour of her shawl, thrown over the palest possible lemon in her chemise. In Two Boys Playing Dice, what is so satisfying is Murillo's infinitely subtle use of silver, grey and white against gradations of black paint, used to create deep, rich shadows.
What I think Manet - and Whistler - loved about these pictures is that painterly values took precedence over content. Working directly on to the canvas without preparatory drawings, Murillo lays on the paint in such a way that there is no distinction between draughtsmanship and colour. He will scumble his blacks into silver or white so that simply by adding or subtracting pigment he creates his lights and darks, like a draughtsman who produces the effect of chiaroscuro by varying the pressure on his chalk.
All but one of Murillo's scenes from childhood are on view in this show. Had the show been limited to pictures by him alone it would have been perfect. But the addition of a wholly unnecessary room full of the paintings of Pedro Nunez de Villavicencio, Murillo's follower, serves to vitiate the show's impact. However, while they aren't a patch on the great master, they do serve to emphasise Murillo's artistic stature.
- 'Murillo - Scenes of Childhood', sponsored by SG Smith London, is at Dulwich Picture Gallery (020 8693 5254), until May 13