Jeet Kune Do is a martial art that is also not a martial art. What this means is that Jeet Kune Do (which means "Way of the Intercepting Fist") is a martial art that takes from other martial arts that which is useful and discards that which is useless. It employs any means to win a fight in the context of hand-to-hand combat - kicking, punching, grappling, biting, eye gouging, and so on. It is what today's martial artists would call "mixed martial arts," or MMA for short.

But it is not necessarily a martial art as we know it. Most, if not all, martial arts are crystallizations made up of sets and forms that prohibit and restrict their practitioners and make them contort their bodies into unusual positions like the "horse stance" or "cat stance." Real fighting entails using your body to its fullest potential; locking it up in forms and stances only restricts the body from realizing its full potential. For instance, while you're getting into your horse stance, your opponent might kick you in your exposed groin.

Jeet Kune Do is about being fluid, stopping or intercepting an attack with your weapons (fist, foot, etc.), and ending the fight as quickly as possible. Being fluid means becoming like water; it is yielding, and yet it is powerful enough to move large objects and crash with ferocity. It is also a mindset: instead of anticipating an opponent's attack, you simply "react" to it using your weapons and the skills you developed through practice and training.

Intercepting means stopping an attack with a counterattack as it is being initiated. One of the most relevant examples of this concept in Jeet Kune Do is the use of the "stop kick." The stop kick is used against an opponent when the opponent is lunging forward toward you in an attack; the side thrust or front thrust kick can literally stop the opponent in their tracks and prevent them from advancing further while also striking them in turn. Training up to this concept looks something like this: 1) learning to block; 2) learning to strike; 3) learning to block then strike; 4) learning to block and strike at the same time; 5) learning to strike without blocking by moving off the line of attack and moving into the opponent where they are open or exposed.
