Regional parties have been a force to reckon with at the Centre ever since the era of coalition governments dawned in the late eighties. Their clout has grown with each election and it promises to get stronger after the present one. There is every possibility of the next PM being from one of the regional parties.
The rise of regional parties makes a section of the Indian elite jittery. It thinks coalition governments dominated by regional parties spell instability and weak governance. Only the two national parties, the Congress and the BJP, can provide stability and governance. Even if coalition governments are inevitable, they are best dominated by the Congress or the BJP, so goes the thinking.
On the face of it, it would appear that these beliefs are well founded. The NDA and UPA coalitions, led respectively by the BJP and the Congress, lasted their full term of five years. In the eighties, V P Singh's National Front government collapsed in just 11 months. The Chandra Shekhar government that followed fell within seven months. In the nineties, the United Front government lasted 21 months.
However, these experiments failed not so much on account of internal dissensions. They failed because the BJP or the Congress found it expedient to withdraw support. These coalitions were unstable because they came to power with a small number of seats and depended on larger parties for support.
There has been a dramatic change in the strength of regional parties since. The regional parties have increased their share of the vote from 20-25% in the pre-coalition era to 45%. Regional parties today rule a majority of the states. It is not difficult to visualise a formation of regional parties in the coming Parliament with a total strength of around 150 seats, equal to or greater than those of the Congress and the BJP. This changes the picture quite a bit. In the eighties and nineties, the Congress and the BJP could topple coalitions in the hope of mustering more seats in fresh elections.
Today, the two leading national parties cannot entertain such illusions. At least in the foreseeable future, there is no escape from the dominance of regional parties. The politics of caste and region needs to play out before national parties regain their ascendancy. For this to happen, we need at least another decade of growth, the swelling of the middle class and the spread of urbanisation.
The two leading national parties, the Congress and the BJP, must know this, hence will not be eager to engage in toppling games. There is thus less reason than before to suppose that governments comprising regional parties will be inherently unstable.
Critics of regional parties also say that they lack ideological coherence and a national perspective. Only the hopelessly na?ve will set any store by ideology in an era of endlessly shifting alliances. The name of the game is opportunism, so forget about ideology.