When creating a plan to be healthier, many people aim to hit the gym after work or cook healthier dinners at home, but it can be our hours on the job that are so impactful on weight and overall wellness. When you consider the average American spends nearly 1,800 hours per year on the job, you can see how the work environment has a significant effect on our health.
People with desk jobs or positions that require little physical activity are at even greater risk for poor health outcomes. The majority of jobs are sedentary in nature requiring little to no vigorous movement, which is a serious concern considering the results of a study published last month that found increased time sitting is associated with diabetes and other chronic illnesses.
Daily movement is an important part of disease prevention and weight management. For example, a 125-pound person will burn about 80 calories per hour sitting at a computer while a similar size store clerk or cook who works on their feet will burn as much as 150 calories per hour. That's a difference of 560 calories during an eight-hour shift.
It's not just the activity level at work that matters. Stress on the job and odd shift hours take a toll as well. People working night shifts often have trouble settling in to normal and healthy eating schedules. Stressful positions and long work hours can lead to missed meals or emotional eating.
Larger business often
1. Assess the food culture
Although meal breaks are required at most worksites, job requirements often determine how lunchtime is spent, whether it is at a desk, at business lunches or squeezed into a jam-packed schedule. Are you surrounded by healthy eaters at work or is there a constant supply of unhealthy foods available? All of these factors can affect the quantity and quality of the food you consume.
2. It takes a team
If you believe there is room for improvement most likely you are not the only one. Start a conversation with your co-workers about ways to be healthier together such as starting a weight-loss group, walking during lunchtime or switching out the sweets in the lunchroom with fresh fruit.
3. Eat breakfast
Studies show that people who eat breakfast tend to be thinner. Breakfast sets the tone for the day for healthy eating and is important for keeping blood sugar levels stable while boosting metabolism.
4. Desk exercises
If you are seated during most of the working day, taking a five-minute break to do some light to moderate exercise every couple of hours can be quite beneficial. Consider simple activities like sitting and standing stretches, marching in place, jumping in place or push-ups. Always speak to your physician before starting a new exercise regimen.
5. Brown bag it
Bringing lunch to work instead of eating out will save both calories and dollars, because of the added control you have when making your own meals. Plan ahead by preparing your lunch the night before so you don't have to spend precious time in the morning scrambling to put a lunch together.
6. Leave the car at home
People who walk, bike or take public transport to work get in significantly more physical activity than people who drive. Not everyone is so lucky as to be able to walk or bike to work, but if you are so fortunate, consider leaving your vehicle at home. Even if you must drive like most of us do in Southern California, consider running any errands you may have during the day by foot to get in extra steps.
LeeAnn Weintraub, M.P.H., R.D., can be reached at RD@halfacup.com.