Starting in April, PBS will present a five-part television series that shows how Native peoples valiantly resisted expulsion from their lands and fought the extinction of their culture -- from the Wampanoags of New England in the 1600s who used their alliance with the English to weaken rival tribes, to the bold new leaders of the 1970s who harnessed the momentum of the civil rights movement to forge a pan-Indian identity. We Shall Remain represents an unprecedented collaboration between Native and non-Native filmmakers and involves Native advisors and scholars at all levels of the project.
The five episodes are:
After the Mayflower - Premiers April 13th
Tecumsehís Vision - Premiers April 20th
Trail of Tears - Premiers April 27th
Geronimo - Premiers May 4th
Wounded Knee - Premiers May 11th
An in-depth website will serve the general public, educators, and students, offering educational resources and several hours of streaming video. Part of PBS Online, the We Shall Remain site will feature Web-exclusive videos exploring contemporary topics such as language revitalization efforts, Native enterprise and tribal sovereignty. The site will also host behind-the-scenes production stories, streaming of the ReelNative films, and information about upcoming events across the nation.
The We Shall Remain Website will launch an extensive Teacherís Guide for social studies educators. The guide will incorporate video segments from the five documentaries into social studies resources, offering both viewing and comprehension aids and classroom activities. This resource will inspire and support teachers to integrate Native history and issues into their curricula and encourage them to present Native history as an integral part of American history. Teacherís Guide will be available beginning in April.
Another resource for teachers is the interactive map shows partners who have initiatives in various states to support the We Shall Remain program. Click on the link in Arizona to find out what is happening with We Shall Remain: Arizona, www.AZPBS.org
Arizona’s initiative uses broadcast, new media and community outreach to build bridges of communication between Arizona’s diverse populations and to promote Arizona regions, culture and ethnic diversity while particularly empowering Arizona Native people.
Also for teachers is the Teach and Learn feature.
Here teachers can access:
- Resources for social studies educators to integrate Native American history into curricula;
- Bibliographies for each of the five programs; and
- Related sites and resources for further learning.
Along with the website, there are a number of initiatives that will supplement the We Shall Remain program. They are:
ReelNative. This unique project offers Native Americans a venue to share their stories with a national audience. At workshops in Arizona, Massachusetts, and Oklahoma, participants ranging in age from fourteen to fifty-five were taught to produce short films. Quirky, touching, funny, and profound, the films reveal the diversity of the contemporary Native experience and testify to the resilience of Native people and culture.
Community Outreach Campaign. This campaign is a nationwide effort to engage Native communities and organizations, Native radio, public television stations, universities, museums, schools, and libraries. The events, activities, and dialogue that come out of these relationships will extend We Shall Remainís crucial message to invite audiences to tune in to the broadcast.
National Library Initiative. WGBH is working closely with the American Library Association (ALA) and its 2007-2008 President Loriene Roy (White Earth Anishinabe) to build awareness of the series among librarians, Native organizations, scholars, and writers. Ms. Roy is also collaborating with WGBH to develop innovative ideas for how to use We Shall Remain materials to serve the unique needs of local communities and tribal libraries. A library event kit developed specifically for public, college, school, and tribal libraries will be distributed to 17,000 public libraries, as well as to all tribal libraries. The kit offers programming ideas and resources to help libraries organize and deliver engaging events related to We Shall Remain. Features include storytelling days, Native literature reading circles, cross-cultural art projects for youth, discussion forums, guidelines for evaluating media about Native peoples, and an extensive bibliography of book, film, and Internet resources.
to educational television, professional development opportunities
and classroom resources related to PBS Programs.
you can record programs on Eight for use in your classroom!
For scheduling information click
-KUAT viewers, click
Reserve your spot at the first ASSET Educator Summer Institute 2009 "Think Upstream"
you scheduled your ASSET workshop yet?
Professional Development Team to get your workshop on
the calendar. Remember we can come to you, at no charge,
to share all the high quality online and broadcast resources
TeacherLine Professional Development
Join educators from across the nation in PBS TeacherLine
professional development that supports multicultural education
with 21st Century Learners. National courses
for spring begin March 25, enrollment
is open now.
a $60 rebate on all National PBS Teacherline courses that
are $169 or more when you join ASSET for a donation of $60.
Conference registration is complimentary for ASSET Educators! Are you a member yet?