Designers prepare handmade or computer-generated drafts. The majority utilize computer-aided design (CAD) technology. Designers require updated telecommunications and computer technology.
In most cases, designers specialize. Many have multiple specialties. The following is a list of different types of designers and what they do:
Commercial and industrial designers design consumer products
Fashion designers design clothes, such as shirts, hats, and pants
Floral designers prepare bouquets with artificial or real flowers
Graphic designers utilize software to prepare layouts for web sites and print publications
Interior designers decorate and organize rooms within offices, businesses, and homes
Merchandise display designers,visual merchandisers, or window dressers, determine what to display in store windows
Set and exhibit designers prepare sets seen in motion pictures, TV shows, and theaters.
Designers may conduct their work in their customers’ homes or businesses, or at the office of the company employing them. They usually plan their days to accommodate their customers’ requests. It is not uncommon for designers to work long days or work during nights and the weekend to reach deadlines. Some designers may be required to travel to fulfill their clients' needs.
How do you prepare for this career?
The education needed for a designer career can vary widely depending upon the specialty. Fashion and floral designers may only require high school diplomas, while graphic, industrial and interior designers may all require a bachelor's degree in a related field. Specialties may also be gained through certificate and associate degree programs.
How much will I earn?
Salaries vary widely depending upon the specialties. The following is a list of the median annual salary of several major specialties in design (as of 2010, from the US Bureau of Labor Statistics):
Almost all of the aforementioned specialties are expected to growth at an average rate of all occupations until 2020. The only exceptions are floral designers, whose job growth is expected to decline by 9 percent, and fashion designers, who will experience no change in growth.
If you want to become a nail technician, there are certain skills you should possess. You should have personal skills, such as being an organized person and able to keep a hygienic work environment. Other personal skills a nail technician should have are thinking with a creative mind, keeping a positive attitude at all times, [...]
Hairstylists are almost always in demand for cutting and styling men's and women’s hair. As a stylist, you of course will be responsible for cutting and styling hair. You may often be asked to color, bleach, highlight or lowlight your customers’ tresses. You could also be called upon to curl or straighten their hair. Sometimes [...]
Cosmetologists are licensed professionals. As a cosmetologist, you will attend cosmetology school to learn to care for hair, nails and skin. You may be referred to as a hairdresser, beautician or beauty operator, and you may work in a beauty salon, spa or own their own business. Other opportunities for licensed cosmetologists are abundant with [...]
Being a makeup artist can be a fulfilling and exciting career. If you have always loved fashion and had an artistic side, this may be the career for you. Becoming a makeup artist, like any other career, requires training. Most of the training you will be doing will be hands-on and not of the traditional [...]
A trained esthetician provides professional-quality skin and body care treatments, such as facials, waxing and even laser treatments for more highly trained estheticians. For an esthetician, the skin is the primary area of focus and study and treatment surrounds improving the look, feel, cleanliness and health of the skin. While estheticians primarily focus on the [...]
Featured Student Profile
Learn Anytime, anywhere.
...even on a remote island!
Every year more and more students are turning to the Internet and distance learning in order to further their education and expand their horizons.
Read our exclusive one on one interview and learn how a busy student fits online learning into his schedule while living abroad.