Reviewing Your Goal Worksheet
Now let’s look at how the goal example was put together.
1 – General review
Go through each of the SMART characteristics and see if they fit with the example plan.
1) Is it Specific? – Yes, the goal relates to a specific race.
2) Is it Measurable? – Yes, and have selected the measurement system and a range of
3) Is it Achievable? – Yes, I have run marathons before and have a reasonable personal best time, and am confident I can achieve it again.
4) Is it Relevant? – Yes, it motivates me to go out and train regularly, keeping me fit and providing relaxation.
5) Is it Time-bound? – Yes, the actual race date is included and each task has been scheduled to fit into the run-up to the date.
2 - Self assessment of tasks and link to personal development plan
I have assessed each task to establish if I am high or low skill or will, and will use this information to create a supporting personal development plan to close any gaps in ability (skill) or enthusiasm (will). Let’s look at each task and self
assessment in turn.
Write up training schedule. I previously made up my own training plans and recognise I am not an expert in this field, therefore I have low skill. I am hugely motivated to get this plan right, therefore I have high will. To address the skills gap, I will get help from a local athletics team to plan my training.
Follow training schedule. I have followed training plans before and understand their importance, therefore I am high skill. I am nervous about running on my own, especially in the winter, so I am low will. Need to do something that will increase my confidence.
Get diet advice and re-stock kitchen cupboards with appropriate food. I have never thought about my diet and running before and don’t know where to start, therefore am low skill. I love all kinds of food and suspect I may have to stop eating some of my favourites, therefore am low will.
Run half marathon. I have run this race before, therefore high skill. I know it’s a great course and my race time will be a good indication of how well my training is going, so am high will. No worries!
Enrol in the London marathon. I have done this before and know I am good at organising myself so am high skill and will. I have included the task as a reminder, as not enrolling would mean I couldn’t run and the whole goal would be affected. In business terms this would be called a “milestone”.
Run the London marathon. I have not assessed this task, as it is the main goal.
Next, Personal Development Requirements