According to IBM, this stop-motion film (made with individual molecules of carbon monoxide) is the smallest movie that has been, or ever will be, created.
IBM's new antimicrobial hydrogel tackles diseased biofilms and kills drug resistant bacteria.
Filmmakers often use real companies and organizations for their research, but sometimes science fiction and science fact don't quite agree.
In tech, five years is an eternity. Five years ago, it was 2007. You probably don't even remember 2007. I certainly don't: 2007 was 5,000 articles ago. IBM has a longer memory than us all, however, and based on its history, the company has five five-year predictions as to how technology will make our lives better within the next five years.
Norman Joseph Woodland, who died on Sunday at the age of 91, invented something that was used five billion times today alone. In fact, you probably have one (or lots) within arm's reach right now: the bar code.
Years ago IBM began its gradual shift from consumer-facing computer company to focusing more on research targeting "big ideas." Now one of those deep research areas has yielded fruit that could influence the next phase of general computing and it's called silicon nanophotonics.
Within the last few years, we've been treated to images of single molecules along with images of orbiting electrons. Today, IBM research has released a new image of a molecule, with enough detail that you can spot differences in the bonds between the individual atoms. Whoa.
There's an arms race going on between antibiotics and bacteria, and bacteria are winning. They've got evolution on their side, and there's a blajillion of them. IBM has been fighting back with bacteria-targeting "polymer ninjas," and they're poised to go beyond medicine and into consumer products.
By 2024, the largest radio telescope ever will dot the landscape of either Australia or South Africa with thousands of antennae spread out over 2,000 miles. The Square Kilometre Array will record the equivalent of an Internet's worth of data twice a day, and IBM is building a computer that can handle it all.
IBM's always been looking out for the best interests of humanity, even when its robots school us at Jeopardy. A patent granted to IBM just a few weeks ago outlines a system they're working on for tying financial incentives in with healthy habits, such that eating well and getting exercise might actually pay off with real money.