We’ve all wondered about certain fruits and vegetables-if there is fat in that? There are common misconceptions of many foods containing fat, whereas they contain no fat or extremely low fat content. On the other hand, there are some foods even if they don’t have fat, promote fat storage in the body. So, let’s find out- Is there fat in that food?
Fruits: As a standard, you can assume that most fruits have absolutely no fat content. Let’s the examples of certain fruits which are often considered to contain fat.
Bananas- Bananas are nutritious and healthy, with extremely low fat content. If you believe that bananas and milk make you fat. The potassium in bananas actually promotes muscle growth and thus fat loss.
Mango- We’ve told you before that about the fat content in mangoes- there is none in the king of summer fruits.
Apples- Apples have health benefits, and have absolutely no fat content. Studies have shown that they apples can promote weight loss.
Chickoo- This much maligned Indian fruit has again no fat content. It has fiber and good carbohydrates as most fruits do. Fruit sugars provide sustained energy, and fiber keeps you from getting hungry, so the chickoo is only good for you!
Strawberries- These delicious fruits are loaded with antioxidants and contain no fat absolutely. Here’s a great strawberry banana smoothie recipe.
Now, that we’ve cleared out the fat content of most fruits, you should know that Avocado is the only popular fruit that contains fat. But avocado are good for your skin. Similar to fruits, many vegetables get a bad rap for their fat content also, so let’s find out-
Potato- French fries contain fat and potato chips are unhealthy, but the potato by itself contains no fat and potatoes can help weight loss.
Brocolli- Brocolli is one of the healthiest vegetables. No fat content, and loaded with antioxidants.
Beans- There are many kind of beans- kidney, black, lima, etc.. But they contain no fat and are among the few vegetable that help you gain muscle.
Lettuce- Lettuce is primarily water. In fact, its the primary ingredient for most salads- the holy grail of diet plans.
Fruits are primarily sugar by weight. Sugar has a bad health rap, some people wonder if fruits are on the approved list? But the natural sugars in fruits is not bad. The glycemic index of most fruits is quite low and they can actually help you lose weight. The fiber and water content in those fruits will keep you feeling full for longer, which will cut down on cravings.
The antioxidants found in fruits strengthen the body’s immune system. Studies have shown that diets rich in fruits and vegetables reduce the risk of cancer and other chronic diseases. Fruits provide essential vitamins and minerals, fibre and other substances that are important for good health and looking good. Fruit rich diet will also keep your skin glowing.
These benefits outweigh the sugar carbohydrates in fruits and we recommend eating at least 2 fruits a day. Did you know apples reduce risk of cancer, and guavas are loaded with Vitamin C for body immunity.
Now that we’re clear that fruits are healthy, but are fruit juices healthy? Processed juices are often loaded with sugar to make them taste better, have preservatives for longer shelf life and and don’t have most of the fruit fiber. Fresh fruit juices are slightly better since they don’t have preservatives and might have more fiber, but we definitely recommend eating the whole fruit for maximum benefit.
Weight loss tip: Replace your dessert with fruit to lose weight!