Get Into Shape For Summer With Vegetarian Diet Tips
Whether or not you want to go fully 100% veg, incorporating more veggies and less "bad stuff" into your diet can help you get into shape for summer s. Don't Panic! You don't need to totally cut out the meat, (unless you want to), and "going veg" is less painful than you may think.
Following a vegetarian diet just ONE day a week can have a significant impact upon your body and health. In the United States, an average adult eats approximately 250 POUNDS of meat each year. By going Veg just one day a week, the average adult can reduce their consumption of meat by 30-40 pounds a year. Not only will vegetarian diet tips one day a week help you reduce weight in time for summer swimsuit season, they also have many other dramatic results.
Go Veg One Day Per Week And…
Reduce Global Warming. The "meat industry" of animal agriculture causes more greenhouse gasses to be released into the environment than cars! Eating vegetarian one day a week helps you reduce your contribution to global warming.
Save Water, Save Life. Animal agriculture uses a LOT of water. By reducing your consumption of animals and going Veg just one day a week, you can save over 80,000 gallons of water a year!
Save the Rainforest! In order to make room for animal agriculture and to grow the crops to feed the animals, millions of acres of rainforest and other land need to be cleared. Going Veg one day a week can help you save over 7,000 sq feet of rain forest each year.
Feed Hungry People. For each pound of beef, chicken or pork, approximately 5-7 pounds of grain must be used to feed that animal. About 33% of the world's grain is currently be used to feed livestock. Eating less animals means more grain available to feed people who are starving in this country and around the world.
Going vegetarian one day a week also helps reduce animal waste, save fossil fuels, and minimize topsoil erosion. On a more personal level, going Veg can help you reduce your risks of cancer and heart disease while helping you to trim and tighten your body for summer. Get started today and be amazed.