falconryArticle Free Pass
Falconry is an ancient sport that has been practiced since preliterate times. Stelae depicting falconry that were created by the Hittites date to the 13th century bce, and cave paintings from prehistoric sites may represent even earlier references to falconry. Merchants, adventurers, and Crusaders from Europe and England became familiar with falconry in the Middle East and on their return home took falcons and falconers with them. The sport flourished in western Europe and the British Isles in the Middle Ages among the privileged classes. During the 17th century, after the advent of the shotgun and after the enclosure of open lands and numerous social upheavals, falconry virtually died out, surviving in Europe largely through the enthusiasm of members of hawking clubs.
In Great Britain the Falconers’ Society of England was founded about 1770 but ceased in 1838 with the death of the then manager, Lord Berners. Because of the scarcity of herons (a main quarry of the club’s peregrine falcons in East Anglia) and also partly because of the plowing up of the heathland over which the falconers rode, the centre of English falconry moved to the Netherlands, and in 1839 the Loo Hawking Club, an Anglo-Dutch society under the patronage of the crown prince (soon to become King William II) of the Netherlands, was formed. In 1853, when the royal patronage was withdrawn, the Loo Club expired. Falconry was kept alive in England by a few aristocratic amateurs and their professional falconers. Additionally, a series of clubs promoted the sport in Britain, culminating in the British Falconers’ Club in 1927. The reduction of the rabbit population by myxomatosis and the placing of many of the traditional prey species on the protected list had a profound effect on the sport after World War II. All British birds of prey came under the protection of the law, and a license was required from the Home Office before a falconer could take a young hawk for falconry.
Falconry clubs exist in other European countries. The French Club de Champagne went out of existence in 1870, but French falconers are organized in the Association Nationale des Fauconniers et Autoursiers Français. In Germany, the Deutscher Falkenorden (founded in 1923) is a thriving club. In the United States falconry is represented by the North American Falconers Association.
A revival of interest in the sport began in the 1970s. With the reprinting of old treatises on the art, in addition to new magazine articles and television programs on the subject, falconry began to attract new adherents.
The birds and the art
Types of birds used in falconry
Falconry is practiced worldwide, although it is considered to be a rare sport. Strongholds of the sport exist in Britain, the United States, Central Asia, and several Persian Gulf states—especially Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates. The Punjab of India and Pakistan and the North-West Frontier province of Pakistan also practice falconry.
By definition, falconry is the taking of wild quarry with trained birds of prey. All diurnal (active in daytime) birds of prey are termed “hawks” in the language of falconry—whether they are falcons, hawks, or eagles—and all hunt naturally in their wild state. The skill of the falconer is to harness this natural hunting ability by training a hawk to hunt in partnership. While the nature of the sport is the same universally, there are many variations in the style of hunting emanating from the laws of the land, the different species of hawks and falcons native to a certain region, and the type of terrain available for the falconer to hunt over.
The hawks can be divided into three groups—longwings, shortwings, and broadwings. The hawks in each of these three categories display different traits because of adaptation to their hunting environments and prey. Longwings are falcons, such as the peregrine, the saker, and the gyrfalcon. They mainly hunt other birds in flight. Because their pursuit of quarry can take them over considerable distances, longwings are flown over open terrain, such as desert or moorland, so the falconer can keep the falcon in sight. Shortwings and broadwings take predominantly ground game, such as rabbit and hare, or bird species close to the ground, such as a pheasant breaking cover. Physically structured to work in enclosed, wooded countryside, shortwings—which are the true hawks such as goshawks or sparrowhawks—usually hunt from trees, or directly from the gloved fist of the falconer. Finally, the broadwinged group includes eagles and buzzards. The broad wing-bases enable them to soar and they are best suited to hunting in rolling countryside and mountainous terrain, although buzzards can also hunt in wooded areas.
In some countries falconers may legally trap wild hawks, while in others only hawks bred in captivity may be used. In Britain licenses to take hawks from the wild were issued up until the 1980s, but, when sufficient numbers of hawks were domestically produced to meet the demand of falconers, the British government ceased to issue these licenses. In the United States hawks may still be taken from the wild under permit. A system of grading for falconers exists in the United States whereby a novice falconer is apprenticed to a more experienced general or master falconer for a period of two years. The only type of hawk that apprentices in the United States are permitted to train is a wild hawk that was trapped during its first year (before it entered the breeding stock of the species). Apprentices are not, however, allowed to take a young hawk from the nest or to purchase one bred in captivity, because if a hawk acquired from these sources is lost before its training has been completed, it will be unable to hunt for itself. General falconers (with two or more years of experience) and master falconers (seven or more years) in the United States can acquire permits to take wild hawks from the nest, or they may buy a captive-bred hawk. Other parts of the world regulate the taking of wild birds of prey according to the rarity of the species concerned and, in some cases, the experience or credentials of the falconer.
Hawks were first bred in captivity in some number by falconers in the late 1960s and early 1970s in Britain, the United States, and Germany. This occurred in response to a dramatic decline in the numbers of some species of wild hawks—especially the peregrine falcon—caused by pesticides such as DDT that made their way into the food chain and thinned the eggshells of wild birds, which thereby caused the eggs to fail. The availability of domestically produced hawks changed the face of falconry in many countries, as nonindigenous species became available to falconers through a commercial trade in captive-bred hawks.
Captive-bred hawks reared by their parents in aviaries are no easier to train than wild-taken hawks, as the taming process necessary to overcome the hawk’s natural wariness of humans is the same. Some species of hawks are by temperament easier to train than others. The most popular hawk used in falconry in Britain is the Harris’ hawk, which is native to Central and South America, as well as to the Southwest of the United States. It is widely bred in captivity in the United Kingdom and has a placid temperament, which makes its training comparatively straightforward. The traditional hawks employed in the sport worldwide are peregrine falcons, goshawks, and sparrowhawks; while these species are unsuitable for novices, they are still the most commonly flown throughout the world by experienced falconers.
What made you want to look up "falconry"? Please share what surprised you most...