Underwater Cameras are cameras that are specially designed for underwater use or in circumstances that requires protection to prevent any water and pressure damage. There are many types of underwater cameras, depending on your budget and uses.
There are underwater cameras that are simply disposed of after use. These are the cheapest type of underwater camera available in the market. They have the capacity to take between 20 to 30 pictures, and photos can easily be developed. They are waterproof enough to be used in harsh rain and snow storms, and are usually tolerant of being fully submerged up to twenty or thirty feet.
There are also underwater cameras that are cheap reloadables. These cameras are designed with economy of price in mind. These are very similar to disposable underwater cameras, expect that the user can replace the film and use the camera multiple times. They are usually capable of greater water depths than their disposable counterparts.
New generation cameras have resolutions in the 3-4 megapixel range and can take excellent quality pictures underwater.
These cameras offer options for every level of diver and snorkeler. For the experienced diver/photographer who wants more control over the camera functions. The Advanced-Dive control system allows users to manipulate resolution, light sensitivity (EV), exposure modes and much more while underwater while the Easy-Dive control system is the perfect choice for divers seeking a simple underwater photo system that produces breathtaking results.
Underwater cameras are designed for one-Button-Operation and can be set to Land or Sea modes plus modes that take into account the unique aspects of underwater photography. Cameras also feature three dedicated underwater external flash modes, allowing for more exposure control when using an external flash. For perfectly lit photos in any situation, users can toggle among Macro Flash, Portrait Flash and Far Flash modes, which adjust exposure based on camera-to-subject distance.
While an on-camera flash helps illuminate objects below the surface, cameras are also compatible with external flash units, which ignite the vivid colors of the underwater environment and allows users to illuminate objects from different angles. Because the external flash is a unit activated via the on-camera flash, no sync cord is necessary. Set the camera to "External Flash," and it automatically de-activates the digital pre-flash.
To compensate for low-light conditions that naturally occur as divers travel below the water's surface, cameras can adjust the shutter speed and aperture automatically to compensate for difficult light conditions, ensuring vivid images without worry of underexposure.
Photos can be composed via a large color LCD monitor on the back of the camera; or users can frame subjects through a top-mounted SportsFinder. Either way, composition is simple, even when viewing subjects through a dive mask. To help conserve power during underwater adventures, users often shut off LCD monitors while the camera is on and compose photos using large top-mounted viewfinders.
With the many technological advances of recent years, underwater photographers now no longer have to compromise on quality. Users are almost guaranteed to return to land with a stunning set of images.