Last month India marked its first full year without a new case of polio caused by naturally occurring (wild) polioviruses. This event is a milestone in the global effort to eradicate polio, as India is one of only four countries in which wild polioviruses have never been eliminated.
Poliovirus infection can result in permanent crippling and impairment of breathing. At their peak, polio epidemics in the U.S. paralyzed or killed up to 58,000 individuals each year, mostly children, before the introduction in 1955 of the inactivated (injected) poliovirus vaccine developed by my father, Jonas Salk, and his research team, and in 1961 of the live (oral) poliovirus vaccine developed by Albert Sabin.
In 1988, the World Health Assembly launched a Global Polio Eradication Initiative led by national governments in partnership with Rotary International, WHO, CDC and UNICEF. The goal was to eliminate wild polioviruses by the year 2000, using the inexpensive and easy-to-administer oral vaccine as the primary tool. At that time, an estimated 350,000 cases of paralytic polio occurred each year worldwide. As a result of this Initiative, in which 20 million volunteers have participated in massive immunization programs at a cumulative cost of around $10 billion, polio caused by wild viruses has been reduced by over 99 percent to fewer than 2,000 reported cases a year for the last 12 years.
Getting the last 1 percent of the way has been challenging. Stopping transmission of polioviruses requires maintaining high vaccination rates in parts of the world where health infrastructure is subpar, where conflict impedes access to portions of countries and where rumors have spread fear about the vaccination program. Wild polioviruses have reappeared in areas where they had previously been eliminated, when immunization rates have fallen and travelers or migrant populations have brought the viruses back from places where they continue to circulate.
Another complicating factor is that the live but weakened viruses used in the oral vaccine can mutate back to a virulent form and cause paralysis in vaccine recipients or their contacts, sometimes spreading to cause polio outbreaks of their own. Although infrequent in proportion to the number of children immunized, polio caused by vaccine-associated viruses now accounts for around a quarter of the total number of cases. In order to eliminate all polio from the world, use of the oral vaccine will eventually need to be stopped so that it does not continue to reintroduce disease-producing viruses. Work is underway to reduce the cost of the inactivated vaccine – now used in most of the wealthier countries because of its safety – so that it is affordable for use elsewhere in the final phases of the eradication effort.
Why is it important that this project be successfully completed? If efforts flag, whatever pockets of poliovirus remain in the world can flare up, spreading polio to any places where immunization rates have dropped. On the other hand, if the eradication program proceeds to completion, the program costs will be outweighed by an estimated $40 billion-$50 billion in cumulative savings, projected through the next quarter of a century, freeing resources that can be applied to other global health needs.