gets - Read a line from a file
gets fileId ?varName?
This command reads the next line from the file given by fileId and
discards the terminating newline character. If varName is specified then
the line is placed in the variable by that name and the return value is a
count of the number of characters read (not including the newline). If
the end of the file is reached before reading any characters then -1 is
returned and varName is set to an empty string. If varName is not
specified then the return value will be the line (minus the newline
character) or an empty string if the end of the file is reached before
reading any characters. An empty string will also be returned if a line
contains no characters except the newline, so eof may have to be used to
determine what really happened. If the last character in the file is not
a newline character then gets behaves as if there were an additional
newline character at the end of the file. FileId must be stdin or the
return value from a previous call to open; it must refer to a file that
was opened for reading. Any existing end-of-file or error condition on |
the file is cleared at the beginning of the gets command.
file, line, read
gets, fgets - get a string from a stream
char *gets (char *s);
char *fgets (char *s, int n, FILE *stream);
gets reads characters from the standard input stream, stdin, into the
array pointed to by s, until a new-line character is read or an end-offile
condition is encountered. The new-line character is discarded and
the string is terminated with a null character.
fgets reads characters from the stream into the array pointed to by s,
until n-1 characters are read, or a new-line character is read and
transferred to s, or an end-of-file condition is encountered. The string
is then terminated with a null character.
lseek(2), read(2), ferror(3S), fopen(3S), fread(3S), getc(3S), scanf(3S),
When using gets, if the length of an input line exceeds the size of s,
indeterminate behavior may result.
If end-of-file is encountered and no characters have been read, no
characters are transferred to s and a NULL pointer is returned. If a
read error occurs, such as trying to use these functions on a file that
has not been opened for reading, a NULL pointer is returned. Otherwise s
PPPPaaaaggggeeee 1111 [ Back ]