A pouch that forms in the wall of the large intestine is called a diverticulum. When it becomes infected or inflamed it is called diverticulitis.
Infected pouches along the colon.
Copyright © Nucleus Medical Media, Inc.
It is not clear why the pouches form. Doctors believe a constant pressure is built up when food moves too slowly through the bowel. This pressure increases then pushes along the side walls creating pouches. Digested food or stool can become trapped in one of the pouches. This leads to inflammation and infection.
The following may contribute to diverticulitis:
Factor that increases your chance of getting diverticulitis include:
Symptoms can come on suddenly. They vary depending on the degree of the infection.
The doctor will ask about your symptoms and medical history. A physical and rectal exam will be done.
Finding the disease early is important. The pouch can break, releasing stool into the abdomen. This is a surgical medical emergency.
Tests may include:
Once the inflammation subsides, other tests may be performed, including:
The goals of immediate treatment are to:
Antibiotics and other drugs are given to fight the infection. Pain medications and drugs are given to decrease the abdominal pain.
For mild inflammation, you can drink clear liquids for the first two to three days. For a more severe case, you will be admitted to the hospital, where fluids are given intravenously (IV). Antibiotics will be given to you through IV. If you have nausea and vomiting, a plastic tube may be inserted through your nose into your stomach. This will help with the vomiting and make you feel more comfortable.
Changes in your diet can help prevent future attacks.
to remove the section of the bowel with pouches may be recommended if:
Surgery is also used to treat complications of diverticulitis, such as:
When surgery is done on an emergency basis, the surgeon will remove the diseased bowel. Because of the serious infection, the two ends of the bowel will not be hooked together. You will most likely end up with a piece of bowel coming out to your abdomen (
). After a period of 6-12 weeks, the surgeon will go back and hook the bowel back together.
If you are diagnosed with diverticulitis, follow your doctor's
The following recommendations may help prevent diverticulitis by improving the movement of stool through the bowel and decreasing constipation:
American Dietetic Associationhttp://www.eatright.org/
American Society of Colon and Rectal Surgeonshttp://www.fascrs.org/
National Digestive Diseases Information Clearinghousehttp://digestive.niddk.nih.gov/
Dietitians of Canadahttp://www.dietitians.ca/
Conn HF, Rakel RE.
Conn's Current Therapy
. 2001. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders Co;2001.
Diverticulosis and Diverticulitis.
National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases website. Available at:
Accessed July 28, 2008.
American Society of Colon and Rectal Surgeons website. Available at:
. Accessed July 28, 2008.
Goroll AH, Mulley AG.
Primary Care Medicine.
4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins;2000.
Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice
. 4th ed. St. Louis, MO: Mosby-Year Book, Inc;1998.
Weisiger R, Bilhartz L, Sleisenger MH, et al.
Sleisenger & Fordtran's Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease
. 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders Co;1998.
2/9/2012 DynaMed's Systematic Literature Surveillance
DynaMed's Systematic Literature Surveillance
: Hjern F, Wolk A, Håkansson N. Smoking and the risk of diverticular disease in women.
Br J Surg.
The #1 daily resource for health and lifestyle news!
Your daily resource for losing weight and staying fit.
We could all use some encouragement now and then - we're human!
Explore your destiny as you discover what's written in your stars.
The latest news, tips and recipes for people with diabetes.
Healthy food that tastes delicious too? No kidding.
Yoga for Back Pain
Pets HelpYour Heart
Are YouMoney Smart?