More than six years ago, London was chosen to host the 2012 Summer Olympics. But have the riots of last week threatened its bid? Historically, non-war-related safety concerns have not been grounds for relocation. And two notable tragedies, the 1972 Munich massacre and the 1996 Atlanta bombing, occurred in cities generally considered to be safe in the months leading up to the Games. But there have been bigger causes for concern, and all has not always ended well. Today, on the seventy-fifth anniversary of the closing ceremonies of the fraught 1936 Olympics in Berlin, here is a look at Berlin and other Olympic sites that experienced social and political unrest prior to the Games:
Event: 1916 Summer Olympics
Location: Berlin, Germany
Predicted catastrophe rating: 7. Even after Germany invaded Belgium in August, 1914, the country held firm to its dream of hosting the Olympics, hoping that the war would not last long.
Actual catastrophe rating: 10. In the summer of 1916, the Battle of the Somme was just beginning, and the Berlin stadium stood vacant. No Olympics would be held until 1920, in Antwerp.
Event: 1936 Summer Olympics
Location: Berlin, Germany
Predicted catastrophe rating: 8. Hitler had taken over as Chancellor three years earlier.
Actual catastrophe rating: Off the charts. While there are no confirmed reports of race- or religion-related violence directed at athletes, David Clay Large wrote this month in a Times Op-Ed that “the Olympics gave the Nazis a lesson in how to hide their vicious racism and anti-Semitism, and should offer today’s International Olympic Committee a cautionary tale when considering the location of future events.”
Notable boycotters: Prominent Jewish athletes, like track-and-fielders Milton Green and Norman Cahners. Spain, which was among the final contenders to host the Olympics, opted out to host its own event, the People’s Olympiad, which was aborted when the Spanish Civil War broke out.
Event: 1940 Summer and Winter Olympics
Locations: Tokyo and Sapporo, Japan. Helsinki, Finland. St. Moritz, Switzerland. Garmisch-Partenkirchen, Germany.
Predicted catastrophe rating: At first, it was a solid 9 as the second Sino-Japanese War compelled the I.O.C. to move the games from Japan to Europe. A year later, the rating was pushed up to 10 when the Second World War broke out.
Actual catastrophe rating: 10. The Olympics would not be held until 1948, in London.
Event: 1956 Summer Olympics
Location: Melbourne, Australia Predicted catastrophe-rating: 6. With the Suez Crisis and Soviet tanks rolling into Hungary, many countries worried that diplomatic instability would carry over to the Games.
Actual catastrophe-rating: 3. The event unfolded without much incident and was even referred to by some as the “Friendly Games.” Tensions did boil over, however, in the final minutes of a water polo contest, known later as the “Blood in the Water” match, between the Soviet Union and Hungary.
Notable boycotters: Egypt, Iraq, Lebanon, Netherlands, Spain, and Switzerland
Event: 1968 Summer Olympics
Location: Mexico City, Mexico
Predicted catastrophe-rating: 7. Ten days before the opening ceremonies, police officers and military forces shot into a crowd of unarmed students in what is known as the Tlatelolco massacre. The official death count is disputed, with some reported figures as high as three-thousand. To date, about forty names of the dead have been documented.
Actual catastrophe-rating: 1. The Games went off as planned.
Event: 1980 Summer Olympics
Location: Moscow, U.S.S.R.
Predicted catastrophe-rating: 5. Shortly after the Soviets invaded Afghanistan in December of 1979, President Carter announced a boycott of the Games: “It is very important for the world to realize how serious a threat the Soviets’ invasion of Afghanistan is.”
Actual catastrophe-rating: 3. The Games were largely a peaceful gathering; of course, that will happen when so many countries who don’t agree with you fail to show up, which also diminishes the value of the medals.
Notable boycotters: Then-Indiana Hoosier and future-Pistons star Isiah Thomas was among the Americans who qualified but could not attend. Over fifty other invited nations chose not to participate, including China, Canada, and Egypt.
Event: 1984 Summer Olympics
Location: Los Angeles, California
Predicted catastrophe-rating: 5. The Associated Press reported that the Soviet Union claimed “extremists working in concert with the White House planned to use hundreds of apartments from which terrorist groups could kill or kidnap Soviet athletes competing in the Los Angeles games.” But maybe they were just mad about the 1980 boycott.
Actual catastrophe rating: 3. No participants were killed or kidnapped. The only real disaster was for McDonald’s, whose promotion to give free food for U.S. medal wins backfired when so many of America’s viable competitors backed out of the games. As in 1980, it’s less fun if you don’t get to beat your biggest competitor.
Notable boycotters: Eighteen nations boycotted the event, including the top three medal winners from the previous Olympics in the U.S.S.R.
1936 Olympics in Berlin. Photograph by Josef Jindrich Sechtl, Wikimedia Commons.