Some supporters of heredity have based their investigations on the following evidences:
(i) Unequal intelligence levels of individuals of different occupational groups; (ii) Unequal intelligence levels of difference: racial categories; and (iii) The study of famous families of Edwards and degenerate families of Jukes.
(F) Unequal intelligence levels of individuals of different occupational ‘groups. Some supporters of heredity have drawn our attention towards considerable differences between the intelligence levels of different occupational groups. For example, in one of the studies it has been observed that the children of professional parents had an average I.Q. (intelligence quotient) of 116; those of semi-professional and managerial classes 112; clerical skilled trades, and retail business 107.5; semiskil1ed minor clerical occupation and business 105; slightly skilled 98; and finally the children of laborers, urban and rural farmers, 96. These differences in I.Q. were attributed mainly to heredity.
(ii) Unequal intelligence levels of racial categories such as Whites and Negroes. In America, a number of psychological intelligence tests were administered to the Negroes and Whites. In these studies of comparative intelligence the Whites faired better than the Negroes. For example, the tests applied to army recruits during World War I had revealed the average mental age of Negroes as 10.4 years and of the Whites as 13.1 years.
(iii) The Study of the families of Edwards and Jukes. The study of the families of Edwards and Jukes as an evidence in favor of heredity is quite fascinating. In America, towards the end of the 19th century, some 1391 descendants of Jonathan Edwards were identified out of which more than 295 were college graduates and among them 13 came to be college presidents or principals and one a vice-president of America. The records showed that there were no convicted criminals among them.
As against the above, in 1887, there were identified 1200 descendants of a certain ‘Juke’ who was born in New ‘York in 1720. Of these, 440 were physically defective or diseased, 310 were paupers, 130 convicted of crime, and 7 condemned as murderers. It was concluded that heredity and not environment, was the decisive cause of the difference of behavior in these families.
It can be safely said that in the present hour, waste management services hold a high level of relevance. It is extremely important to save the planet from getting negatively impacted by all the hazardous waste.. ReadBy: Jems Marryy | 2013-05-15
The world has finally realised the importance of our environment, gone are the days of extensive commercial activity with no thought for the wider environmental impacts, which is why it is vital to find a leading environmental consultancy.. ReadBy: Aadon Thompson | 2013-05-07
Rivers are flowing across a large number of states. Most of the north Indian states are having rivers such as Ganges, Yamuna, Sutlej, Narmada, Godavari, etc, which flows into the central India and are to some extent, responsible for diminishing the water woes.. ReadBy: Leo Turpin | 2013-05-02
1888 PressRelease - Educational segments for Public Television help keep the public informed on these important locations.. ReadBy: Patrick1Gall | 2013-05-01
The distinction between function and dysfunction can further be made clear by making use of the much fashionable organic analogy.. ReadBy: Mark vaughn | 2012-04-25 | News and Society
J.J. Rousseau, the French writer of the 18th century, in his famous book “The Social Contract” (1762) wrote that man in the state of nature was a ‘noble savage’ who led a life of “primitive simplicity and idyllic happiness”.. ReadBy: Mark vaughn | 2012-04-25 | News and Society
The relation or the type of unity between the part and the whole, between the individual and society is not merely a physical unity, or a functional unity, or organic or systematic unity, but it is something more than these.. ReadBy: Mark vaughn | 2012-04-25 | News and Society