This tutorial gives step by step instructions to design and create a model of cam. No prior experience of using Solid Edge or Engineering Reference is required for this tutorial. However an engineering knowledge on the design of cam will be useful.
Each step in the tutorial demonstrates the task to be performed with Graphical User Interface (GUI) of Engineering Reference. Some tasks may require interaction with Solid Edge also. This tutorial should take about 15 min to complete
In this tutorial you design and create a model of cam with the following specifications.
Follower Roller Dimensions
You will do the following tasks in the design of cam
Start Solid Edge and Engineering Reference
Engineering Reference environment is accessible through Solid Edge environment only. So if Solid Edge is not running currently, start Solid Edge from the windows start menu.
To start Cams Module, Select the Engineering Reference tab from the Edge bar. Scroll down the edge bar until you find Cams
Double click on Cams to start the Cams Module
Entering Basic Input
From the Engineering Reference interface start Cams module.
Enter the Pitch Circle Diameter, Cam Width and the Follower Roller dimensions.
Follower Roller Dimensions :
Leave the other parameters in the GUI to default
Setting parameters and calculating the output for each segment
Now switch to Calculated Results tab to input the details of each segment of the cam. Input the following parameters for the segment 1
Click on Calculate to display the results for the first segment. The segment count moves to the next segment.
The segment count is set to 2 now. This indicates that the calculation is complete for the first segment and input is required for the segment 2. Input the following parameters for the segment 2
Click on Calculate to display the results for the second segment.
The segment count is set to 3 now. This indicates that the calculation is complete for the second segment and input is required for the segment 3. Input the following parameters for segment 3.
Click on Calculate to display the results for the third segment.
Creating the 3D Model
Use the Create button to create 3D model of cam.
: If the current environment is a Part Environment then a new part is created. Use File, Save As command in Solid Edge to save the file to a different location. If the current environment is Assembly Environment then an instance of the 3D model is added to the assembly and the assembly is saved.
This concludes tutorial
In this Tutorial you have learned how to use Cams Module to design and create a 3D model of cam for the given inputs
The Design Parameters tab
The Calculated Results tab
Using the Cam Module
Symbols and Conventions used in Engineering Reference
Return to Solid Edge Index