Enter a name to search for Wyoming birth certificates. This website was created to provide genealogists with access to Wyoming birth certificates.. Additional information on how to obtain Wyoming birth certificates is available below.
Return to Birth Certificates home page.
Birth certificates contain information about a person's birth, including the date of birth, place of birth, sometimes the names of the mother and father, and even the physician who attended the birth. Birth certificates issued by state and local governments will often include the place of residence, and the mother's maiden name.
Birth certificates can be used to establish a person's date and place of birth. Most birth certificates provide the mother's maiden name. Birth certificates are often required to obtain other documents, licenses or to prove eligibility.
This webpage gives you access to all of the online databases containing Wyoming birth records, Wyoming birth ceritificates, Wyoming birth notices, Wyoming birth indexes, and other related Wyoming genealogy records.
Birth records have long been used to help with genealogy research. They are considered to be "primary source" records, because the information is recorded by an eye witness, at the time the birth takes place. The Internet has allowed people to store birth records into various online archives. This has brought access to online birth records much more easier for genealogy researchers.
Newspapers frequently publish notices of births, and in addition to birth certificates, are a popular source of research by genealogists. Newspapers typically do not announce the names of the newborn, but list the sex of the child, the names of the parents, the place and date of birth.
On this page you will find the most comprehensive databases containing birth records of Wyoming. We also suggest searching for "Wyoming birth records" using Google.com, which will yield all such databases.
Search Wyoming Birth Certificates
How to Obtain Wyoming Birth Certificates
Wyoming began recording births and deaths in 1909. Very few birth and death records were kept on the county level prior to that time. Marriages have been recorded statewide since 1941. Earlier marriages were recorded by the county clerk in the county were the license was issued. All Wyoming marriage records from 1869 to 1970 are available from the Wyoming State Archives and Historical Department for all Wyoming counties.
For birth and death records from July 1909 and marriage records from May 1941, contact:
Vital Records Services
Personal check or money order should be made payable to Vital Records Services. Cost for copy is $12.00. To verify current fees, the telephone number is (307) 777-7591. Information on how to obtain certified copies is also available via the internet at http://wdhfs.state.wy.us/vital_records
For prior records, write to the clerk of the county in question.
Recommended Genealogy Websites