Definition of division :
1. A course of notes so running into each other as to form one series or chain, to be sung in one breath to one syllable.
2. A grade or rank in classification; a portion of a tribe or of a class; or, in some recent authorities, equivalent to a subkingdom.
3. Difference of condition; state of distinction; distinction; contrast.
4. Disunion; difference in opinion or feeling; discord; variance; alienation.
5. One of the groups into which a fleet is divided.
6. One of the larger districts into which a country is divided for administering military affairs.
7. Separation of the members of a deliberative body, esp. of the Houses of Parliament, to ascertain the vote.
8. That which divides or keeps apart; a partition.
9. The act or process of diving anything into parts, or the state of being so divided; separation.
10. The distribution of a discourse into parts; a part so distinguished.
11. The portion separated by the divining of a mass or body; a distinct segment or section.
12. The process of finding how many times one number or quantity is contained in another; the reverse of multiplication; also, the rule by which the operation is performed.
13. The separation of a genus into its constituent species.
14. Two companies of infantry maneuvering as one subdivision of a battalion.
15. Two or more brigades under the command of a general officer.
voice, disseverment, department, partitioning, fragment, year, autopsy, affiliate, boundary, fracture, variability, atom, character, instalment, column, particle, verse, form, contrasting, commune, segmentation, moiety, variant, paragraph, component part, unit, category, passage, cutting, offshoot, divergence, classification, chapter, theatrical role, line, schism, disjuncture, disunion, wedge, naval division, discussion section, role, caste, distribution, social class, divider, office, discrepancy, severance, component, lobe, breaking, scene, disagreement, phrase, bishopric, fission, family, variableness, reduction, breakdown, ramification, distinction, dispute, constituent, variation, ingredient, organ, apartment, sectionalisation, parceling, selection, constituency, demarcation, parish, sharing, divergency, clause, divorcement, distinguishing, admeasurement, grade, collect, agency, course of study, dominion, contribution, plane section, stratum, dissension, air division, class, episode, persona, arm, course, act, degree, front, village, barrier, element, township, diagnosis, ward, parting, disseverance, function, movement, subsidiary, socio-economic class, lump, surgical incision, book, sort, splitting, section, assemble, sectionalization, variance, analysis, course of instruction, race, prelacy, kind, range
bisection (part of speech: noun)
disjunction (part of speech: noun)
disengagement, split, fissure, dissection, partition, disarticulation, amputation, disunity, disassembly, bisection, divorce, cleavage, disassociation, break, part, rent, slice, cut, incision, disintegration, disconnection
separation (part of speech: noun)
crew (part of speech: noun)
coterie, herd, force, detachment, detail, troop, posse, fellowship, cell, retinue, litter, flock, fleet, bunch, collection, wing, band, complement, battalion, crowd, fraternity, group, sect, team, caucus, society, crew, union, coalition, assemblage, outfit, party, pack, junta, club, school, circle, regiment, nest, platoon, hive, phalanx, army, set, string, company, gang, tribe, covey, league, faction, body, ring, staff, host, cadre, aggregation, brigade, drove, mob, bevy, troupe, cabal, clique, clan, assembly, squad, colony
allotment (part of speech: noun)
commission, segment, allowance, measure, lot, quota, chunk, apportionment, quantum, allocation, portion, parcel, piece, allotment, stipend, share, proportion, stake, percentage, budget, assignment, ration, dispensation
alienation (part of speech: noun)
region (part of speech: noun)
nation, precinct, area, province, locality, territory, duchy, district, borough, earldom, neighborhood, dukedom, field, kingdom, Shire, region, empire, commonweal, tract, town, domain, bailiwick, state, beat, circuit, canton, riding, municipality, realm, county, country, place, city, quarter
calculation (part of speech: noun)
estimation, statistics, calculation, gauge, thought, approximation, value, conclusion, judgement, mathematics, tally, evaluation, account, supposition, presumption, consideration, rank, assessment, arithmetic, method, computation, schedule, appraisal, program, study, plot, enumeration, system, calculus, quantification, score, inference, algorithm, guess, multiplication, sum, count, plan, reckoning, valuation, deduction, triangulation, determination, algebra, scheme, measurement, total
portion (part of speech: noun)
- Whatever might be the result for others, they themselves had nothing to suffer from this division. - "Stories from Tagore", Rabindranath Tagore.
- Another division went to the east of the Katberg and the third to the west of the Didima; then the three bodies moved towards each other in open order. - "By Veldt and Kopje", William Charles Scully.
- I have no time to enter into detail, but I regard this division as a most remarkable fulfilment of the prophetic word. - "Rome, Turkey and Jerusalem", Edward Hoare.