The more things change, the more they stay the same
Today, a few words from the past.
"By February of this year, there were only 47 workers in private employment to support each 10 workers for our various governments. And make no mistake: Every American worker must pay about a fifth of the salary of a government worker, plus fringe benefits, office space, equipment, mimeograph paper and all the things a government worker uses.
See full article text
"The average private individual makes between $5,000 and $6,000 and pays about a fourth of that in taxes. In a lifetime, the experts say, the average individual earns about a quarter of a million dollars — a princely sum — and pays out about $60,000 in taxes at present rates.
"There are about $50 million families in the U.S. All government expenses must be paid by them — state, local and federal. Growing population almost automatically means larger state and local expenses, but the federal government does not meet population-connected needs of police, firemen, schools, sewers and other local services in any great degree. Yet, federal expenses have been growing faster than the population.
"The Administration's new budget of more than $107 billion in actual spendng works out to over $2,100 for each American family. Much of this budget is made up of loans to prosperous groups, aid to prosperus communities, grants to uncooperative and wasteful foreign governments, status projects for local areas and many other items which could be cancelled or deferred.
"The reason the budget is so big is that small groups who want specific projects are very demanding, while taxpayers in general suffer in silence.
"But relatively minor decreases in the budget would mean large reductions in the burden on individual taxpayers.,
"For instance, a $1 billion reduction works out to a $20 break for the average family. A $10 billion reduction would mean a $200 lightening of the average family load.
"Congress needs to hear from you. Your message:" your family needs the $200 more than it needs new Federal projects. Cut the spending. Cut the taxes."
The Daily Record (Stroudsburg)
April 9, 1963