Environmental Studies Courses, Fall 2007
ANSO 1090.01 Topics in Geography: Geographic Transitions (3 credits)
This is a teacher certification course. It will be an exploration of most areas of geography: land-human relationships, regions, spacial interaction, population, resources and socioeconomic development. Students will look at geography in a changing world, doing so from the perspective of future teachers in elementary and secondary classrooms.
International Studies, Environmental Studies [CUL, HST]
SCIN 1010.01 and 1010.06 Topics in Physical Science: Natural Disasters
This is a survey of the various natural disasters and their causes. We will explore their relationship to Earth processes and the long term risks to human populations. We will also examine how scientists determine the causes, effects, and prediction of catastrophes. May be repeated if content differs. . (SCI)
SCIN 1100.01 Earth Science and the Environment and SCIN 1101.01Earth Science and the
An introduction to planet Earth in space, the study of the structure of the Earth, the geological processes that control the development of the Earth's surface, and weather and climate. The student will be exposed to the following scientific disciplines: geology, oceanography, meteorology, climatology, and astronomy. The student will become familiar with the scientific basis for many day-to-day physical phenomena. Open to non-majors. Laboratory required. SCIN 1100 and SCIN 1101 must be taken concurrently. (SCI)
HIST 1010 05 Topics in History: American Environmental History
Environmental history examines how humans have interacted with our environment over time to extend our understanding of the past beyond wars, politics, laws, treaties, and government. This course will look at American history--including all the familiar episodes, such as the Pilgrim's first Thanksgiving, the slave trade, the Revolutionary War, the Civil War, and westward expansion--from the point of view of the land. Our questions will include: How did various people view the land? How were their experiences shaped by the land? How did their activity change the environment? This course counts towards the Environmental Studies Minor and meets the HST general education requirement.