This is a classic article from New Scientist's archive, republished as part of our 50th anniversary celebrations
The repression of scientists and intellectuals during Stalin's time could create the impression that dissidence was widespread among them. However, this was not the case. Stalin was an anti-intellectual in many of his actions. He often supported badly educated or just primitive people, considering them to be "great" scientists because they had declared their intention of carrying out some extraordinary achievement. Sometimes this support was justified. But very often Stalin supported semi-educated pseudoscientists like T. D. Lysenko. Such scientists then tried to establish a dominating position through ideological pressure and by using the apparatus of terror. This cruelty and terror of the state machine made organised dissidence in science impossible.
Khrushchev's bold denunciation of the Stalin terror in 1956, and his rudimentary attempts to establish some legal justice in the country, stimulated a better intellectual climate, including the scientific. Khrushchev's initial measures in support of science, encouraging scientific exchange with the West and developing new science centres, together with the rehabilitation of political prisoners, won enthusiastic support. During this period (1953-57) he was even sensitive to demands about Lysenko. In 1956 Lysenko was dismissed from his position as president of the Lenin Academy of Agricultural Sciences of the USSR. He was reinstated in 1961 when Lysenko sided with Khrushchev in his quarrel with agricultural experts and scientists.
An important centre of scientific and political opposition arose in the agricultural and biological sciences around the Lysenko issue. Hundreds of scientists - including chemists, physicists and others - united against Lysenko and against Khrushchev's support of Lysenko. Khrushchev attacked these scientists for opposing Lysenko's biology. Two tragic episodes exposed the explosive relations between Khrushchev and the scientific community. They strained Khrushchev's relations with two groups - nuclear physicists and spacecraft and rocketry technologists - who were the elite of the elite.
It was suppressed geneticists who in 1955 - 56 made a number of attempts to arouse nuclear physicists to the genetic dangers of radioactivity. Then, a tragic catastrophe occurred in 1958, which made nuclear physicists extremely sensitive to the radiobiological and genetics issue. For many years nuclear reactor waste had been buried in a deserted area a few dozen miles from the Urals town of Blagovehsnesk. The waste was not buried very deep. Nuclear scientists had often warned about the dangers involved in this primitive method of wasted disposal, but nobody listened. Suddenly there was an enormous explosion. The nuclear reactions had led to overheating in the burial grounds. The explosion poured radioactive materials high into the sky. It was just the wrong weather for such a tragedy. Strong winds blew the radioactive clouds hundreds of miles away.
Tens of thousands of people were affected, hundreds dying, though the real figures have never been made public. Many villages and towns were only ordered to evacuate when the symptoms of radiation sickness were already apparent. The irradiated population was distributed over many clinics. But no one really knew how to treat the different stages of radiation sickness, how to measure the radiation dose received by the patients and their offspring. Radiation genetics and radiology could have provided the answer, but neither of them was available.
All this greatly shocked the nuclear scientists, and their opposition to Khrushchev's anti-genetic stand became too strong to resist. The government was forced to legalise classical genetics, at least for radiobiology and medicine. Lysenko's only remaining power base was agriculture.
The other line of resistance developed in space research. In October 1960 Khrushchev decided to head the Soviet delegation to a meeting of the UN General Assembly. He and other heads of East European countries were to travel on the ship "Baltika". Always obsessed with the idea of showing the Americans Soviet superiority, Khrushchev issued a directive that a Soviet rocket to the Moon should be launched to coincide with the time of the Baltika's docking in New York.
The elite of Soviet rocket technologists was at the "cosmodrome". However, when the button was pressed the ignition did not work. According to safety regulations, any inspection could only take place after the fuel had been removed. This was a long process and would mean postponing the whole spectacle. Marshal Nedelin, who was in charge, decided to investigate the fault immediately. The special ladders and platforms were moved to the rocket and dozens of engineers and experts started to explore the multi-rocket system. Suddenly, the ignition started to work. The rocket fell because it was blocked by the ladders. All the men and women in the area were killed. They were some of the best representatives of Soviet space technology.
The government's attempt to hide the real story - the official press referred to Nedelin's death as being due to a plane crash! - meant that the tragic death of many prominent scientists and technical experts passed without even short obituaries. The duplicate rocket was later launched and declared a great achievement. But this would not heal the wounds of those who had lost their relatives, friends and colleagues.
These are just a few examples that show how Khrushchev began to lose the confidence of Soviet scientists.
First published in New Scientist on the 4 November 1976
Barefoot scientist: Trofim Denisovich Lysenko came to prominence in 1927 as a "barefoot scientist" who promised great improvements for Soviet agriculture -- which rarely appeared. He espoused a form of Lamarkism: the idea that plants could pass on acquired traits to their offspring and criticised academic geneticists, claiming that their isolated laboratory work would never help the Soviet people. Only after Khrushchev's dismissal in 1964 did investigations into Lysenko's work finally destroy his reputation.
50 Years of New Scientist: The Best Articles - find many more in our exclusive Special Report. You can also have your say on what you think was the biggest scientific advance of the last 50 years, in our New Scientist Forum
If you would like to reuse any content from New Scientist, either in print or online, please contact the syndication department first for permission. New Scientist does not own rights to photos, but there are a variety of licensing options available for use of articles and graphics we own the copyright to.
Have your say
Only subscribers may leave comments on this article. Please log in.
Only personal subscribers may leave comments on this article