REEF SSCR-1 "Narwhal" redesigned Trident Submersible Carrier:
In their exploration of the East Coast of the United States, the R.E.E.F. found an underwater Pre-Rifts US navy underwater bunker. In this bunker were two Trident class submersible carriers that had been under construction before the coming of the rifts and were virtually complete. Along with the submarines themselves was equipment to make parts for the vessel. After finishing the vessels with some small modification, they were commissioned in the R.E.E.F. Navy. The equipment was moved to the R.E.E.F. base in what had been the Old American State of Florida and it was decided that more vessels would be constructed to a modified design. The design of the vessel is known only to the New Navy and the R.E.E.F. The submarine also furnished the REEF with advanced underwater systems. It was decided that a special covered bunker would be constructed and used to build Narwhal class submersible carriers to prevent observation from other parties. The covered bunker is also used for refitting vessels when not in use for construction and a second has been constructed. One of the largest concerns by the R.E.E.F. about spying is the Coalition. This vessel is the closest the REEF has to a true carrier and are considered very valuable and will not be risked lightly.
The main modification to the design is the modification of the launch system to enable Logan transformable fighters instead of Manta Ray submersible fighters. The two craft are of similar size so the modification is fairly straight forward. While there were a number of Manta Ray fighters in the bunker when the vessels were discovered, the R.E.E.F. considered the Logan veritech fighter to be more flexible and was already being manufactured. The Manta-Ray fighters were given the New Navy as a good will gesture. Operation is identical to that of a standard Trident launch system and the same number of fighters can be carried. The fighters simply launch from the bays when the vessel is on the surface using powerful electromagnetic catapults. On the surface, each launch requires about thirty seconds to lock a fighter on the catapult and then accelerate the fighter along the launch rails. Launching underwater requires more time, about forty-five seconds per launch. This is because the hangars have to be evacuated of air and the fighters have to be moved into the launch area while flooded. The submersible carrier does not have enough air to be wasted on launches and it is stored in tanks after the hangar has been flooded. To be retrieved, the fighters must land where the launch rails are located and then are dragged back into the landing bay / hangar.
Weapon system modifications come in two stages with the first two vessels being modified less than later submersible carriers. The initial two vessels had their two Ion Cannons and Laser Cannons replaced by Particle Beam designs. The particle beam design was copied from the rifle on the USA G-14 Space Glitterboy and has equal range but have a much higher rate of fire. The particle beams also inflict greater damage than the laser cannons and are smaller than the Ion Cannons. While the weapons have a limited number of shots, the capacitors are far larger than those carried on the power armor and is not considered to be a limitation. Like on the Trident class, all weapon mounts are retractable to reduce drag. Both cruise and long range missile launchers are retained from the original design even though cruise missiles are viewed by the R.E.E.F. as having limited effectiveness. This is due to the fact that cruse missiles only carry a slighter larger warhead and are not effective against aircraft and missiles. It would have been virtually impossible to modify the almost completed vessels due to requiring structural changes so the launchers were retained. The third and later members of the class were built by the R.E.E.F. with two extra long range missile launchers in place of the cruise missile launchers. Torpedo tubes were retained unmodified in both designs along with advanced decoy systems. While some Pre-Rifts sources list the Trident class as carrying depth charges, this is incorrect and none of the Narwhal class carries depth charges.
In addition to fighters, the Trident class carries a number of power armors. The REEF carries the Katana SAMAS due to being very flexible even though it is not as capable under water as the Semper Fi power armor. The REEF also did not want to create a new production line to manufacture an additional power armor design.
Model Type: REEF designation SSCR-1 (New Navy designation for
Tridents is SSVN-22)
Class: Light Submersible Carrier
Crew: 144, 14 Officers, 18 Chief Petty Officers, and 112 Enlisted (Has a high degree of automation)
Troop Capacity: 60 total; 20 ADCAP Logan pilots and 40 Marines.
Robots, Power Armors, and Vehicles:
|40||REEF-PA03A Katana Power Armors|
|12||ADCAP Logan Veritech Fighters|
M.D.C. by Location:
|Retractable Particle Beam Turrets (4, Superstructure):||400 each|
|Torpedo Tubes (6 4 in front, 2 in rear):||100 each|
|Long-Range Missile Batteries (4 in first two ships, 6 in others):||150 each|
|Cruise Missile Launchers (4, first and second ship in class only):||200 each|
|Manta-Ray / Logan Launch Bays (2):||500 each|
| Bow Planes (2):||200 each|
| Pump Jet Propulsor (1):||500|
| Main Body:||3,200|
 Destroying the submarines bow planes will reduce the submarine's ability to change depths but will not eliminate it. It also makes it difficult for the submarine's crew to control the submarine giving a penalty of -25% to all piloting rolls.
 Destroying the submarines Pump Jet Propulsor causes serious problems. The submarine will no longer be able to use forward momentum and the bow planes to keep the submarine level. It is recommended that ballast takes are immediately blown so submarine comes to surface.
 Depleting the M.D.C. of the main body destroys the submarine's structural integrity, causing it to sink. If the submarine is underwater, the entire crew will die unless protected by environmental armors that can withstand the pressure that the submarine is under. If on the surface, there are enough flotation devices and inflatable life rafts to accommodate everyone aboard. Note: The vessel's bridge is not on the mainsail but is instead deep within the submarine's hull.
Water Surface: 60 knots ( 111.3 km/69.6 mph)
Underwater: 40 knots (73.6 km/46 mph)
Maximum Depth: 2.5 miles (4 km)
Maximum Effective Range: Effectively Unlimited due to fusion engines (needs to refuel every 20 years and requires maintenance as well). The vessel carries 12 months of supplies on board.
Height: 50 feet (15.2 meters)
Width: 65 feet (19.8 meters)
Length: 560 feet (170.7 meters)
Weight: 19,400 tons
Cargo: 60 tons of nonessential equipment and supplies. Each enlisted crew member has a small locker for personal items and uniforms. Ship's officers have more space for personal items. Most of the ship's spaces are taken up by extra ammo, armor, troops, weapons, fighters, and engines.
Power System: Nuclear; average energy life of 20 years.
Market Cost: Not for sale; many nations and organizations would pay hundreds of millions to billions of credits for a new and undamaged Trident or Narwhal Submarine.
- Retractable Particle Beam Cannons (4): Cannons are on the top of the submarine with two forward of the main sail and two aft of the submarines sail. The weapons are mounted in the same locations and replace both the Ion Cannons and the Laser Cannons on the Trident class submersible carriers. Weapons are used underwater against submarines and torpedoes and above the water against aircraft, missiles, and other targets. The weapon system is essentially a copy of the particle beam cannon off the USA-G14 placed in turret style retractable mounting and a larger than the standard capacitor from the power armor version. The system can be retracted so that it does not disrupt the hydrodynamics of the submarine. While weapons do not have an unlimited payload like the original weapons, the weapons have a greater rate of fire. Normally controlled by a gunner inside of mount but can also be controlled by crew on the bridge of the sub in case of casualties.
- Heavy Torpedo Tubes (6): The submarine is designed to carry torpedoes as one of it main weaponry. While smaller torpedoes can be fitted as well, the REEF mostly carries heavy torpedoes that inflict maximum damage. Four torpedo tubes are mounted in the front of the sub and two torpedo tubes are mounted in the rear of the sub.
- Long-Range Missile Batteries (4 or 6): The first two ships of the class carry four of these launchers but later ships of the class carry two additional long range missile launchers using the space for the four cruise missile launchers and payload. Since the long range missiles do only slightly less damage than cruise missiles, this great increase in payload is a great advantage. These launchers are used to engage enemy aircraft or missiles as well as against surface ships or land targets. All missile launchers can only be used on the surface, or from up to 30 feet (9.1 m) below the water's surface. A similar missile to the modern ASROC missile is available for launchers as well. System can target more than one target at the same time.
- Cruise Missile Batteries (4 - First Two of Class): The first two ships of the Narwhal class carry cruise missile launchers but on later ship classes they have been replaced with more long range missile launchers. A powerful but limited missile systems. Cruise missiles have minuses to hit small targets and the ship cannot carry a very large number of them. Long range missiles can also almost get the same effect for damage as cruise missiles, making them not as useful as they once were. System can target more than one target at the same time.
- Advanced Decoys (8): The submarine carries eight advanced decoy drones. They are a small automated vehicles that creates a false sonar image designed to mimic the submarine's sonar signature. It has a small propulsion system that can simulate movement (has a top speed of 10 knots) and maneuvers. If decoys are not destroyed, they can be recovered and repaired. Rifts Earth decoy systems are assumed to not operate against Phase World weapons due to technological difference.
- Noisemakers: The submarine carries noisemakers to decoy torpedoes. These noisemakers are similar to those used by Coalition submarines. The noisemakers are launched from the middle of the submarine.
Maximum Effective Range: On the Surface: 11,000 feet (about 2 miles/3.2 km), Under Water: 5,500 feet (about 1 mile /1.6 km)
Mega Damage: 4D6x10 per blast
Rate of Fire: Equal to combined hand to hand attacks of the gunner.
Payload: 60 shots in each capacitor, recharges at the rate of one shot every 30 seconds for each Particle Beam
Maximum Effective Range: 40 miles (64 km)
Mega-Damage: By Heavy torpedo warhead type (See Revised Rifts Torpedoes).
Rate of Fire: Each tube can fire once per melee round
Payload: 72 total: The REEF subs normally carry only the heaviest warheads available.
Maximum Effective Range: As per long range missile type (Go to Revised bomb and missile table).
Mega Damage: As per long range missile type (Go to Revised bomb and missile table).
Rate of Fire: One at a time, or volleys of 2, 4, or 8 per launcher per melee (32 or 48 total).
Payload: For first and second ships of class: 128 long range missiles total with 32 per launcher. For third and later ships of the class: 192 long range missiles total with 32 per launcher.
Maximum Effective Range: As per cruise missile type (Go to Revised bomb and missile table).
Mega Damage: As per cruise missile type (Go to Revised bomb and missile table).
Rate of Fire: One at a time or in Volleys of 2, 3, or 4 per melee.
Payload: First and second ships of class only: 8 total; two per launcher. Does not carry any extra missiles for reloads.
Effects: The decoy has an 80% chance of fooling ordinary non military sonars and non smart guided torpedoes, the decoy has a 50% chance of fooling military level sonars (like those of the Coalition), and the decoy has a 25% chance of fooling advanced military sonars (Like those of the New Navy and Triax) and smart torpedoes.
Decoys have a duration of 30 minutes (120 melee rounds)
Maximum Effective Range: Not Applicable
Rate of Fire: Ship can launch one drone per melee.
Payload: 8 Decoys
Effect: 50% of decoying normal torpedoes and 20% of decoying smart torpedoes.
Rate of Fire: 2 at a time (Can be reloaded in one melee)
Payload: 20 Noisemakers.
The submersible carrier has all systems standard on a robot vehicle plus the following special features:
- Enhanced Radar: Can identify and simultaneously track up to 364 different targets. Range: 500 miles (800 km).
- Advanced Hull Sonar System: Range of 80 miles (69.5 nautical miles / 128.7 km). This hull sonar system has both a passive and active system built in. Sonar system can track up to 32 targets at one time and has a +10% to read sensor and weapon system skill rolls. Sonar also has built in communication system and sound pulse system to detect obstacles, objects, vessels and fish (schools and large animals), as well as measure distances and depth.
- Advanced Towed Array Sonar: The system is basically a long and very sensitive sonar system carried behind the submarine on a long cable. Range of 250 miles (217.2 nautical miles / 402.3 km). This is an incredibly sensitive and is as powerful as the special purpose pre-rifts SURTASS system. This towed array sonar system has both a passive and active system built in. Sonar system can track up to 64 targets at one time.
- ESM: This system is mounted in mounted in the superstructure and is extended in a similar manner to a periscope. The antenna is very hard to detect both visually and by radar. Can detect another radar system at 125% of the range of the transmitting radar.
- Quieted propulsion and Anechoic Coating: The ship is designed with a very quiet propeller design, the submarine's reactors make very little noise, and the ship is coated by a sonar defeating rubber coating. The submarine is -50% to detect when traveling at less that 15 knots and is at -30% to detect when traveling at speeds greater than that.
[ Altarian TM, Bandito Arms TM, Chipwell Armaments TM, Coalition States TM, Cyber-Knight TM, Federation of Magic TM, Free Quebec TM, Golden Age Weaponsmiths TM, Iron Heart Armaments TM, Kittani TM, Larsen's Brigade TM, Mechanoids TM, Mega-Damage TM, Megaversal Legion TM, Millennium Tree TM, Mutants in Orbit TM, Naruni Enterprises TM, New Navy TM, New Sovietskiy TM, NGR TM, Northern Gun TM, Phase World TM, Psyscape TM, Rifter TM, SAMAS TM, S.D.C. TM, Shemarrian TM, Splugorth TM, Stormspire TM, Sunaj TM, Tolkeen TM, Triax TM, Wellington Industries TM, Wilk's Laser Technologies TM, and Xiticix TM are trademarks owned by Kevin Siembieda and Palladium Books Inc. ]
[ Beyond the Supernatural®, Heroes Unlimited®, Nightbane®, Ninjas & Superspies®, Palladium Fantasy®, and Rifts® are registered trademarks owned by Kevin Siembieda and Palladium Books Inc. ]
[ Macross®, Robotech®, Robotech: Sentinels®, SDF-1®, Southern Cross®, and Zentraedi® are registered trademarks owned and licensed by Harmony Gold USA, Inc. ]
Mischa has no art home Page at present but many other items on my site.
Writeup by Kitsune (E-Mail Kitsune).
Copyright © 1998, 1999, 2000, & 2001, Kitsune. All rights reserved.