American Heritage® Dictionary of the English Language, Fourth Edition
- n. The theological and philosophical system of Saint Thomas Aquinas, a system that dominated scholasticism.
Century Dictionary and Cyclopedia
- n. The doctrine of the followers of Thomas Aquinas, an eminent theologian of the thirteenth century (died 1274). Thomas Aquinas held two sources of knowledge—faith and reason—the doctrines of unconditional predestination and efficacious grace, and a physical as well as a moral efficacy in the sacraments; and he denied the doctrine of the immaculate conception. His theology, embodied in his great work, “Summa Theologiæ,” was based on a philosophical system rather than on either the Bible or the traditional teaching of the church. It was an attempt to reconcile Aristotelian philosophy with the Christian faith. It is of very high authority in the Roman Catholic Church, and its influence is great even outside of that church. Also
GNU Webster's 1913
- n. (Eccl. Hist.) The doctrine of Thomas Aquinas, esp. with respect to predestination and grace.
- n. the comprehensive theological doctrine created by Saint Thomas Aquinas in the 13th century and still taught by the Dominicans
“Those of us who had the honour and the rare advantage of knowing him intimately and well over many years find, upon looking back upon that vast experience, something unique, over and above the learning, over and above the application of that learning to Thomism, which is surely the very heart of the Dominican affair.”
“Just as Aquinas respected the Church Fathers, I think there is room within "Thomism" as a theological tradition to recognize that the Church's liturgy is a part of Sacred Tradition and thereby incorporate it as a theological source, using the insights of insights of theologians like Fr.”
“If that is true, then it is an organism, even if it rapidly ceases being one--invocations of "Thomism" and "Thomistic propositions" supposedly to the contrary notwithstanding.”
“Many consider this to be the most perfect and complete summary of Christian theology, and he established an entire type of Christian philosophy known as "Thomism", which is followed to this day.”
“If such a philosopher were to say, "There is a conflict between the teachings of the First Vatican Council and the science of philosophy on the ability of human reason to demonstrate the existence of God," we could easily point out to him that there are other schools of philosophy, such as Thomism, that have no such conflict, and that he is wrong to claim for his own school the mantle of philosophy as a whole.”
“↑ sourced from the section entitled 'Thomism' in the Stanford Enclopdia on Thomas:”
“I had a supposition, since he bills his blog as "Just Thomism" that his conceptions were basically Aristotelian-Thomistic.”
“James Chastek over at Just Thomism had an interesting post today about the futility of demanding proof of everything.thomism. wordpress.com/”
“The following is an essay by James Chastek at Just Thomism that I found especially interesting.”
“Jay Richards has posted another installment in his series on Thomism and "Thomist" Critics of Intelligent Design.”
Looking for tweets for Thomism.