A Helping Hand Is Worth MillionsJonathan Fahey, 12.03.08, 12:00 AM EST
Military-sponsored researchers try new fusion of man and machine.
The quest for bionic limbs is yielding stunning results: Prototype prosthetic arms can pick a credit card out of a pocket, scratch an itchy nose and even move based on a human's brain waves.
But while these prototypes are spectacularly more advanced than anything developed before, they also show just how far researchers and engineers have to go before they can approach the sublime handiness of the hand. Our natural limbs will surely always be more flexible, sensitive and dexterous than any copy our limbs can design and build.
But that doesn't mean we should stop trying. University of Michigan materials science and engineering professor David Martin, along with colleagues from several other departments at Michigan, are working together on the basic science that could lead to bionic limbs that would impress even the 1970s TV hero Steve Austin.
They are being funded by a grant from the U.S. Army in the amount of--you guessed it--$6 million. The hope, of course, is to restore some semblance of normal life to soldiers who have lost limbs, like the scores of Iraq veterans victimized by those wretched improvised explosive devices.
The Michigan researchers are working on one of the thorniest problems confronting bionic body parts, their interfaces with human bone, muscle, nerves and skin.
Recent advances in bionic limbs are largely thanks to the U.S. military's research and development agency, the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency, or DARPA, which is funding a program called "revolutionizing prosthetics" that focuses specifically on arms and hands.
One of DARPA's two main contractors, inventor Dean Kamen's company DEKA, has produced a prototype that has been tested on patients in laboratories and will soon be put into trials in peoples' homes.
A more advanced prototype, the responsibility of Johns Hopkins University's Applied Physics Laboratory, could be ready for clinical trials in 2010.
Amputees who don these complex limbs will control them through nerves emerging from the shoulder that have been rerouted and attached to otherwise useless muscles in their chests. This technique was pioneered by Todd Kuiken, director of the Neural Engineering Center for Bionic Medicine at the Rehabilitation Center of Chicago. Sensors in the chest muscles detect nerve impulses and transfer those impulses electrically to move arms and hands accordingly.
The brain is tricked into thinking the nerves are attached in the right place. It's an uncanny and amazing feat. Patients testing out the limbs have even found themselves using their prosthetic arms without consciously thinking.
But this method has limits. For example, there is only so much chest muscle real estate available for nerve attachment, which can limit the number of nerve connections and therefore how much the prosthetic arm can do.
One part of the Michigan work is to try to find a more sophisticated way of connecting the bodys wires--nerves--with the wires that would move the prosthetic arm and hand.
Martin's idea is to build what he describes as tiny soup cans, about a centimeter long and three or four millimeters across, that would be filled with muscle cells from the patient and a highly-conductive polymer foam called poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene), or PEDOT.
This polymer would create a scaffold for the muscle cells, allow blood and nutrients to flow to the cell and transmit electrical impulses.
Nerves could be coaxed to grow into these cans and create neuromuscular junctions with the muscle cells inside, just like the neuromuscular junctions that spark all of our muscles. The conductive polymer would be able turn nerve signals into electrical impulses and send the signals either wirelessly or through wires to the prosthetic arm and hand.
"This way, you can intimately integrate the device with live tissue," says Martin. "It ought to be faster, with higher resolution, and we could put them on several nerves."
Another team at Michigan is working on the skin-prosthesis interface, a place where infection often causes havoc. They are trying to develop a material that will mimic skin like that around our gums, which emits a constant ooze of mucous to protect against bacteria. This new material would automatically and constantly squirt tiny amounts of protective fluid where the skin and the device meet.
Yet another team is working on the bone-prosthesis interface, but neither the bone work nor the skin work is quite as far along as Martin's nerve and muscle work.
So far, Martin and his colleagues have been able to coax a severed nerve to grow through a scaffold of PEDOT and reattach. And the progress of the nerve can be recorded because the PEDOT is able to pick up and transmit nerve signals as the two nerve ends grope for each other. Both developments fuel Martin's optimism.
Nevertheless, Martin cautions that all of his work is basic research at this point, for use, hopefully, in future generations of prosthetics.
"What we hope is that at some point the guys making the current arms will be able to use what we are working on," says Martin. "It would be wonderful to get this into people who could use it."