aquaculture (def.) to
foster the growth of the natural produce of fish or freshwater mussels.
biological diversity in an environment as
indicated by numbers of different species of plants and animals.
stock (def.) mature fish that provide eggs and
milt to create fish for planting in lakes and streams.
conservation (def.) planned
management of a natural resource to prevent exploitation, destruction,
diversity (def.) differing
from one another.
animals or plants that are in danger of becoming extinct.
no longer existing on earth.
glochidia (def.) the larva of
a freshwater mussel (family Unionidae) that develops as an external parasite on
flow: (def.) water that flows by gravity; not
assisted by mechanical means.
alteration (def.) a change in the structure
or function of habitat.
fish (def.) a certain species of fish that serves
as a host for parasitic larva of freshwater mussels.
of or relating to production of electricity by waterpower - in this
case mainly in the form of a hydroelectric power plant at a dam site.
integrity (def.) the
quality or state of being complete or undivided.
facility (def.) a facility used to isolate
gametes (eggs) that come directly from the wild to prevent the
introduction of disease into the hatchery system.
larva (def.) the
early form of an animal (as a frog or sea urchin) that at birth or
hatching is fundamentally unlike its parent and must metamorphose
before assuming the adult characters.
mitigation (def.) replacing
a lost resource with an acceptable alternative (example- as in mitigation
hatchery which raises cool or cold water fish to replace lost warm
water fisheries after the habitat has been altered by a dam).
parasite (def.) intimate
association between organisms of two or more kinds; especially :
one in which a parasite obtains benefits from a host which it usually
culvert (def.) a culvert that is positioned
too high to allow fish passage.
propagation (def.) to
increase (as of a kind of organism) in numbers.
remnant (def.) a
small surviving group.
animals and plants that are likely to become endangered in
the foreseeable future.