Century Dictionary and Cyclopedia
- n. The fifth month of the French revolutionary calendar, from January 20th to February 18th inclusive in the year 1794.
GNU Webster's 1913
- n. The fifth month of the French republican calendar adopted in 1793. It began January 20, and ended February 18. See vendémiaire.
- n. fifth month of the Revolutionary calendar (January and February); the rainy month
“At the time of the Decree of Pluviose slavery was still upheld by the laws of New York just as there was also a thriving British slave trade.”
“By contrast the French Revolution in its Jacobin phase came to support a policy of general slave emancipation (the Decree of Pluviose An 2, February 1794).”
“The decree of Pluviose gave the revolting slaves an interest in fighting the English, to keep the island French.”
“From the associations of the Friends of the People, which was at the same time public and secret, sprang the Society of the Rights of Man, which also dated from one of the orders of the day: Pluviose, Year 40 of the republican era, which was destined to survive even the mandate of the”
“Pluviose works five straight 15 hour days behind the wheel of a taxi he and a friend from the Bronx lease at a cost of $1700 a month.”
“The other evening, Pluviose listened intently to the radio as he headed across the Triboro Bridge toward Manhattan.”
“I come here from Haiti twenty years ago," Pluviose said the other night.”
“His name is Francois "Frank" Pluviose, a 42-year-old New York City cabdriver who commutes to work each week from Reading, Pennsylvania -- a two and a half hour bus ride -- and he is totally immune to the disease of cynicism that has managed to infect so much of our politics for too many years.”
“Luxembourg, 8th Pluviose, Second Year of the French Republic, one and indivisible.”
“To remove these difficulties, we transmit you a certified copy of an authenticated decree of the National Convention of France, of the sixteenth Pluviose, second year of the Republic; (February fifth, 1794,) which has been lately received by the Pennsylvania”
‘Pluviose’ hasn't been added to any lists yet.
Looking for tweets for Pluviose.