This area of the website is an educational
resource with a multi-tiered approach:
- Please see: Dylan Thomas section/ Children's
Activities area for children aged between 6-11: featuring
a learning activities pack - biography / activities / colouring-in
as a downloadable pdf pack.
- Schools Teacher's Packs:
provides specially prepared packs from 2 Carmarthenshire teachers
Claire Argyle and Elaine Edwards with pdf files for conversion
into Eng Lit PowerPoint presentations on some of Thomass
key works for Key Stages 3 & 4. Also included in this section
will be a downloadable schools video project <please add details
from the video>.
- Thomas in Context:
A Further Education Area with a section for A & AS level students
looking at Thomas in the context of English literature during
the 1930's/1940's/early 1950's with responses to Thomas after
his death from the shifts in fashion and critiques from members
of the Movement poets in the late 50's/early 60's. This is also
an area written for general readers to enjoy too! On the Thomas
in Context page is a specially compiled Timeline pdf document
by Dr John Goodby which chronologically lists events political,
social and cultural around the context of Dylan Thomass
life from 1914 and beyond to 1960.
- Distance Learning
(currently in development): Will provide information on online
accredited modules from Trinity College, Carmarthen and UCW, Swansea
on courses for studying Dylan Thomas and mid-C20th English literature.
- Essays & Academic
Papers (currently in development): This area is a higher education
area which will include essays and academic papers on new Dylan
Thomas research. Of particular interested are correlations being
made by new researches and new critical approaches into the textual
materiality of Thomas's works. A future development will be to
include the Dylan Thomas Conference Papers from 2000 onwards.
[Each essay will be published on the website in this section area
& formatted into an e-book styled pdf file available as a
non-editable/read/print-only file for resource; the object of
publishing/ or re-publishing the essays are to show the new discourses
and research currently being engaged with Dylan Thomas, and will
hopefully be of interest to both academics and non-academic readers
of the website.]
- Bibliography: is
a full Dylan Thomas resource bibliography from primary to tertiary
sources, with an additional useful General context, literary history
and critical theory (edited selection).
- Literary Links:
A specially compiled twofold links resource (1) to assist the
online research of Thomas in Context with Thomass literary
contemporaries; plus a special page on the seriously neglected
modernist poet Lynette Roberts (2) a specially selected list of
important contemporary literary website links.