Texas eighth graders scored higher than their counterparts across the nation in math and science – but lower in reading – on the most recent Nation’s Report Card exam, which also showed impressive long-term gains for minority students in Texas. A new study spotlighting student achievement in the five most populous states – Texas, California, Florida, Illinois and New York – indicated that Texas has a leg up on the other states among eighth graders – one of two grade levels (4 and 8) regularly tested across the nation on the National Assessment of Educational Progress. One of the highlights was that math scores for black students in Texas rose 42 points between 1990 (the first NAEP) and 2011 (the most recent NAEP) – the largest gain in a subject of any ethnic group within the so-called “mega-states.”
In addition, according to the report from the U.S. Department of Education, white and Hispanic eighth graders in Texas had greater gains in average math scores from 1990 to 2011 than their peers in the other mega-states as well as across the nation. Students from lower-income families in Texas and students with disabilities in Texas and Florida had greater gains than the nation from 2003 to 2011. By contrast,Texas eighth graders had difficulty in reading skills, scoring below the national average and showing little improvement between 1998 and 2011 on the NAEP. Among fourth graders,Texas students demonstrated improvement in reading and math, but not significantly different than their peers in other states.
Texas Education Commissioner Michael Williams said Thursday the report spotlights “some major successes” in the state. “The data from more than a decade confirm that the hard work of our students and educators in Texas is paying tremendous dividends for the future of Texas,” Williams said. The commissioner said the 32-point gain in math scores between 1990 and 2011 “speaks to an emphasis Texas has placed on a critical core subject.” Along with math, he added, “Our eighth grade performance in science in 2011 reveals Texas is on the path to meet the growing job needs in critical STEM (science, technology, engineering and math) field across the nation.” But Williams also said he does “not believe any of the states represented think the gains have been enough, or that the work is anywhere near complete.” The report from the National Assessment Governing Board noted that the five states have 40 percent of the nation’s public school students and reflect the rapidly increasing numbers of minority students in the public schools. Students were tested in math, reading and science.