Dear Neil: We have a lovely xeriscape garden that has been invaded by what we are told is a relative of wandering Jew. It has small blue flowers, and it sprawls over our plantings. How can we eliminate it?
Answer: That sounds like our native spiderwort, and it is, indeed, a cousin of wandering Jew. Like its relative, it roots very easily from pieces of stem clippings, so when you dig or pull it, you will have to be sure that all roots and stems come along. There is no herbicide spray or granule that can be used to eliminate it without risk to your desirable plants nearby. However, you could try painting a 2,4-d weedkiller on with a foam rubber brush. I have this weed in my own beds from time-to-time, and I always dig it out carefully. (Don’t be surprised when you see improved varieties of spiderwort sold with other perennials at the garden center.)
Dear Neil: An elderly neighbor (now deceased) grew a tiny type of tomato in his gardens for many years. They reseeded, and always came up “true.” They have wonderful flavor, but they’re only half the size of a quarter. Any idea what they might be? He thought a bird had brought them up from South America.
Answer: I doubt the South American origin of this specific tomato. They look like tiny cherry tomatoes. One of the hybrid types you’ll see fairly often is Sweet 100, so named because it seems like there are 100 fruit in a cluster. It’s larger than yours, and it would not reproduce true if grown from seed. What he had/what you now have is an inbred tomato that can be grown year-after-year from seeds saved from the prior year. Or, as you’ve noted, they’ll also come up volunteer, carried by birds from one part of the yard to another. Save some, and carry on his tradition.
Dear Neil: What varieties of peaches are recommended for Texas?
Answer: It will vary, depending on the number of chilling hours (between 32 and 45 degrees) that the trees will be receiving. That can vary a great deal within any newspaper’s circulation area. You’ll find the most accurate recommendations at the Texas A&M Horticulture website. Search for “recommended peach varieties Aggie Horticulture” and you’ll get many matches. If you’re unsure of your area’s number of chilling hours, do a web search for “chilling zones peaches Aggie Horticulture.” That will allow you to pinpoint the best variety for your part of your county. (Note that Elberta will not make lists of varieties recommended for Texas.)
Dear Neil: What might have happened to our Gold Star esperanza? (sample enclosed)
Answer: The sample was dried and virtually shredded when it arrived, but it looks like leaf cutter bees may have worked it over. It appears that perfect semi-circular holes had been chewed out of the edges of the leaves. The female insect cuts the leaves, then builds her nest with the leaf tissues. She doesn’t ingest the leaves, and she’s only there for a few moments, so spraying is impractical. The pests tend to be worse some years than others. Stay the course. It’s a great plant that will do better other summers.
Dear Neil: I have an oak tree planted 6 feet from our back porch. Two roots are showing above ground. They are 2 to 3 inches in diameter. Can I remove them without risking harm to the tree? When can I do this? I thought I was watering them properly.
Answer: This surface root thing isn’t about watering at all. It’s just the way that live oaks and a few other trees develop. You can remove up to 20 percent of a tree’s root system in a given year without risking serious injury to the tree. October or November would be your best months to do the pruning, once the heat has passed, and as far removed from the following summer as possible.
Dear Neil: Is it too late to plant a gardenia? What type of soil do they prefer? Should I just grow it in a pot?
You can plant landscape trees and shrubs virtually all year long. The exception might be made for plants like gardenias, figs and oleanders that can suffer freeze damage in cold winter weather. Those should be planted in spring or summer. Gardenias prefer morning sun, then shade all afternoon, and they need highly acidic soils. As for growing one in a container, it could not be exposed to temperatures lower than the mid-20s without risk of freeze damage.
Dear Neil: Pellets I’ve used in the past have just chased fire ants to other parts of our yard. What can I use that will actually eliminate them?
Answer: Look for one of the 12-month bait products at a nursery, hardware store or feed store. There are several brands on the market today, each capable of eliminating fire ants on an area-wide landscape basis. If you have existing mounds that are especially bothersome, use one of the drenches that you pour through the mound. Fire ants are very controllable with this two-step approach.
Have a question you’d like Neil to consider? Mail it to him in care of this newspaper or e-mail him at firstname.lastname@example.org. Neil regrets that he cannot reply to questions individually.