While most clients come to see us for issues related to brain development and functioning, understanding and addressing issues related to physical health can be an important component of treatment.
The brain and the body are integrally connected, and problems with our physical health can significantly affect our mental health and cognitive functioning.
For many of the clients we see, imbalances and problems in the physical arena create or exacerbate behavior, communication, social, and learning problems. We believe that a person cannot even begin to function at his or her best when experiencing physical pain or discomfort, or when the body is not functioning optimally.
One of the first things we do is advocate for appropriate medical treatment when a client presents with behavioral symptoms that appear to have a biological component. Examples include: self-injurious behavior, frequent posturing or unusual body movements, crying/screaming episodes, resistance to eating, and chronic sleep disruption, among others.
In addition to helping clients get the medical attention they require, we directly provide support in the following areas:
Healthy brains and bodies require that we each get a range of nutrients throughout the day in appropriate amounts for our age and size. Unfortunately, the standard American diet does not provide us with the amounts and types of nutrients our brains and bodies need for optimal functioning. Many children have diets that are high in carbohydrates, sugars, and preservatives; and are limited to foods such as macaroni and cheese, chicken nuggets, fries, chocolate milk, and pizza. The nutrition support we provide helps parents understand the types and amounts of food their child should be eating, and how to present it in a way that the child will tolerate.
Many people have heard about special diets for autism, ADHD, and other disorders, but don’t understand how or why they may be helpful. There are many different types of special diets, including those free of dairy, gluten, preservatives, sugar, and yeast. We work with families, using specialized testing when appropriate, to determine the types of diets that may work best for their child. Implementation support including recipes, cooking tips, and strategies to help the child tolerate a new diet are provided.
There are a variety of vitamin, mineral, and other natural supplements that can significantly support functioning in a variety of areas. Some of these areas include sleep, energy level, digestion, and mood, among others. We provide clients with recommendations regarding supplements that may benefit them, along with education and resources to support implementation of an appropriate supplement regimen.
Contact our office to schedule a free 15-minute initial consultation to find out how our programs and services can meet your needs.