PRE-SCHOOL DANCE CLASS: Ages 3 & 4
Your child will learn basic ballet, tap skills, creative movement, motor skill development games, and tumbling. In addition, children learn centre work, fun and creative movement activities, and flexibility exercises.
BALLET/TAP DANCE CLASS - LEVEL 1: Ages 5 & UP
Children learn basic ballet and tap through creative dance techniques. In addition, children learn centre work, across the floor creative motor skill activities. Flexibility exercises are included to enhance dance skills. This class is a prerequisite for taking Ballet/Tap 2 or any other class.
BALLET/TAP DANCE CLASS - LEVEL 2, 3: (Prerequisite Ballet/Tap 1)
More challenging ballet and tap skills are introduced in addition to beginning jazz skills. Centre work and across the floor movement and flexibility exercises are included to enhance dance skills. This class is a prerequisite for taking Ballet 1, Jazz, Tap, and Ballet Folklorico.
BALLET 1, 2 & 3 & POINTÉ DANCE CLASS: Children & Adults
Ballet is the basic foundation of all dance disciplines; therefore, Ballet is the prerequisite to taking any dance discipline on our schedule. Ballet demands great physical virtuosity. Students learn vocabulary of classical ballet and dance interpretation with adequate and proper feeling. The class is divided into three sections: exercise at the barre, centre floor work where problems of balance and choreography are mastered. Ballet 3 is for dancers who have advanced passed Ballet 1 & 2.
JAZZ DANCE CLASS: (All Levels)
Jazz is a feeling, an attitude, and a freedom of movement. We combine jazz, modern dance, and ballet in an exciting infusion of energy and natural rhythm for all ages. Dancers learn to express their feelings and learn how to dance with an attitude to popular music they enjoy. Additionally, dancers learn basic Jazz techniques, choreography, and flexibility exercises.
BALLET FOLKLORICO 1, 2 & 3 DANCE CLASS: Children & Adults (Age 6 & Up)
Dancers learn about the Mexican culture while learning the art of Ballet Folklorico. In addition, dancers learn the history and dances from different regions of Mexico while mastering Mexican footwork (zapateado) and the use of the ballet Folklorico skirt. This is a stimulating, informative and valuable class for any child or adult wanting to learn traditional dance from the Mexican culture. Ballet Folklorico 2 & 3 is for dancers who have advanced passed Ballet Folklorico 1.
TAP DANCE CLASS:
Prerequisite Ballet/Tap Level 1, 2 or 3 or previous tap experience
This fun class will teach dancers the history of tap as well as time steps, rhythm tap, and combinations of steps and sounds. Tap is more than just making sounds with your feet. It is about expressing yourself, percussively, with your feet and body, making music, and making statements.
Hip Hop is a dance style that is influenced by Hip Hop music. It is developed from several cultures including jazz, rock, tap, and Latino. Hip hop is a very energetic form of dance that allows the dancer to perform with freedom of movement giving them the chance to add their own style & personality. This fun filled class will teach the dancer rhythm, style and popping moves.