A Message from
Books are longer and more complex than at levels 5 and 6. Size of print is smaller and there are more lines of print on the page. Books have longer sentences and paragraphs. There are more multisyllabic words. Illustrations enhance the story, but provide low support for understanding meaning.
Level 7 titles:
¡El lobo llama a la puerta! Ward
Books are more difficult and varied than level 7. Informational books with new concepts and chapter books with complex narratives and memorable characters can be found in this level. Illustrations enhance the text but offer little support for figuring out new words. Texts have many high frequency words but may also have unfamiliar and/or technical words.
Level 8 titles:
Plantas que comen animales Fowler
Level 9 includes longer chapter books, shorter informational books, and literary texts with illustrations that enhance meaning. Stories have multiple episodes related to a single plot. Some stories have to do with times, places, and characters outside childrens experience.
Level 9 titles:
El chiquero Teague
At Level 10 there is a variety of texts, including informational books, biographies, chapter books, and some longer, highly literary, or informational picture books. Chapter books have more sophisticated plots and characters that are developed throughout the text. Some books have abstract or symbolic themes that require higher-level conceptual understanding. Texts contain an expanded vocabulary with many multisyllabic words.
Level 10 titles:
Sapo y Sepo son amigos Lobel
Books have a variety of formats. Topics vary widely and include subjects that will be familiar to children and those that are new. Literary selections have complex language and subtle meanings that require interpretation and background knowledge. Chapter books are longer with few pictures.
Level 11 titles:
Ruby, mono ve, mono hace Rathmann
Longer texts in a variety of genres. Chapter books present memorable characters developed through literary devices such as humor, irony, and whimsy. Informational books offer mystery and suspense. Vocabulary continues to expand, and topics go well beyond students own experiences.
Level 12 titles: