The discussion on last week’s Newton’s Cradle puzzle is still very much alive. Gary has posted an interim solution update, but the problem is far from being completely solved, and Gary’s experiments are still in progress. We welcome further ideas and results of experiments by readers on this very interesting executive toy. Gary and I considered having another post featuring new experiments on the Newton’s cradle, but decided to wait. We may still do so in the future, as new theoretical and experimental insights on this marvelous contraption become available.
In the meantime, here’s an interesting and fun scenario that we created based on a puzzle sent to Numberplay by one of our regular contributors, Ravi Kumar Meduri of Hyderabad, India. It involves a game that an animal handler plays with his octopus, Paula, during playtime.
Octopuses — or octopi — are extremely intelligent, certainly the most intelligent of all invertebrates. They can solve puzzles and learn mazes. The basic scenario of Paula’s game is sketched in the figure above. Paula is placed in an opaque octagonal enclosure. Each side of the enclosure has a door. Whenever a bell rings to signal a new round, Paula opens one of the eight doors. If her handler is behind the door, Paula gets a fish reward. If not, the door is closed. The handler then moves one door clockwise or counterclockwise, and a new round starts. Since octopuses have poor hearing, Paula cannot make out where her handler is, or in what direction he moved. Unfortunately, neither does she have the gift of ESP that her cousin Paul reputedly had, so she has to depend on her smarts alone.
1. If Paula is allowed to open only one door every round, it is clear that she cannot be guaranteed to ever get her reward, but she may still win the game by chance. How many rounds, on average, before she gets her reward?
2. Things get more interesting if Paula is allowed to open any two doors every round. Is there a guaranteed strategy for Paula to get her reward now? If there is, what is the minimum number of rounds it will take? What strategy minimizes the average number of rounds to get the reward?
3. And what if Paula can open 3 doors every round?
I confess I love the word octopus. I love all aspects of it: the prefix octo, the two ways to pronounce the suffix pus, the two plurals of the word, the sense of danger and villainy that octopus connotes in movies, and as an erstwhile tournament Scrabble player, the fact that it is a bingo* in a seemingly poor rack. So let’s have some fun with octopuses and octopi.
*A bingo, in Scrabble parlance, is a word that allows you to use up all the letters in your rack and therefore earn a bonus of 50 points.
4. Besides -es and -i, there are at least three other plural suffixes possible for English words ending in -us. What are they?
5. Do you think the octopus illustrated above is venomous?
6. Why would it be funny if the answer to one of the questions above were to be 25.1?
7. How many octopus villains from movies and stories can you list?
8. Can you make sentences, preferably topical, that have the words octopus, octopi or octopuses hidden in them?
How on earth can you (insert Republicans or Democrats here!) concoct opinions like that?
Cheerio. Have eight times as much fun!
Solutions will be provided here, highlighting interesting and/or correct responses, within two weeks of this post. Please send suggestions for future puzzles to firstname.lastname@example.org.