English 301: Literature for Children
Guidelines for Final Exam
Dr. Tina L. Hanlon
Children's Literature Course Home Page
Format of Exam:
Don't forget that in ANGEL, you can set the calendar to display as a list, in order to view a list of the assignments for each month or week.
Material You Should Study:
Know what the items below mean or refer to. Examples are given in parentheses to remind you how some of the selections that we studied fit some of the categories, but you should be able to name and discuss other examples we have discussed since midterm. although maybe we discussed some shortly before midterm, too. Boldface items below are ones that involve works we studied since midterm. You may have the opportunity to discuss the oral reports in section II or III.
Know titles and authors of the three novels you studied for this course.
Cautionary tale (satirized in Silverstein poem "Sarah Sylvia Cynthia Stout...")
Lyric poems (poems that don't tell a story)
Narrative poems, including ballads ("John Henry"is an example in the anthology, and "Kemp Owyne")
Folktale or fairy tale
Story theatre folktale adaptation ("Mutsmag," Jack tales)
Satire of traditional tales and lit. (Lewis Carroll poems, Roald Dahl's poem "Little Red Riding Hood and the Wolf" & other Part 7 selections)
Myth (Daedalus and Icarus)
Romantic influences on childrens novels (such as The Secret Garden)
New Realism in childrens fiction (1960s on)
Animal fantasy or folktale
Domestic fantasy (some domestic fantasies, such as Pippi Longstocking, are also called light fantasy)
Looking glass fantasy (Harry Potter books, Wonderful Wizard of Oz excerpts--and we had excerpts from The Looking Glass earlier)
Intertextuality (The Secret Garden refers to "Mistress Mary" rhyme, Bridge to Terabithia refers to Narnia series and other stories)
Metafiction (good example in Roald Dahl's poem "Little Red Riding Hood and the Wolf")
Culturally specific content in a book (rural urban cultural and class differences in Bridge to Terabithia)
Sexism in folktales and childrens literature and modern treatment of gender roles (e.g., Bridge to Terabithia)
Use the Introductions and index in the anthology to brush up on definitions/characteristics of literary types and background that might be useful in writing answers (but you arent responsible for specific material in those chapters that we have not touched on in class discussion).
II. For the essays, be well prepared to write about the assigned novels and ones you chose, and know at
least one example for each of the categories of oral literature we have studied
since midterm. You should be able to discuss realism and types of fantasy in fiction or poetry,
the influence of Romanticism on fiction or poetry (particularly through the early twentieth
century), different methods of retelling/adapting/revising or satirizing stories from oral traditions, treatment of historical
and social problems in childrens and young adult fiction, portrayals of
friendship and adult-child relations, and the childs or adolescents
point of view.
In your essays, if you mention examples of works not assigned for the class, restrict your examples to those found in the anthology and those mentioned in class (including oral reports), or books you know the professor is familiar with.
You shouldnt have to go beyond your course texts and class notes to prepare for this exam, but if you think your notes are weak or you want to strengthen your definitions and understanding of literary terms and types, you might consult a reference book such as The Oxford Companion to Childrens Literature, The Oxford Encyclopedia of Children's Literature, or Rebecca Lukens Critical Handbook of Childrens Literature or Critical Handbook of Literature for Young Adults (available in library resources and Hanlons office).
III. Take-Home Essay:
Discuss one of the generalizations about features of childrens literature presented by Perry Nodelman in The Pleasures of Childrens Literature or one theme from Jerry Griswold's Feeling Like a Kid. These are listed on the page Characteristics of Childrens Literature as a Genre. Select one item from those lists and explain how it applies to at least three works of literature that were assigned in this course. Two of your examples must be novels you studied for this class, and one of those two could be a novel excerpt or short story from the anthology. One of your examples must come from the oral tradition (directly or through adaptation). If you choose to use additional examples, they can be of any type, including poems and picture books.
Nodelmans and Griswold's generalizations are quite broad so there are many ways you could focus and organize your answer. You dont have to discuss every point mentioned in the list summarizing Nodelmans ideas. For example, if you choose to write about repetition, you can focus on one type of repetition. Besides the types of repetition mentioned on the list, you could discuss the idea that there is much repetition from one book and author to another in childrens literature (e.g., that there are more sequels and more echoes of previous books and reworkings of the same themes and motifs in childrens literature than in adult literaturei.e., there is lots of intertextuality). You can structure your whole essay as a comparison/contrast of your examples, or use some other method to illustrate different dimensions of the topic.
If you think the author is overgeneralizing, discuss works that provide exceptions (but note that item 11 qualifies the generalization in item 9, so dont accuse Nodelman of saying all childrens literature is didactic). You may include a sample work from the course readings that you believe should not be considered a work of childrens literature, to contrast with your examples that do fit the definition of childrens literature.
Dont choose Nodelman's number one unless you feel quite confident about discussing style and vocabulary in childrens literature.
Do not spend hours and hours writing this essay, but obviously you can consult your books as you develop your ideas. Although you dont want to turn this into a research paper, you should give informal acknowledgement if you use ideas you know came from particular secondary sources (e.g., you recall reading that Maurice Sendak said X about the importance of fantasy). You dont have to use direct quotations, but if you do, use quotation marks and give page numbers from the Crosscurrents anthology or novel you are quoting. This essay is expected to be more polished in organization, completeness of ideas, clarity of wording, use of standard English, and mechanics than essays might be when they are written during the exam period. Typing is preferred.
Turn in this essay at the beginning of the exam period (or earlier if you prefer). If for some reason you choose not to write this essay before Dec. 13 at 10:30 a.m., you can use part of the exam period to write it, rather than getting a 0 on 30% of the exam grade, but you will be taking the risk that having more to write within two hours will weaken your performance on the whole exam. You will not be allowed to refer to this study guide during the exam period.
Read the instructions carefully and answer the number of questions required. Don't leave any blank or it will cost you too many points.
Budget your time so that you won't be forced to leave anything blank or run out of time for checking your answers at the end.
Follow any instructions you might find about not duplicating the same examples or writing about a certain number of different authors.
Select examples that you know well and that fit the question especially well.
Don't just summarize plot or rephrase the idea in the question. Be sure you stress the significance of the examples you discuss.
Include specific details as much as possible, without just summarizing plot or using up too much time on any one question.
Write clearly, legibly, and in complete sentences (for your sake as you check your answers as well as the reader of the test).
See also Pointers for Taking Essay Tests .
December 12, 2012