The cove yawns like a Cheshire cat’s ear-to-ear grin, inviting local inhabitants and tourists to stroll along a mile-long sandy beach. Considered by many to be the Caribbean’s finest, Flamenco Beach lies on Culebra, a tiny speck of land off Puerto Rico’s east coast that boasts a striking range of biodiversity. The human population of 1,800 is outnumbered by multitudes of migratory birds, sea turtles and marine life, including critically endangered leatherback and hawksbill sea turtles.
Culebra’s near-pristine nature lends inspiration to local artists like Jorge Acevedo, whose creations – on paper, wood, canvas, steel or even in song – depict mangroves, pelicans, turtles and crabs in bold reds, yellows and azure blues. “If art can give voice to these silent, fundamental elements, then it’s time well spent,” Mr. Acevedo said.
The island’s history, however, is also one of occupation: for 40 years, Culebra was a testing ground for bombings, mock amphibious landings and other war exercises by the American military. Starting in the 1970s, residents began protesting the military presence, however, and beginning in 1975, Culebra was allowed to slowly revert to its natural state.
In his work, Mr. Acevedo invokes Culebra’s military history and natural bounty. “My pelicans take on a kind of jet look,” he says. “I can’t paint a crab without it looking like some sort of tank.”
The military pulled out when Mr. Acevedo was 5 and living near San Juan in Puerto Rico. He recalls his grandfather’s promising him that they would go camping on Culebra. The trip never materialized, but the lure of the island endured in his imagination.
While studying art in the Boston area, Mr. Acevedo finally found an excuse to visit Culebra on a kayaking trip. “I came here and was immediately inspired by the striking beauty of the place, by the people and the history,” he said. Returning to school, he recalled, “I couldn’t get this place out of my system.” A short while later, he moved to Culebra and built a ramshackle tree house studio on the fringe of a red mangrove swamp.
Traces of the military occupation endure. People occasionally stumble upon unexploded ordnance in the island’s protected forests and coral reefs, and signs warn visitors not to stray off paths bordered by pond-size bomb craters. Follow Flamenco Beach’s westerly curve, and you will find the rusted hulk of a Navy tank.
When he first encountered the tank, Mr. Avecedo said, he was repelled by the violence it symbolized. But he continued to visit the silent behemoth, and in 2000 he brought along his brushes to paint Klimt-like swirls of green and yellow along its sides, crowning the turret with his trademark symbol, “dancing fish,” a synthesis of fish bones and a human figure.
He now believes that the military presence and the threat of unexploded ordnance spared Culebra from being overdeveloped like much of the rest of the Caribbean.
Ana Roman, the federal Fish and Wildlife Service’s manager for the Culebra National Wildlife Refuge, said much of Culebra’s shoreline was privately owned, which contributed to the island’s conservation. About one-quarter of the island consists of protected nature reserves.
But Culebra’s future is not entirely certain. Like many throughout the world, its coral reefs are in decline, and about 50 percent of its mangrove forests have been cleared for development in the last half century.
And now, a corporation based in San Juan aims to build a hotel amid the mangroves where Mr. Acevedo keeps his art studio. He is petitioning the local and federal government, the Environmental Protection Agency and Puerto Rico’s Department of Natural Resources to protect the site under the terms of the federal National Wildlife Refuge Improvement Act and the Culebra Conservation and Development Act, which were adopted shortly after the military pulled out.
Because mangroves are considered natural heritage sites in Puerto Rico, Ms. Roman said, developers need commonwealth and federal permits to build on public mangrove sites and must demonstrate that a project is in the public interest.
To call attention to the issue, Mr. Acevedo is currently painting the mangrove sanctuary and residents like the seabirds and coral reef fish.
“All three worlds meet in the mangrove habitat — the sea, land and sky,” he said, adding, “We can fight for our ecosystem and protect it with art.”
He sees Culebra as a test-tube microcosm for global struggles over precious natural resources and the tensions between development and conservation.
“In the end, we’re only here for a moment,” he said. “What remains is what we leave behind for future generations: Culebra.”