Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) Infection - What Increases Your Risk
Most people get HIV by having unprotected sex with someone who has HIV. Another common way of getting the virus is by sharing needles with someone who is infected with HIV when injecting drugs. You have an increased risk of becoming infected with HIV thro
HIV & AIDS Guide - Cause
Learn about the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) and how the virus affects the body and immune system.
HIV: Taking Antiretroviral Drugs
Taking antiretroviral drugs for HIV will not cure your infection. However, it may allow you to remain healthy for a longer time.Your willingness and ability to follow your antiretroviral therapy schedule exactly as prescribed is essential for successful treatment of your HIV infection. Not following your prescribed HIV therapy may cause treatment failures, such as: Drug resistance.Higher viral ...
A CD4+ count is a blood test to determine how well the immune system is working in people who have been diagnosed with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV).
Fusion and Entry Inhibitors for HIV
Drug details for Fusion inhibitors for HIV.
Treatment for people with tuberculosis (TB) who also have human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) is nearly the same as for people who don't have HIV. But there are some important differences,including: 1 Checking to make sure that the TB medicines are not changing the effectiveness of the medicines used to treat the HIV infection. Continuing treatment for longer than 6 months. Treatment may go on ...
Tuberculosis in People With HIV - Topic Overview
People who are infected with the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) have an increased risk for developing a tuberculosis (TB) infection. Their risk for a TB infection doubles in the first year they developed the HIV infection. 1 If they have latent TB,which cannot be spread to others,they are at risk for the infection becoming an active disease,which can be spread to others. Active TB in ...
Caring for Someone With HIV or AIDS
Caring for someone with HIV or AIDS.
Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) Infection - Health Tools
Should I start antiretroviral drugs for HIV infection even though I have no symptoms?
Opportunistic Infections in HIV - Topic Overview
Opportunistic infections and diseases occur in people whose immune systems have been weakened. They usually do not occur in people who have healthy immune systems. When the immune system is weakened by a disease such as HIV infection,opportunistic diseases may cause serious,even life-threatening,illnesses. Opportunistic infections that are common in people who have AIDS include: ...