Diabetes (Hepatopathy) in Dogs
Diabetic Hepatopathy in Dogs
Diabetic hepatopathy is a disease of the liver which causes lesions to develop on the liver. It is associated with diabetes mellitus, and for unknown reasons, this type of liver disease is also associated with lesions on the skin. One of the possibilities may be a link to metabolic system and a change in the organ systems.
This is a relatively uncommon disease and there is no breed that is more disposed than others, but it does tend to affect predominantly male dogs that are middle-aged to older.
Symptoms and Types
You will need to give a thorough history of your dog's health and onset of symptoms. Standard tests will include a chemical blood profile, complete blood count, urinalysis and electrolyte panel. A skin biopsy will be taken for laboratory analysis.
Using the results from the bloodwork, your veterinarian will be able to determine how advanced the disease is. The complete blood count (CBC) may show a mild regenerative anemia, and the biochemistry profile may show high liver enzymes and low amino acids.
If the liver is severely compromised, characteristic crystals will be seen in the urine (crystalluria). Abdominal X-rays can be used to look for enlargement of the liver, and in some cases, may show effusion (an escape of fluid from the organ). An abdominal ultrasound is ideal for visualizing the liver in more detail and for searching for a possible pancreatic mass. Ultrasound may show nodular lesions, a swiss cheese appearance, or an uneven shape along the edge of the liver. Your doctor may decide to take a liver biopsy, but this procedure may further complicate the diagnosis or condition, as affected dogs do not heal well from the procedure.
A gland that aids in both digestive and insulin functions
Any type of pain or tenderness or lack of soundness in the feet or legs of animals
The disappearance of the signs and symptoms of a particular disease; this is often used in association with cancer
A medical condition; the contamination of a living thing by a harmful type of bacteria
An in-depth examination of the properties of urine; used to determine the presence or absence of illness
A hormone created by the pancreas that helps to regulate the flow of glucose
Inducing death on an animal or putting them to sleep
Term used to refer to any substance or drug that stops seizures.
A condition of the blood in which normal red blood cell counts or hemoglobin are lacking.
The process of removing tissue to examine it, usually for medical reasons.
The escape of fluid or blood into tissues or body spaces or cavities
Organic substances that aid in the creation of proteins; also the end product of the decomposition of certain proteins.
A hormone that increases the amount of glucose in the blood; secreted by the pancreas
Diabetes in Dogs
Diabetes mellitus is a diseased state by which the body suffers from either an absolute...
Liver Tumors in Older Dogs
Hepatic nodular hyperplasia is a seemingly benign lesion found in the liver of middle-aged...
Latest In Dog Nutrition
Does My Senior Dog Need Special Dog Food?
Whether or not your senior dog needs special dog food depends, to a large extent,...
The Role of Exercise in Pet Weight Loss
Exercise is beneficial for our pets in so many ways. It helps decrease stress, improve...