What is Taekwondo?
Taekwondo is a modern martial art, characterized by its agility of the human body. There are multiple interpretations of the name taekwondo. Taekwondo may be loosely translated as “the way of the foot and fist” or “the way of kicking and punching.”. The sport has been founded in Korea and is one of the popular modern martial arts.
Disciplines of Taekwondo
Taekwondo has four disciplines which are explained in a separate page/chapter of this site. The four disciplines are:
- Break test
It is the combination of these four disciplines that makes the art called
Objectives of Taekwondo
1 to develop an appreciation for Taekwondo as a sport and as an art
2 to achieve physical fitness through positive participation
3 to improve mental discipline and emotional equanimity
4 to learn self-defense skills
5 to develop a sense of responsibility for one self and others.
Taekwondo for kids
Taekwondo has no age limits and is a very good sport for children. They learn fast reactions through games, learn to respect others and learn to know their abilities and disabilities. Competition rules are a bit different for children then they are for adults. Although children wear full body protection (preferably thicker than the protection for adults) only kicks and punches to the body are allowed, no kicks to the head.
Dennis Chamber has been practicing Martial Arts for twenty-eight years and has achieved the ranking of 5th Degree Black Belt in Taekwondo. Dennis has won numerous Grand Championship Competitions. His ability to create an atmosphere that helps the enhancing of self-confidence is second to none.
Dennis Chambers has been practicing Martial Arts for twenty-six years and has achieved the ranking of 5th Degree Black Belt in Taekwondo. Dennis has won numerous Grand Championship competitions. Dennis’ other Martial Arts studies include Judo, Jujitsu, Aikido and Kuk Sul Won. He has taught a wide variety of students ranging from age four to sixty-five. His ability to create an atmosphere that helps the enhancing of self-confidence is second to none.