A Cheat Sheet is one pager (or in some cases a few pages) brining together the most important and often used information about a specific technology, tool etc. Cheat Sheets are useful because Web Developers today need to remember more things to be effective doing their job than most people can manage. Having the right Cheat Sheets printed out and placed on the wall next to the monitor is like adding extra memory banks to an exhausted computer – the information you need can be accessed instantly. This post focus on Cheat Sheets for Web Developers but You can find them on many other subjects. Read on and pick the Cheat Sheets you need.
- Markup Cheat Sheets (CSS, HTML, XML)
- Server side programming (PHP, .NET, SQL etc.)
- Regular expressions
- Search Engine Optimization Cheat Sheets
There’s a lot of cheat sheets available for CSS, html and any other web technology. I have picked a few that I believe stand out because they are able to assist you remebering important elements of key web technologies or because they are really well structured.
Print out your favorite Cheat Sheet and put it on the wall just next to your monitor to get instant access to help and reference.
Good looking and well structured CSS overview
The CSS cheat sheet is a one-page reference sheet, listing all selectors (as of CSS 2.1) and properties. It includes a visual example of the box model, unit reference for CSS units and the various media types CSS makes allowance for.
All you need to know about CSS in 3 parts. These documents go through all important aspects of CSS on a minimum number of pages.
Get help with some of the CSS elements that are so easy to forget.
There are not a lot of CSS 3 Cheat Sheets available by now but Smashing Magazine provide a great one for Free. This is a must have if you plan to start using some CSS 3!
If you want to follow the development of CSS3, this page is the place to start.
This cheat sheet is designed to be a quick reference to all of the elements and attributes available in the XHTML 1.1 specification. And because XHTML 1.1 is designed to be modular, it is organized into sections to mirror the XHTML abstract modules and the elements and attributes contained within each.
Good looking and well structured html overview
The information is pretty much just a copy of what is found in the WHATWG specs, just condensed and hopefully a bit easier to read. There are virtually no explanations, however, and no examples other than some graphics for compositing values and a few other things (the appearance of which is very much inspired by those found in Mozilla’s examples). So, it’s basically just a listing of the attributes and methods of the canvas element and the 2d drawing context.
This cheat sheet contains a list of all of the HTML 4 character entities including ISO 8859-1 (Latin-1) entities. The characters are organized into 8 groups: Latin characters, Greek characters, numbers, puncutation and miscellaneous symbols, mathematical symbols, currency symbols, arrows and shapes, and spacing symbols.
Each character contains a unicode entity reference (e.g.  ) as well as a named entity reference (e.g. ) where available.
This cheat sheet contains a chart of 1050 colors grouped by hue and varied into 25 different saturations and brightnesses for each. Each color has the HTML color code reprsented as a Hex triplet (e.g. #808080). Also, it contains a chart of the 216 Web-safe colors and each is represented as a single-digit Hex triplet (e.g. #999).
The RGB Hex colour chart is a very large (183kB) PNG file, and is sized to fit on a standard A4 piece of paper. It shows the 216 so-called “web safe” or “non-dithering” colours (there are actually only 22 web safe colours, but those are revolting).
This sheet cover Core, Native, Class, Element, Utilities and Request
- Modules are sorted in a somewhat logical order – those commonly used are mostly in the left/center area, while deprecated/utility methods are all the way to the right
- Method can be recognized by parentheses following it (anything that doesn’t have ones is a property)
- Deprecated items are marked red and have NO parentheses/arguments specified
- Prototype extends quite few native objects’ prototypes with a set of convenient methods. In such cases there’s an explicit note about it next to a module name – i.g. stripScripts() method from “String (String.prototype)” can be called as ‘foo’.stripScripts()
- When a module is also a class, there’s a “(constructor)” note next to it – i.g. “Hash (constructor)” means that it should be called as new Hash()
- There are few bonus items (such as those from Prototype.Browser) which are not yet included in documentation
Very comprehensive overview of jQuery selectors. This is a must have for every jQuery developer!
The PHP cheat sheet is a one-page reference sheet, listing date format arguments, regular expression syntax and common functions.
This website contains a 2-page light and lean PHP cheatsheet and an 8-page comprehensive PHP cheat sheet for committed PHP developers
3 cheat sheets covering comparison using different operators etc.
The ASP cheat sheet is designed to act as a reminder and reference sheet, listing various of the oft-forgotten parts of ASP / VBScript.
Regular expressions is really about knowing what syntax to use and there are many details to memorise. I would recommend that you get yourself a cheat sheet. In my opinion a good cheat sheet is essentials and I personally recommend the one Added Bytes provide for free.
Creating good content that is presented in the right way is important but only haft the way to get visitors. Understanding and mastering Search Engine Optimization, SEO is quite essential and here you get some really good overviews
This cheat sheet cover most of what you need, Important SEO Html Tags, Search Engine Indexing Limits, Recommended Title Tag Syntax, Common Canonical Issues, Important Search Engine Robot User-Agents etc.