Eczema is a skin condition that is accompanied by red and itchy rashes. The most common type of eczema, atopic dermatitis, can be considered as a form of allergic reaction. Eczema can affect both adult and children and can even be acquired by infants. What causes eczema is unknown until now, but experts suggest that if you have a family history of allergies and skin conditions similar to it, there's a huge chance you can acquire it too. There is no exact cure for eczema, but there are several things you can do to avoid it.
Eczema is an allergy-like condition and can be triggered when the skin is exposed to allergens and other harsh elements that are contained in household items such as solvent, soap, detergents, and cleansers. By minimizing contact with these potential triggers, an outbreak of eczema can be prevented. Individuals who have hand eczema are especially advised to use soap and detergent that do not hold harsh components.
Eczema on hands is a very common case. It can be acquired through constant contact with elements that can be found in soap and detergent. To prevent such condition, always wear protective gloves whenever you're working with substances that may contain harsh ingredients. Wear plastic gloves when washing the dishes or when you're doing the laundry. In the same manner, wear gloves when the weather is cold because cold air can cause skin dryness, a factor that can set off breakouts.
Since eczema can be quite itchy, it may seem right to wash the skin regularly to relieve yourself of the irritation. This is somewhat tricky though because even though constant washing and cleansing may relieve yourself of itchiness, it also strips your skin off its natural oil, leaving your skin dry and prone to outbreaks. What you can do is to apply a moisturizer right after every bath to make up for lost moisture. At the same time, make sure you only use mild soap to avoid skin irritation.
It's very critical to apply moisturizer every now and then if you are suffering from eczema. Dry skin can trigger eczema so keeping your skin moisturized may lower your risk for flare ups. Choose a moisturizer that's not heavy in oil and alcohol because these two elements can leave your skin dry. Petroleum jelly is also a good moisturizer. Aside from being easy on the pocket, it's also rather effective in keeping the skin hydrated and preventing outbreaks.
Finally, always take what your doctor gives you for medication especially when your eczema flares up. Such medication may come in the form of corticosteroid cream that you can rub in affected areas. Never scratch or rub skin with eczema vigorously as it could only worsen the condition. Even after your eczema has gone, you should still follow these tips because skin that's been affected by eczema can be affected again if irritated.
Would you like a fresh and perfect skin? Therefore, ensure that your skin earns the right nourishment it requires to regrow properly and avoid the early warning signs of aging.Have a look at this author's website all about beauty tips and increasing skin moisture.
Posted under Allergies
This post was written by Miriam Boons on April 9, 2011