No problem! Here are 6 ideas for your Halloween desserts: 
1. Frankenstein's Monster Crispy Rice Treats: This is a fun dessert that is easy to make and doesn't require the use of an oven. First, make up a batch of crispy rice treats by melting butter and marshmallows on the stovetop. Once melted, add some crisped rice cereal and green food coloring, then stir to combine. Leave to set in a rectangular pan, then cut into uniform rectangle shapes. Take some melted dark or milk chocolate, and dip the top part of the treat into the chocolate to resemble hair. Add edible candy eyeballs for the eyes, and use black icing to pipe on a smile and some scars. To make the recipe gluten-free, ensure that the rice cereal you're using is a gluten-free variety. 
2. Mummified Cookies: These cute cookies are easy to make. Take a sugar cookie, either store-bought or homemade. Make a simple frosting of powdered sugar, vanilla extract, and milk (no food coloring needed) and pipe it onto the cooled cookies in a zig-zag motion. Use candy eyeballs or black icing for eyes. Bake your sugar cookies at home using gluten-free flour to make the recipe gluten-free.
3. Monster Cake Pops: Make some cake pops using whichever cake flavor you'd like (or use multiple flavors). Once they have cooled completely, melt some white candy melts or white chocolate at a low temperature. Separate them into bowls and add different food coloring to each bowl (you can use whichever colors you'd prefer, but colors such as bright blue, green, or orange would be great for these pops) and coat the cake pops in the coating. Once the coating has set, decorate them with candy eyes and Halloween sprinkles. To make the recipe gluten-free, use gluten-free flour to make your cake pops, or you can substitute the cake with giant marshmallows.
4. Spooky Pull-Apart Cupcakes: Pull-apart cupcakes are a great way to feed a crowd without having to make an entire cake and cut it into pieces. Bake some cupcakes at home or purchase store-bought plain cupcakes that aren't already frosted. Then, you will assemble your cupcakes so they are sitting together in the desired shape. For example, if you were making a pumpkin pull-apart cake, you would assemble the cupcakes into a circular shape. Then, take your frosting and frost the cupcakes as though you were icing an entire cake. You can keep this as simple or make it as extravagant as you want. Some ideas for a Halloween-inspired pull-apart cake include a pumpkin, a ghost, or a tombstone. When guests want to eat a part of the cake, all they have to do is remove one of the cupcakes! Bake your cupcakes at home using gluten-free flour to make the recipe gluten-free.
5. Mini Cobweb Cheesecakes: Make miniature vanilla cheesecakes (baked cheesecakes would work best for this recipe) in some Halloween-themed cupcake liners. Once the cupcakes have cooled in the fridge, take some black icing or melted dark chocolate, and use a piping bag to pipe a cobweb pattern onto the top of each cheesecake. For an extra spooky touch, you can add a candy or chocolate spider on top of the cobweb. To make the recipe gluten-free, you can leave out the crust on your cheesecakes, or make the crust using gluten-free cookies or graham crackers.
6. Graveyard Pudding: Take small plastic cups and fill them with chocolate pudding about 3/4 of the way up. Take some crumbled chocolate cake or chocolate sandwich cookies like Oreos, and use them to top the pudding to resemble the soil. Then take half a cookie that is rectangular or semi-rectangular in shape, such as a Milano cookie. Pipe "RIP" onto the cookies using icing or melted chocolate, then stick it on top of the soil to resemble a tombstone. You can also add some gummy worms on top of or inside the pudding mix. To make the recipe gluten-free, ensure the cake and/or cookies you are using for the soil and tombstones are gluten-free varieties.
