Bachelor's degrees are the most commonly sought after of college degrees. They are also the degrees that most employers look for when it comes to evaluating potential employees. Because bachelor's degrees are so common, it's generally possible to attain one in just about every major area of study.
Online bachelor's degree programs are also available, providing more flexibility to students who work or have other commitments.
There are a wide variety of potential career options for graduates who hold a bachelor's degree. Generally, it takes the equivalent of four years of study to complete a bachelor's degree.
The median weekly earnings for a full-time worker with a bachelor's degree or higher was $1,137 in 2010—that's nearly twice the amount earned by those with no college education at all.* Completing a bachelor's degree program online or offline requires 120 credits on average. This amounts to approximately 40 separate courses.
Bachelor's degrees are available in a tremendously wide variety of different subjects. In 1970, the prestigious University of California at Berkeley even awarded a student a bachelor's degree in magic. While the student in this case created his own major, this event likely marks the one and only time a major university ever awarded a degree of any kind in magic.
While it's true that bachelor's degrees are generally available in every major area of study, there are two primary types of bachelor's degrees available. These are the Bachelor of Science (BS) and the Bachelor of Arts (BA).
The Bachelor of Science degree requires that students complete most of their credits in courses related to life sciences, physical sciences, or mathematics.
The Bachelor of Arts degree, on the other hand, requires that students earn most of their credits in courses related to liberal arts. Typically, bachelors of arts degrees are attained in subjects belonging to such fields as social sciences, humanities, and arts.
Attaining a Bachelor of Arts or Bachelor of Science degree may be a great asset in terms of improving your value on the career market. However, many students complete such degrees in advance of pursuing more advanced degrees. With a BA or BS under your belt, you'll likely have the qualifications necessary to pursue a master's degree or look into additional certificate programs (depending on your field of study).
Having a bachelor's degree is a great way to make yourself more marketable on the job circuit. But going on to pursue a master's degree or even a PhD may potentially help you take your career to yet another level.
If you're looking for a degree or certificate program, you've come to the right place. Yahoo! Education gives you access to an education database that can help you find a school and program that is right for you.
Get started now!