The use of Ultrasound in small animal veterinary medicine has grown rapidly in Village Vet practice in the past 5 years. This has allowed early diagnosis and better management of diseases which previously went undetected for months or years.
What is Ultrasound?
An ultrasound examination is an imaging technique in which deep structures of the body can be visualised by recording echoes of ultrasonic waves which are directed into the tissues. Unlike x-rays which are potentially dangerous, ultrasound waves are considered to be entirely safe.
What is the difference between ultrasound and other types of scan?
Because you get a moving image with ultrasound – as opposed to a static one that you get with an x-ray or brain scan – you can see precisely how the body is functioning in a non-invasive way.
We can check the size, structure and appearance of internal organs to see how each one is working in action.
Which parts of the body do you use ultrasound for?
With the heart, we can use it to watch how it beats, look at its size and see if there is an enlargement. With the intestines, we can assess if muscles are contracting properly as part of the body’s mechanisms for processing food. It is ideal for getting a close look at small organs (kidneys, liver and spleen) and to check for foreign structures in the chest. Images can be frozen and then printed from the computer to provide a positive record of the examination.
Do you choose to use either ultrasound or x-ray?
No, it depends on the condition or what we are trying to find out. When it is appropriate, we may use it as the first line of investigation, such as with a urinary tract problem. Ultrasound may be used in conjunction with x-ray to give a full picture of what might be wrong.
What are the benefits to a pet?
There is no need for sedation or anaesthetic, and it is often okay for the pet to eat beforehand – which makes owners and pets feel happier! Importantly, it is well tolerated by pets, there is no pain, nor is there any exposure to rays. One of the greatest benefits is that it can help us identify problems, like an adrenal gland tumor, which one might not see on x-ray.
Does the technique have any drawbacks?
Ultrasound examinations are of little value in the examination of organs that contain air. Ultrasound waves will not pass through air and therefore it cannot be used to examine the lungs.
Do you need to be specially trained to use ultrasound?
Yes, the machine is totally operator dependent. Our expert has spent ten years developing skills, including one to one training with a top US radiologist, and a specialisation in internal veterinary medicine.
Is the technique affordable?
Ultrasound has become more affordable of late. It is proving its value, particularly in respect of cases such as pregnancy diagnosis, evaluation of the size and normality of internal organs, evaluation of heart function, blood flow and examination of structures within the eye, which make its cost very well worthwhile.
Please contact your local Village Vet practice for more information.