Common to individuals on the autism spectrum are social skills deficits, sometimes referred to as “The Theory of Mind” or social skills deficits.
The Theory of Mind or social skills deficits will affect the individual’s communication, imagination and social skills.
All individuals on the autism spectrum will have varying degrees of social skills deficits. Having social deficits make reading facial expression and body language difficult this can lead to social misunderstandings.
Children on the autism spectrum will not normally adopt the anticipatory posture or raise their hands to be carried or picked up
Children on the autism spectrum are not normally cuddly babies, in-fact most autistic babies will stiffen or resist being held, they normally avoid snuggling up. They will normally prefer to be held facing outwards with their back to the person holding them.
Autistic infants will sometimes not recognize their own name or be inconsistent in recognizing it.
Probably the most noticeable symptom is the lack of eye contact. Where as a normally developing child will give and maintain eye contact, autistic infants will look away quickly and avoid eye contact.
A normally developing child may stare into the mother’s eye noticing their own reflection, infants with autism will show no interest in their reflection and choose not to stare or maintain any eye to eye contact.
Children on the spectrum will normally not be interested in the normal growing up games like pat-a-cake and incy wincy spider. They will prefer not to be engaged in social interactions choosing not to “wave bye bye to Daddy” and so on…
Which of cause will be upsetting and begin to sound alarm bells that perhaps something is not quite right…
All children on the spectrum will have impaired autism social skills…
However, the nature of these impairments can vary…And there are ways you can help your autistic youngster better cope and manage thoughts and feelings.
One such way is introducing autism social skills stories…These are an excellent proven technique for assisting infants with autism with the development of social skills. Helping to promote and maintain autism social skills…
Autism social skills stories…Are used with great success, providing the autistic youngster with support and an understanding of what, where, why and when things happen. As well as what they can expect from other as well as what others will be expecting of them.
Introducing autism social skills stories early to the autistic child’s is beneficial.
Infants with autism will want repetition and sameness so by introducing autism social skills stories early enough this will enable you to teach social skills early, like toileting and good eating habits as well as other skills like saying Hi and thank you.
All helping your autistic youngster being accepted within their own peer group as well as within today’s society
To view an example social story or to download autism social stories visit one of our many sites all specializing in autism and asperger social skills stories as well as offering friendly support advice and help