These Environmental Geology course descriptions provide examples of how faculty across the country have designed their courses to teach these concepts.
Results 1 - 10 of 23 matches
Marine Environmental Geology
Course taught by Prof. Ed Laine, Bowdoin College (firstname.lastname@example.org) and Cathryn Field, Lab Instructor (email@example.com). Example compiled by Suzanne Savanick, Science Education Resource Center (firstname.lastname@example.org).
This course is an introduction to the aspects of marine geology and oceanography that affect the environment and marine resources. Service-learning is an essential component of how students learn about the earth. We deliver part of the content of this course by arranging for students to solve a problem with a local community partner.
Kirsten Nicolaysen, Whitman College
This course serves both non-science majors and entering Geology and Environmental Studies majors.
Environmental Geology, UNC-Wilmington
John Huntsman, University of North Carolina - Wilmington
University of North Carolina Wilmington Entry level environmental geology course, 31-70 students Information for this profile was provided by John Huntsman in 2007. Jump down to Overview and Context * Course ...
Attila Kilinc, University of Cincinnati-Main Campus;
After a brief introduction to volcanology students learn the relationships between plate boundaries and plate intriors and volcanism. Next seven major volcanic hazards and what can be done to mitigate them is ...
Greg Baker, University of Tennessee, The
This course examines surface and borehole geophysical methods that are currently being developed in industry, government labs and academia for examining the upper 200 m of the Earth's surface.
GEOL 4821: Environmental Geophysics
Samuel Peavy, Georgia Southwestern State University
An upper-level elective course in geophysics for geology majors with environmental applications.
Exploration and Environmental Geophysics
, Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge
In the absence of drilling, geophysical exploration methods are the principal means of examining the shallow subsurface. These techniques are non-invasive and relatively inexpensive. The objective of this course is ...
Lawrence L. Malinconico, Lafayette College
The students are exposed to the geophysical methods that geologists and civil engineers use to examine a number of different geological and environmental problems. While it will be important to understand the ...
Environmental Geology and Urban Geology
Solomon Isiorho, Indiana University-Purdue University-Fort Wayne
This course is designed to provide the student with basic understanding of the "human-oriented" aspects of the earth sciences. The geologic features and processes that affect our environment will be ...
Steven Lev, Towson University