This article is
- freely available
Lab-on-a-Chip Pathogen Sensors for Food Safety
Department of Agricultural and Biosystems Engineering, the University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ 85721, USA
Department of Chemical Engineering, Hongik University, Seoul 121-791, Korea
* Author to whom correspondence should be addressed.
Received: 9 May 2012; in revised form: 28 June 2012 / Accepted: 4 July 2012 / Published: 6 August 2012
Abstract: There have been a number of cases of foodborne illness among humans that are caused by pathogens such as Escherichia coli O157:H7, Salmonella typhimurium, etc. The current practices to detect such pathogenic agents are cell culturing, immunoassays, or polymerase chain reactions (PCRs). These methods are essentially laboratory-based methods that are not at all real-time and thus unavailable for early-monitoring of such pathogens. They are also very difficult to implement in the field. Lab-on-a-chip biosensors, however, have a strong potential to be used in the field since they can be miniaturized and automated; they are also potentially fast and very sensitive. These lab-on-a-chip biosensors can detect pathogens in farms, packaging/processing facilities, delivery/distribution systems, and at the consumer level. There are still several issues to be resolved before applying these lab-on-a-chip sensors to field applications, including the pre-treatment of a sample, proper storage of reagents, full integration into a battery-powered system, and demonstration of very high sensitivity, which are addressed in this review article. Several different types of lab-on-a-chip biosensors, including immunoassay- and PCR-based, have been developed and tested for detecting foodborne pathogens. Their assay performance, including detection limit and assay time, are also summarized. Finally, the use of optical fibers or optical waveguide is discussed as a means to improve the portability and sensitivity of lab-on-a-chip pathogen sensors.
Keywords: microfluidics; bioMEMS; food safety; water safety; E. coli; Salmonella
Article StatisticsClick here to load and display the download statistics.
Notes: Multiple requests from the same IP address are counted as one view.
Cite This Article
MDPI and ACS Style
Yoon, J.-Y.; Kim, B. Lab-on-a-Chip Pathogen Sensors for Food Safety. Sensors 2012, 12, 10713-10741.
Yoon J-Y, Kim B. Lab-on-a-Chip Pathogen Sensors for Food Safety. Sensors. 2012; 12(8):10713-10741.
Yoon, Jeong-Yeol; Kim, Bumsang. 2012. "Lab-on-a-Chip Pathogen Sensors for Food Safety." Sensors 12, no. 8: 10713-10741.