logging in or signing up ATM Aruncs3390 Download Post to : URL : Related Presentations : Share Add to Flag Embed Email Send to Blogs and Networks Add to Channel Uploaded from authorPOINT lite Insert YouTube videos in PowerPont slides with aS Desktop Copy embed code: Embed: Flash iPad Copy Does not support media & animations WordPress Embed Customize Embed URL: Copy Thumbnail: Copy The presentation is successfully added In Your Favorites. Views: 1506 Category: Education License: All Rights Reserved Like it (2) Dislike it (0) Added: September 17, 2010 This Presentation is Public Favorites: 1 Presentation Description Done BY LIJO Govt Polytechnic Chelakkara ,Thrissur , Kerala Comments Posting comment... By: 09TM1A0465 (3 month(s) ago) plz send this ppt to firstname.lastname@example.org Saving..... Post Reply Close Saving..... Edit Comment Close By: deeshikha (19 month(s) ago) plz send me ppt....at email@example.com Saving..... Post Reply Close Saving..... Edit Comment Close Premium member Presentation Transcript Slide 1: weLcome AUTOMATED TELLER MACHINE : AUTOMATED TELLER MACHINE CONTENTS : CONTENTS INTRODUCTION HISTORY LOCATION FINANCIAL NETWORKING HARDWARE SOFTWARE SECURITY RELIABILITY FRAUD CONCLUSION INTRODUCTION : INTRODUCTION An automated teller machine(ATM),also known as automatic banking machine(ABM),cash machine, or cash point. It is a computerized telecommunications device that provides the clients of a financial transactions in a public space without the need for a cashier. The customer is identified by inserting a plastic ATM card with a magnetic strip. HISTORY : HISTORY An experimental Bankograph was installed in New York City in 1961 by the City Bank of New York. A first cash dispensing device was used in Tokyo in 1966. ATMs first came into use in December 1972 in the UK;the IBM2984 was designed at the requet of Lloyds Bank. LOCATION : LOCATION ATMs are placed not only near or inside the premises of banks, but also in locations such as shopping centers/malls, airports, grocery stores, petrol/gas stations, restaurants, or any place large numbers of people may gather. These represent two types of ATM installations: on and off premise. . In Canada, when an ATM is not operated by a financial institution it is known as a "White Label ATM”. Many ATMs have a sign above them indicating the name of the bank or organization owning the ATM, and possibly including the list of ATM networks to which that machine is connected. This type of sign is called a topper. FINANCIAL NETWORKING : FINANCIAL NETWORKING allows for the use of a scrip cash dispenser. Many banks charge ATM usage fees. In some cases, these fees are charged solely to users who are not customers of the bank where the ATM is installed; in other cases, they apply to all users. Most ATMs are connected to interbank networks, enabling people to withdraw and deposit money from machines not belonging to the bank where they have their account or in the country where their accounts are held . HARDWARE : HARDWARE An ATM is typically made up of the following devices: CPU (to control the user interface and transaction devices) Magnetic and/or Chip card reader (to identify the customer) PIN Pad (similar in layout to a Touch tone or Calculator keypad), often manufactured as part of a secure enclosure. An ATM is typically made up of the following devices: CPU (to control the user interface and transaction devices) Magnetic and/or Chip card reader (to identify the customer) PIN Pad (similar in layout to a Touch tone or Calculator keypad), often manufactured as part of a secure enclosure. Secure cryptoprocessor, generally within a secure enclosure. Display (used by the customer for performing the transaction) HARDWARE : HARDWARE Function key buttons (usually close to the display) or a Touchscreen (used to select the various aspects of the transaction) Record Printer (to provide the customer with a record of their transaction) Vault (to store the parts of the machinery requiring restricted access) Housing (for aesthetics and to attach signage to Secure cryptoprocessor, generally within a secure enclosure. Display (used by the customer for performing the transaction) Function key buttons (usually close to the display) or a Touchscreen (used to select the various aspects of the transaction) Record Printer (to provide the customer with a record of their transaction) Vault (to store the parts of the machinery requiring restricted access) SOFTWARE : SOFTWARE Typical platforms previously used in ATM development include RMX or OS/2. Today the vast majority of ATMs worldwide use a MicrosoftOS, primarily Windows XP Professional or Windows XP Embedded. Linux is also finding some reception in the ATM marketplace. An example of this is Banrisul, the largest bank in the south of Brazil, which has replaced the MS-DOS operating systems in its ATMs with Linux. SECURity : SECURity A number of attacks on ATMs resulted, with thieves attempting to steal entire ATMs by ram-raiding. Another attack method, plofkraak. Modern ATM physical security, per other modern money-handling security, concentrates on denying the use of the money inside the machine to a thief, by means of techniques such as dye markers and smoke canisters. RELIABILITY : RELIABILITY Before an ATM is placed in a public place, it typically has undergone extensive testing with both test money and the backend computer systems that allow it to perform transactions. ATMs and the supporting electronic financial networks are generally very reliable, with industry benchmarks typically producing 98.25% customer availability for ATMs and up to 99.999% availability for host systems. Improper money checking can cause the possibility of a customer receiving counterfeit banknotes from an ATM. fraud : fraud Card duplicating Breaking the vault Hacking the software CONCLUSION : CONCLUSION ATM is the most exciting development in communications ever. Its development is a risk that offers big rewards; ATM has the potential to be the technology that provides huge bandwidths at low cost if the hurdles can be overcome. THANK YOU : THANK YOU You do not have the permission to view this presentation. In order to view it, please contact the author of the presentation.