This resource guide will focus on United States history and Western Civilization. Library materials on United States History may be found in the E call number area with the following divisions:
||Revolution to Civil War
||Late Nineteenth Century
||Later Twentieth Century (1961- )
When searching for materials on U.S. History you should use the subject terms “ United States – History”. Keywords include American history, Colonial America, names of centuries or specific events. Resources
on Western Civilization may be found in the CB call number area or by searching the library catalog. You may search by subject using Western Civilization, Civilization-History, Europe-Civilization, or Rome-Civilization. Keywords that you may search
are: Civilization, Western Civilization, Ancient Civilization, time periods such as Renaissance,
or names of countries or wars.
You may access the following databases from any computer workstation on campus. For off-campus access, please follow the instructions found on the library’s homepage under “Off-Campus Access Instructions” or click here for an online tutorial.
America: History and Life is a complete bibliographic reference to the history of the United States from prehistory to the present.
HarpWeek: Explore History provides full-text access to America’s leading illustrated newspaper of the nineteenth century.
Humanities International Complete provides full text of hundreds of journals, books and other published sources covering all aspects of the humanities.
Project MUSE is an online collection of over 250 scholarly journals covering the subject area of history.
Women's Studies International covers the core disciplines in Women's Studies to the latest scholarship in feminist research.
Academic Search Complete is a valuable and comprehensive scholarly, multi-disciplinary full-text database.
MasterFILE Premier is composed of full text journal and magazine articles, reference books, biographies, primary source documents, and an Image Collection.
American Memory, from the Library of Congress, “chronicles historical events, people, places, and ideas.” Topics such as African American history, culture, environment, government, literature, and music are covered .
Encyclopedia of World History: Ancient, Medieval, & Modern,
Sixth Edition, a comprehensive listing of more than 20,000 entries that span the millennia from prehistoric times to the year 2000.
Making of America is a digital library of full-text primary sources in American social history from the antebellum period through reconstruction. Materials may be searched within the database or text and read freely online.
Documenting the American South provides access to digitized test, images and audio files related to Southern history, literature, and culture from the colonial period through the first part of the 20 th century.
Internet History Sourcebooks Project is a collection of public domain historical texts maintained by Fordham University.
The Avalon Project at Yale Law School contains full-text digital documents related to the fields of law, history, economics, politics, and government.
World History : HyperHistory presents 3,000 years of world history in timelines, lifelines, and maps.
If you have questions regarding any of these resources or need assistance finding
additional information, please Ask a Librarian.