How is Climate Change Affecting Marine Life?
Contact: Yvonne Menard, 805-658-5725
Join us to view “A Sea Change,” a documentary film that explores the effects of climate change on the world’s oceans. The rapid rise of carbon dioxide levels in the atmosphere since the Industrial Revolution is increasing acidification of the sea.
While the oceans cover about 70% of Earth’s surface, little is known about the effects of increased carbon dioxide levels in the sea, as compared to terrestrial ecosystems.
Some scientists warn that this change in the marine environment may impair the ability of many species, such as urchins, abalone, and lobster to grow shells or skeletons. This change may impact the Channel Islands ecosystem, one of the most diverse marine environments in the world.
The film follows retired educator and concerned grandfather Sven Huseby back to stunning ancestral sites in Norway, Alaska, and the Pacific Northwest, where he finds cutting-edge ocean research underway. His journey of self-discovery brings adventure, surprise, and revelation to the science of ocean acidification.
Gretchen Hofmann, Professor of Ecology, Evolution, and Marine Biology at the University of California, Santa Barbara is a leading researcher on this topic. She will be present to answer questions after the presentation.
Channel Islands National Park and Channel Islands National Marine Sanctuary, in conjunction with the Environmental Defense Center, will present the 90 minute film at 7:00 p.m. Wednesday, October 14, 2009, at the Channel Islands National Park Robert J. Lagomarsino Visitor Center, 1901 Spinnaker Drive in the Ventura Harbor. The program is free and open to the public.
An additional showing will be held at 7:00 p.m. Tuesday, October 27, 2009, at the Santa Barbara Museum of Natural History, 2559 Puesta del Sol, Santa Barbara, CA 93105.
Did You Know?
The Channel Islands are home to the most well-preserved archeological sites on the Pacific coast, with more than 10,000 years
of continuous human occupation recorded.