- DAIRY PRODUCTS
- WEB EXCLUSIVES
- BUYERS GUIDE
June is National Dairy Month. To celebrate, Dairy Foods is highlighting five new foods and the role dairy plays in a well-balanced diet. National Dairy Month started as National Milk Month in 1937 and was originally created as a way to promote drinking milk, according to the International Dairy Foods Association.
Here are 5 new dairy products to celebrate National Dairy Month, plus some dairy facts to get you thinking.
1. Trickling Springs Creamery’s gourmet chocolate milk - Cocoa Metro Dark Drinking Chocolate
Fact: Milk is a significant source of riboflavin (vitamin B2) which helps promote healthy skin and eyes, as well as vitamins A and D.
2. Sartori’s limited edition aged goat cheese
Fact: There are over 2,000 varieties of cheeses. Also, cheese takes up about 1/10 the volume of the milk it was made from.
3. Ilios Greek yogurt butter
Fact: It takes approximately 21.8 pounds of whole milk to make one pound of butter.
4. Magnolia all-natural ice cream from Ramar Foods International
Fact: Ice cream became an edible morale symbol during World War II. When the war ended, and dairy product rationing was lifted, America celebrated its victory with ice cream. Americans consumed over 20 quarts of ice cream per person in 1946.
5. Tillamook’s organic light yogurt
Fact: Fruit was first added to commercially produced yogurt in 1946 by the Dannon Company Inc.
National Dairy Month also was created to stabilize the dairy demand when production was at a surplus, but it’s now developed into an annual tradition that celebrates the contributions the dairy industry has made to the world after the National Dairy Council stepped in to promote the cause.
National Dairy Month is a good way to start the summer with nutrient-rich dairy foods as part of the "3-A-Day" recommended by the National Dairy Council.
According to the National Dairy Council, consuming three servings of dairy a day (i.e. milk, cheese, and yogurt) is an easy way to get necessary nutrients to help build stronger bones, achieve healthier bodies and reduce the risk of osteoporosis. In addition, research suggests that these same three servings of dairy when part of a nutrient-rich, balanced diet can help a person maintain a healthy weight.