Dynamics is concerned with the effects of forces on the motion of any and all objects, and controls the way objects and avatars interact and move relative to one another. A sound understanding of dynamics is essential for any physics engine.
Below, we offer a selection of links from our resource databases which may match this term.
Related Dictionary Entries for Dynamics:
Resources in our database matching the Term Dynamics:
Results by page 
The Petman robot, created by Boston Dynamics, is a possible successor to BigDog. Built using the same engineering principles, it is essentially a two-legged version of the go-anywhere workhorse.
Created by Boston Dynamics at request from DARPA, shortly after the BigDog pack mule prototype was created. LittleDog is a timid-looking four-legged robot about the size of a Chihuahua.
German researchers develop a simulation that approaches fluid dynamics from a new angle. Considering the makeup of the solid structures the droplets hit, as every bit as important as the physics of the droplet itself.
Novint Falcon is a commercial grade haptics unit. Essentially, it is a 3D joystick that responds with the full range of force: Weight, shape, texture, dimension, dynamics and force effects.
Whilst over 30 years old now, this book is one of those whose usefulness is never likely to fade. It is a physics book, dealing with the mathematics and physical constraints of getting any rigid body jointed system to move as desired. Designed initially with robots in mind, long before the avatar, the maths contained within is ideal for grounding on ragdoll physics as used with avatars.
BigDog, a creation of Boston Dynamics, is the poster child for quadruped robots. A large, bulky pack-bot, it is designed to go anywhere a human soldier can go, walkingh across any terrain, with four firm feet. It can walk on almost any surface, run on those same surfaces, recover from being whacked hard when standing still or running, and carry half a tonne with every step whilst it does all this.
Modelled loosely on the design of the robot BigDog, Boston Dynamics' latest quadruped combat robot prototype manages to shatter a 23 year-old record for the fastest legged robot on Earth.
Researchers at the University of Southern Denmark are tackling the virtual voice problem from the other end. They are attempting to understand how the zebra finch makes the noises it does, and accomplishes its range of sounds, by capturing the existing organs in its throat, modelling them in 3D, converting to a virtual environment and attempting to animate the model to produce the same sounds via fluid dynamics.
Industry News containing the Term Dynamics:
November 18th 2012 - November 20th 2012
San Diego, California, USA
The Division of Fluid Dynamics of the American Physical Society exists for the advancement and diffusion of knowledge of the physics of fluids with spe...
Using just an upgraded desktop computer equipped with a relatively inexpensive graphics processing card, a team of computer scientists and biochemists at the University of California, San Diego, has developed advanced GPU accelerated softwa...
July 19 – July 22, 2012
East Lansing, Michigan, USA
It is a great pleasure for the BEACON Center for the Study of Evolution in Action at Michigan State University to host the 13th International Artificial Life Conferen...
A freely walking biped robot the size and shape of a human being is being developed to realistically simulate a soldier wearing protective clothing.
The robot, PETMAN (from Protection Ensemble Test Mannequin), is being develo...
Computer simulations of blood flow through mechanical heart valves could pave the way for more individualized prosthetics
Every year, over 300,000 heart valve replacement operations are performed worldwide. Diseased valves are often replaced with mechanical heart valves (MHVs), which cannot yet be designed to suit each patient’s specific needs. Complications s...