In addition to playing an important role in the development of a growing fetus, proper thyroid hormone levels also help to minimize the chance of any thyroid complications after delivery. One particular postpartum complication is postpartum thyroiditis, a condition characterized by an inflamed thyroid gland. Postpartum thyroiditis is not a typical infection, however. The gland does become inflamed, but the cause is unknown. Postpartum thyroiditis is a condition that results in temporary hyperthyroidism (overactive thyroid), followed by temporary hypothyroidism (underactive thyroid). Postpartum thyroiditis is fairly common. In fact, 5 to 10 percent of women develop the disease after giving birth, according to the American Thyroid Association (ATA).
Certain risk factors may help predict who is at an increased risk for developing postpartum thyroiditis, according to the ATA. These include:
When the thyroid becomes inflamed, it will first emit large quantities of thyroid hormone into the bloodstream (hyperthyroidism). During this phase, most women are unaware of any symptoms, which are often mild and short-lived. However, once this initial phase passes, a woman either recovers completely or has sustained damage to her thyroid. If the thyroid gland was damaged, this damage—together with a depleted reservoir of thyroid hormones—can lead to hypothyroidism (underactive thyroid). This condition, too, may also clear up or result in further damage and complications.
The following are the most common symptoms associated with the hyperthyroidism or hypothyroidism that accompany postpartum thyroiditis. However, each individual may experience symptoms differently. Symptoms may include:
|Feeling warm||Feeling tired|
|Experiencing muscle weakness||Constipation|
|Feeling tremulous||Loss of memory|
|Experiencing anxieties||Cannot tolerate cold weather|
|Rapid heartbeat||Cramps in the muscles|
|Loss of concentration||Feeling weak|
|Weight loss||Weight gain|
Postpartum thyroiditis symptoms may not appear until several months after childbirth. Symptoms are also often mistaken for normal signs of recovery from childbirth. Always consult your doctor for a diagnosis.
Diagnostic procedures used to detect postpartum thyroiditis depend on the phase of the disease. If symptoms of hyperthyroidism are present, a radioactive iodine uptake test can often determine whether it is postpartum thyroiditis or Graves' disease, the most common form of hyperthyroidism. A blood test to measure levels of thyroid hormones (T4) and thyroid-stimulating hormones (TSH) can usually determine whether the mother has hypothyroidism.
Specific treatment for postpartum thyroiditis will be determined by your doctor based on:
Treatment depends on the phase of the disease and the degree of symptoms the woman is experiencing. According to the ATA, it is very important for women to have ongoing thyroid monitoring since 80 percent of women with this diagnosis will have normal thyroid function within 12 to 18 months after the onset of symptoms.
Click here to view the
Online Resources of High-Risk Pregnancy