Kids and Teens
Parents can help children prevent tooth decay and cavities by monitoring their eating habits. Offer children healthy snack alternatives such as apples, bite-size carrots or other foods that are naturally sweet, and instruct children to avoid candies, chocolate, and other foods that contain refined sugar.
Pacifiers provide a source of comfort to infants. Prolonged use, however, can affect the proper development of the mouth and tooth alignment.
Braces are not only traditional shiny gray metal bands. Learn more about caring for your teeth when wearing braces.
Cleaning a child’s teeth should begin when the first tooth is visible, because teeth are susceptible to decay as soon as they appear in the mouth. Children should also see a dentist every six months to help your child develop a positive attitude about the dentist.
Just because chewing tobacco is smokeless does not mean it is harmless.
Cough syrup can contribute to tooth decay. There are several things you can do to lessen its effects.
With today’s lifestyles, adolescence is when soda and sugary, high-carbohydrate foods displace healthy foods such as milk, fruits and vegetables.As a result, a generation may be left with permanent damage to oral and overall health.
What do dentists give out at Halloween? Our survey gathers their best advice for Halloween treats and avoiding the scary tricks candy can play on teeth.
You may not be able to prevent your child from eating candy – but you can take active steps to prevent tooth decay and promote good nutrition all year long.
When children need difficult or complex dental procedures, you may need to consider the options for sedation to help control your child's anxiety.
More dentists are becoming the first line of defense when it comes to recognizing eating disorders in patients. A dentist may spot the warning signs of an eating disorder and be able to point parents in the right direction to get help.
Dental experts warn that once a child reaches the preschool years, a pacifier can become a habit that impedes the development of healthy teeth.
Dental sealants can protect your children from cavities. Sealants are applied to the chewing surfaces of molars to act as a barrier between the tooth and harmful bacteria.
When it comes to cavities, not all candy is created equal. The chewier the candy, the more likely it is to stick around and cause cavities. Limit your children’s risk for cavities by limiting the amount of time their teeth are exposed to sticky, sugary or sour candy.
Dental decay is the most common chronic disease in young people between the ages of 5 and 17, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC).
A large part of the teeth-whitening market comes from image-conscious teens who are buying do-it-yourself teeth whitening kits. But teens who want a whiter smile should seek dentist supervision, says the Academy of General Dentistry (AGD).
The problems that can arise from an oral piercing might surprise you. In fact, most dentists discourage oral piercing because of these risks.
Baby bottle tooth decay is caused by the frequent exposure of a child's teeth to liquids containing sugars. Preventing baby bottle tooth decay involves changes in a child's diet.