Center for Remote Sensing
Earth & Marine Science Bldg.
Santa Cruz, CA 95064
Maps & Directions
Other UCSC Links:
©2005 UC Santa Cruz. Last reviewed
by the CRS webmaster.
FOCUS ON RESEARCH
Remote sensing of the Earth and other Planetary surfaces is a rapidly growing science that cuts across a wide range of disciplines, including volcanic, tectonic, biologic, oceanographic and environmental studies of the Earth’s surface, as well as the search for past and present life on other planetary surfaces. It involves multispectral, hyperspectral and thermal imaging, RADAR and LiDAR imaging, and the engineering development of new remote sensing tools. The close interaction between scientists and engineers at UCSC distinguishes this program from many others and leads to exciting interdisciplinary ventures not possible without such interactions.
Above Image: 3D visualization and temperature
measurement within the crater of Mt. St. Helens, Washington. Topography
from LiDAR and temperature values from MASTER thermal observations.
Flown by the Airborne Sensor Facility on October 14, 2004. Image
processed by JPL.
UCSC takes over operation of NASA Ames Airborne Sensor Facility
The University of California, Santa Cruz, has taken over the operation of NASA's Airborne Sensor Facility, a major program for observation and monitoring of Earth's environment based at NASA Ames Research Center in Moffett Field. [More]
UC Santa Cruz engineering students develop a coral reef monitoring system
Five senior engineering students at the University of California, Santa Cruz, are trying to push the limits of low-power wireless transmission to facilitate the monitoring of remote natural environments. [More]
UCSC to lead ambitious multidisciplinary research project on wireless communication networks
Researchers at the University of California, Santa Cruz, are leading a major collaborative effort to develop the technology for complex wireless communication networks that can be set up in rapidly changing environments such as battlefields and emergency situations. [More]