Fans of the Cat in the Hat have cause to celebrate this holiday season with two stories based on the one-hour PBS Kids primetime special The Cat in the Hat Knows a Lot About Christmas! In A Reindeer's First Christmas, narrator Ralph—a yearling caribou—tells how but for the help of the Cat in the Hat, Sally, Nick, and some new friends, he narrowly misses spending his first Christmas at home and pulling Santa's sled! And in New Friends for Christmas, Sally and Nick learn that with a little help from family and friends—and a spare mini-Thingamajigger—its possible to accomplish almost anything! Perfect for stuffing stockings or as a small gift, this "2 in 1" Pictureback also comes with two pages of glittery punch-out Christmas ornaments that are sure to be cherished for years to come.
About Tish Rabe
Dr. Seuss was born Theodor Geisel in Springfield, Massachusetts on March 2, 1904. After attending Dartmouth College and Oxford University, he began a career in advertising. His advertising cartoons, featuring Quick, Henry, the Flit!, appeared in several leading American magazines. Dr. Seusss first children's book, And To Think I Saw It On Mulberry Street hit the market in 1937, and the world of children's literature was changed forever! In 1957, Seuss's The Cat in the Hat became the prototype for one of Random House's best- selling series, Beginner Books. This popular series combined engaging stories with outrageous illustrations and playful sounds to teach basic reading skills. Brilliant, playful, and always respectful of children, Dr. Seuss charmed his way into the consciousness of four generations of youngsters and parents. In the process, he helped kids learn to read.
Winner of the Pulitzer Prize in 1984 and two Academy Awards, Seuss was the author and illustrator of 44 childrens books, some of which have been made into audiocassettes, animated television specials, and videos for children of all ages. Even after his death in 1991, Dr. Seuss continues to be the best-selling author of children's books in the world.