Commercial buildings use a significant amount of energy, accounting for almost 20 percent of all energy consumed in the United States. Companies are taking steps to reduce energy use in buildings, including upgrading lighting systems, switching to more energy efficient office equipment and appliances, and using technology to better manage energy consumption.
The resources below include presentations, reports and news on energy efficiency improvements in commercial buildings, as well as links to other organizations and web sites active on this issue.
A technology once considered an exotic flourish for fancy new "green building" projects is quickly finding a home in Manhattan's older office towers.
A Golden Corral restaurant operator expects to save as much as $252,000 a year, with an eight-month ROI, after the installation of Efficient Energy America control systems for heating, ventilation and air conditioning (HVAC).
Improving energy efficiency in buildings is the top European strategy for reducing carbon footprints, according to a new study from Johnson Controls, and the resulting cost savings paired with government incentives are what is driving energy efficiency initiatives.
The Energy and Housing and Urban Development departments joined today in announcing participating lenders for a pilot program to finance homeowners' energy efficiency projects.
Poorly fitted air conditioners that leave large gaps around windows can cost New York City buildings a total of $130 million to $180 million a year in extra fuel consumption, leading to as much as 525,000 tons of carbon dioxide emissions, according to a report released today by the Urban Green Council.
The report found that the average room air conditioner leaks as much air as a six square inch hole—and increases total annual heating costs by $130-$180 million in New York City alone.
Ford, Lowe’s, J.C. Penney and KB Home are among the winners of the 2011 Energy Star Awards, announced by the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) today.
Three years ago, the Army began coating its tents in Iraq with 3 inches of spray-on foam in an effort to slash energy needs and trap costly air conditioning inside.
Programmable thermostats, which now make up about half the U.S. sales of all thermostats, could be more trouble for some than they're worth.
Most energy efficiency efforts, Google’s Energy Czar William Weihl said during Climate One at The Commonwealth Club, is a no brainer.
A few years ago in central Florida, John Santarpia had an idea. He was the president and CEO of a credit union and felt he needed to do something to improve its image.
Johnson Controls has announced that its current public sector building efficiency projects are “guaranteed” to save more than $4.7 billion in energy, water and operational costs over the next ten years.
The Natural Resources Defense Council (NRDC) and Institute for Market Transformation (IMT) have launched a global library of building energy rating policies.
Energy Secretary Steven Chu defended his agency's budget raise on Capitol Hill yesterday, including one program that may test Republicans' appetite for bipartisan energy policy.
One of the nation’s leading homebuilders is offering energy-efficient homes in two new markets.