What are the benefits of aerobic exercise? Is it so good that everyone needs to talk about it all the time? How great can walking, running and swimming really be?
These are some of the questions that I have heard very often, be it on blogs, forums, questions in fitness magazines and the list goes on. I think the problem is, experts keep talking about how important aerobic exercise is without explaining why and how it helps you.
Therefore, my goal today is for you to read about the benefits of aerobic exercise, and hopefully by the end of this article, you will be convinced that you should invest some time to engage in physical activity.
It would be even better if you enjoyed learning about aerobic exercise so much, that you shared it with your friends, family and colleagues using the button at the end of this page!
Regular aerobic workouts actually help to reduce high blood pressure in the arteries by lowering the "bad" cholesterol and increasing "good" cholesterol. This prevents the arteries from getting clogged up.
With clear arteries, your blood pressure is lower and you lower the risk of getting various cardiovascular diseases.
Basically, regular exercise places stress on your bones. This tells your body to increase the bone density of your bones, making them much stronger. Regular exercise would mean that your body keeps rebuilding your bone tissues.
Since aerobic activity is about increasing the body's oxygen intake into the heart and lungs, you can be sure that when you engage in regular aerobic exercises, you are on your way to losing those pounds!
Besides diseases, aerobic activity is also responsible for the state of one's mental fitness.
Even the elderly can benefit from this if they begin to work out regularly. It doesn't have to be extremely intensive. They can choose to take a walk every day with family members or friends!
Some people wonder if exercise is enough to cure depression. Well, in severe cases, regular aerobic exercise will not be enough to replace counselling and therapy sessions. However, in mild cases, it can help to prevent and treat depression in the long run.
While humans used to die from lack of nutrition in decades past, most cases of death are due to illnesses such as cardiovascular diseases and osteoporosis.
Since we now know that there are so many benefits of aerobic exercise, I wish that you will feel more motivated to set aside some time to work out. You do not have to exercise like a freak. Aim to work out regularly maybe three times a week for half an hour every time is great enough!
Hard work will always pay off, motivate yourself and you will reduce the risk of getting such diseases.
I remember the one major problem I had when I was helping my friend with her weight issue (for the full story, watch the video at the start of this page), and that was her lack of time to fit in much workout routines.
This short report will show you how making simple changes to your diet can be the very thing that can help you lose weight quickly, effectively without risking your health. A proper eating system is the one main factor why so many find it hard to lose weight.
Of course, you will need to put in effort as well. Read more about Eat And Lose Weight.
If you enjoyed this page, why not join the mailing list to Exercise For Beginners Primetime, an e-zine that gives you special fitness information ONLY subscribers get to read! You won't be disappointed!
There is a book that helps you lose weight FAST, look incredible and be healthy. How much would you pay for it?
Subscribe to Exercise For Beginners Primetime e-Zine