The Underwater Landscape
Ninepin Point gets its name from a series
of large boulders, 2-3 metres in diameter, which are visible from the shore
during low tides. These form part of a large, spectacular rocky reef that extends
offshore 150 metres to the sandy seafloor at depths of 7 to 10 metres. The reef
is dissected by numerous gutters 1-2 metres deep.
Flora - the Seaweeds and Sea-grasses
The reserve contains a highly localised algal flora, including a number of species not recorded outside the region, such as the red algae Schizoseris tasmanica.
Brown kelps such as bull kelp (Durvillaea potatorum)
, strap weed (Philospora comosa)
and common kelp (Ecklonia radiata)
dominate in exposed areas, while in more sheltered waters, neptune's necklace (Hormosira banksii)
, green sea-lettuce (Ulva spp.)
and sticky weed (Sargassum spp.)
are common. The red seaweeds dominate on the reefs and Sonderopelta coriaceae
and Thamnoclonium dichotomum
are two particularly abundant species.
Fauna - Invertebrates and Fish
In the absence of light-loving seaweeds, invertebrate animal and fish communities that would normally be found below 20 metres proliferate in the shallow waters. Fish species commonly encountered in the reserve
include the blue-throated wrasse (Notolabrus tetricus)
, butterfly perch (Caesioperca lepidoptera)
, barber perch (Caesioperca razor)
, little rock whiting (Neoodax balteatus)
, toothbrush leatherjacket (Acanthaluteres vittiger)
, jackass morwong (Nemadactylus macropterus)
and southern hula fish (Trachinops caudimaculatus)
. The red-velvet fish (Gnathancanthus goetzii)
, a rare and unusual creature with venomous spines, is also known to inhabit the reef.
A vast array of invertebrates inhabit the reserve including a diversity of colourful sponges, delicate lacework bryozoans, feather-like hydroids, ascidians, anemones, octopus, squid, crabs, shrimps, sea-snails, southern rock lobster (Jasus edwardsii) and blacklip abalone (Haliotis rubra). Common urchins (Heliocidaris erythrogramma), common featherstars (Commanthus trichoptera), pencil urchins (Goniocidaris tubaria) and colourful and brightly patterned seastars, such as the firebrick star (Petricia vernicina) and biscuit star (Pentagonaster duebeni), are also abundant on the reef.
The reserve area contains potential habitat for several threatened species including the seastar Smilasterias tasmaniae, the live-bearing seastar (Patiriella vivipara), gunns screw shell (Gazameda gunnii) and spotted handfish (Brachionichthys hirsutus). The reserve also supports breeding populations of little penguins (Eudyptula minor) and contains a small forest of giant string kelp (Macrocystis pyrifera) and a shark refuge area.