BREAKING: Red Wine Found to Kill Cancerous Cells
On May 4th, a research study is going to be published in the Journal of Biological Chemistry explaining that a chemical in red wine actually KILLS cancer. The chemical in question is found in the skins of red grapes and was found to kill human leukemia and lymphoma cells.
This beautiful molecule, C-3-R (cyanidin-3-rutinoside), is found in high concentrations in red wine. It is produced by certain red varietal vines to protect the berry from ultraviolet radiation.
It was tested on leukemia and lymphoma with very promising results. All of the cancerous cells died within 18 hours or less, and none of the non cancerous cells were injured. This is a major breakthrough in the medical community. For years, researchers were searching for something that would kill cancerous cells and not harm healthy ones, this is a huge breakthrough.
The health benefits of red wine have come to light in recent years. The relationship between red wine and cardiovascular disease has been documented in famous studies like the French Paradox. But this discovery may be the most important to date.
If used as a cancer treatment, C-3-R would have to be commercially produced. As the levels found in red wine would not be high enough to be therapeutic. One would have to drink near lethal amounts of red wine to have the effect needed to combat leukemia or lymphoma.
Also, this research has shown that certain varietals and regions produce higher amounts of beneficial anti-oxidants. For example, Pinot Noir has a higher amount of C-3-R and Resveratrol than almost all other red varietals. Additionally, specific regions, like Oregon and Burgundy were higher in the desirable antioxidants than those of warmer regions like California.
The physiological reason for this isn’t very well understood, but researchers are very optimistic that they may be on track to finding a cure for certain cancers. C-3-R is currently being tested, so don’t expect it to be available anytime soon. Hope is on the horizon, and it may be in your glass. Cheers.