Constipation is the most widespread gastrointestinal complaint in the United States. Our lives of constant rush, hectic schedules, late nights and fast food consumption habits have turned constipation into a problem of epidemic proportions. According to the recent research, 4.4 million people in USA are suffering from constipation. Those reporting constipation most often are children, women, and adults age 65 and over.
Constipation is a state of costiveness or irregularity in which an individual experiences hard feces that is difficult to expel. Defecation in constipation is extremely painful and in severe cases leads to bowel obstruction.
With the advancement of medical science, several constipation cures have been formulated. These include laxatives, prescription medications, enemas, suppositories, combination products, miscellaneous drugs, and natural remedies as explained below:
Constipation Cure Though Laxatives
Lubricant laxatives: – Lubricant laxatives mainly consist of mineral oil or plain oil or emulsion in combination with water. It is beneficial for only short-term usage however its long-term use may cause potential disadvantages i.e. deficiency of vital vitamins and lipid pneumonia.
Emollient laxatives: – Emollient laxatives are mainly sued as stool softener. It makes defecation easier and softens the stool temporarily. However it is not recommended together with mineral oil or certain prescription medications.
Hyperosmolar laxatives: -Hyperosmolar laxatives are unabsorbable, indigestible compounds that cause softening of the stool. It stays within the colon and retains the water that is already present in the colon. However these laxatives are associated with fewer side-effects like abdominal bloating and flatulence.
Example of Hyperosmolar laxatives- Lactulose, sorbitol and polyethylene glycol
Saline laxatives: – Saline laxatives contain non-absorbable ions that remain in the colon and cause water to be drawn into the colon. It may cause softening of the stool. However saline laxatives should not be taken on the regular basis as they may results in diarrhea.
Example of Saline laxatives-Epsom salt
Stimulant laxatives: – It may cause the muscle of the small intestine and colon to propel their contents more rapidly. These laxatives are highly effective but then cause severe diarrhea, dehydration, intestinal cramping and loss of electrolytes. Overuse of stimulant laxatives may worsen constipation.
Example of stimulant Laxatives- cascara (castor oil), senna and aloe.
Tegaserod: – FDA approved constipation cure designed for treating abdominal pain, constipation in women with irritable bowel syndrome. The most commonly found side-effect of this drug is diarrhea
Constipation Cure through Enemas
Enemas are mainly used when there is hardening of stool in the rectum. Enemas stimulate the colon to contract and eliminate stool. These are effective but then cause disturbances of the fluids and electrolytes in the body. Furthermore they can damage the rectum.
Constipation Cure Through Miscellaneous Drugs
Certain miscellaneous drugs are used to treat constipation like Colchicine, Misoprostol, Orlistat etc
Constipation Cure Through Natural remedies
Natural treatment for constipation is the BEST option so far as it is associated with any side-effects. Natural Constipation cure is also safe for long-term usage. ErboLaxa is one such innovative herbal constipation aid that ends constipation problem naturally by restricting irregular bowel movements, and painful defecation. It improves the overall digestive functions of an individual. ErboLaxa possesses natural laxative properties which help in adding water to your stool thereby making bowel movement easier.
ErboLaxa will make life easier and enjoyable for you!!
Click here to Order erbolaxa