The most important nutrients that the body needs cannot be produced by it. How these nutrients are introduced into a person's body can have a big impact on how to use them.Nutrients do not act alone but together with other nutrients. To maximize the availability of carotenoids foods recommended below, they should be eaten raw or lightly cooked.
Peritonitis is an inflammation of the peritoneum, a thin membrane that covers the abdominal wall and internal organs. Inflammation can be caused by a bacterial or fungal infection of this membrane.There are two major types of peritonitis: primary and secondary. Primary peritonitis is triggered by an infection spread from the lymph nodes in the blood and peritoneum. This type of peritonitis is rare, less than 1% of all cases.The most commonly seen is secondary peritonitis, which occur
1. Endocrine system
The endocrine system plays an important role in the development of important functions in the body (digestion, reproduction, homeostasis).The endocrine system is composed mainly of hypothalamus, pituitary, thyroid, parathyroid, adrenal glans, pineal gland and reproductive glands.Endocrine secretions works with the immune system and the nervous body heal itself.Important endocrine glands secrete hormones directly into the bloodstream. It the
Hydrotherapy is part of medicine which involves the use of external water to maintain and restore the health of a person.Hydrotherapy includes sauna, steam baths, foot baths and applying hot or cold compresses. Hydrotherapy’s father, Sebastian Kneipp is a Bavarian monk who lived in the 19th century. Kneipp believes that diseases can be cured by removing toxins from the body with water.
Contents1. Overview 2. Typ
Between 10-15% of lung cancers are diagnosed in people who have never smoked, most of them women.Statistics show that 1 in 5 women diagnosed with lung cancer have never smoked, compared to 1 in 10 men.
Contents1. Overview 2. How do we know if we suffer from lung cancer or if there’s
Infection-causing bacteria and viruses harmful to the body can be contacted from various places, from hospital wards to a neighbor’s hand. These infections are almost impossible to avoid completely, but anyone can try their prevention by using various methods.In this article you can find information about: - Prevention of contracting HIV - HIV is the virus that causes AIDS, a condition in which a
Thyroid dysfunction during pregnancy requires special attention because of maternal-fetal complications that can occur in the absence of appropriate treatment. The most common thyroid dysfunction in pregnancy is the hypothyroidism.Causes that may lead to hypofunction may be iodine deficiency, chronic autoimmune thyroiditis etc.
Contents1. Overview 2. Diagnosis and sym