Understanding The Portuguese Language & Providing Professional Portuguese Interpreters, Translators and Transcriptionists
American Language Services ® (ALS) understands the importance of working in the Portuguese language. For over a Quarter of a Century, American Language Services ® has worked with the Portuguese language as well as hundreds of others from around the world. We offer comprehensive language services 24 hours, 7 days a week worldwide by providing Portuguese interpreting, translation and transcriptions services along with hundreds of other languages and dialects. Our linguists are native speakers and writers who are screened, credentialed, certified, field tested and experienced in a number of specific industry settings. The Portuguese language is unique and has very specific origins and characteristics.
Brazilian Culture and Portuguese
Today it is one of the world's major languages, ranked 6th according to number of native speakers. It is the language of about half of South America, even though Brazil is the only Portuguese-speaking nation in the Americas. It is also a major lingua franca in Portugal's former colonial possessions in Africa. Brazilian culture has historically been influenced by European, African, and Indigenous cultures and traditions. Its major early influence derived from Portuguese culture, because of strong colonial ties with the Portuguese empire. Among other inheritances, the Portuguese introduced the Portuguese language, the Catholic religion and the colonial architectural styles.
Portuguese is a pluricentric language with two main groups of dialects, those of Brazil and those of the Old World. For historical reasons, the dialects of Africa and Asia are generally closer to those of Portugal than the Brazilian dialects, although in some aspects of their phonetics, especially the pronunciation of unstressed vowels, they resemble Brazilian Portuguese more than European Portuguese. They have not been studied as widely as European and Brazilian Portuguese.
There is a maximum of 9 oral vowels and 19 consonants, though some varieties of the language have fewer phonemes (Brazilian Portuguese has 8 oral vowels). There are also five nasal vowels, which some linguists regard as allophones of the oral vowels, ten oral diphthongs, and five nasal diphthongs. In total, Brazilian Portuguese has 13 vowel Phonemes.
Who are You Going to Trust with Your Vital Portuguese Language Needs?
The Portuguese language is an important language worldwide. It is vital to understand the general nature and specific idiosyncrasies of Portuguese. Since 1985, ALS has provided outstanding Portuguese interpreters, translators and transcriptionsts worldwide.
Chicago Interpreters | Chicago Translation Service | Chicago Transcription Service | Dallas Interpreters | Dallas Translation Service | Dallas Transcription Service | Houston Interpreters | Houston Translation Service | Houston Transcription Service | Irvine Interpreters | Irvine Translation Service | Irvine Transcription Service | Las Vegas Language Service | Las Vegas Interpreters | Las Vegas Translation Service | Las Vegas Transcription Service | Los Angeles Language Services | Los Angeles Interpreters | Los Angeles Translation Service | Los Angeles Transcription Service | Miami Interpreters | Miami Translation Service | Miami Transcription Service | Orlando Interpreters | Orlando Translation Service | Orlando Transcription Service | Philadelphia Interpreters | Philadelphia Translation Service | Philadelphia Transcription Service | San Diego Interpreters | San Diego Translation Service | San Diego Transcription Service | San Francisco Interpreters | San Francisco Translation Service | San Francisco Transcription Service | Washington DC Interpreters | Washington DC Translation Service | Washington DC Transcription Service ...Language Services by City | Language Services by State