Beginner English as a second language Quizzes, Interactive Mind Map based on
Conversations on Different Topics, Practice "Speaking" English with an
ESL (English as a second language), ESOL (English for speakers of other
languages), and EFL (English as a foreign language) all refer to the use or
study of English by speakers with a different native language.
The many acronyms used in the field of English teaching and learning may be
confusing. English is a language with great reach and influence; it is taught
all over the world under many different circumstances. In English-speaking
countries, English language teaching has essentially evolved in two broad
directions: instruction for people who intend to live in an English-speaking
country and for those who don't. These divisions have grown firmer as the
instructors of these two "industries" have used different terminology, followed
distinct training qualifications, formed separate professional associations, and
so on. Crucially, these two arms have very different funding structures, public
in the former and private in the latter, and to some extent this influences the
way schools are established and classes are held. Source:
Wikipedia English as a foreign or second language
A house is a home, building or structure that is a dwelling or place for habitation by human beings. The term includes many kinds of dwellings ranging from rudimentary huts of nomadic tribes to free standing individual structures. In some contexts, "house" may mean the same as dwelling, residence, home, abode, lodging, accommodation, or housing, among other meanings. The social unit that lives in a house is known as a household. Most commonly, a household is a family unit of some kind, though households can be other social groups, such as single persons, or groups of unrelated individuals. Settled agrarian and industrial societies are composed of household units living permanently in housing of various types, according to a variety of forms of land tenure.
The financial crisis of 2007–2010 was related to the collapse of real estate bubbles, notably in the United States. Source:
Graphic organizers Graphic organizers are visual
representations of knowledge, concepts or ideas.
To see a note, hover over a note button
To scroll the mindmap above, click and drag the map's background and move
it around , or click on background and use the arrow keys.
link to another page, click a link button
To Fold/Unfold a node, click the node
or right click a Node and select Fold/Unfold all from Node.
in or CTRL '+',
out or CTRL '-', Reset
(center), Shadow On/