The proof, as they say, is in the pudding. A first-of-its-kind national study of the toxic chemical "body burden" in health professionals found an array of hazardous chemicals in twenty doctors and nurses across the country, highlighting the need for state lawmakers to enact strong legislation that would alleviate the devastating impacts of these chemicals.
As part of a national study, Clean Water Action served as a liaison to the national biomonitoring report released by the Physicians for Social Responsibility.
Twenty health professionals from ten states -- including state Representative Jimmy Womack, MD and the founder of MSU's Department of Pediatrics, Dr. William Weil --were tested for selected hazardous chemicals stored in their bodies.
The participants were tested for 62 different chemicals through a process known as biomonitoring. Each participant had at least 24 individual chemicals in their body, and two participants had a high of 39 chemicals detected.
These chemicals are emerging or known chemicals of concern, are known or suspected of causing hormone problems, reproductive problems, neurological problems (including developmental, memory, learning, or behavioral issues), thyroid problems, cancer, diabetes and hypertension.
Strong state legislation that would address the affects of these chemicals has already been proposed. HB 4699 would phase out several uses of deca-BDE, the toxic flame retardant which is the only commercial formulation of PBDEs not yet banned in Michigan. HB 4522 would limit children's exposure to BPA.
The Michigan House has already passed 11 bills related to these chemicals, but they've stalled in the Senate. HB 4763-69, the Children's Safe Products Act, would provide consumers with a right-to-know about the presence of the most toxic chemicals in children's products. This commonsense legislative package - which enjoys strong support from parents, health professionals and Michigan independent toy store owners and passed overwhelmingly in the House - is pending before the Senate Health Policy Committee. Similarly, HB 4277-81, which would limit mercury in products are pending before the Senate Committee on Natural Resources & Environmental Affairs.
Send a message to the Senate, and tell them to protect Michiganders from these toxic chemicals by enacting strong legislation.