2012-11-30 15:33:34 -
Diabetes is reaching near epidemic proportions in the United States, and Florida Heart Group recommends everyone affected by this condition have checkups for heart disease performed.
/EINPresswire.com/ With this statistic recently reported by the American Diabetes Association, the severity of diabetes is put squarely into perspective. In addition, if nothing is done to reduce the prevalence of this condition, approximately 1 in 3 Americans will be impacted by diabetes.
In observance of this startling trend, leading Florida cardiology practice Florida Heart Group is recommending all people diagnosed with diabetes stop in for a checkup. Why?
"People with diabetes are more likely to suffer from heart disease, as elevated blood sugar levels can cause damage to many parts of the
body, including the heart," said Andrew Laverghetta, the Florida vascular clinic's CEO.
"When it comes to diabetes and potential heart disease, it's wise to take every precaution available. Our goal is to make sure everyone lives the longest, healthiest life possible. If someone's affected by diabetes, we want to make sure that's all they have, and nothing more," he continued.
Symptoms of Heart Disease
Heart disease typically is evidenced by three noticeable categories of symptoms in both men and women:
Unusual fatigue - Understanding whether or not fatigue is the precursor to heart disease is best determined by a doctor. However, people affected by unusually high levels of fatigue should be concerned they are experiencing potential heart disease symptoms.
Sleep disturbance - Any unusual or prolonged sleep disturbances can be an indicator of a heart condition. People who suffer heart attacks often have been experiencing sleep disturbances in the months leading up to the attack.
Physical symptoms - Shortness of breath, indigestion, and unusually high anxiety levels may indicate the presence of a heart condition.
Individuals with or without diabetes who are experiencing these symptoms are recommended to call Florida Heart Group to schedule a checkup. The Florida heart hospital is open Monday through Friday from 8:30 a.m. to 5:30 p.m. and can be contacted at 407-894-4472.
ABOUT FLORIDA HEART GROUP: Founded in 1979, Florida Heart Group has expanded to become the leading provider of diagnostic, treatment, and prevention of cardiovascular disease. With over 19 cardiologists and numerous specializations such as Adult Congenital Heart Disease, Diagnostic Imaging, Women's Heart Disease, Interventional Cardiology, and Heart Failure, the practice has the ability to help patients throughout all stages of the heart disease treatment process. The organization also has a vein treatment center that offers procedures such as endo venous laser ablation, ambulatory phlebectomy, and ultrasound guided sclerotherapy. Florida Heart Group can be followed on Facebook, Twitter, or their blog.
Florida Heart Group
PR Courtesy of Online PR Media