How to Learn Gaelic (Irish)
Irish is the first official language of the Republic of Ireland. There are approximately 72,000 native speakers who use Irish on an everyday basis and more than 1.6 million people who speak Irish as a second language. Outside of Ireland, citizens of Irish descent make up a substantial portion of the population in the United States, Australia, and New Zealand. The Irish people are famous for their pride and passion for their culture and heritage. The most distinguishing features of a culture are entrenched in its language. Accordingly, the Irish language plays an important role in understanding the national identity that is so important to the people of Ireland and those of Irish descent. This language binds together a proud people who demonstrate a strong passion for their homeland regardless of their current home country.
While Irish enjoys the title of Ireland’s official language, a majority of the Irish population prefers to communicate in English. As a result of the massive transition into English, the Irish language was said for a while to have been subsiding. In an attempt to save the language, many regions in Ireland send their children to Irish schools where all interactions and lessons are presented in Irish.
Due to an event that many are referring to as the “New Irish Renaissance”, more people are now able to read, write, and speak Irish than at any point in the past 150 years. More newspapers, books, and magazines have been published in Irish in the past century than in the entire history of the country!
Irish is a relatively simple language to learn in comparison to many other European dialects. The unique pronunciations can sometimes cause trouble for new beginners, but interactive language tools with built-in voice recognition software will be an excellent source of coaching for your developing accent. With this award winning language software, mastering the pronunciation of this passionate language will be a breeze. The vocabulary and grammatical aspects of this language are relatively simple. With the use of educational tools and the dedication that comes to everyone equipped with Irish blood, you could play a part in continuing the revival of Irish Gaelic.
The Irish language is of vital importance to the more than 70 million people who claim to have Irish blood. The Irish are very passionate about their culture, and this language connects people of Irish descent from all over the world. This is especially important in today’s harsh economic climate as Ireland is struggling to maintain its identity amongst admittance to the European Union and its subsequent bankruptcy. There has never been a time where it has been of more importance for citizens of every country with Irish blood to band together and work to preserve their cultural significance. More people are learning Irish now than at any point in history.