Channel: 170 Found
Linear deep part of a body of water through which the main volume of water flows and is frequently used as aroute for watercraft (passage, reach, strait, thoroughfare, throughfare).
Church: 998 Found
Building used for religious worship (chapel, mosque, synagogue, tabernacle, temple).
Civil: 350 Found
A political division formed for administrative purposes (borough, county, municipio, parish, town, township).
Cliff: 161 Found
Very steep or vertical slope (bluff, crag, head, headland, nose, palisades, precipice, promontory, rim, rimrock).
Crater: 7 Found
Circular-shaped depression at the summit of a volcanic cone or one on the surface of the land caused by the impact of a meteorite; a manmade depression caused by an explosion (caldera, lua).
Crossing: 230 Found
A place where two or more routes of transportation form a junction or intersection (overpass, underpass).
Dam: 813 Found
Water barrier or embankment built across the course of a stream or into a body of water to control and (or) impound the flow of water (breakwater, dike, jetty).
Falls: 182 Found
Perpendicular or very steep fall of water in the course of a stream (cascade, cataract, waterfall).
Flat: 498 Found
Relative level area within a region of greater relief (clearing, glade, playa).
Forest: 30 Found
Bounded area of woods, forest, or grassland under the administration of a political agency (see "woods") (national forest, national grasslands, State forest).
Gap: 336 Found
Low point or opening between hills or mountains or in a ridge or mountain range (col, notch, pass, saddle, water gap, wind gap).
Glacier: 186 Found
Body or stream of ice moving outward and downslope from an area of accumulation; an area of relatively permanent snow or ice on the top or side of a mountain or mountainous area (icefield, ice patch, snow patch).
Gut: 53 Found
Relatively small coastal waterway connecting larger bodies of water or other waterways (creek, inlet, slough).
Harbor: 16 Found
Sheltered area of water where ships or other watercraft can anchor or dock (hono, port, roads, roadstead).
Hospital: 102 Found
Building where the sick or injured may receive medical or surgical attention (infirmary).
Island: 417 Found
Area of dry or relatively dry land surrounded by water or low wetland (archipelago, atoll, cay, hammock, hummock, isla, isle, key, moku, rock).
Isthmus: 1 Found
Narrow section of land in a body of water connecting two larger land areas.
Lake: 2,989 Found
Natural body of inland water (backwater, lac, lagoon, laguna, pond, pool, resaca, waterhole).
Lava: 6 Found
Formations resulting from the consolidation of molten rock on the surface of the Earth (kepula, lava flow).
Locale: 3,345 Found
Place at which there is or was human activity; it does not include populated places, mines, and dams (battlefield, crossroad, camp, farm, ghost town, landing, railroad siding, ranch, ruins, site, station, windmill).
Military: 28 Found
Place or facility formerly used for various aspects of or relating to military activity.
Mine: 339 Found
Place or area from which commercial minerals are or were removed from the Earth; not including oilfield (pit, quarry, shaft).
Park: 999 Found
Place or area set aside for recreation or preservation of a cultural or natural resource and under some form of government administration; not including National or State forests or Reserves (national historical landmark, national park, State park, wilderness area).
Pillar: 93 Found
Vertical, standing, often spire-shaped, natural rock formation (chimney, monument, pinnacle, pohaku, rock tower).
Plain: 6 Found
A region of general uniform slope, comparatively level and of considerable extent (grassland, highland, kula, plateau, upland).
Populated Place: 2,660 Found
Populated place or area with clustered or scattered buildings and a permanent human population (city, settlement, town, village).
Post Office: 119 Found
An official facility of the U.S. Postal Service used for processing and distributing mail and other postal material.
Range: 61 Found
Chain of hills or mountains; a somewhat linear, complex mountainous or hilly area (cordillera, sierra).
Rapids: 45 Found
Fast-flowing section of a stream, often shallow and with exposed rock or boulders (riffle, ripple).
Reserve: 51 Found
A tract of land set aside for a specific use (does not include forests, civil divisions, parks).
Reservoir: 524 Found
Artificially impounded body of water (lake, tank).
Ridge: 575 Found
Elevation with a narrow, elongated crest which can be part of a hill or mountain (crest, cuesta, escarpment, hogback, lae, rim, spur).
School: 2,787 Found
Building or group of buildings used as an institution for study, teaching, and learning (academy, college, high school, university).
Slope: 7 Found
A gently inclined part of the Earth's surface (grade, pitch).
Spring: 769 Found
Place where underground water flows naturally to the surface of the Earth (seep).
Stream: 6,339 Found
Linear body of water flowing on the Earth's surface (anabranch, awawa, bayou, branch, brook, creek, distributary, fork, kill, pup, rio, river, run, slough).
Summit: 2,689 Found
Prominent elevation rising above the surrounding level of the Earth's surface; does not include pillars, ridges, or ranges (ahu, berg, bald, butte, cerro, colina, cone, cumbre, dome, head, hill, horn, knob, knoll, mauna, mesa, mesita, mound, mount, mountain, peak, puu, rock, sugarloaf, table, volcano).
Swamp: 65 Found
Poorly drained wetland, fresh or saltwater, wooded or grassy, possibly covered with open water (bog, cienega, marais, marsh, pocosin).
Tower: 308 Found
A manmade structure, higher than its diameter, generally used for observation, storage, or electronic transmission.
Trail: 438 Found
Route for passage from one point to another; does not include roads or highways (jeep trail, path, ski trail).
Tunnel: 11 Found
Linear underground passageway open at both ends.
Valley: 1,145 Found
Linear depression in the Earth's surface that generally slopes from one end to the other (barranca, canyon, chasm, cove, draw, glen, gorge, gulch, gulf, hollow, ravine).
Well: 19 Found
Manmade shaft or hole in the Earth's surface used to obtain fluid or gaseous materials.
Woods: 35 Found
Small area covered with a dense growth of trees; does not include an area of trees under the administration of a political agency (see "forest").
Legal Notice: This website is informational only. No representation is made or warranty given as to its content. User assumes all risk of use. Lat-Long.com, its owners and its suppliers assume no responsibility for any loss or delay resulting from such use. About