Today’s picture: Willow Tree, Remuera, Auckland, July 27 2008
Part 1: Today's word
If things or people are compatible, they go well together. This is used a lot about technology and, in particular, computing. It’s important that the software is compatible with the operating system – otherwise it might not work properly. In teams too, it’s important that the members are compatible. If two people are compatible, it doesn’t mean they’re the same. Sometimes very different people can work well together, so we can still say they are compatible. This is also important in personal relationships. ‘Incompatibility’ is a common reason people give when they want to divorce. In other words, they feel that they can’t live together any more.
Paul had to leave when he realised his working methods weren’t compatible with his colleague’s.
Another advantage of the new system is compatibility with industry standards.
For more practice, see Unit 3 of www.academicenglishgenerator.com
Part 2: Test
Here are FOUR sentences with the word of the day. But only THREE are correct. Which is the Odd One Out?
Can you try and be more compatible. It’s impossible to work with you sometimes!
Although great workers individually, I guess their personalities were just not compatible.
The merger of the departments proved to be much more difficult than we’d expected as the different approaches to teaching and research were simply not compatible.
It’s important to work together with local communities to ensure that health reforms are compatible with the existing culture and customs.
Part 3: Practice Questions:
Do you feel that the way your course is delivered is compatible with your learning style?
Apart from computer software, what other products sometimes suffer from compatibility problems?
Part 4: Kiwi Quiz Question
Which part of New Zealand is the first inhabited place in the world to see the new dawn?
The Chatham Islands
Part 5: Today's online reading: Olympic Inspiration 2
(from The BBC)
Vocabulary for the article:
impoverished / run-down / to murmur / a kick / gruelling / to sear / to heave / to squat
Questions for the article:
Where does Nery Brenes come from?
What are the sports facilities like there?
Who does he live with?
What event will he participate in at the Olympics?
Today’s musical intro / outro: From Mauritania, N. Africa
‘Mauritania, My Beloved Country’ by Khalifa Oud Eide & Dimi Mint Abba. From the CD ‘Moorish Music from Mauritania’. 1990: World Circuit. CD may be purchased from: http://www.tower.com/details/details.cfm?wapi=106957854. The best music store in Auckland is ‘Real Groovy’ on Upper Queen St - a great place to spend a rainy afternoon!