Aggressive Dog Behavior
Aggressive Dog Behavior
There are numerous factors behind aggressive dog behavior. It may be as a result of a dominance associated issue between you and the dog, or it could be a set-off that was certainly not thoroughly addressed from puppyhood – for instance an assault by a different dog. Whatever is triggering your dog’s aggression, nevertheless, you should deal with it as quickly as possible. The effects of continuous aggression is often not just frightening, but dangerous if not immediately taken to task.
The Origin of Aggressive Dog Behavior
Dog aggression may start as early as 6 weeks of age, a vital age when a puppy ought to be socialized together with other dogs and provided the required training that will keep them from biting other people. This interval of socialization continues until the canine turns 14 weeks of age and may expand even further past that.
This suggests a number of things. First, under no circumstances should you take a puppy away from its litter earlier than 8 weeks of age. Never apply severe discipline with the puppy between 8 and 10 weeks and make certain the dog is extremely delicately dealt with in that time. Striking, shouting or other severe punitive measures at an early age could breed aggressive behavior in dogs after a while.
Your dog will need to have been adequately socialized with people and other canines by the time he reached 14 weeks to prevent any kind of long term aggression problems.
Real aggression may be brought on through several variables. Heredity and genetics are surely factors – certain dog breeds could be much more aggressive when compared with others – but it is by no means a hard fast rule. Furthermore, dogs which have not been neutered or spayed tend to be more susceptible to aggressive behaviors.
By far, however, the most crucial element in developing aggressive dog behavior is their surroundings. A dog which has poor living conditions, tough masters, hardly any socialization, or that has been scared or assaulted by another dog, is much more likely to end up aggressive as it grows older.
Aggression can certainly develop from the necessity to establish a pack pecking order. Biting, posturing, and other aggressive traits will often be the consequence of a dog testing for dominance. You’ll need to establish dominance at an early age and maintain that placement over the dog’s adolescence to make sure that it won’t have an opportunity to take charge of the household.
Stopping and Controlling Aggressive Dog Behavior
Should your dog display aggressive patterns after 14 months of age, when it has attained sexual maturity, particularly once it has been altered, make sure you deal with the issue promptly. First, be sure you have established yourself as the pack leader. Don’t reward your dog for aggressive conduct, even if it’s frightened (especially in this scenario).
Train your dog to respond to your directions, manage feeding and walking times, and ensure your dog has a strong leader at home. Should you defer to the dog or let it take liberties in your home, it will display stronger aggression toward others.
In case your dog is defensive-aggressive, they might strike out at an individual in fear. These types of dogs might not have been appropriately socialized. Keep them away from young kids (which they might see as direct threats) and attend a training session or behaviorist who can gradually adjust your dog to a social environment.
Aggressive dog behavior is a big issue that lots of owners have, but it is usually managed, even while your dog gets older. Should your aggression ever advance to violence, think about finding a specialist to get involved before someone gets hurt and your dog is held responsible.