cave formations: secondary mineral deposits formed in caves, caused by the dissolution of minerals (such as calcite) and their subsequent deposition in crystalline form in growing layers in a variety of shapes.
A mineral deposit of calcium carbonate that precipitates from solution in a cave.
A general term for all secondary mineral deposits in a cave. Includes stalactites, stalagmites, flowstone, and crystal growths. Terms such as 'formation' or 'decoration' are sometimes used in a similar manner, but can cause confusion, eg. with geological formations.
A deposit formed in cave when calcium carbonate (CaCO3) or some other mineral precipitates from drips or thin films of water. Stalactites and stalagmite are common speleothem.
Any natural mineral formation or deposit occurring in a cave, including flowstone, helictites, soda straws, and moon milk.
a type of geological formation found in underground caverns
A mineral deposit formed in a cave by the action of water.
A secondary mineral deposit formed in caves, most commonly calcite.
A general term for any mineral deposit or formation found in caves, such as stalactites, stalagmites, or gypsum flowers.
Cave formations. These take a wide variety of delicate forms and may exhibit broad variations in size, color, opacity or translucence, fluorescence, and composition.
A deposit formed in caves when calcium carbonate (CaCO3) or some other mineral precipitates from drips or thin films of water. Stalactites and stalagmites are common speleothems. more details...
A formation that grows in a limestone cave by the accumulation of travertine precipitated from water solutions dripping in a cave or flowing down the wall of a cave.
A speleothem is a mineral deposit formed in a cave. Speleothems are made when calcium carbonate (CaCO) or other minerals precipitate (drip out of solution) from slow-moving cave water. Stalactites and stalagmites are examples of speleothems.
the scientific term for a cavern formation. Comes from the Greek words "spelaion" meaning cave, and "therma" meaning deposit speleological: referring to the science of caves
A speleothem (from the Greek for "cave deposit") is a secondary mineral deposit formed in caves. It is the formal term for what is also known as a cave formation, or amongst cavers sometimes known as decorations or pretties.