The Power of Positive Thinking Unveiled
You have probably had someone tell you to think positive when you were in a trying situation. That is because the power of positive thinking is something that is a widely held belief. Most people easily accept that when you give off positive energy, you can infect others with that positive energy and that they will return that energy to you. It is basically the idea that what you put out there will come back to you. Positive influences are all around us.
They exist because people love to feel good. People prefer the positive to the negative. You can likely relate to this. You would probably rather be around someone who is upbeat and full of energy than someone who is depressed and moping around. People see that thinking positive and having a positive attitude can play a large role in their life. Positive thinking can be very powerful and by putting it to work in your life; you can reap the positive benefits.
So What is Positive Thinking Anyway?
Positive thinking can be defined as thinking good thoughts or being optimistic. When it comes to positive thinking there is no room for the negative. When you are a positive thinker, you will always look on the good side of things. You will not dwell on bad things; instead, you will look for the good in them. Positive thinking involves no negative thinking.
Instead of thinking about what could go wrong, a positive thinker thinks about what can go right. A positive thinker is going to look for the good in things. That means they will always try to find something positive about every situation. Positive thinking plays a large role in life. A person who thinks positive will end up having a more positive life then someone who thinks negative.
A positive thinker is going to be able to stay upbeat in any situation. That is because they do not dwell on the negative. They can always find a way to look at the positive in any situation. When bad things happen, a positive thinker is not going to let themselves get down and they are not going to let the bad invade their thoughts. Instead, they are going to look for positive things and look to find the solution to the negative situation.
They also adopt a different attitude than a negative thinker. A positive thinker is going to try to stay upbeat and happy. They are going to try to stay energized and not allow themselves to get down. If they feel tired or lazy, they are going to do something to help bring them back up. Positive thinking can be used in every aspect of life, from the little things to major things. It can be used to help you get through trying times.
You can also use it to just make your average day go a little better. Positive thinking involves being able to see the good things, even in something bad. It involves being able to turn off the negative thoughts and replace them with good thoughts. Positive thinking will allow you to avoid always going to the negative when something bad happens. It will also allow you to assume that good things will come your way and it will help you project an attitude that will help bring good things your way.
Positive thinking is something that allows you to turn negatives into positives. It allows you to look on the brighter side of life. Positive thinking will open your eyes and your life to a world that is brighter and better than the negative one most people dwell in.
Positive thinking will help you grow and be open to success. Through positive thinking, you will be able to allow yourself to start to envision your life as being positive and powerful. You will open up the door for good things to happen in your life.
Looking at it From a Child’s Perspective
Perhaps the greatest teacher of positive thinking is a child. Children are the ultimate positive thinkers. They have not learned that life throws curves and that challenges are around every corner. They look at life as a big adventure. Maybe you should adopt that way of thinking. Think about a child in your life. They seem to have no fear of new things. They will try anything once. They love life and are optimistic and happy.
Children love to explore the world and what life has to offer. They are willing to put themselves out there just to learn. Children have to have this amazement for life. This is how they learn and how they develop their identity. It allows them to live in a positive manner. Children do not jump to the negative because they believe there is good out there. They do not know about all the bad that the world holds because you shelter them from that. Let yourself develop that child-like faith. Stop yourself from dwelling on the bad in life and start looking for the positive instead.
Think about that saying ‘stop and smell the roses’. A child would do that, but would you? Chances are it is not likely you would. So, change that about yourself. Slow down and take time to enjoy life. Stop filling everyday with to do’s. Enjoy life and you will soon find it is easy to embrace the positive. Here are some things that children do that you can bring into your life. These things will help you to be able to look at the positive instead of the negative.
- Explore new things. Instead of walking away from the unknown, walk towards it. Children are always exploring. This is how they learn. Let yourself start exploring again.
- Do not walk away from a challenge. When children are challenged, they get excited and look at it as a game. Let yourself accept challenges instead of walking away.
- Make a mess. Children are messy. They love to make messes, but most of the time it is not just to make you mad. Children make messes because they are learning and they simply do not care if they get a little messy in the process. Happiness can be messy and unrestricted.
- Ignore the rules. Children ignore the rules all the time. Often it gets them into trouble, but many times, they end up having a fun time simply because they are doing something they were specifically told not to do. Defying authority can be an adrenaline rush. Break a few rules now and then and let yourself feel like a kid again.
- Pretend. Make believe is a big part of being a child. Almost everything you do revolve around pretending. The imagination is a wonderful thing. Allow yourself to go to some make believe place. Get away for your normal life and pretend you are someone else. Have fun and you are sure to smile.
There are plenty more ways you can use the influence of a child to drive your progress towards a positive attitude. You should watch children play. Just see what they do and take notes on how different their lives are from yours. How do they get through the day without stressing about every little thing? Do not let yourself get hung up on the fact that they do not have responsibility. Responsibility should in no way hold you back from being positive. It is just an excuse and excuses kill the positive attitude you are working so hard to build. Just focus on being child-like. Let yourself be free and just love life.
How is Positive Thinking Powerful?
Positive thinking is, obviously, something that can have a great impact on a person. What is hard to understand is why positive thinking is so powerful. That involves taking a good look at how positive thinking works. Positive thinking works in three different ways. First, it works on you and your general attitude. Second, it works on those around you. Lastly, it has a way of influencing your environment. How exactly positive thinking works on these things is, open for debate, though.
Some people believe that positive thinking is related to karma. That whatever you put out there comes back to you. Others believe that positive thinking is a mental thing that triggers positive things. Whatever your beliefs, it is hard to doubt the power of positive thinking. You will feel how powerful positive thinking is. Once you start to implement positive thinking in your life, you will start to see it work for you.
Positive thinking has a way of changing your whole view on life. You will start to find the good in things and that will make you happy. You will be less likely to feel down and instead you will allow positive thinking to guide you to happy thoughts. You will start to do everything in a more positive way, including how you treat others. This will not go unnoticed. Your interaction with others plays a large part in your life. Other people are going to be greatly influenced by your positive thinking. You will start to see this because they are going to start treating you differently.
Others will sense your positive attitude and they will treat you in a positive way. Someone who is often rude or just inattentive to you will likely start to treat you in a nice way or pay more attention to you. You will start to find that people are more likely to offer you help when you need it. They will likely do nice things, such as hold doors open or just give you a smile. Your positive attitude may even be contagious. You may start to see people you spend a lot of time with exhibiting your positive attitude and positive thinking. Positive thinking has a way of even influencing your environment, but it may not be in the way you think.
Just because you think positive does not mean that everything will automatically go your way. However, when you think positively you will be less likely to see the negative in things and therefore your environment will appear to change. You will probably start to notice the little things more than ever before and that will have a nice effect on you. Positive thinking will allow you to believe in yourself. It will allow you to believe that you can accomplish something if you put your mind to it.
You will be able to set goals and reach them because you will believe that you can do it. You will not have negative thoughts to hold you back. Positive thinking is very influential. It is going to start to shape everyone and everything around you. You are going to see the great power it has almost immediately. The power of positive thinking is not subtle. You have to make an effort to let positive thinking start turning all your thoughts and ideas into positive thoughts and ideas. It is up to you to start pushing the negativity out of your head and let positive thoughts guide you.
When you start to find your thoughts, drifting to the negative it is your responsibility to make an effort to make them positive instead. Go ahead and train yourself to always find the positive in anything. One you do this it will go a long way towards changing your attitude. The power of positive thinking is that it will shape your life. Positivist is so contagious that it will affect the world around you. You will start to see positive thinking everywhere you go.
Positive thinking has a power that is undeniable. It is something that will not be subtle. It will have such a great impact on you and your life that you will wonder how you ever lived before putting it to work in your life. The true power of positive thinking is that it allows you to live life to its fullest potential and for all that, it has to offer without letting negativity bring you down.
Body Language and Positive Thinking
Body language is something that we are not often aware of, but it sometimes can say more than our words ever could. That is why it is so important to pay attention to body language and always be aware of what it is saying to others. Body language is the movements of your body, the way you hold your body, and facial expressions, including eye movement. It often corresponds with our attitudes and sometimes contradicts what our words are saying.
When our body language and our words do not match, people are likely to believe the body language as it is often an unconscious thing that gives away the truth. When you are trying to implement positive thinking in your life, you also have to implement positive body language. When you are truly committed to a positive way of thinking then your body language will follow. However, if you are not whole-heartedly into positive thinking your body language could give you away.
It is very important that when you want to put positive thinking to work in your life that you become aware of your body language. You may actual want to learn a little about body language so that you can recognize negative body language and not let it interfere with your positive thinking and attitude. A great example of how body language can affect others and reflect your inner feelings is the smile. It is likely that you have smiled at a stranger before.
What happened? Probably what happened is that they smiled back. Do you know that smile probably prompted them to smile at someone else and so on with your smile becoming contagious? Smiles have a way of effecting people. One smile you give a stranger could prove to be just the motivation someone needs to be cheerful that day instead of grumpy. You never know. Besides being contagious, a smile tells others you are happy. It says you are having a good day and you want to share that with them.
A smile is powerful body language. It is also common when you approach a situation in a cheerful manner with positive body language that you end up having a positive experience. People are more likely to help you and to go out of their way to make sure you get what you need when you approach things in a positive manner. You should definitely learn about body language and make sure you avoid negative body language. It will take some effort at first until you train your body not use negative body language. Body language can be a dead give away that your true feelings are not positive. That is why part of positive thinking involves positive body language.
Positive Thinking’s Biggest Threat
You may believe, after reading this far, that negative thoughts are positive thinking’s biggest enemy, but that is wrong. As mentioned earlier positive thinking’s biggest enemy is excuses. When you make an excuse, you are opening a door for negative thoughts. Excuses are just your way of trying to trick your mind. You are trying to pass on responsibility for something every time you make an excuse. Excuses can make becoming a positive thinker very difficult.
If you are someone who is used to making excuses, then you will have a hard time becoming a positive thinker unless you stop making excuses. Excuses are something that can make your mind think it is doing positive things when it really is not. An excuse will just make you think you are okay and not being negative at all, but in reality using an excuse is just a negative thought in disguise.
In order to be a positive thinker and put the power of positive thinking to work in your life, you have to get rid of the excuses. If you feel that you are about to make an excuse, then stop. Think about why you are making the excuse. What are you going to get from it? What benefit does this excuse have? Try to identify what is really going on and why you feel you need to make the excuse. Are you just trying to sneak in a negative thought and trying to explain to your positive side why it is okay?
This is common, especially when a person is just beginning to use the power of positive thinking. Do not give up, though, if you start to find yourself making excuses. Just learn to be aware of this common tactic your brain has to try to keep the negative hanging around.
Putting the Power to Work in Your Life
Many times people are drawn to the negative, so implementing positive thinking can be some work. You literally have to train your brain to think positive. You have to learn how to rid your mid of negative thoughts. It may seem simple to think positive, but when you are used to thinking negatively, it can be quite difficult.
You will be naturally inclined to go to the negative. You really have to make a conscious effort to fight off the negative and only stick with the positive. It can be a battle, but you can do it. Ironically, by being a positive thinker, your issues with fighting off negative thoughts will actual be made easier. That is because your positive thoughts are going to be telling you that you can fight off the negative thoughts and that you can overcome them.
You will have the necessary will power to stop negative thoughts in their tracks. You will have to fully immerse yourself into positive thinking. You will have to surround yourself with positive influences. You have to be very focused on the positive and be committed to pushing away the negative. Here are some things you can try to bring a positive spin to your life and make positive thinking easier:
- Be aware of negative thoughts. When you have a negative thought, you have to recognize it. You should figure out where it came from, why you are having it and how to deal with it. Being a positive thinker does not mean you can avoid all negative things. It means you learn how to constructively deal with them and not let them take you over.
- Be persistent with positive thinking. You cannot let even one day go by without making sure you are thinking positive. You have to constantly be working on it until it becomes second nature.
- Identify fears that cause you to think negatively. Often when a fear is confronted, it ends up being not as intimidating as it first seems. Fear is simply your lack of being able to see that bad things will not necessarily happen. When you learn to let go of fear and trust in yourself you will see it is easier to stay positive.
- Watch your emotions. Try to stick to feelings of happiness, success and strength dominate you. Try to avoid feelings of weakness, fear and self-doubt.
- Do things that make you happy. Watch happy movies, read happy books and listen to happy music. Surround yourself with happiness and you will begin to react to that.
- Hang out with other positive thinkers. Try to avoid people who are often sad or unhappy. Avoid those who speak negatively or who act in a negative manner.
- Read about positive thinking and positive things. This includes reading books that are upbeat. You could also read inspirational things to help you get into the positive way of thinking.
- Use visualization. You have to imagine yourself being positive, acting positive and thinking positive. You should picture positive things in your mind and allow yourself to think about positive situations.
- Use positive words. Avoid negative words. Try to always make your conversations and thoughts positive. When you are thinking to yourself, use positive words. When you are talking to others, use positive words.
- Smile. Use your smile to project your positive attitude. Let your smile speak for you. If you do nothing else, then put a smile on your face. It will do a world of wonder.
- Never allow yourself to quit. A quitter’s attitude is a big dose of negativity. Besides that if you quit, you will never succeed and failure makes it hard to keep positive. Additionally, quitting is associated with laziness and laziness is a symptom of negative thinking. When you think positive, you will not feel lazy or like you want to quit.
You have to make positive thinking your new lifestyle. It is just like changing your diet. Let’s say you are giving up carbs. You are not going to tempt yourself with breads or really want to be around people who eat many carbs. The same can be said for positive thinking.
You are not going to tempt yourself with negative thoughts or want to be around people who are negative. You have to reshape your life so it fits your new style of thinking. You may want to make sure that you are ready for such a change in your life. You should ask yourself if you are ready to be a positive thinker. Are you ready to let go of the negative?
Are you ready to be optimistic? Can you really let go of the little things and look on the bright side of things? Are you willing to put forth the work that is necessary to become a positive thinker? You have to answer yes to these questions in order to truly be able to become a positive thinker. It can help to set goals.
Goals are very powerful. They can drive you and help you to accomplish things. When you have a set of goals, you work harder and you feel as if you have to accomplish them. You should set reasonable goals to help pave your way towards positive thinking. Here is an example of some goals you can set:
- Use a positive affirmation each day.
- Try to complement someone everyday for a week.
- Smile at everyone I see today
Through using goals, you can make your path to positive thinking much easier. You can watch your progress and be able to track how you are doing at implementing positive thinking in your life. Becoming a positive thinker is something anyone can do. It is a matter of just putting your mind to it. It is going to be a lot of work, but it is well worth it.
The Impact of Positive Thinking
Positive thinking can have a huge impact in your life. It is the power of positive thinking. Once you start to bring positive thinking into your life you are going to start seeing it at work. There is no doubt that you will begin to see rewards for all your hard work. Positive thinking has a way of infecting everything in your life.
You will begin by starting to wake up and go through your day feeling happy and upbeat. You will see the feelings of sadness start to fade away until eventually all you feel is happy, no matter what the current circumstances are in your life. You will also see others start to treat your differently. You will begin to be greeted with positive words and actions. You will start to see your positive attitude become contagious and the people around you will begin to adopt your positive thinking.
You will begin to be able to handle situations better. When something bad happens, you will not fall apart, but rather look for something positive to focus on and help you through it. You will also be able to see the end of your troubles and that will make getting through it much easier. You will begin to look at life in a different way. No longer will you fear the unknown, but you will embrace it and begin to actually enjoy learning new things and tackling challenges.
Positive thinking can do all of this for you. It can really reshape your life. It can help you live the life you have always wanted. You will be able to accomplish more and to reach goals that you once wondered if they were even possible. The impossible will become the possible. It may seem crazy to believe that by simply changing the way you think can change your life, but it is true. Positive thinking can change your life because it has the power to do so. The power of positive thinking is strong and it works.
The Power of Positive Thinking at Work
It can be helpful to get an example of how something works in order to understand how it can work for you. Here is a story about John and how the power of positive thinking influenced his life.
John was in the middle of a very nasty divorce. His soon to be ex-wife was fighting him all the way about everything possible. He had trouble sleeping, eating and felt himself slipping into a great depression. Every time he had to meet with his attorney, he experienced stomach pains and he was sure he was getting an ulcer. He was constantly worried about being able to make it after the divorce was finalized.
He also worried about how this all was effecting his two children. John was in a very bad place. Then, one day, he ran across some information about the power of positive thinking. He was so interested in what he read that he decided to see if it could work in his life. John started to become aware of his thoughts. He started to push all the negative thoughts out of his mind. Instead of approaching his situation with fear, he went towards it with courage.
He stood his ground and did not give in. He laid down his demands and stuck to them. He stopped letting himself be walked all over by his ex. John began thinking positively about his situation. He began envisioning a positive outcome. He stopped letting himself get down about what was happening in his life and started looking at all the positive things he had gotten out of it. Now that he was separated, he felt happier. He could do whatever he wanted without having his wife nag him.
He was closer than ever to his kids because he now cherished the limited time he was able to spend with them. He was able to get his financial affairs in order, too. John was able to get through the divorce. He came out in the end without losing everything, being able to maintain a good relationship with his kids and even being able to somehow maintain a civil relationship with his ex. By changing to a positive attitude, he was able to stop letting everything get him down.
He was able to get through the trying situation without letting himself fall apart. In the end, the power of positive thinking was working for John, just as it can work for you. You can see through John’s story that positive thinking can get you through the rough times. It is not hard to believe that it can get you through everyday, too. Just as John changed his attitude and his way of thinking, so can you. You can make positive thinking work in your life and start turning your bad situations into good ones. You can get favorable results and outcomes, too.
The power of positive thinking cannot be denied. Once you have seen it at work you will believe in it. Once you experience it you will wonder how you ever got by without it. You have learned a lot about positive thinking and how powerful it is. You have learned how to define positive thinking, aspects of positive thinking and how exactly positive thinking works.
You have been given tips and advice to help you turn yourself into a positive thinker and how to use that new positive thinking power to change your life. Positive thinking is a complete life change. It is more than just thinking with a can do attitude. Positive thinking is a life style and you have to adapt everything in your life to fit with your positive thinking life style. You will see massive changes in yourself and those around you once you bring positive thinking into your life.
The power of positive thinking is not a myth. It is true and real. You will see it if you begin to live with positive thinking. The benefits are hard to deny. Once you start thinking positive you will begin to reap the rewards. It is not hard, either. All it takes is some focused work to train your mind into positive thinking. With some work you will soon be able to put the power of positive thinking to work in your life.
Remember the story of John and how he used the power of positive thinking to get past a really tough time in his life. Also, keep in mind how excuses can work against you in your goal to become a positive thinker. Keep everything in your mind that you have learned so that you are ready to become a positive thinker and to be able to really benefit from the power of positive thinking.
Do not walk away from reading this and forget what you have learned. There are some valuable lessons, from learning to think like a child to how to stop negative thoughts. This information is going to be the backbone of your quest to positive thinking. Do not let yourself live without giving the power of positive thinking a try. It is well worth the work. You can be a positive thinker and you can change your life through the power of positive thinking.
Did you enjoy this article? Please support us and check out our E-books!
- Digital Photography Triumph – The Essential Guide to Launch a Digital Photography Business
- Business Branding – A Blueprint Guide for Beginners
- The Art of Productivity – Powerful Strategies for Getting Things Done
We hope you enjoyed this article! Please don’t forget to subscribe to our RSS-feed or follow Inspirationfeed on Twitter, Google+, and Facebook! If you enjoyed the following article we humbly ask you to comment, and help us spread the word!