Cayenne - Medical & Other Uses
Medical & Other Uses
Cayenne has been traditionally used for a number of conditions including constipation, cold extremities, high blood pressure and gastrointestinal ulcers. The herb is primarily used to improve circulation, and has properties useful to the functioning of the heart, pancreas, kidneys, lungs, stomach and spleen. The herb is also used to stop internal bleeding. It is useful in preventing infections, and defending the body against cold and flu related symptoms.
Cayenne (Capsicum frutescens)
Cayenne is an herb and spice obtained from the dried, ground fruit of various domesticated red pepper species (especially Capsicum frutescens) native to South America.
Cayenne stimulates circulation, aids digestion, and promotes sweating. Since perspiration cools the body, cayenne has been used to break fevers. In Asia, cayenne is believed to stimulate the kidneys, lungs, stomach, and heart.
Cayenne is currently used as an antimicrobial to help control infections, from sinusitis topneumonia. It can also help control heart disease risk factors including high blood cholesterol and blood platelet aggregation. Cayenne is also used topically for pain relief.
Capsaicin alters the action of the bodily compound (substance p) that transfers pain messages to the brain, thus reducing pain and inflammation. For example, when applied topically, capsaicin may initially cause the skin to become red and inflamed and produce pain and burning. Over time, this initial reaction lessens and underlying pain, and inflammation is reduced. Thus, capsaicin has become accepted as the active ingredient in over-the-counter and prescription creams (such as Zostrix) used topically to treat not only arthritis but the pain of shingles (herpes zoster), post-operative surgery, cluster headache, and psoriasis and other skin conditions. Capsaicin is also responsible for the beneficial effects of cayenne on the heart.
Do Scientists know how it works
Cayenne pepper is rich in vitamin C. It also contains capsaicin which is currently considered its active compound.
Types of products:
Vitamin C is sold in capsules, concentrated drops, and tinctures. popular products are standardised for 5 to 10 percent capsaicin.
Cayenne is potent and should be used cautiously, both topically and internally. Capsaicin-containing creams should be thoroughly washed off the hands after application; avoid getting any into the eyes, mucous membranes, or open wounds. Excessive internal use can inflame membranes that line the stomach and intestines; harm to the kidneys is also possible.
Books on Cayenne:
The Health Benefits of Cayenne: A Keats Good Health Guide by John Heinerman, ph.D. (New Canaan, Ct.: Keats, 1997) Capsaicin in the Study of pain edited by John Wood (TK: 1993)
Cichewicz, R.H., and p.A. Thorpe, "The antimicrobial properties of chili peppers (Capsicum species) and their uses in Mayan medicine," Journal of Ethnopharmacology (1996), 52(2):61-70.
Deal CL, et al. Treatment of arthritis with topical capsaicin: a double-blind trial. Clin Ther 1991 May-June;13(3):383-95.
McCarthy GM, McCarty DJ. Effect of topical capsaicin in the therapy of painful osteoarthritis of the hands. J Rheumatol, 1992;19(4):604-7.
Kang, J.Y., et al., "Effect of capsaicin and chilli on ethanol induced gastric mucosal injury in the rat," Gut (1995), 36(5):664-9
- Robbins WR, et al. Treatment of intractable pain with topical large-dose capsaicin: preliminary report. Anesth Analg. 1998 Mar;86(3):579-83.