Tag: "crop" at biology news
USAID, Conservation International & Starbucks launch Conservation Coffee Alliance in Central America
...ing practices such as water and soil conservation, crop
diversification, and chemical fertilizer and pesticide reduction that help protect the surrounding forest, streams and wildlife. Starbucks works with CI and the cooperatives providing farmers with financial support, technical assistance to raise the...
NSF awards 22 new projects for plant genome research
...ositeae, a group of plants that includes important crop
species such as lettuce, sunflower and artichoke, ...f pulpwood for the U.S. paper industry and a major crop
in the southeastern states. A number of functional genomics studies will look at how genes contribut...
Genetic modification of linseed produces healthier omega 3 and 6 fatty acids
... PUFA that may be obtained from fish oils. Oilseed crop
species contain all of the proteins and enzymes necessary for the biosynthesis of the range of fatty acids present in seed oil, but they lack the few additional enzymes (certain fatty acyl desaturases and elongases) necessary for the biosynthesis of ...
K-State, other universities to study how climate affects plant evolution
...nd will help to inform conservation management and crop
improvement strategists, he said. "Being on the forefront of the knowledge that will help feed the world of the future is not only gratifying for us personally, but also should be a real benefit for both our state and our country," said Ron Trewyn, K...
Byproduct of water-disinfection process found to be highly toxic
...V-uh], a genetic toxicologist in the department of crop
sciences. "This research says that when you go to alternatives, you may be opening a Pandora's box of new DBPs, and these unregulated DBPs may be much more toxic, by orders of magnitude, than the regulated ones we are trying to avoid." Plewa and c...
Proteins show promise for mosquito control
... of 10,000 lakes," she says, where rice is a major crop
and the weather is hot and humid, perfect for mosquito breeding. Worldwide, mosquitoes are notorious for spreading not only malaria, but also dengue fever (so painful it's commonly called "break bone fever"), several forms of encephalitis, yellow f...
Sandia experiments may reduce possibility of future water wars
...nlight has to be filtered in arid areas to prevent crop
damage because it is too intense. The challenge is to create reliable, effective materials to use that part of the spectrum the plant is not interested in using to produce power that can be put on a grid as well as operate the greenhouse." Commercial...
Washington University in St. Louis plays key role in sequencing moss genome
...ants, and about the same size as the genome of the crop
plant rice. Mosses are considered to be the first land plants that evolved about 450 million years ago, predating the flowering or seed plants by some two hundred million years. Although this non-vascular plant lacks structures such as flowers, seed...
... . Powdery mildew is a typical fungal infection in crop
plants and only the regular application of fungici... once, presumably in Ethiopia, some time after the crop
had been domesticated by native Ethiopians," says Ralph Panstruga. Today's agriculturally used cult...
UCR earns $1.5 million grant to examine how engineered crop genes stray
...ply. Biotechnology has the potential of increasing crop
yields, lowering production costs, and offering consumers more choices and higher quality at the supermarket. But certain risks have been identified, such as the evolution of new weeds because of contamination with transgenes that make them more diff...
Stanford researcher's findings may shed light on common, deadly birth defect
...o a genetic component: children with HPE routinely crop
up in some families, although the severity of symptoms within a family can vary widely. This mishmash of possible causes and symptoms has made it difficult for doctors to prevent and treat the disorder. The researchers turned to chicken embryos to st...
Tobacco promising factory for biopharmaceuticals
...s tobacco in his research because it is a non-food crop
and is well suited as a "factory" for recombinant protein production. The leafy green tobacco plant is relatively easy to alter genetically and produces thousands of seeds and a great deal of biomass. As a non-food crop, genetically manipulated tobac...
Plant gene discovery could enhance plant growth, reduce fertilizer needs and phosphate pollution
... toward enhancing the beneficial relationship for crop
plants , while reducing fertilizer use and phospha...e biologists can do to improve phosphate uptake in crop
plants will make agriculture more sustainable and less harmful to the environment," she predicted. ...
Plant respiration not just an evolutionary leftover, study shows
... Some have even set about to genetically engineer crop
plants so that the activity of the enzyme that ini...esult, they have thought, would be more productive crop
plants that make more efficient use of available resources. But the new UC Davis study suggests that...
Canadian Society of Agronomy partners with Plant Management Network
...ence Database, including more than 3,000 plant and crop
science documents provided by PMN partners. "CSA's...with PMN allows CSA members fast access to applied crop
and plant information from highly respected sources at a discounted rate," said CSA Executive Direc...
Healthy fats and oils essential to satisfy calorie-conscious consumers
...etter product shelf life, and a decreased usage of crop
protection chemicals," explains Technical Insights Research Analyst Kasturi Nadkarny. There is also a growing need to educate consumers regarding saturated or trans-fats. To address this issue, the FDA has announced regulations that enforce mandatory...
UGA named recipient of $5.6 million grant from NSF for corn improvement
...is Wayne Parrott, a professor in the department of crop
and soil science at UGA's College of Agricultural and Environmental Sciences. Other collaborators on the grant include James Birchler of the University of Missouri; Jiming Jiang of the University of Wisconsin; and Gernot Presting of the Univers...
'Trap' crop saves Texas cross timbers melon production
...first noticed a few yellow vines in his watermelon crop
in the late 1990s but didn't think much of it. .... The next year, it struck again, turning half his crop
into a mass of yellow, wilted heap of vines, leaves and unmarketable fruit. At war with diseases, ...
Plant pathologists look to forensics to aid in biosecurity
...n how forensics can be applied to plant health and crop
security will be presented during the Microbial Forensics: Plant Pathogen Models symposium at the APS Annual Meeting in Anaheim, Calif., July 31 -- August 4, 2004. The symposium will explore the principles of microbial forensics as they may apply to ...
Study finds plant enzyme function changes with location in cell
...t products to meet specific needs, such as growing crop
plants that make different, perhaps healthier oils...hat might one day be useful in producing healthier crop
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10