Poorurbanplanningmay give rise to noise pollution, sinceside-by-side industrial and residential buildingscan result in noise pollution in the residential area.Other sources of indoor and outdoor noisepollution are car alarms, emergency service sirens,office equipment, factory machinery, constructionwork, groundskeeping equipment, barking dogs,appliances, power tools,lightinghum, audioentertainment systems, loudspeakers, and noisypeople.
. The unwantedsound is called noise. This unwanted sound candamage physiological and psychological health.Noise pollution can cause annoyance andaggression,hypertension,high stress levels,tinnitus,hearing loss, sleep disturbances, andother harmful effects.
Chronic exposure to noise may causenoise-induced hearing loss.Older males exposed tosignificantoccupational noisedemonstratesignificantlyreduced hearing sensitivity than theirnon-exposed peers, though differences in hearingsensitivity decrease with time and the two groupsare indistinguishable by age 79.
A comparisonof Maabantribesmen,who were insignificantlyexposed to transportation or industrial noise, to atypical U.S. population showed that chronicexposure to moderately high levels of environmental noise contributes to hearing loss.
High noise levels can contribute tocardiovasculareffects and exposure to moderately high levelsduring a single eight hour period causes astatistical rise inblood pressureof five to tenpoints and an increase instress
Noise can have a detrimental effect on animals bycausing stress, increasing risk of death bychanging the delicate balance in predator/preydetection and avoidance, and by interfering withtheir use of sounds in communication especially inrelation to reproduction and in navigation.Acoustic overexposure can lead to temporary orpermanent loss of hearing.
An impact of noise on animal life is thereductionof usable habitatthat noisy areas may cause,which in the case of endangered species may bepart of the path toextinction.Noise pollution hascaused the death of certain species of whales thatbeachedthemselves after being exposed to theloud sound of militarysonar.
unheard voices might be warnings, finding of prey, or preparations of net-bubbling. When onespecies begins speaking louder, it willmask otherspecies' voice, causing the whole ecosystem toeventually speak louder.European Robinsliving in urban environments aremore likely to sing at night in places with highlevels of noise pollution during the day,suggesting that they sing at night because it isquieter, and their message can propagate throughthe environment more clearly.
Interestingly, thesame study showed that daytime noise was astronger predictor of nocturnal singing than night-timeLight pollution,to which the phenomenon isoften attributed.Zebra finchesbecome less faithful to theirpartners when exposed to traffic noise. This couldalter a population's evolutionary trajectory byselecting traits, sapping resources normallydevoted to other activities and thus lead toprofound genetic and evolutionaryconsequences.
Figures compiled by Rockwool, themineral woolinsulationmanufacturer, based on responses fromlocal authorities to aFreedom of Information Act(FOI) request reveal in the period April 2008 -2009UK councilsreceived 315,838 complaintsabout noise pollution from private residences.This resulted in environmental health officersacross the UK serving 8,069noise abatementnotices, or citations under the terms of the Anti-Social Behaviour (Scotland) Act. In the last 12months, 524 confiscations of equipment have beenauthorised involving the removal of powerfulspeakers, stereos and televisions.WestminsterCity Councilhas received more complaints perhead of population than any other district in theUK with 9,814 grievances about noise, whichequates to 42.32 complaints per thousandresidents. Eight of the top 10 councils ranked bycomplaints per 1,000 residents are located inLondon.
inMelbourne,Australia,designedto reduceroadway noisewithout detracting fromthe area's aesthetics.Technology to mitigate or remove noise can beapplied as follows:There are a variety of strategies for mitigatingroadway noiseincluding: use of noise barriers,limitation of vehicle speeds, alteration of roadwaysurface texture, limitation of heavy vehicles,useof traffic controls that smooth vehicle flow toreduce braking and acceleration, and tire design.An important factor in applying these strategies isacomputer modelforroadway noise,that iscapable of addressing localtopography,meteorology,traffic operations and hypotheticalmitigation. Costs of building-in mitigation can bemodest, provided these solutions are sought in theplanning stage of a roadway project.Aircraft noisecan be reduced to some extent bydesign of quieter jet engines,which was pursuedvigorously in the 1970s and 1980s. This strategyhas brought limited but noticeable reduction of urban sound levels. Reconsideration of operations,such as alteringflight pathsand time of dayrunway use, has demonstrated benefits forresidential populations near airports.FAAsponsored residential retrofit (insulation)programs initiated in the 1970s has also enjoyedsuccess in reducing interiorresidentialnoise inthousands of residences across theUnited States.Exposure of workers toIndustrial noisehas beenaddressed since the 1930s. Changes includeredesign of industrial equipment, shock mountingassemblies and physical barriers in the workplace.Noise Free America,a national anti-noisepollution organization, regularly lobbies for theenforcement of noise ordinances at all levels of government.