Cycle of Life
Among the Rocks by Robert Browning
Oh, good gigantic smile o' the brown old earth,
This autumn morning! How he sets his bones
Autumn by T. E. Hulme (Thomas Ernest Hulme)
A touch of cold in the Autumn night—
I walked abroad,
November Night by Adelaide Crapsey
With faint dry sound,
Autumn by Grace Paley
What is sometimes called a
tongue of flame
Autumn Song by Dante Gabriel Rossetti
Know'st thou not at the fall of the leaf
How the soul feels like a dried sheaf
The Beautiful Changes by Richard Wilbur
One wading a Fall meadow finds on all sides
The Queen Anne’s Lace lying like lilies
Nature in Autumn
Beyond the Red River by Thomas McGrath
The birds have flown their summer skies to the south,
And the flower-money is drying in the banks of bent grass
Fragment 8: Thicker than rain-drops on November thorn by Samuel Taylor Coleridge
Thicker than rain-drops on November thorn
Hendecasyllabics by Algernon Charles Swinburne
In the month of the long decline of roses
I, beholding the summer dead before me,
When the Frost is on the Punkin by James Whitcomb Riley
When the frost is on the punkin and the fodder’s in the shock,
And you hear the kyouck and gobble of the struttin’ turkey-cock,
The Road Not Taken by Robert Frost
Two roads diverged in a yellow wood,
And sorry I could not travel both
Sonnet LXXIII: That Time of Year thou mayst in me Behold by William Shakespeare
When yellow leaves, or none, or few, do hang
Upon those boughs which shake against the cold,
Mnemosyne by Trumbull Stickney
It’s autumn in the country I remember.
How warm a wind blew here about the ways!
Autumn Begins in Martins Ferry, Ohio by James Wright
In the Shreve High football stadium,
I think of Polacks nursing long beers in Tiltonsville,
Neighbors in October by David Baker
All afternoon his tractor pulls a flat wagon
with bales to the barn, then back to the waiting
Beginning by James Wright
The moon drops one or two feathers into the field.
The dark wheat listens.
Theme in Yellow by Carl Sandburg
I SPOT the hills
With yellow balls in autumn.
The Empty House by Walter De La Mare
See this house, how dark it is
Beneath its vast-boughed trees!
Halloween Party by Kenn Nesbitt
We’re having a Halloween party at school.
I’m dressed up like Dracula. Man, I look cool!
Song of the Witches by William Shakespeare
Double, double toil and trouble;
Fire burn and caldron bubble.
Amoretti LXVII: Like as a Huntsman by Edmund Spenser
Like as a huntsman after weary chase,
Seeing the game from him escap'd away,
My Autumn Leaves by Bruce Weigl
I watch the woods for deer as if I'm armed.
I watch the woods for deer who never come.
Poems to read as the leaves change and the weather gets colder.
Cycle of Life