Building a house is an intelligent and a complex process and home buying traditionally has been an important factor in one’s life. Very rarely there is thought given on what actually happened behind the construction facade to make a dream home into reality The construction phase of the home-building process is when all your dreams and plans come to realization. It is the easiest, most gratifying and most enjoyable part of the process. The methods and materials used to build a home vary from region to region, but the following are the eight basic steps must be completed for most newly built homes:
Site Cleaning: After a developer purchases land the site needs to be cleaned. The site cleaning may include removing of trees and leveling the surface, placing stakes to mark where the house will be situated on the lot and hooking up temporary electricity service.
Excavation and the foundation of the structure: After site cleaning the land is dug to create a strong foundation, setting and pouring the foundation, installing plumbing pipes, pouring the concrete floor of the home, digging trenches for utility lines, waterproofing the basement walls and grading. A developer must ensure that his building has a strong foundation in order to sustain earthquakes, storms and so on.
Framing: This is when the structure is rising above the ground level that includes installing steel beams, erecting a wood structure and installing windows and exterior doors. During framing stage of construction, Column, beam, slab, staircase and walls are constructed. This may be execute with steel, concrete, wood etc. majority cost of your structure may consumed here only. Foundation and framing take approximately 60 to 65 % cost of your entire house.
Roofing and Exterior Work: Roofing and exterior work, which may include applying roofing materials and installing siding, an outdoor deck, rain gutters and a garage door etc.
Mechanicals Electrical and Plumbing work: This step may include installing plumbing, electrical and heating/cooling systems, pre-wiring the home for a security system, running wiring for telephones, cable television and an intercom and placing pipes for a central vacuum.
Interior finish work: This includes installing insulation, installing and finishing drywall, painting and staining, and installing cabinets, countertops, hard surface floor coverings, baseboards and built-in appliances.
Trim: It include hanging interior doors, attaching window trims, installing fireplaces and mantles, setting plumbing fixtures, installing light switches and electrical outlets, hanging electrical fixtures, setting heating registers, thermostats and heating/cooling unit and installing faceplates for the central vacuum, intercom, cable television and telephone outlets.
Final work: Includes installing carpet padding and carpets, cleaning the exterior and interior of the home, finishing the driveway and landscaping and completing any miscellaneous fix-up work on the entire home.
Get involved in your home building from the beginning and take an active interest in the pricing of materials and accessories/fittings offered to you. Home buying does not end by signing a mere contract but one must closely monitor the various stages of construction. A buyer must approach a developer and ask questions in case of discrepancies since many aspects of your home, such as structure and foundation, will be unchangeable after a certain point.
Author is the Director of Sanghvi Group of Companies.