iNDRAWATI, yUNI (2007) ASPEK-ASPEK PUITIS PADA LIRIK-LIRIK LAGU RELIGIUS "OPICK" (SEBUAH TELAAH STRUKTUR). Other thesis, University of Muhammadiyah Malang.
ASPEK-ASPEK PUITIS PADA LIRIK-LIRIK LAGU RELIGIUS.pdf
Download (85Kb) | Preview
Basically, when listening to songs or singing it is an activity of art appreciation. This activity can be entered in the activities of appreciation because the songs are the lyrics to the rhythm of the rhythm of a product activities compose literature. The lyrics of the song can be classified as a form of poetry, though with literature values. Thus listening to singing is an activity to enjoy literature (poetry). While singing the song is an activity to bring literature or poetry. The songs you listen to is not merely a beautiful song, but even more so the content of his poetry capable of entertaining people. Love poems sung by singers from different period of time and never boring because it is always updated by the poet (author of the lyrics.) Each has a different lyric poetry that are always able to provide entertainment (Kes, 1987:1). Based on this Waluyo can be concluded that the song is one way of bringing poetry, song or hymn is sung poetry. The results of this study will also be expected to contribute to the world of education, especially in the teaching of literature (poetry). On the subject of Indonesian language and literature appreciation class X of the first semester 2006, which discussed the appropriate curriculum on understanding poetry conveyed directly or indirectly to identify the elements of a poem that is delivered directly or through recordings, revealing the contents delivered directly poetry or through the recording and the subject of poetry to express their opinions through discussion is to discuss the content of poetry relating to the image sensing, feeling, thought and imagination through discussion. This research report can be used as the basis for the use of songs Opick to be used as instructional media. If this Opick song proved to have a regular reliable kesustraan element, it can be used as a bridge for students to understand the elements kesustraan in poetry in general. Teaching methods used can be developed using the song or sing in methods of teaching poetry. Teachers can draw students' attention by listening to a song. Moreover Opick songs are popular songs so easily enjoyed and understood and teaching materials should be the center of attention of students. As noted by Situmorang (1983:32) of teaching material must be able to attract the attention of students as such, the teaching of poetry which is usually less enjoyed by students can be overcome. The result is expected also to increase the input to the creator of the song in this case is Opick order to maintain the elements of literature in the creation of the songs.
|Item Type:||Thesis (Other)|
|Subjects:||L Education > L Education (General)|
|Divisions:||Faculty of Teacher Training and Education > Department of Indonesian and Literature|
|Depositing User:||Zainul Afandi|
|Date Deposited:||13 Jun 2012 05:43|
|Last Modified:||13 Jun 2012 05:43|
Actions (login required)