Americans like to complain about the paltry yields they can get on bonds and bank accounts, but it could be worse. Across Northern Europe, yields are turning negative.
The German government this week sold two-year bonds with an average yield of minus 0.06 percent. That means the government will give investors back less than they paid for the bonds in two years and won't pay any interest in the meantime.
Although yields on German bonds trading in the secondary market have dipped below zero before, this was the first time the government issued a minus-zero note. Two-year bonds of Switzerland, Denmark, Germany, Finland, the Netherlands and Austria are also trading with negative yields on the secondary market.
In the past year, Switzerland, Germany, Denmark, France, Netherlands and Belgium have sold shorter-term securities - such as three- and six-month bills - with negative yields.
But negative yields on longer-term notes indicate how far eurozone investors are willing to go to avoid potential losses on bonds from weaker countries such as Greece, Spain and Italy.
"The reason rates are negative is that people have lost confidence in most banks and governments around the world," says Wall Street economist Ed Yardeni.
When investors sell bonds, the price of the bonds goes down and the yields go up. Yields on 10-year Spanish and Italian bonds have risen to the 6 to 7 percent range as investors have fled those countries. Much of that money has moved into bonds issued by Switzerland (which is not part of the eurozone) and stronger European nations. When investors buy bonds, the price goes up and the yield goes down.
Some money fleeing Europe has found its way into U.S. banks and Treasurys, which has contributed to another sharp decline in yields brought on by fears of a slowing economy. In the United States, yields are 0.09 percent on three-month Treasury bills, 0.22 percent on two-year notes and 1.5 percent on 10-year notes.
To buy U.S. securities, European investors must buy dollars, which exposes them to currency risk. To avoid that, they must stick with euro-denominated bonds.
Yields on U.S. Treasury bills have dipped below zero on occasion. Yields on five- and 10-year inflation-indexed Treasury bonds are below zero today, a sign that investors are so concerned about rising prices they are willing to pay a premium for these bonds. But experts do not expect yields turning broadly negative like they have in parts of Europe, barring another financial crisis.
That's partly because the U.S. banking system is considered stronger and is a smaller part of the economy than the banking system is in Europe. Also, investors here can park their money in banks and earn at least zero interest and still have a government guarantee if they stay below the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp. limit.
That limit is $250,000 per person per bank for most types of accounts. Through the end of this year, noninterest-bearing transaction accounts are fully insured.
In Europe, "there isn't a uniform deposit guarantee like we have in the U.S. That is something Europe is working on and would be a help" to the economy, says John Lovito, manager of American Century International Bond Fund.
Lovito says his fund has sold some short-term Swiss bonds when their yields turned negative and some German bonds just before they dipped below zero. "We think this (negative yield) situation could persist for a while," he says.
To get yield, his fund - which is limited to higher-rate bonds - has moved more money into longer-term maturities and bonds issued by countries outside of continental Europe, such as England.
Are negative yields a sign that we could be verging on another financial crisis?
Axel Merk, manager of the Merk Funds, says no. "It's different now. We have many more safeguards in place," he says. "We do know that central banks will do anything to keep their financial systems afloat. I'm concerned that we are not allowing market forces to work. We are turning our banks into utility companies. That cannot be good for economic growth."