I woke up in the morning and yawned, stretching and rubbing the sleep from my eyes, before I saw the framed Union Jack poster hanging beside my closet door. Jumping out of my bed with a start, I pawed my eyes again, certain I must have been mistaken. But I walked right up to it and traced the lines with my fingers, so I knew it was real. Right where my stars and stripes used to be. 

I went downstairs, ready to accuse my little brother of pulling the prank, but was immediately distracted when I rounded the corner into the kitchen. Our coffee maker was gone. My mother was boiling water in a tea kettle on the stove. 

“Morning, love,” she said in what sounded like a Liverpudlian accent. “Fancy a cuppa’?” 

I answered, “A what now?” 

“There’s bubble and squeak here, too, if you’re hungry.” 

Before I could giggle and ask her why she was talking gibberish and imitating Ringo Starr, I saw a headline on the muted television playing above the fridge and knew right away something was very, very wrong. 

It was November in an election year. The news should have been focused on the presidential candidates. But instead, it was all about Guy Fawkes Day and the Her Majesty the Queen. Glancing around the room, I noticed other strange changes, too. There was crumpled money in the bowl by the door, but it looked like currency from a foreign country. Through the window, I spotted a car driving on the wrong side of the road. 

I swallowed hard, trying to keep my cool, and went to the stove. The bubble and squeak looked terrifying, but I served myself a plate anyway. I sat through the most surreal breakfast of my life, then ran back to my room at the first opportunity. Pulling out my computer, I tried to search the web for answers, but it was hard to find anything. When I searched “American Revolution,” nothing came up at all. 

It seemed there was no other explanation. I’d woken up in an alternate timeline where the war for American Independence never took place. But I just shrugged and sighed. It wasn’t so bad. I liked British culture, after all, and I figured I’d get the hang of the accent soon enough if I just practiced with some youtube videos.
