At Centegra Hospital – McHenry, highly trained specialists perform electrophysiology procedures (EP) in a specially designed EP lab with the most advanced technology and equipment. EP procedures diagnose the source of arrhythmias, or heart rhythm disturbances. The EP lab is also used for the implantation of pacemakers, evaluation of certain heart rhythm medications and prediction of the risk of a future cardiac event.
What is an electrophysiology procedure study (EP study)?
An electrophysiology procedure study is recommended for patients with heart rhythm disorders or who may be at risk for sudden cardiac death.
During an EP study, an electrophysiologist may provoke arrhythmia events and collect data about the flow of electricity during actual events. As a result, EP studies help to locate the specific areas of heart tissue that give rise to the abnormal electrical impulses that cause arrhythmias.
How is an EP study performed?
After being given medication to help you relax, a small area in either the groin or neck will be numbed and a small catheter will be inserted.
Once the catheter reaches the heart, electrodes at the tip of the catheter gather data and several electrical measurements are made. These measurements help to pinpoint the location of the faulty electrical site. At this time, the electrophysiologist may induce the arrhythmia, which is necessary to ensure the precise location of the problematic tissue. After the damaged area is confirmed, the electrophysiologist may give different medications or electrical impulses to determine their ability to stop the arrhythmia and restore the normal heart rhythm.
Based on the data from the EP study and information given before the study begins, the electrophysiologist may choose to implant a pacemaker (implantable cardioverter device -ICD).
What should I expect?
The procedure generally is not painful, although you may feel some pressure as the catheter is inserted. For many, the most difficult part of the procedure is having to lie still for a long time.
How long does an EP study procedure usually take?
A complete EP study procedure usually takes about two hours.
How should I prepare for an EP study?
- Generally, you will be asked not to eat or drink anything for six to eight hours before the procedure.
- You may be asked to stop some medications before the procedure. Please ask your electrophysiologist if you are to stop any medication.
- Make arrangements with a friend or family member to drive you to and from the hospital. You will not be able to drive home after the procedure.
- Pack a small bag in case your electrophysiologist decides to keep you in the hospital overnight.
- Bring a list of the names and dosages of all the medications you are taking.
Centegra Electrophysiology Lab Location
Centegra Hospital – McHenry
4201 Medical Center Dr.
McHenry, IL 60050