Before embarking on these steps, make sure to take a look at and accomplish the tasks on the “Emergency Preparedness Basics” page. Feel free to work on these steps at your own pace, but if you would like to have more guidance we recommend signing up for our Babystep Checklists. These checklist are email reminders you receive every two weeks and outline a plan for you to complete all ten steps within one year.
|STEP 1: SHELVES
Determine which type of shelf system you want to use and purchase one shelf to get started. Build your own, buy plastic or metal shelves, or splurge and buy a fancy can rotation system.
|STEP 2: WATER
Store a 2 week’s supply of water (1 gallon per person per day). Buy 55 gallon barrels, get several 5-6 gallon jugs, or fill up empty soda/juice bottles. Make sure it is food grade plastic.
|STEP 3: 3 MONTH SUPPLY
Purchase a three month supply of foods you normally eat. Come up with meal plans for the 90 days, or just buy extras of things you use a lot.
|STEP 4: LONG TERM EDUCATION
Educate yourself on long term food storage and determine the types of foods, recipes, etc. you want to eat. Use an online tool or spreadsheet to figure out quantities for your family.
|STEP 5: GRAINS
Purchase your grains and learn how to use them: wheat, corn, barley, rice, pasta, etc.
|STEP 6: LEGUMES
Purchase your legumes and learn how to use them: dried beans, bean soup mixes, lentils, soy beans, etc.
|STEP 7: BAKING INGREDIENTS
Purchase items necessary for baking such as oil, sugar, powdered milk, salt, etc.
|STEP 8: FRUITS AND VEGETABLES
Purchase or preserve fruits and vegetables to supplement your core foods.
|STEP 9: COMFORT FOODS
Purchase any comfort foods that would be pleasant to have should you be forced to live off your food storage for a long time (chocolate, pickles, spices, etc).
|STEP 10: NON-FOOD ITEMS
Purchase non-food items such as toothpaste, deodorant, female products, diapers. Paper plates, plastic utensils, etc. are helpful to avoid wasting water washing dishes.