SOC 321K • Development and Global Social Change-W
9:00 AM-10:00 AM
This course is designed to help students develop a critical understanding of social, economic and political challenges posed by development and globalization as well as their writing skills to craft opinion pieces, reaction essays and research papers. The first half of the course will address the social and economic implications of globalization in terms of inequality and poverty. We will focus on inequalities in wealth and welfare in and between countries. Students will be provided with theoretical and empirical tools to examine the contemporary nature of international inequality, division of labor, migration and urbanization. Also, we will juxtapose the convergences and divergences between the developing and the developed world in relation to issues of social equity, welfare, poverty, segregation and unemployment. The second half of the course will deal with the political implications of the contemporary nature of globalization including ethnic discontent, fundamentalist upsurge, wars and international migration. This part of the course will concentrate on the themes of political violence, conflict and contention in and between countries after the end of the Cold War. The reading assignments and the class discussions will invite students to critically think about the issues of democracy, social equity and globalization. By the end of the course, students will have a better understanding of the contemporary forces of global social change and will be better able to evaluate their implications from a comparative perspective. This class involves a writing component and students will be asked to turn in regular written assignments dealing with the issues discussed in class.
Each student will turn in 10 reaction papers throughout the semester. Reaction papers will be on the assigned readings; expected to be brief, straightforward, creative and analytical. A guide with details on how to write a reaction paper is posted on blackboard. There will also be a final research paper that students are supposed to turn in at the end of the semester.
Your class participation grade is mainly based on your attendance and active participation into class discussions. Participation is required and attendance will be taken randomly through a sign-in sheet.
Rothenberg, Paula S., Beyond Borders: Thinking Critically About Global Issues, Worth Publishers, 2006
McMichael, Philip, Development and Social Change: A Global Perspective, Pine Forge Press, 2004
Giarrusso, Roseann et.al., A Guide to Writing Sociology Papers, Worth Publishers, 2008