JKBOSE 12th Syllabus
Jammu and Kashmir State Board of School Education (JKBOSE) was established in 1975 under the act called Jammu and Kashmir State Board Of School Education Act related to Elementary Education, Secondary Education, Higher Education and other matters to promote education for all.
Do not worry about the syllabus. Here is the complete detailed description of the Syllabus. Refer this and get well prepared for Your Exam and Score high percentile.
Syllabus for 12th Class:
Maximum Marks: 100
Time: - 3 Hours
The Paper shall be divided into (04) Sections which shall cover prose & Poetry from
Chinar-II apart from writing skills & grammar.
(10) Minutes shall be exclusively provided to the students for understanding the question
paper apart from the allotted time.
One seen passage from Chinar-II with internal choice followed by questions, fill in the blanks,
true false etc. Shall be asked to the student of (05) Marks.
One unseen passage with internal choice followed by questions, fill in the blanks, true false etc.
shall be asked to the student of (05) Marks
One reference to context type question based on the prose passage from Chinar II 05 Marks.
One to be attemted out of three.
Two questions of 04Marks each based on textbook titled Chinar-II of 100-150 words to be
attempted out of given four questions . [4 × 2 = 8 Marks
One long Answer type question based on character study/ Description of Scene/ theme /Style to
be attempted with internal choice . [5 × 1 = 05] Marks
02 objective type questions to be asked based on vocabulary, biographical information of the
writer/ textual information. Each question shall carry (1/2) Mark 1/2 ×4 = 2 Marks
One seen stanza of poem from Chinar-II with internal choice followed by questions, fill in the
blanks , true false etc. shall be asked to the student of (05) Marks.
One unseen stanza of poem with internal choice followed by questions, fill in the blanks, true
false etc. shall be asked to the student of (05) Marks
One reference to context type question based on the poem from Chinar II of 05 Marks. One to
be attemted out of three.
Four questions of 02 Marks each based on literary devices (metaphor, simile, hyperbole,
personification , imagery , irony, paradox etc ) from poems in Chinar-II of 50 -100 words to be
attempted . Four questions to be done out of six. 2 × 4 = 8 Marks.
a. Article/paragraphing writing with clues (narrative or descriptive) 05 Marks
b.Letter (personal or official) 05 Marks
c.Diary entry, notemaking, Dialogue, Report Writing, Advertisement , poster, E-mail or Sms.
i. Compound and Complex Sentences [03 Marks]
ii. Tense (Present , Past Future) [04 Marks]
iii. Auxiliary Verb [01 Marks]
iv. Relative Clause [02 Marks]
v. Conditional Clause [02 Marks]
vi. Reported Speech [02 Marks]
vii. Passives [02 Marks]
viii. Article [02 Marks]
ix. Preposition [02 Marks]
x. Conjunction [02 Marks]
Pattern of Paper
Reading Comprehension------ (20) Marks.
Q 1.1 Two seen passages/stanzas each from prose and poetry, from Chinar-II with internal
choice followed by questions, fill in the blanks , true false etc. shall be asked to the
student each of (05) Marks.
[5 × 2] = 10 Marks.
Q 1.2 Two unseen passages/stanzas, one from prose and one from poetry with internal choice
followed by questions, fill in the blanks/true false shall be asked to the student , each of (05)
[5 × 2] = 10 Marks.
Total (20) Marks
Literature ------ (33 Marks)
Q 3.1 Two questions based on textbook titled Chinar-Ii of 100-150 words to be attempted out
of given four questions. [4 × 2 = 08] Marks
Q 3.2 One long Answer type question based on character study/ Description of Scene/ theme
/Style to be attempted with internal choice . [5 × 1 = 05] Marks
Q 3.3 four very short answer type questions of two marks each based on literary devices and
general to be attempted out of nine ( metaphor, Simile, hyperbole, personification, imagery,
irony, paradox etc.) [4 × 2 =8]
One reference to context type question to be attempted out of three based on the prose from
Chinar II of 05 Marks
One reference to context type question to be attempted out of three based on the poem from
Chinar II of 05 Marks
Q 3.4 (04) objective type questions to be asked based on vocabulary, biographical information
of the writer/ textual information. Each question shall carry (01MarK.
Total (33) Marks
Writing Skills------- (25) Marks
Q 2.1 One question on paragraph writing / article writing (Narrative or Descriptive) to be
attempted with internal choice (100—150 Words) [5 × 1] = 05 Marks.
Q 2.2 One task on letter writing (Personal & Official) to be attempted with internal choice.
[5 × 1] = 05 Marks.
Q 2.3 One task to be attempted on note making or diary entry. [5× 1] = 05 Marks.
Q 2.4 One task to be attempted on dialogue writing or report writing (80-100 Words)
[5 × 1] = 5 Marks.
Q 2.5 One task to be attempted on writing of Advertisement or designing a Poster
(50-80) Words [03 × 1] = 03 Marks.
Q 2.6 One task to be attempted on E-Mail writing or S.M.S. [2 Marks]
Total (25) Marks
Grammar----- (22 Marks)
i.Compound and Complex Sentences [03 Marks]
ii.Tense (Present , Past Future) [04Marks]
iii.Auxiliary Verb [01 Marks]
iv.Relative Clause [02 Marks]
v.Conditional Clause [02 Marks]
vi Reported Speech [02 Marks]
vii.Passives [02 Marks]
viii.Article [02 Marks]
ix.Preposition [02 Marks]
x.Conjunction [02 Marks]
HOME SCIENCE (ELECTIVE)
Maximum Marks: 100
Theory: 70 marks Time: 3 Hours
Practicals: 30 Marks
Unit I: EARLY CHILDHOOD (0-3 years) Marks 12
Some specific characteristics: physical and motor-height, weight and body proportions; motor
development during 0-3 months, 3-6 months, 6-9 months, 9-12 months and 1-3 years
(milestones only); social and emotional developments; recognition of people around;
socialization, expression of emotions; cognitive development; learning through concrete
operations and language development.
Protection from preventable diseases: immunization - concept and types (natural and
acquired), breast feeding (one of the ways to develop natural immunity); immunization chart;
symptoms and incubation period of childhood diseases - TB, DPT, polio, measles, cholera,
Unit II: Marks 06
Special needs of disadvantaged and disabled children: socially disadvantaged, physically
handicapped (partially blind & deaf, affected/missing limb): characteristics & needs.
Substitute care at home and outside: siblings, grand parents, neighbours creche, day care
centres etc: Integrated Child Development Scheme (ICDS) - objectives and functions.
Unit III: My Apparel Marks 11
Clothing and its relation to personality: Factors that influence the selection of clothes:
personality, age, climate, occupation, figure, occasion, fashion.
Checking size and quality in ready-made garments (need and criteria: seams, hem, plackets,
fasteners, workmanship, design, drape).
Care of clothes: General principles and precautions to be followed while removing stains and washing: Cleansing agents: soaps and detergents (basic differences); Storage of clothes.
Unit IV: Applications of Home Science Education Marks 06
Application of knowledge of Home Science in everyday life.
Usefulness of some of the skills learnt here for supplementing family income.
Skills learnt here can be gainfully used for employment (self-employment, apprenticeship).
Further training required to make this field a career: various sources and facilities available for
Unit V : Nutrition for Self and Family Marks 09
Planning meals for the family: meaning and importance of meal planning, principles
and factors affecting meal planning, planning meals for the family; keeping in mind the needs of
individual members, including children, pregnant women, lactating mother, members suffering
from fever and diarrhoea; role and preparation of ORS.( Food groups planning only)
Unit VI: Marks 09
Ways to ensure good health for the family: using safe drinking water, qualities of safe
drinking water; household methods of making water safe for drinking; boiling, filtering, use of
alum and chlorine tablet role of hygiene for food handlers at home level. Safety against food
adulteration, definition and meaning of food adulteration as given by PFA; common adulterants
present in cereals, pulses, milk and milk products, fats and oils, sugar, jaggery, honey, spices
and condiments and their ill effects.
Unit VII: Money Management and Consumer Education Marks 11
Family Income: various sources of family income: (i) money income, (ii) real income, direct
and indirect; Supplementing family income-need & ways; need and procedure for keeping
Savings and Investment: meaning and importance of savings; ways/methods of investment
banks, post-office, LIC, Units, PPF, PF; basis for selection of method of investment risk,
security, profit, tax saving.
Unit VIII: Marks 06
Consumer Protection and Education: meaning, problems faced by consumer, Consumer
Protection Act (1986) and Services; Consumer aids: levels, standardization marks, advertising,
guidebooks/leaflets, Consumer redressal forum. Consumer Behaviour & demand, market
demand, its determinants, concept of price elasticity.
Practicals Time: 3 Hours 30 Marks
External: 20 Internal:10
I. Know Little Children Marks 02
II. Nutrition for Self and Family (contd.) Marks 07
III. Money Management and Consumer Education Marks 02
IV. My Apparel Marks 04
V. Things I can do with my Home Science Training – Record Marks 03
VI.Viva Marks 02
Unit I: Know Little Children (0-3 years)
Activity: Observe a child in neighbourhood or at home for various milestones of physical and
motor developments and prepare a chart.
Practical: Make an interview schedule for working mother.
Activity: Interview three mothers working outside the home to find out their arrangements of
substitute care for their children (0-3 yrs) in their absence.
Practical-Prepare of chart of milestones
Practical: Prepare a chart for immunization of a child.
Unit II: Nutrition for Self and Family
Practicals: Plan meals for the family and carry out modifications to suit individual needs
including persons suffering from fever or diarrhea and for pregnant and lactating mother.
Prepare and serve one dish.
Practical: Preparation of oral dehydration solution
Practical: Simple tests for checking adulteration in-
(iii) Milk and milk products
(iv) Tea leaves
(v) Dhania powder
(vi) Red chillies
(vii) Haldi powder
(viii) Gur (Jaggery)
(ix) Black Pepper (Whole)
Unit III: Money management and Consumer Education
Activity: Open an account. Find out and report how an account is opened in a bank and post
Collect and fill forms.
Activity: Read and evaluate labels of any four household items bearing different standardization
Practical: Fill bank/post office forms
Practical: Prepare one label each for four household items/products bearing different
Unit IV: My Apparel
Practical: Make sample of
(a) basic stitches and seams:
(i) Running Stitch
(iii) Blind stitch
(b) Fasteners - Buttons and hooks.
(c) Patch work
or make an apron and incorporate all the above (a, b, and c).
Practical: Examine quality in ready-made garments.
Practicals: Relative effect of temperature of water on the clothes during the process of washing
clothes (cold, lukewarm, hot). Draw conclusions and how this knowledge is helpful.
Removal of stains of -
(i) Tea stain
(ii) Coffee stain
(v) Ball point ink
Practical: Make a soap/detergent (liquid/powder/cake)
Max. Marks: 100 Marks Time: 3 hrs.
I. Babar's Invasion 7 marks
II. Humayun; his problems 5 marks
III Suri Dynasty 5 marks
IV Akbar 9 marks
V Jahangir 5 marks
VI ShahJahan 8 marks
VII Disintegration of Mughal Empire 8 marks
VIII Society and Culture 8 marks
IX British Conquest of India 10 marks
X Revolt of 1857 10 marks
XI Reform Movements 10 marks
XII National Movement 15 marks
Max. Marks: 100 marks Time: 3 hrs.
Unit : Babar's Invasion and cause of his success. 7 marks
Unit II : Humayun-his problems. 5 marks
Unit III : Suri Dynasty-contribution of Sher Shah 5 marks
Unit IV : Akbar-Consolidation.of Mugal Empire 9 marks
Expansion of the Empire; Administrative measures: Land revenue and
Mansabdari system; Towards Integration: Akbar's Rajput and Religious policies
Unit V : Jehangir; Role of Nur Jahan 5 marks
Unit VI : Shah Jahan : Changes in Mansabdari System 8 marks
Problem of succession
Unit VII : Climax & Disintegration of Mughal Empire Aurangzeb's Religious Policy;
Revolts against Aurangzeb for regional independence. Aurangzeb's Deccan
Policy. Shivaji-administration. Causes of the downfall of the Mughal Empire.
Unit VIII : Society & Culture: 8 marks
Class structure; Religious Movements; Architecture; Foreign &
Unit IX : British Conquest of India 10 Marks
(i) Factors leading to the establishment and consolidation of British rule in
India with special reference to the conquest of Bengal.
(ii) Subsidiary Alliance of Lord Wellesley and the Doctrine of lapse of Lord
Unit X : Revolt of 1857 10 Marks
(i) Causes and consequences. Causes of the failure of the Revolt of 1857.
(ii) Impact of the British rule on Indian economy and society
Unit XI : Reform Movements 10 marks
(i) Brahmo Samaj, Arya Samaj
(ii) Sir Syed Ahmed Khan.
(iii)Reforms among Sikhs.
(iv)Social reforms-Emancipation of Women.
Unit XII : National Movement: 15 marks
(a) Moderate and Extremist Phases
(i) Factors leading to the growth of National Movement.
(ii) Formation of Indian National Congress and the role of Moderates.
(iii) Rise of extremism and the partition of Bengal.
(iv) Boycott and Swadeshi Movement.
(v) Genesis of Muslim league.
(b) Gandhian era
(i) Khilafat and Non co-operation Movement.
(ii) Civil Disobedience Movement.
(iii) Quit India Movement.
(iv) Indian Independence and the Partition.
1. Medieval India: A Textbook for Class XII Published by NCERT
2. Modern India: A Textbook for Class XII Published by NCERT
3. Contemporary World History: A Textbook for Class XII Published by NCERT
Max. Marks: 100 Time: 3 hrs.
A) Literature Reader II
- • The Turning Point
- • Polar Meltdown
- • Forests – Desperate Measures Needed Taking up Challenge
One question based on the reading comprehension of prose passage of 10 marks, followed by
questions such as Multiple Choice Questions; Fill in the blanks, True / False, Vocabulary etc.
(Seen Vs Unseen) 1 × 10 = 10 marks
One questions based on the Summary / Precise of the given prose of 10 marks with internal
choice (Seen Vs Unseen)
10 × 1 = 10 marks
One question of 05 marks on the textual understanding of prose lesson with internal choice.
5 × 1 = 5 marks
- • Some Hill Stations Ghosts
- • The Rightful Inheritor the Earth
- • Ha’ Penny
- • The Devil Outwitted
One question based on the reading comprehension of short story followed by question based on
Vocabulary, Fill in the Blanks, True / False or a question based on the development of a story
from a given outline and theme 10 × 1 = 10 marks
One question of 05 marks based on the moral / theme / style etc. with internal choice
5 × 1 = 5 marks
- • Abraham Lincoln’s Letter to His Son’s Teacher
- • The Secret Machines
Two question based on the Stanza of the poem followed by questions with internal choice. This
shall carry 03 marks. 03 × 2 = 6 marks
Three very short questions based on literary devices, of two marks with internal choice, also by
asking about broader term in general such as metaphor, similie , imagery etc. 03 × 2 = 6 marks
- • Don’t Call Out or You’ll Be Shot
- • The Count’s Revenge
One question based on the description of event / situation / character / theme / conversation etc.
of 08 marks.
8 × 1 = 8 marks
One question on ‘Note Making or Note Taking of a given passage with internal choice
One question on writing of an advertisement on the given caption with internal choice
One question based on the writing of memorandum on any given topic with internal choice
One question on writing of a circular on a given topic with internal choice
One question on writing of report on any of the given topics with internal choice
One question based on the formation of tables, bar charts, histograms etc. and their interpretation
on the given topics with internal choice 5 marks
One question on the editing / proof reading of the given prose passage. 5 marks
One question on writing the notes on any one of the following topics:
a) Dialects b) Accent c) Register d) Style 5 marks
- • Textbook of Functional English Published by Goyal Brothers in Collaboration with J&K
State of School Education.
- • Literature Reader II
- • Language Skills Book
Theory: 100 Marks Time: 3 Hours
Unit I: Introduction Marks 04
• What is microeconomics?
• Central problems of an economy, production possibility curve and opportunity
Unit II: Consumer Equilibrium and Demand Marks 18
• Consumer’s Equilibrium: meaning and attainment of equilibrium through Utility
Approach: One and two commodity cases.
• Demand: market demand, determinants of demand, demand schedule, demand
curve, movement along and shifts in demand curve, price elasticity of demand,
measurement of price elasticity of demand – percentage, total expenditure and
Unit III: Producer Behaviour and Supply Marks 18
• Production function: returns to factor and returns to scale
• Supply: market supply, determinants of supply, supply schedule, supply curve
movement along and shifts in supply curve, price elasticity of supply,
measurement of price elasticity of supply – percentage and geometric methods
• Cost and Revenue: Concepts of costs; short-run cost curves (fixed and variable
costs; total, average and marginal costs); concepts of revenue – total, average and
marginal revenue and their relationship. Producer’s equilibrium – with the help of
MC and MR.
Unit IV: Forms of Market and Price Determination Marks 10
• Forms of market – perfect competition, monopoly, monopolistic competition –
their meaning and features, oligopoly, meaning , features
• Price determination under perfect competition – equilibrium price, effects of shifts
in demand and supply.
Unit V: Simple Applications of Tools of Demand and Supply Curves (Non-Evaluative)
The teachers can be given the flexibility to choose the issues: rationing, floors and
ceilings and Food Availability Decline (FAD) Theory (the teachers may also choose
alternative examples that are simple and easy to understand)
Unit VI: National Income and Related Aggregates — Basic Concepts and
Measurement Marks 15
• Macroeconomics: meaning.
• Circular flow of income, concepts of GDP, GNP, NDP, NNP (at market price and
factor cost), National Disposable Income (gross and net); Private Income,
Personal Income and Personal Disposable Income
• Measurement of National Income –Value Added method, Income method and
Unit VII: Determination of Income and Employment Marks 12
• Aggregate demand, aggregate supply and their components
• Propensity to consume and propensity to save (average and marginal)
• Meaning of involuntary unemployment and full employment
• Determination of income and employment: two sector model
• Concept of investment multiplier and its working
• Problems of excess and deficient demand
• Measures to correct excess and deficient demand – availability of credit, change in
Unit VIII: Money and Banking Marks 08
• Supply of Money-currently held by public and commercial banks
• Money: meaning, evolution and functions
• Central bank: meaning and functions
Unit IX: Government Budget and the Economy Marks 08
Government budget - meaning, objectives and components.
Classification of receipts - revenue receipt and capital receipt; classification of
expenditure – revenue expenditure and capital expenditure, plan & non-plan,
development & non-developmental.
Balanced budget, surplus budget & deficit budget: meaning & implications.
Various measures of government deficit - revenue deficit, fiscal deficit, and primary
deficit: their meaning and implications. Downsizing the role of government: meaning
Unit X: Balance of Payments Marks 07
• Balance of payments account - meaning and components;
• Foreign exchange rate – meaning of fixed and flexible rates, merits and demerits;
determination through demand and supply.
• A brief analysis about recent exchange rate issues
Maximum Marks : 100
Theory: 70 marks Time: 3 Hours
Practicals: 30 Marks
A. Fundamentals of Human Geography Marks 35
Unit I: Human Geography: Nature and Scope Marks 03
Unit II: People Marks 05
• Population of the world – distribution, density and growth;
• Population change-spatial patterns and structure; determinants of population change;
• Age-sex ratio; rural-urban composition;
• Human development – concept; selected indicators, international comparisons.
Unit III: Human Activities Marks 10
• Primary activities – concept and changing trends; gathering, pastoral, mining, subsistence
agriculture, modern agriculture; people engaged in agriculture and allied activities –
some examples from selected countries;
• Secondary activities – concept; manufacturing: agro-processing, household, small scale,
large scale; people engaged in secondary activities – some examples from selected
• Tertiary activities – concept; trade, transport and communication; services; people
engaged in tertiary activities – some examples from selected countries;
• Quaternary activities – concept; knowledge based industries; people engaged in
quaternary activities – some examples from selected countries.
Unit IV: Transport, Communication and Trade Marks 10
• Land transport – roads, railways – rail network; trans-continental railways;
• Water transport- inland waterways; major ocean routes;
• Air transport – Intercontinental air routes;
• Oil and gas pipelines;
• Satellite communication and cyber space;
• International trade – Basis and changing patterns; ports as gateways of international
trade, role of WTO in International trade.
Unit V: Human Settlements Marks 05
• Settlement types – rural and urban; morphology of cities (case study); distribution of mega
cities; problems of human settlements in developing countries.
Unit VI: Map work on identification of features based on above units on the outline
Political map of world. Marks 02
B. India: People and Economy Marks 35
Unit VII: People Marks 05
• Population – distribution, density and growth; composition of population: linguistic, sex
and religious; rural-urban population change through time – regional variations;
• Migration: international, national – causes and consequences;
• Human development – selected indicators and regional patterns;
• Population, environment and development.
Unit VIII: Human Settlements Marks 04
• Rural settlements – types and distribution;
• Urban settlements – types, distribution and functional classification.
Unit IX: Resources and Development Marks 12
• Land resources – general land use; agricultural land use – major crops; agricultural
development and problems, common property resources;
• Water resources – availability and utilization – irrigation, domestic, industrial and other
uses; scarcity of water and conservation methods – rain water harvesting and watershed
management (one case study related with participatory watershed management to be
• Mineral and energy resources – metallic and non-metallic minerals and their distribution;
conventional and non-conventional energy sources;
• Industries – types and distribution; industrial location and clustering; changing pattern of
selected industries – iron and steel, cotton textiles, sugar, petrochemicals, and knowledge
based industries; impact of liberalization, privatization and globalization on industrial
• Planning in India – target area planning (case study); idea of sustainable development
Unit X: Transport, Communication and International Trade Marks 07
• Transport and communication — roads, railways, waterways and airways; oil and gas
pipelines; national electric grids; communication networkings – radio, television,
satellite and internet;
• International trade — changing pattern of India’s foreign trade; seaports and their
hinterland and airports.
Unit XI: Geographical Perspective on Selected Issues and Problems Marks 04
(One case study to be introduced for each topic)
• Environmental pollution; urban-waste disposal;
• Urbanization-rural-urban migration; problem of slums;
• Land Degradation.
Unit XII: Map work on locating and labeling of features based on above units on the
outline Political map of world. Marks 03
C. Practical Work Marks 30
Internal assessment: 10 marks
External assessment:20 marks
Unit I: Processing of Data and Thematic Mapping Marks 10
• Sources of data;
• Tabulating and processing of data; calculation of averages, measures of central tendency,
deviation and rank correlation;
• Representation of data – construction of diagrams: bars, circles and flowchart; thematic
maps; construction of dot; choropleth and isopleth maps.
• Use of computers in data processing and mapping.
Unit II: Field Study Marks 07
Field visit and study: map orientation, observation and preparation of sketch;
survey on any one of the local concerns; pollution, ground water changes, land use and
land- use changes, poverty, energy issues, soil degradation, impact of floods and drought,
catchment area of school, Market survey and Household survey ( any one topic of local
concern may be taken up for the study; observation and questionnaire survey may be
adopted for the data collection; collected data may be tabulated and analysed with
diagrams and maps;
Unit II: Practical Record Book and Viva Voce Marks 03
Theory: 100 Marks Time: 3 Hours
Part A: Contemporary World Politics
1. Cold War Era in World Politics Marks 07
Emergence of two power blocs after the second world war. Arenas of the cold war.
Challenges to Bipolarity: Non Aligned Movement, quest for new international economicorder.
India and the cold war.
2. Disintegration of the ‘Second World’ and the Collapse of Bipolarity. Marks 07
New entities in world politics: Russia, Balkan states and Central Asian states,
Introduction of democratic politics and capitalism in post-communist regimes. India’s relations with Russia and other post-communist countries.
3. US Dominance in World Politics: Marks 06
Growth of unilateralism: Afghanistan, first Gulf War, response to 9/11 and attack on
Iraq. Dominance and challenge to the US in economy and ideology. India’s renegotiation of its relationship with the USA.
4. Alternative Centres of Economic and Political Power: Marks 04
Rise of China as an economic power in post-Mao era, creation and expansion of
European Union, ASEAN. India’s changing relations with China.
5. South Asia in the Post-Cold War Era: Marks 06
Democratisation and its reversals in Pakistan and Nepal. Ethnic conflict in Sri Lanka,
Impact of economic globalization on the region. Conflicts and efforts for peace in South
Asia. India’s relations with its neighbours.
6. International Organizations in a unipolar World: Marks 05
Restructuring and the future of the UN. India’s position in the restructured UN. Rise of
new international actors: new international economic organisations, NGOs. Howdemocratic and accountable are the new institutions of global governance?
7. Security in Contemporary World: Marks 05
Traditional concerns of security and politics of disarmament. Non-traditional or human
security: global poverty, health and education. Issues of human rights and migration.
8. Globalisation and Its Critics. Marks 05
Economic, cultural and political manifestations. Debates on the nature of consequences
of globalisation. Anti-globalisation movements. India as an arena of globalization and struggle
9. Environment and Natural Resources in Global Politics: Marks 05
Environment movement and evolution of global environmental norms. Conflicts over
traditional and common property resources. Rights of indigenous people. India's stand in
global environmental debates.
Part B: Politics in India since Independence
10. Nation-Building and Its Problems: Marks 05
Nehru’s approach to nation-building: Legacy of partition: challenge of ‘refugee’
resettlement, the Kashmir problem. Organisation and reorganization of states; Political conflicts
11. Era of One-Party Dominance: Marks 06
First three general elections, nature of Congress dominance at the national level, uneven
dominance at the state level, coalitional nature of Congress. Major opposition parties.
12. Politics of Planned Development Marks 05
Five year plans, expansion of state sector and the rise of new economic interests. Famine
and suspension of five year plans. Green revolution and its political fallouts.
13. India’s External Relations Marks 06
Nehru’s foreign policy. Sino-Indian war of 1962, Indo-Pak war of 1965 and 1971.
India’s nuclear programme and shifting alliances in world politics.
14. Challenge to and Restoration of Congress System: Marks 05
Political succession after Nehru. Non-Congressism and electoral upset of 1967, Congress
split and reconstitution, Congress’ victory in 1971 elections, politics of ‘garibi hatao’.
15. Crisis of the Constitutional Order: Marks 07
Search for ‘committed’ bureaucracy and judiciary. Navnirman movement in Gujarat and
the Bihar movement. Emergency: context, constitutional and extra-constitutional dimensions,
resistance to emergency. 1977 elections and the formation of Janata Party. Rise of civil
16. Regional Aspirations and Conflicts Marks 05
Rise of regional parties.. The Kashmir situation. Challenges and responses in the North
17. Rise of New Social Movements: Marks 05
Farmers’ movements, Women’s movement, Environment and Development-affected
people’s movements. Implementation of Mandal Commission report and its aftermath.
18. Recent Developments in Indian politics: Marks 06
Participatory upsurge in 1990s. Rise of the JD and the BJP. Increasing role of regional
parties and coalition politics. UF and NDA governments. Elections 2004 and UPA government.
Major concepts of Poltical Science published by NCERT New Delhi
Max. Marks:100 Time: 3hrs
A. INDIAN PHILOSOPHY
1. Nature and Schools of Indian Philosophy Marks 10
2. Philosophy of the Bhagavad Gita Marks 10
3. Buddhism, Jainism Marks 10
4. Nyaya-Vaisesika and Samkhya- Yoga Marks 10
5. Advaita Vedanta Marks 10
B. WESTERN PHILOSOPHY
6. Knowledge and truth Marks 10
7. The causal Principle. Marks 10
8. Nature of Reality Marks 10
9. Realism and Idealism Marks 10
C. Applied Philosophy
10. Environmental Ethics, Professional Ethics and Philosophy of Education Marks 10
A. INDIAN PHILOSOPHY
Unit 1: Nature and Schools of Indian Philosophy: Some basic issues: Rta, Karma, Four
Purusarthas : Dharma, Artha, Kama and Moksa
Unit 2: Philosophy of the Bhagavad Gita: Karma Yoga (Anasakta Karma), Svadharama,
Unit 3: Buddhism, Jainism
Four noble truths and eight-fold path; Theory of dependent origination. Anekantavada,
Unit 4: Nyaya - Vaisesika and Samkhya – Yoga
(1) Nyaya theory of Pramanas, (2) Vaisesika Theory of Padarthas ‘, (3) Samkhya Theory
of Three Gunas, (4) Yoga- The Eight-fold Practice.
Unit 5: Advaita Vedanta
The nature of Atman, Brahman and the world.
B. WESTERN PHILOSOPHY
Unit 6 : Knowledge and truth
Rationalism, Empiricism and Kant’s Critical Philosophy
Unit 7 : The Causal Principle
Nature of Cause
Aristotle’s theory of four-fold causation cause-effect relationship: entailment,
regularity and succession. Theories of causation.
Unit 8: Nature of Reality
Proofs for the existence of God
Ontological, Teleological and Cosmological arguments.
Unit 9 : Realism and Idealism
C. Applied Philosophy
Unit 10: Environmental Ethics and Professional Ethics
(a) Study of Physical, Mental and Spiritual Environments
(b) Medical and Business Ethics.
(c) Philosophy of Education
1. John Patrick Introduction to Philosophy
2. John Hospers Introduction to Philosophical Analysis
3. D.M. Datta and S.C. Chatterjee Introduction to Indian Philosophy
4. M. Hiriyanna Essentials of Indian Philosophy
5. A.C. Ewing Fundamental Questions of Philosophy
6. H. Titus Living issues in Philosophy
7. C.D. Sharma A Critical Survey of Indian Philosophy
8. William Lillie An Introduction to Ethics
Max. Marks: 100 Time: 3 Hrs.
Unit 1: Curriculum:
a) Meaning and importance of curriculum with reference to the views as put forth by:
i) Ross ii) Cunningham iii) Dewey iv) Tagore
v) Zakir Hussain
b) Types of curriculum:
i) Subject centered curriculum: its meaning, merits and demerits.
ii) Activity centered curriculum: its meaning, merits and demerits.
iii) Defects in Curriculum
Unit II: Co-curricular activities:
a) Meaning and Significance.
Unit III: Gandhian Education:
Basic scheme of education with reference to :
Unit IV: Elementary Education:
(a) Meaning & Objectives
(ii) Remedies – Non-Formal Education (NFE), District Primary Education
Programme (DPEP), and Early Childhood: Care and Education (ECCE).
c) Wastage & Stagnation – causes & remedies
Unit V: National Integration:
(a) Meaning and importance
(b) Obstacles in the way of national integration
(c) Role of education in promoting national integration
Unit VI: Population Education:
(a) Meaning and Objectives of population education
(b) Population Explosion: causes, its effects and strategies of population control.
Unit VII: Human Development:
(i) Meaning and Principles of growth and development:
(ii) Stages of growth and development (infancy, Childhood and Adolescence with
reference to physical, mental and social development) 10 marks
Unit VIII: Child Study:
(ii) Meaning and Importance.
(iii) Methods (case study and observation methods) 6 marks
Unit IX: Role of Emotions in the development of a child:
A. Meaning and Classification.
B. Common patterns of emotions (Affection. Fear, Anger and Jealousy)
C. Training of emotions 6 marks
Unit X: Acquired Elements of behaviour:
Imitation sympathy and suggestion: their meaning
Types and importance of education. 5 marks
Unit XI: Learning:
(i) Meaning and definition as given by Skinner, Hilgard, Gales, Thorndike.
(ii) Laws of learning (Primary and Secondary) and their educational implications.
(iii) Types of learning (Perceptual, Motor, Verbal and Conceptual) 10 marks
Unit XII: Educational Statistics:
(i) Meaning of variability.
(ii) Methods of determining variability through Range, Q.D, M.D, and S.D.
(Calculations) 15 marks
1. A textbook of Education by Dr. G. Rasool and Dr. H. P. Mangotra.
2. A Modern Textbook of Education by J. S. Walia.
3. Educational Statistics by Dr. G. Rasoo1.
4. Education Psychology by H. R. Bhatia.
5. An Introduction to Education by N. A. Nadeem. Fulbright Publishing Company, Simco
Press Building, Doodganga Road, Karan Nagar, Srinagar-190010 (Kashmir).
Maximum Marks : 100
Theory: 70 marks Time: 3 Hours
Practicals: 30 Marks
PSYCHOLOGY, SELF AND SOCIETY
Unit I: Intelligence and Aptitude Marks 09
The unit aims at studying how people differ with respect to intelligence and aptitude.
Individual differences in intelligence: Theories of Intelligence; Culture and Intelligence;
Emotional intelligence; Aptitude: Nature and types: Assessment of psychological attributes.
Unit II: Self and Personality Marks 10
This unit focuses on the study of self and personality in the context of different
approaches in an effort to appraise the person. The assessment of personality will also be
Concepts of self, self-esteem, self-efficacy and self-regulation; Culture and self;
Personality Concept; Approaches to Personality: Type and Trait, Psychodynamic, Humanistic,
Behavioural and Cultural; Assessment of Personality: Self-report Measures, Behavioural
Analysis, and Projective Measures.
Unit III: Human Strengths and Meeting Life Challenges Marks 07
This unit deals with the nature of stress and how responses to stress depend on an
individual’s appraisal of stressors. Strategies to cope with stress will also be dealt with.
Life challenge and adjustment; Concept of adaptation; Human strengths and virtues:
Nature, types and effects on psychological functioning; Coping with stress; Concepts of health
and well-being; Life style, health and well-being.
Unit IV: Psychological Disorders Marks 10
This unit discusses the concepts of normality and abnormality and the major
Concepts of abnormality and psychological disorder, Causal factors associated with
abnormal behaviour, Classification of disorder, Major psychological disorders: Anxiety,
Somato-form Dissociative, Mood, Schizophrenic, Developmental and Behavioural Substance
Unit V : Therapeutic Approaches and Counseling Marks 07
This unit discusses the goals, techniques and effectiveness of different approaches to
treat psychological disorders.
Nature and process of therapy; Nature of therapeutic relationship; Types of therapies:
Psychodynamic, Humanistic, Cognitive, Behavior; Alternative therapies: Yoga, Meditation;
Zen; Rehabilitation of mentally ill people. Counseling.
Unit VI: Attitude and Social Cognition Marks 08
This unit focuses on the formation and change of attitudes, cultural influences on
attributional tendencies and conditions influencing pro-social behaviour.
Explaining behaviour through attributions; Social cognition; Schemas and stereotypes;
Impression formation; Nature and components of attitudes; Attitude formation and change;
Behaviour in the presence of others: Pro-social Behaviour; Prejudice and discrimination;
Strategies for handling prejudice.
Unit VII : Social Influence and Group Processes Marks 07
The unit deals with the concept of group, its functions and the dynamics of social
influence process like conformity, obedience and compliance. Different conflict resolution
strategies will also be discussed.
Influence Processes: Nature of Conformity, Obedience, and Compliance: Cooperation
and Competition; Groups: Nature, formation and types; Influence of group on individual
behaviour; Social identity; Inter-Group Conflict; Conflict Resolution Strategies.
Unit VIII: Environmental and Social Concerns Marks 06
This unit focuses on the application of psychological understanding to some important
Human- environment relationship; Environmental effects on human behaviour. Noise,
pollution, crowding, natural disasters, social issue: Aggression and Violence; Social Inequality
and Poverty; Media and human values; Promoting pro-environmental behaviour, Human rights
and citizenship; Peace.
Unit IX: Applied Psyhology. Marks 06
This unit introduces some of the important areas of application of psychology.
Application of psychology to following areas:
PRACTICAL 30 Marks
External: 20 Internal:10
Psychological Testing Practicals
The students shall be required to prepare one case profile and conduct 2 Practicals related
to the topics covered in the course. The case profile will include developmental history of the
subject, using both qualitative (observation, interview) and quantitative (Psychological testing)
approaches. Practicals would involve using standardized psychological assessment devices in
different domains (e.g. intelligence, personality, aptitude, adjustment, attitude, self-concept, and
Distribution of Marks:
(i) Practical File 03 Marks
(ii) Case Profile 03 Marks
(iii) Viva Voce (Case profile and practical) 04 Marks
(iv) Two practicals (5 for accurate conduct and 10 for reporting). 10 Marks
Textbook Suggested: Textbook of Psychology published by NCERT New Delhi
Maximum Marks : 100
Theory: 80 marks Time: 3 Hours
Unit 1: Introducing Indian Society Non- Evaluative
Colonialism, Nationalism, Class and Community
Unit 2: Demographic Structure and Indian Society Marks 06
Rural-Urban Linkages and Divisions
Unit 3: Social Institutions: Continuity & Change Marks 06
Family and Kinship
The Caste System
Unit 4: Market As a Social Institution Marks 06
Market as a Social Institution
Unit 5: Pattern of Social Inequality & Exclusion Marks 06
Caste Prejudice, Scheduled Castes and Other Backward Classes
Marginalization of Tribal Communities
The Struggle for Women’s Equality
The Protection of Religious Minorities
Caring for the Differently Abled
Unit 6: The Challenges of Cultural Diversity Marks 08
Problems of Communalism, Regionalism, Casteism & Patriarchy
Role of the State in a Plural and Unequal Society
Unit 7: Suggestions for Project Work Non-Evaluative
CHANGE AND DEVELOPMENT IN INDIA
Unit 8: Structural Change Marks 06
Colonialism, Industrialization, Urbanization.
Unit 9: Cultural Change Marks 06
Modernization, Westernization, Sanskritisation, Secularization .
Social Reform Movements & Laws
Unit 10: The Story Of Democracy Marks 06
The Constitution as an instrument of Social Change
Parties, Pressure Groups and Democratic Politics
Panchayati Raj and the Challenges of Social Transformation
Unit 11: Change And Development In Rural Society Marks 06
Land Reforms, Green Revolution and Agrarian Society
Unit 12: Change And Development In Industrial Society Marks 06
From Planned Industrialization to Liberalization
Changes in the Class Structure
Unit 13: Globalisation And Social Change Marks 06
Unit 14: Mass Media And Communication Process Marks 06
Unit 15: Social Movements Marks 06
Class-Based Movements: Workers, Peasants.
Caste-Based Movements: Dalit Movement, Backward Castes, Trends in Upper Caste
Responses.Women’s Movements in Independent India. Tribal Movements. Environmental
Practical Examination Max. Marks 20 Time allotted: 3hrs
External: 15 Internal: 05
A. Project (undertaken during the academic year at school level) 05 marks
i. Statement of the purpose: 11/2marks
ii. Methodology / Technique: 11/2 marks
iii. Conclusion: 2 marks
B. Viva - based on the project work 02 marks
C. Research design 08 marks
i. Overall format: 1 mark
ii Research Question/Hypothesis : 1 mark
iii. Choice of technique: 2 mark
iv. Detailed procedure for implementation of technique: 2 mark
v. Limitations of the above technique: 2 mark
B & C to be administered on the day of the external examination
Maximum Marks: 100 Time: 03 hr
Chapter I: Algebraic Equations (10 marks)
Definition of a Polynomial, Algebraic Equation, Roots of an equation, Fundamental
Theorm of Algebra (without proof), Every Equation of nth degree has n and only n roots,
Synthetic division, Relation between the roots and coefficients of an equation, Solution of cubic
equations under given conditions (Roots in A.P, G.P, H.P etc).
Chapter II: Matrices and Determinants. (14 marks)
Definition of Matrix, Types of matrices; Addition and Multiplication of Matrices, Transpose
of a matrix, Properties of Transpose (with illustration and without proof).
a) (A/)/ = A
b) (KA)/ = KA/ where K is a real number.
c) (A + B)/ = A/ + B/
d) (AB)/ = B/A/
Determinants of order not exceeding 3, Properties of determinants (with illustrations and
without proof) and their application, Minors and co-factors of the elements of a determinant:
Zero relation, Solution of Linear Equation ( with not more that 3 variables) using determinants
(Cramers rule). Singular and non-singular Matrices, Adjoint of a Matrix, Inverse of a Matrix,
Solution of Linear Equations with not more than 3 variables using matrix methods.
Chapter III: Probability (06 marks)
Random experiment and sample space, event, Definition of Probability in a discrete
sample space, its simple applications. Theorems on probability:.
P( A )= 1 - P(A), P(AUB) = P(A) + P(B) - P(A∩B), and their simple applications
Chapter IV: Partial Fractions. (06 marks)
Partial fractions with Linear, Repeated Linear and Quadratic Denominators.
Chapter V : Three Dimensional Geometry. (14 marks)
Co-ordinate of a point in space, Distance between two points, Section formula,
Direction cosines and direction ratios of a line joining two points, Projection of the join of two
points on a given line, Angle between two lines whose direction ratios are given.
Chapter VI: Limits and Continuity of a function (10 marks)
Limit of a function, Left and Right hand limits, Algebra of Limits, Fundamental Limits,
→ → → →
lim , lim lim 1, limlog 1
0 θ 0
And their Applications. Continuity of a function at a point.
Chapter VII: Differentiation (10 marks)
Derivative of a function, Its Geometric and Physical significance, Derivative of some
simple functions from first principle (Algebraic, Exponential and Trigonometric only).
Derivative of Sum, Difference, Product and quotient of functions. Second order derivative of a function Derivative of Inverse Trigonometric functions.
Chapter VIII: Applications of Derivatives (10 marks)
Tangents and Normals, (Cartesian Cordinates only), Maxima and Minima. Statements of
Rolle’s Theorem and Lagranges Mean Value Theorem and their simple applications.
Chapter IX: Integration (10 marks)
Integration as inverse of differentiation, Integration by substitution, Integration by parts,
Integration by partial fractions, Simple problem on definite integrals.
Chapter X: Differential Equations. (10 marks)
Differential Equations of first order and first degree, Variable separable, Homogeneous
Equations, Linear differential equations,.
Max. Marks: 1OO Time allowed: 3 hours
I. Teachings of Islam 10
II. Islamic character 10
III. Human values in Islam 10
IV. Human Rights in Islam 10
V. Rights of women 10
VI. Introduction to the Quran 10
VII. Knowledge and the Quranic teachings 10
VIII. Economic teachings of the Quran 10
IX. Introduction to Hadith 10
X. Introduction to Fiqh 10