After years of improvement, the quality of New York City's air is again on the decline, as growing numbers of automobiles spew rising amounts of carbon monoxide and smog-producing pollutants into the atmosphere.
Twenty years of the Federal Clean Air Act have indeed made New York's vistas clearer and its buildings cleaner. But government officials and environmentalists agree that New Yorkers are still breathing some of the unhealthiest air in America.
The nation's largest city has never met Federal health standards for two of the most dangerous pollutants -ozone, the major component of smog, and carbon monoxide. Now, with the levels of those substances rising again, only Los Angeles has dirtier air, and just a few cities - Chicago, Houston and Denver - are considered as bad.
Cars Are Blamed
''Generally speaking, New York's air is cleaner than Los Angeles's, but that's not saying a whole heck of a lot,'' said Ronald H. White, a senior program manager at the American Lung Association in Washington.
In 1988, for example, one of the worst years for pollution in the decade, New York's peak levels of ozone and carbon monoxide exceeded Federal health limits by more than 50 percent. New York exceeded Federal ozone health standards on 28 days that year, compared with 176 days in Los Angeles.
Most environmental experts say the twin problems of ground-level ozone and carbon monoxide are largely a result of a 25 percent increase in the number of motor vehicles in the region since 1980; cars are the single largest source of those pollutants.
To some extent, the failure to bring New York's air up to the standards of the Clean Air Act of 1970 is a failure of state and local governments to take politically risky actions needed to force compliance. But many environmentalists argue that it is also a failure of Congress and the Environmental Protection Agency to enforce Federal rules. Congress is now debating proposals to toughen the Clean Air Act, but even if lawmakers decide to adopt them, compliance will undoubtedly be years away.
''It will get worse before it gets better,'' said Eric Goldstein, a lawyer with the Natural Resources Defense Council, a New York-based advocacy group. The country, he said, has reaped the maximum benefit of the 1970 Clean Air Act's requirement that cars reduce tailpipe emissions of hydrocarbons and nitrogen oxides, which contribute to ozone.
The news about air pollution is not all disappointing. In general, New York's air has become much freer of lead, sulfur dioxide and soot. A brownish-yellow haze of ozone-generated smog hangs over the city on some days, as it did 20 years ago, but overall visibility has improved because there is far less soot and grime in the air, environmental officials say; buildings and clothing take longer to get dirty.
Still, New York's air remains unhealthy; breathing elevated levels of ozone and carbon monoxide can lead to a host of health problems. Carbon monoxide can cause headaches and place additional stress on people with heart disease. A colorless, odorless gas, it is a result of incomplete fuel combustion and reaches its highest levels where traffic is heaviest.
Exposure to ozone can produce shortness of breath and, over time, permanent lung damage. Recent research indicates that ozone may be harmful at levels even lower than the current Federal standard. The pollutant is produced by a chemical reaction in the air among hydrocarbons, oxides of nitrogen, heat and sunlight. Ground-level ozone should not be confused with its counterpart in the upper atmosphere, a protective layer that filters ultraviolet radiation.
Debate in Congress
On Capitol Hill, Congress is debating much stricter limits on pollution caused by motor vehicles and businesses, both large and small, as well as requiring the use of cleaner-burning fuels. The Senate has passed a clean air bill, and the House is scheduled to debate its version soon. President Bush has said he favors strengthening the Clean Air Act. Some environmentalists, however, have complained his proposals would not go far enough to reduce pollution.
Should Congress settle on less-restrictive Federal measures, New York City might be forced to reconsider politically sensitive transportation controls, state and Federal officials say.
In the 1970's, the city backed away from adopting tougher pollution-control measures. They would have required, for example, that all truck deliveries be made at night, that cruising by taxis be restricted, that higher bridge tolls be imposed and that the number of cars entering Manhattan be curtailed. Instead, less-stringent measures were introduced: The number of parking spaces were reduced; bus lanes were created on some avenues, and traffic control officers were hired.
Those actions were taken only after environmental groups sued the city to carry out a clean air plan devised years before. Today, both the state and the city are still out of compliance, and they have been ordered by a Federal court to submit an adequate clean air plan no later than September 1991. #760,000 Cars a Day Constantine Sidamon-Eristoff, Regional Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency, said New York would almost certainly require new transportation controls, among other changes, if Congress does not mandate strict controls, like requiring cars to run on cleaner-burning fuels.
''Without alternative fuels, the city will have to take those tough decisions,'' Mr. Eristoff said. On a typical business day, more than 760,000 cars converge on Manhattan below 60th Street, 100,000 more than in 1980.
One control measure would be to restrict the number of cars entering Manhattan, but Mayor David N. Dinkins is skeptical that such limits would work or be worth the kind of ''incredible disruption they will produce,'' said Albert F. Appleton, the city's Environmental Protection Commissioner.
''No one can say what the ripple effects will be,'' he said.
Under any new air pollution law that Congress passes, it will be years before New York complies with health standards for carbon monoxide and ozone because of long phase-in provisions. Depending on the legislation, the city could be given at least 15 more years to achieve the Federal goals.
But even if no new law is passed, New York will still be obligated to meet the health standards that it has consistently failed to do under the current Clean Air Act.
Under existing law, the Federal Government is allowed to prepare anti-pollution programs for states if they fail to do so and to apply sanctions, like prohibiting the construction of new sources of pollution. In the past, however, the Environmental Protection Agency has been reluctant to take either action in New York and most of the country.
Tougher Emission Standards
To that end, the state has slowly moved forward on its own. Under regulations scheduled to take effect by next fall, passenger cars for sale in New York would be required to meet the tougher emissions standards prevailing in California, beginning in the 1993 model year. Several other Northeastern states have joined New York.
Also, large and medium-size gasoline stations in the New York City area are required to install devices that recover smog-forming vapors emitted when gasoline is pumped into tanks. During the warmer months, stations throughout the state and in some other Northeastern states are required to sell gasoline that is less likely to evaporate and contribute to ozone pollution.
Despite these and other measures, city and state officials assert that there is just so much they can do to control ozone levels without stronger Federal standards. Far more than carbon monoxide, ozone is a regional problem characterized by air masses that travel long distances and build up as they move along. An Oxymoron? States upwind of New York contribute 40 percent of the state's total ozone, said Thomas C. Jorling, the state's Commissioner of Environmental Conservation. In the same way, the phenomenon, called ozone transport, contributed to peak ozone readings in Connecticut in 1988 that were even higher than those of New York City.
Environmental officials acknowledge that progress in cleaning up the air has slowed, and they are dismayed that the expression ''New York air quality'' has become oxymoronic. But they contend that air quality and health problems would be far worse today if no action had been taken 20 years ago.
''Our air would be unlivable,'' Mr. Jorling said.
The Environmental Protection Agency's New York regional office estimated that peak ozone levels and the number of days a year the city violated health standards would be twice as high if there had been no Clean Air Act. The agency estimated that the numbers for carbon monoxide would be three to four times as high.