A thriving metropolis of monuments, museums and breathtaking architecture, Washington DC is the..
Officially founded on July 16, 1790, Washington, DC is unique among American cities because it was established by the Constitution of the United States to serve as the nation’s capital. From the beginning it has been embroiled in political manoeuvring, sectional conflicts, issues of race, national identity, compromise and, of course, power.
The choice of Washington’s site along the Potomac and Anacostia Rivers resulted from a compromise between Alexander Hamilton and northern states who wanted the new Federal government to assume Revolutionary War debts and Thomas Jefferson and southern states who wanted the capital placed in a location friendly to slave-holding agricultural interests.
George Washington, the first president and namesake of the city, chose the site and appointed three commissioners to help prepare for the arrival of the new government in 1800. In 1800 the federal government consisted of 131 employees. Pierre Charles L’Enfant designed the city as a bold new capital with sweeping boulevards and ceremonial spaces reminiscent of Paris of his native France. Benjamin Banneker, a self-taught African-American mathematical genius, provided the astronomical calculations for surveying and laying out the city. The full development of Washington as a monumental city, however, did not come until a hundred years later when the McMillan Commission updated its plan to establish the National Mall and monuments that most visitors to Washington now know.
During the War of 1812, British forces invaded the city and burned down public and government buildings, including the White House, in response to American forces invading York, now known as Toronto. However, the British left residential areas untouched and respectfully spared the home of the Commandant of the Marines, located on Marine Barracks. The home is now the oldest government building in continuous use in the nation’s capital. The Patent Office and the Post Office were also spared because of Dr. William Thornton, Superintendent of Patents, pleading with British officers that the knowledge lost therein would be a disservice to mankind.
As a southern city, Washington has always had a significant African- American population. Before the Civil War, the city was home to a growing number of free blacks who worked as skilled craftsmen, hack drivers, businessmen and labourers. It also included enslaved African Americans and was the site of slave auctions before they were outlawed in the city in 1850. Slaves owned in Washington were emancipated on April 16, 1862, nine months before Lincoln’sEmancipation Proclamation of January 1, 1863. Washington remained home to a large African- American population who created vibrant communities and championed civil rights despite racial segregation and prejudice. Duke Ellington was born and raised in Washington’s Shaw neighbourhood and played in his first band here.
Washington, DC, was envisioned by its founders as a commercial centre as well as the seat of government. The location on the Potomac River was chosen, in part, because it already included two existing port towns of Georgetown, Maryland and Alexandria, Virginia which served as regional shipping centres for tobacco and wheat. When Alexandria returned to Virginia in 1846, residents argued that inclusion within the Federal District of Columbia hurt business and the city of Washington would never need that much room to grow.
But after the Civil War, Washington did grow, eventually absorbing Georgetown and the surrounding farms and rural areas beyond L’Enfant’s original plans for the city. The initial boundary of Washington City was Florida Avenue, originally called Boundary Street. The first neighbourhoods were those that grew up around the Capitol (Capitol Hill), the Center Market (Downtown), and the White House (Lafayette Square).Two early suburbs, LeDroit Park and Anacostia, both began as developments that excluded African Americans and later became predominantly African-American communities.
DC is also a cosmopolitan city. While it has always had foreign delegations from the countries of the world it also boasts an increasingly diverse ethnic population. A growing Latino population represents every Central and South American country with a particularly large community of Salvadorans. A large Ethiopian population has resulted from the political turmoil there. New ethnic groups have brought new restaurants, as well as new residents. While DC lost residents to surrounding suburbs in the 1990s, new housing and urban revitalisation are attracting people back to the city for a renaissance of housing, offices, entertainment and nightlife.
As the capital of the world’s most powerful democracy, it is ironic that residents of Washington lack full self government and that limited self government was only restored in 1974 after nearly 100 years with an appointed commissioner system. Representation in Congress is limited to a non-voting delegate to the House of Representatives and a shadow Senator. 1964 was the first Presidential election in which Washington residents were able to vote.
After more than two centuries as the nation’s capital, Washington is brimming with a unique history of its own. It has developed as a complex and layered city with multiple personalities. As home to the federal government, it has attracted a diverse mix of government workers, Congress members from every state, foreign emissaries, lobbyists, petitioners and protestors. While elected and appointed officials come and go giving the city its reputation as a transient community, many of the city’s residents have called Washington home for multiple generations. Their stories give Washington its distinctive character as both a national and local city.
With the inauguration of Barack Obama in 2009, a wave of change pulsed through the District and brought with it a new, youthful and invigorated DC. As the Obamas have settled into the White House, they’ve also made themselves at home in DC with visits to hot city eateries, cultural attractions and neighbourhood staples, bringing international attention a progressive city historically considered conservative by many. Now unofficially dubbed the “Capital of Cool,” the shift in DC’s atmosphere is shedding new light on the District’s appeal as a modern, cosmopolitan city.
California! The name has been held up like a dream since the gold rush of the mid-1800s. Today it..Florida Information
Located in the far south east of the United States Florida is the 4th most populous state in the US..Texas Information
Located in the central south of the United States Texas is the largest of the ‘Lower 48’ states..San Francisco Information
San Francisco is a unique city famous for Hollywood-style car chases, clanging cable cars..Honolulu Information
Home to the State Capitol, Honolulu is the vibrant epicenter of Hawaii. Here you’ll find..Las Vegas Information
Like a blanket of jewels glittering in the desert, the neon-lit playground of Las Vegas sparkles..Waikiki Information
Located on the south shore of Honolulu, the world-famous neighborhood of Waikiki was once a..Downtown Hilo Information
Downtown Hilo is Hawaii Island’s biggest small town featuring centuries-old wooden storefronts..Hawaii Volcanoes National Park Information
Watch the landscape change before your very eyes at Hawaii Volcanoes National Park. Located 30..Boston Information
Famous for its academic institutions and pivotal role in the American Revolution, Boston is the..North Shore Information
If there is such a thing as a perfect wave, you’ll likely find it on Oahu’s North Shore. The..Waimea Bay Information
Located on the legendary North Shore, Waimea Bay was an influential surf spot during the dawn of..Atlanta Information
Welcome to Atlanta, Georgia! Long known as a top destination for meetings and conventions, Atlanta..Austin Information
In 1839, five mounted scouts searched a broad area of wilderness seeking a site for a new capital..Empire State Building Information
Take in panoramic vistas of New York City from its highest viewing point, the Empire State Building..Kansas City Information
Kansas City offers a wealth of attractions. The striking landscape includes wide boulevards..Lansing Information
No matter the reason, or the season, Michigan's Capitol City offers unique, affordable attractions..Manhattan Information
Good things come in small packages - the City's tiniest borough packs enough iconic attractions and..Montgomery Information
Alley Entertainment Area Continues to Grow The Alley Entertainment District in downtown Montgomery..