February 7, 2013
As you already know, there’s no lesson next week. So I guess you might find time to revise the contents we’ve seen so far. As you know, the book New English File has a website which contains activities for all the aspects seen in each file. Below you can see what I’m talking about. Just click on the image and do the online activities. Remember that we’ve seen Files 1-3. Enjoy your carnival.
February 9, 2012
Today we saw this great video in class.
After watching the video, I wanted to find out where it came from and I’m not completely sure. It can be found on Eliot Glazer’s channel on Youtube, but I can’t find if it belongs to a collection. Reading the information about the video, the people starring are himself and his sister, Illana Glazer. The previous links are both their personal blogs, but they have both another site each with where they have their own web series.
Illana’s web series is called Broad City, and Eliot’s It Gets Betterish. I haven’t seen any of them, but seeing this video I bet they do have good stuff there.
Well, I showed this video and asked my students to write a dialogue using the expressions they heard, and here is the result. Hope you like it.
Javi, Débora, you are just great. Thank you very much.
December 13, 2011
This is a classic on this blog. Our famous lists of mistakes. This time it’s referred to the podcasts you recorded last week. We are going to include everything I promised.
First of all, here you are the presentation. Please read it, as I’ve added words to the sounds. After reading it, please follow the instructions given on the last slide.
Secondly, you can visit the link to the sound chart of our book, where you have the examples seen in class.
Now you can watch now again the video “We are sinking”, Remember that good pronunciation can save lives.
Then you can see what happens when you mispronounce a foreign language, yes, that nobody will understand what you mean.
Finally, I want you to pay attention to Fergie as she says “I can’t go any further than this”, you’ll see exactly how /ð/ is pronounced. Pay attention at 1:20.
October 27, 2011
This is my last discovery, a pronunciation dictionary where words are pronounced by native speakers. It includes all kinds of words, even proper names and it includes words in many different languages.
Do yo know more dictionaries like this one?
October 20, 2010
In internet you can find some web sites to help you with your pronunciation. In those pages, you just need to paste the text you want to hear and click the right button.
One of this pages is http://text-to-speech.imtranslator.net/speech.asp?dir=en. If you go to this page, you first need to paste or write a full text or sentence in the box. Then, click on ‘Say it’. Wait a couple of seconds and you will hear the text.
You have to make sure that the grammar and the spelling are correct, otherwise you won´t get the right pronunciation. It´s a good resource to paste sentences from a book or from internet.
Do you like this website? Do you know similar web pages? Please comment!