American Heritage® Dictionary of the English Language, Fourth Edition
- n. A musical instrument with a keyboard and metal plates struck by hammers that produce bell-like tones.
Century Dictionary and Cyclopedia
- n. A musical instrument, played from a keyboard of five octaves, in which the sound is produced by the blows of hammers upon steel plates placed over resonators of wood. It was invented by Mustel of Paris in 1886, and has been introduced into some orchestral and operatic scores.
- n. music a musical instrument consisting principally of a set of graduated steel plates struck with hammers that are activated by a keyboard.
GNU Webster's 1913
- n. (Mus.) a musical instrument consisting of graduated steel plates that are struck by hammers activated by a keyboard.
- n. a musical instrument consisting of graduated steel plates that are struck by hammers activated by a keyboard
- French célesta, from céleste, celestial, from Latin caelestis; see celestial. (American Heritage® Dictionary of the English Language, Fourth Edition)
“A '' 'celesta' '' or '' 'celeste' '' ([[France | French]]: '' heavenly '') is a percussion instrument with a piano-like keyboard, connected to hammers which strike a graduated set of steel plates suspended over wooden resonators.”
“Spine-tingling effects pour out of the orchestra pit: steamy strings, creepy celesta, slippery harp, fluttery piccolo, tender soprano and alto flutes, seductive bass and treble clarinets, and a battery of heart-palpitating percussion instruments.”
“In the far corner, meanwhile, is Biophilia's "gameleste" – a celesta rebuilt with brass to mimic the sounds of the south-east Asian gamelan.”
“Performed by the Chroma chamber orchestra on instruments as diverse as the guitar and celesta, the music is partly influenced by ethnographical recordings made in the Belgian Congo in the 1950s.”
“Biophilia" is built in large part on instruments Björk and her team invented, including a bronze keyboard that's a cross between a celesta and a gamelan, a digital pipe organ, a Tesla coil that replicates rumbling bass, and a series of 30-foot-tall sound-producing pendulums.”
“On his own version, Mr. Akinmusire plays the celesta with its chime like "heavenly" sound.”
“A celesta plays the "magical" music of the duplicating machine that empowers the German students.”
“On record, Mr. McCombs's band couches intricate lyricism in soft rock and piano balladry, but with sumptuous touches of arcane instruments like celesta, Hammond organ, and bass clarinet.”
“Each of the four movements presents a different emphasis on the combinations of instruments: The first is a brilliant muted fugue with strings and celesta, which Alsop held to a marvelously simmering restraint until the piano impatiently burst in, in the second movement, to show how things could sound if they got a little louder.”
“The program began with the Bartók piece - piano, celesta, and harp center stage with the orchestra divided into two separate ensembles on either side.”
These user-created lists contain the word ‘celesta’.
a reflection on :
Indo-European root stāk- to stand, place
words that evoke magic, mystery, mayhem, magnificence or anything else that glimmers in the grass
Looking for tweets for celesta.