- Health Library
- PetMD U
Potassium is similar to sodium and chloride in that it also works to maintain fluid balance and is necessary for muscle and nerve function. Deficiencies of potassium can lead to diarrhea, vomiting and other illnesses similar to sodium/chloride deficiencies. Without adequate potassium, the dog's heart will not be able to beat normally.
Sulfur is important in the maintenance of a dog's hair, skin, and nails. It assists wound healing and detoxifies the body. Skin conditions generally develop with sulfur deficiencies. Dietary sources of sulfur include eggs, fish, meat and molasses.
Even though they are used in extremely small amounts, trace minerals are also essential part of dog nutrition. Some of the more common trace minerals you may be familiar with include iron, zinc, copper, iodine, magnesium and selenium. Iron is important in oxygenation of red blood cells, energy production and maintenance of the immune system and is found in organ meats (liver), poultry, beans and red meats.
Zinc also supports the immune system, is important in skin and hair coat health and aids in protein digestion. Dietary sources of zinc include eggs, pork, liver, brewer's yeast and lamb meat. Copper is necessary for the body to properly use iron and it also plays a role in bone growth and maintenance. Sources of copper include whole grains, liver beans. Iodine is important in the production of thyroid hormones which regulate metabolism.
Selenium is another essential trace mineral that works with vitamin E to support immune system function. Manganese is necessary for the body’s utilization of certain vitamins (B1, C, E and biotin). Other trace minerals you may have heard of include nickel, molybdenum, aluminum, silicon, chromium, boron, cobalt and fluorine.
An element found in trace amounts in soil; closely related to sulfur
A type of fungus that produces buds
A bundle of fibers that are used in the process of sending impulses through the body
The group of processes that involve the use of nutrients by the body
A medical condition in which the body has lost fluid or water in excessive amounts
The product that is crated when bones are ground and dried.