Go 'Round the World with Travel Maps' at Central Library
Whether they depict the whole world or just one city, maps are more than a mere navigational tool.
They're also a treasure-trove of art and a rich source of knowledge, as demonstrated by Round the World with Travel Maps, showing at the Hong Kong Central Library Exhibition Gallery from April 16 to 29.
The exhibition is jointly presented by the Hong Kong Public Libraries, Marco Polo's Cartocell and the Lands Department. Admission is free.
The almost 300 displays include Western and Oriental travel maps and modern and ancient maps of Hong Kong. They run the gamut from the Ping Jiang Tu, an 800-year-old map from the Southern Song Dynasty, to the newest maps of the deep ocean floor.
The exhibition is organised under 10 themes:
Windows of the World -- Explorers began broadening the horizons of our world around 1400 AD. The 12 magnificent world maps in this collection will inspire you to stretch your own limits by exploring new markets and opportunities.
Cities of China -- Are you curious to know what Shanghai and Chongqing looked like during the Qing Dynasty, or locate Beijing's magnificent scenic spots? More than 80 city maps illustrate the development and evolution of China's great cities over 5,000 years.
Famous World Cities -- Maps of Tokyo, Melbourne, London, Rome, Paris, Zurich and New York.
Nations Around the World -- Tourist maps as promotional tools in China, Japan, Korea, the Philippines, New Zealand, the Middle East, Italy, Germany, Holland, Luxemburg, Greece and other countries.
Park of Dreams -- What is the most rewarding thing about travel? If your answer is turning dreams into reality, you'll enjoy these colourful hanging maps and ancient Chinese map scrolls, plus maps of the Swiss lakes, the Great Barrier Reef, Disneyland and other attractions.
Tourist Spots -- Travellers like to keep maps as souvenirs of the countries they visit. The ones collected here depict a number of ideal travel destinations, as well as some of the world's most famous universities, such as Cambridge, Oxford, Harvard, Yale and Princeton.
Scenic Landscape -- A must for people who love exploring untrodden nature. It features maps of the polar regions, mountains, rivers and seas, including the deep sea floor.
Transportation Maps -- Bus, metro, railroad, airline and highway route networks.
Provinces of China -- The expressways, railroads and special trunk roads in various Mainland provinces.
Pearl of the Orient -- Five kinds of Hong Kong maps, covering trails, countryside, roads, urban and town areas and air navigation charts. Visitors can also use the Map Archives Retrieval System to browse maps and aerial photos that provide an insight into Hong Kong's changing landscape.
In connection with the exhibition, special talks will be given on April 18, 19, 20 and 26 on the production, use and development of maps. All talks will be conducted in Cantonese and take place in Activity Room 1, G/F of the Central Library.
For enquiries about the exhibition and talks, call 2921 2648 or browse the website at www.hkpl.gov.hk
End/Friday, April 11, 2003