Compose a set of Theme and Variations
In addition to your theme, compose 5 variations.
Strive to make each variation distinctly different and musically interesting.
See the Theme & Variations Rubric for grading criteria.
Choose a theme. The melody should be a well-known tune (like "Pop Goes the Weasel"), the theme of a popular song or any other well-know melody. Refer to this Song List if you need some ideas. The theme should be at least 8 measures long. Your melody can certainly be longer.
Plan and list your "Variation strategy" - how you will handle each element in the 6 sections of your piece (including the statement of the theme). Elements will include harmonic progressions, mode, melody, rhythm, meter, accompaniment patterns, style, etc.
Score your theme with its accompaniment first. Make sure that your theme can stand alone, but that it is straight-forward. End your theme with a double bar (not a final double bar).
Use patterns for accompaniments and countermelodies. Think in a linear direction, as well as vertically. Play these parts separately and make sure they don't sound "random". This can happen when your only concern is consonant harmony.
Don't forget to double-check voice-leading, part-writing, and harmonic progressions
|When complete, print a hard copy to turn in during class |
|Rename your Finale file: YourNameVariations.mus|
E-mail the Finale file to me at firstname.lastname@example.org. Make sure, before you send it that your file has a .mus extension. DO NOT turn in your composition in more than one Finale File. Part of your grade is based upon the formatting of your composition
Do not write your piece in the key of "C".
The theme of your composition does not have to be stripped down and boring in order to vary it. It must have its own accompaniment. Each segment (your theme and then 5 more variations) should be able to stand alone as its own "mini" composition.
Make sure you supply sufficient harmonic material in every variation. Variations that can be played with 2 fingers probably need more work.
| ||Avoid closed harmony in the bass clef when more than an octave below the melody line in treble clef.|
One variation should contain chromatic harmonies (refer back to your notes from the first half of the semester). Label that variation as chromatic and provide a harmonic analysis (Roman numerals) of ALL chords in that variation. Inserting a few random accidentals does not constitute a chromatic variation.
|One variation should be written in a Classical style. Label that variation as Classical.|
|Correct voice-leading and part-writing rules must be observed (e.g., no parallel chords, doubled leading tones within a chord, etc.) |
|The entire composition must be notated on Finale (no exceptions). Part of your grade will be based on the appearance of your score.|
Include a title, yourself as composer, tempo indication, and dynamics
|Begin each of your variations on a new line. Go to the Finale page for instructions on how to start a new line for each variation. |
Label your theme as "Theme" and each variation as "Variation 1", "Variation 2", etc.