“Ayurveda medicines were integrated thousands of years ago into the human diet.”
Ayurveda medicines are considered as an alternative medicinal approach by Western medicine standards. Western standards consider Ayurveda medicines to be complementary and alternative medicine (CAM) in its holistic approach to treating the body. The philosophy of Ayurveda medicine offers the ancient Ayurveda medicine science concept of body/mind balance. Ayurveda medicine treatment consists of Ayurvedic herbs introduced into the body through a balanced Ayurveda medicine diet, herbal supplements, massage and steam therapy.
Myth #1: Products prepared from herbal extracts or concentrates are superior
Herbal extracts and concentrates can actually cause unwanted side effects in the same way that western pharmaceutical drugs. This is because the natural balance of the whole herb is lost when extracted or concentrated.
Myth #2: Higher Potency is more effective
Indian Ayurvedic herbs are sourced more than 1100 medicinal plants. Most of these Ayurvedic herbs are harvested from the wild for maximum potency. Ayurvedic medical science also describe the need for different dosages based on the age of the patient. The ancient Vedic texts state that an individual from birth to sixteen years of age is in Bal (child) state, sixteen to the age of seventy as Madhya ( middle age). In all, there are seven basic bodily stages that dictate the dosages of Ayurvedic herbs. Medicinal plants used in Ayurveda treatments are based on individual characteristics and emphasize that each individual is different and needs different dosages of herbal treatments. It is also a science based on frequency and consistency in an Ayurvedic medicine diet.
Myth #3: Growing conditions of the herbs does not matter
Climate and geography, as well as the method of growing does affect the potency of medicinal plants used in Ayurveda. Many Ayurvedic herbs are found to be indigenous to India and are treasured for their healing properties. The highest quality Ayurveda products are herbal compositions which are made up from organic herbs, flowers, stem and leaves, roots and fruits, which are grown organically without the use of chemicals or pesticides.
Myth #4: Testing for contamination is not necessary
Ayurveda Medicines should follow closely the ancient processing method described in the Vedic texts for making Ayurvedic herbs. The Ayurvedic herbs, fruits, leaves, spices, oils flowers are composites are used to create natural formulations with no artificial properties. These Ayurvedic medicines contain natural binders like gum acacia. The highest quality Ayurveda medicines are tested for the presence of heavy metals, microbial content and aflatoxin prior to shipment. This is to ensure Ayurveda products only consist of property identified Ayurvedic herbs of the highest quality in order to meet the increasing demand for Ayurveda products. Ayurveda products are monitored with a quality control process at every step of production, from the actual procurement and identification of these indigenous herbs, to their final destination.
Myth #5: Plant identification is not necessary
Plant identification is extremely important in all areas of Ayurvedic medicine science. These Ayurveda products are processed and sold as dietary supplements and as ethnic traditional medicines used in the philosophy of Ayurveda medicine. Each of the herbs, roots, oils, leaves and flowers of these Indian plants are required to be identified using an HPLC chromatographic process. Medicinal plants used in Ayurveda are Ayurvedic herbs, oils, plant extracts and other botanical properties found in ayurveda products. To insure their potency and effectiveness, it is vitally important that all medicinal plants used in ayurveda herbal products are grown properly, processed according to ancient traditions and properly tested, manufactured and packaged.
Living Shanti offers Sri Sri Ayurvedic medicines and Ayurveda products that assist in maintaining healthy digestion, elimination, immunity, cardiac function, mental clarity, bronchial function, liver function and vitality. To know more about Ayurveda supplements and herbal Ayurveda remedies, visit http://www.LivingShanti.com