Bringing People Together
Murals welcome visitors and students alike, personalize the students’ environment, inspire school spirit and enhance satisfaction with their surroundings – making school a comfortable and cheerful place. Since attitude influences learning, improved academic achievement may be seen.
Long term mural residencies, minimum 10 days, offer schools the opportunity to provide a school-wide project with a choice of minimal or maximum student and teacher participation.
Schools may elect to have students involved in the development of the mural, helping design and paint it, or having an artist-in-residence create the mural with a small group of students assisting; while other classes take “field trips” to the work site to gain an understanding of the process and ask questions of the artist.
Both types of mural residencies begin with a planning meeting to determine the school’s goals and theme for the mural.
A mural can be used to communicate an idea or vision, to highlight the school name, to recognize a special event, or as a lasting gift from graduating students.
Mural residencies are also a beneficial project for municipalities, as a beautification strategy, reflecting the culture and history of the town and promoting community engagement and civic pride.
Corporations might consider a mural residency, as a team building event or a diversity awareness project. Encourage creativity, cooperation, communication, and gain a lasting piece of art for your office - a reminder of what can be accomplished when everyone works together.
Grades: Elementary, Secondary & Adult
Curriculum Connections: Language Arts, Math, Social Studies
Lyric Soprano Yvette Lewis offers an exciting residency that is an opera immersion experience for preschoolers.
The 5-day program begins with her assembly, Little Red Hen and The Three Bears, designed to provide an introduction to the “singing story.”
Yvette holds interactive workshops during the week with small groups of children working on the school’s choice of opera - The Three Little Pigs or The Gingerbread Man.
She shows the preschoolers a fun-filled, easy way to learn new words and melodies, and how to play roles and instruments to accompany the singing. The children will also complete art projects throughout the week, creating their own opera folders.
The residency culminates with a performance, where the children proudly present what they have learned.