The Red-necked Wallaby can be distinguished from other wallabies by its white cheek markings and red colouring on the neck. The rest of its body fur is grey to reddish in colour with a white or pale grey abdomen. Their muzzle, paws and toes are black in colour. The Red-necked Wallaby is protected by law in all states of Australia.
The Red-necked Wallaby ranges throughout the eastern parts of Australia from the Queensland - New South Wales border area, right through to South Australia. It is also found in Tasmania. Found in subtropical, cool temperate, wet and dry sclerophyll forests, and woodland with adjacent grassy areas, this nocturnal animal spends most of the day resting amongst dense understory within the forest.
Usually this wallaby is a solitary animal, but may be seen grazing from late afternoon to dawn in grassy areas in groups. The Red-necked Wallaby eats mainly grasses and herbs, and likes areas that are partially cleared with surrounding patches of sheltered forest.
A female is able to breed at the age of around 14 months while a male comes into sexual maturity at around 19 months of age. The pouch life for a Red-necked Wallaby joey is about 9 months, with the joey continuing to suckle till it is around 12-15 months of age.
Red-necked Wallaby Profiles
Here at Australia Zoo, keepers are said not to have favourites among their animals, however some just have special places in our hearts. In the kangaroo and wallaby section, that special place is taken by Annie, one of the Red-necked Wallabies. Annie arrived at the Zoo after she was raised by a carer from when she was only a couple of months old. Her mother was tragically hit by a car, but luckily she was found unharmed in the pouch and taken to a carer to be raised.
Annie was given to the Zoo, where she has grown to be one of the favourites among our visitors too. With her love of humans, Annie can be seen throughout the day hopping over to visitors where she eagerly awaits a pat and, hopefully, a handful of food. Each morning Annie awaits the keepers at the front gate knowing that morning feed time is soon to come, however her love of food has also earned her the name of 'Fatty BumBum'. Annie, even though not human, has become part of the kangaroo and wallaby keepers' lives and hopefully will be hopping around her enclosure for many years to come.