THE women’s liberation movements of the 1960s and 1970s changed Western societies as profoundly as the struggles to abolish slavery and to ensure voting rights for blacks and women. Yet the women who led the charge are largely unsung, their voices unheard.
This is about to change. To mark International Women's Day, the British Library has unveiled an historic collection of interviews with the women who radically re-imagined gender roles a generation ago. The “Sisterhood and After” project features 420 hours of interviews with feminists from across Britain who helped launch the fight against sexual discrimination at work and at home.
Susie Orbach, a psychotherapist and author of the 1978 “Fat Is a Feminist Issue”, says, for example, that the pressure to conform to beauty standards is worse now than when she first wrote her book. “I think from then until now people [have thought] it trivial, despite the fact that it is absolutely marauding the lives of our girls and increasingly boys,” she says. “We’re exporting it all over the world, and creating body hatred in all of these other countries.”
Equal pay, however, is one issue "that actually does make women sit up,” says Rowena Arshad, a member of the first black women’s group in Scotland, who campaigned for passage of the Sex Discrimination Act of 1975. “They don’t understand why research can show a woman lawyer and a male lawyer starting at the same time, the same qualification, and by the time she’s 40 she’s still a lawyer, and he’s a senior partner.”
The women’s liberation movement in Britain was a collective enterprise that grew from the experience of many different individuals. “The recognition that the things we felt were social phenomena was incredibly liberating,” says Catherine Hall, a feminist historian. “The frustrations of motherhood, the sense of isolation, the boredom, the being at the beck and call of somebody else, the loss of independence—sharing it was so fantastic.”
Such life histories also remind us that each person can have an impact, says Polly Russell, the library’s lead curator for social science. “These women did change the way all of us live our lives. The things we take for granted today—going to university, working—are entirely because these women articulated a different way of living in the world.”
The trailblazers on tape include Jenni Murray, a broadcaster, Sue Lopez, a female footballer, Zoë Fairbairns, a writer and former member of the Spare Rib magazine collective, and Jan McKenley, an activist for abortion rights. Documenting the camaraderie and joy that animated these so-called “Second Wave” feminists was a delight, says Ms Russell.
Jo Robinson tells laughingly of throwing vegetables at the press during the Miss World protest, and shouting: “We’re not ugly, we’re not beautiful—we’re angry!” Sue O’Sullivan, co-editor of “Serious Pleasure”, a lesbian erotica collection, notes dryly: “If we ever had to read another story about breasts the size of melons and waves breaking and torrents of orgasms, we would all die, we were so bored.”
Una Kroll, now 87, describes her zest at becoming a deaconess in the Church of England, and later one of the first female Anglican priests at the age of 71. “I rejoiced when I was made a deaconess and I was menstruating. I loved it, because there was a full, live woman preaching the gospel, and she was menstruating. She was dirty and unclean. Well! You know, that kind of thing had to be counted.”