Boys and girls in early adolescence don’t go to school to learn. They go to middle school to be with their friends. Friendship becomes a learning curve. It also serves as ample reason for preteen angst. Does anyone/everyone like me? To be or not to be… liked is the universal quandary during this stage of life. Unfortunately, kids between the ages of 10 and 15 see their own worth only as it is reflected in the eyes of their peers or their friends. When so much rides on friendship, it’s hardly surprising that parents get into the friends act.
Over the past decade, many parents have asked me friends-related questions such as “Is one friend enough for my son?” or “Why doens’t my child have any friends when he’s such a great kid?!” or “My 13-year-old has hundreds of friends on Facebook, but these are not like real friends, right?” What well-meaning parents are really trying to ascertain is how many friends are enough for the well-being of preteens.
The term “friend” has become muddy at the dawn of the 21st century. In the old days, or at least according to the dictionary, a friend is “a person whom one knows well and is fond of; an ally, a supporter or sympathizer.” Now in the age of social networking, “friend” is not only a noun but a verb. Facebook aficiandos click to “friend” people thus allowing them entrance into their online world. Those “friended” are called friends, so it’s easy to accumulate huge numbers of virtual friends. These online folks may become allies or act in supportive ways through their communiqués but they certainly at the start of electronic hook-ups are not persons whom one knows well.
Is having 622 BFFs harmful?
The 622 BFF line comes from Peggy Orenstein’s book Cinderella Ate My Daughter in which she raises red flags about the too-many-friends phenomenon. She brings to the table Adriana Manago, a Los Angeles researcher at the Children’s Digital Media Center, who studied college students’ behavior on MySpace and Facebook. Explaining this research and its impact on social media relationships among kids, Orenstein explains that online, “The self becomes a brand. Instead of intimates with whom you interact for the sake of the exchange, friends become your consumers, an audience for whom you perform.” Sites such as Facebook and YouTube, and dot com pages that many kids now create for themselves encourage boys and girls to create a persona for their on line audience. Chatting on line with that audience may be about camaraderie, but it is not the same thing as friendship.
The risk of having hoards of Facebook friends or Twitter followers lies in this generation’s tendency toward becoming self-centered, even narcissistic. There’s an old saying that in order to have a friend, you have to be a friend. If a preteen is constantly taking and posting pictures of her personal escapades, blogging about private experiences and planning the next episode of her onscreen life, s/he is not engaging in a two way dialogue. You need to ask the other person, “What’s new?” or “How are you doing?” Then you need to listen and care about the answers. It’s not to say this can’t be done online with friends — but not with 622 BFFs.
Is One Real Friend Enough?
Middle schools are like caste systems. There is a hierarchy wherein popular kids rule the roost, wannabees try to get into the top, a large group of ordinary kids populate the middle, and a few loners operate solo on the bottom rung. The cool boys and girls have lots more friends. However, these friends are not always loyal and can turn into backstabbers at a moment’s notice. Popularity is a competitive, mercurial sport. The kids who are not socially invested with status actually have more freedom to find a friend or two. Better yet, that friend may be more trustworthy. Their social lives are more stable.
Parents want their preteens to be popular because these kids tend to be the best athletes, the best looking, the best students, the best at socializing, the most talented stars of school productions. In fact, having the most social engagements on the calendar has a dark side. With plenty of friends and parties, popular boys and girls have a higher likelihood of risky behaviors like drinking, substance abuse and early sexual experimentation. All those friends can multiply the chances for getting into trouble.