Criminal record is an archive of an individuals criminal history and typically checked by potential employers, landlords to screen persons honesty. The facts kept in this database are distinct for various nations and even varies regionally within a country. Typically most of the nations include information associated with non obliterating legal violations and about traffic violations like speeding and driving while intoxicated. But in some nations once criminal history includes the real convictions where the person is guilty and sentenced by a court and in some other countries includes arrests, charges dismissed, charges waiting, and also information about the charges for which the person is found innocent in a court of law.
Searching for Criminal record checks are mainly two types they are standard and vulnerable sector.
1. Vulnerable sector,
A vulnerable criminal record check is associated with minors of less than 18 years of age and considers factors like age, physical or mental unfitness and other inadvertencies and includes whether they are temporarily or permanently in a condition of dependency or about the greater threat of being abused by individuals in authority.
2. Standard sector,
Standard background record check is operated at 4 levels. Level 1 is the most fundamental check and on the other hand level 4 is the most far reaching check. Criminal record check cannot be performed without the consent of the person and can be done by only authorized individuals belonging to police department.
a. ln level 1 the records of convicted criminal offenses are examined.
b. In level 2 the records of Level 1 and arresting charges are checked.
c. In level 3 the records of Level 2 and charges that have not been dismissed are checked.
d. Level 4 check includes all the records of Level 3 and also examines regional police databases, court and law administering agency databases.
Criminal violations can be acquitted by the federal government of each country as concluded by the crime associated according to the Criminal Records Act. By the crime associated according to the Criminal Records Act.Tags: online court records, check criminal records, online criminal background check