Posts published by Andrea Perelman
In this lesson, students consider how pivotal moments affect the course of history. They then create annotated timelines of important moments in the history of the United States. Learning is synthesized by writing comprehensive reports highlighting one event and speculating on how the course of history might have been different if one significant moment had been altered.
In this lesson, students explore the concepts and content necessary to debate whether or not schools should regulate the quantity or type of food and beverages students consume, and develop position papers.
In this lesson, students will learn about and create models of the earth’s layers, and then synthesize their learning by writing short stories about journeys to the center of the earth.
In this lesson, students fill out a quiz about congressional leaders and select a historic majority leader to research in pairs and create charts about. For homework, they write letters to a current majority or minority leader with suggestions about leadership on a current issue.
In this lesson, students share opinions about the legitimacy of eavesdropping on citizens. They then debate the main issues raised in the article and write letters to Congress expressing their points of view.
In this lesson, each student will consider a special adult who plays a significant role in his or her life. Through peer interviews students reflect on their feelings about this important person, then write newspaper articles sharing their discoveries.
In this lesson, students share opinions about significant figures in music history. They then work in groups to curate an exhibition of hip-hop music and history by collecting artifacts that represent relevant people, places, events and ideas.
In this lesson, students will examine current events and American history as they relate to an Op-Ed piece. They then write essays from the perspective of a modern-day explorer to further reflect upon the main ideas presented by the author.
In this lesson, students will consider ways the public interacts with the news media, and participate in a blog simulation using current news stories.