|http://ghr.nlm.nih.gov/ A service of the U.S. National Library of Medicine®|
The official name of this gene is “N-acetylglutamate synthase.”
NAGS is the gene's official symbol. The NAGS gene is also known by other names, listed below.
The NAGS gene provides instructions for making the enzyme N-acetylglutamate synthase. This enzyme is needed for the urea cycle, a series of reactions that occurs in liver cells. The urea cycle processes excess nitrogen, generated when protein is used by the body, into a compound called urea that is excreted by the kidneys. Excreting the excess nitrogen prevents it from accumulating in the form of ammonia, which is toxic, especially to the nervous system.
N-acetylglutamate synthase controls the production of a compound called N-acetylglutamate in the mitochondria, the energy-producing centers in cells. N-acetylglutamate is necessary to activate the enzyme carbamoyl phosphate synthetase I. This enzyme controls the first step of the urea cycle, in which excess nitrogen compounds are incorporated into the cycle to be processed.
Approximately 12 NAGS gene mutations have been identified in people with N-acetylglutamate synthase deficiency. A mutated NAGS gene may result in an N-acetylglutamate synthase enzyme that is shorter than normal or the wrong shape, or may prevent the enzyme from being produced at all.
The shape of an enzyme affects its ability to control a chemical reaction. If the N-acetylglutamate synthase enzyme is damaged or missing, N-acetylglutamate will be produced in lower-than-normal amounts, or not at all. This shortage of N-acetylglutamate interferes with proper activation of carbamoyl phosphate synthetase I, preventing it from fulfilling its role in the urea cycle. Excess nitrogen is not converted to urea for excretion, and ammonia accumulates in the body. This accumulation causes neurological problems and other signs and symptoms of N-acetylglutamate synthase deficiency.
Cytogenetic Location: 17q21.31
Molecular Location on chromosome 17: base pairs 42,082,031 to 42,086,435
The NAGS gene is located on the long (q) arm of chromosome 17 at position 21.31.
More precisely, the NAGS gene is located from base pair 42,082,031 to base pair 42,086,435 on chromosome 17.
See How do geneticists indicate the location of a gene? (http://ghr.nlm.nih.gov/handbook/howgeneswork/genelocation) in the Handbook.
You and your healthcare professional may find the following resources about NAGS helpful.
You may also be interested in these resources, which are designed for genetics professionals and researchers.
See How are genetic conditions and genes named? (http://ghr.nlm.nih.gov/handbook/mutationsanddisorders/naming) in the Handbook.
ammonia ; compound ; deficiency ; enzyme ; excretion ; gene ; mitochondria ; nervous system ; neurological ; phosphate ; protein ; toxic ; urea
You may find definitions for these and many other terms in the Genetics Home Reference Glossary (http://www.ghr.nlm.nih.gov/glossary).
The resources on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Users seeking information about a personal genetic disease, syndrome, or condition should consult with a qualified healthcare professional. See How can I find a genetics professional in my area? (http://ghr.nlm.nih.gov/handbook/consult/findingprofessional) in the Handbook.