The following is a teacher example of a
standard, 350-word, essay. The essay was written with the
participation of the English 10 students attending the Wednesday
Living Without TV
Television is an important
part of modern life, one we can hardly imagine living without.
If I were forced to live without television, however, I would
pursue other interests, socialize with friends and family, and
exercise more often.
Without TV in my home, I
would have time to pursue other interests. For example, I love
to play the piano and without the distraction of TV, I would
have more time to practice. At other times, I could paint
portraits of my family and friends. Painting takes a lot of time
and if I had no television, I would surely have enough to
complete my work. Time to follow my interests would be much
easier to find if someone came and took away my TV.
Not only that, but I could find much more
time to socialize with my friends and family if my TV
disappeared. At my house, the TV is always on during dinner. As
a result, we rarely have conversation with one another. Without
the TV to interfere with us, we might have time to tell each
other about what happened to us that day. In addition, we could
more easily find more time to talk with old friends on the
telephone. Thus, social time would increase with no TV.
Most importantly, lacking a TV would
give me a big increase in the available time for exercise in my
life. With extra time, I could make the long journey to Bowen
Island and go on an enjoyable hike in the mountains. Another
exercise I could do more often would be to go swimming or to an
aerobics class at Bonsor Community Centre near my home. Having
more exercise would provide big health benefits to me; watching
more TV will only develop my bottom muscle.
Exercising frequently, socializing with
friends and family, and pursuing other interests would be the
benefits of having no TV at my home. Just think how much more
time I would have if I got rid of my computer, too!
Back to Top