Partnerships for Innovation
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE
July 20, 2012
While many of their friends were using their break to enjoy various summer activities, 36 exceptional high school students along with 14 teachers from across 12 Appalachian states, chose to spend two-weeks of their summer vacation participating in a hands-on camp focused on math, science and technology.
The Appalachian Regional Commission, Oak Ridge National Laboratory and Oak Ridge Associated Universities hosted the 23rd annual High School Summer and Math-Science-Technology Institute from July 7-20, during which the students and teachers worked on cutting-edge science projects with mentors at ORNL and participated in a variety of East Tennessee tours and activities.
Students were nominated by their state governor and chosen to participate in the program by ARC. Students were selected based on their potential to excel in math and science, to continue in higher learning, and to influence others in their communities as the leaders of tomorrow.
Since 2000, the program has provided a total of 471 students and 199 teachers with in-lab learning experiences at one of the nation’s premier national laboratories. In addition, they have had the opportunity to visit some of the area’s most popular educational and recreational attractions.
The two-week camp kicked off with a ropes course at Mountain Challenge on the campus of Maryville College and a guided tour of the Oak Ridge National Laboratory. Students and teachers were then divided into 10 teams led by mentors and scientists.
The students were assigned projects with topics that included supercomputers, the design of novel polymeric materials using computer simulation, visualization of 3D molecular structures using X-Ray and neutron scattering, fabrication and testing of fiber reinforced plastic composites and robotic systems engineering.
The teachers divided into four research teams that focused on chemical sciences, physics, environmental sciences, and materials sciences.
During this year’s institute, the participants visited the Museum of Appalachia, the American Museum of Science and Energy and various department tours at the University of Tennessee. At ORNL, the institute’s attendees also toured the Spallation Neutron Source, the supercomputing facilities, the Center for Nanophase Materials Science, and the Graphite Reactor.
The summer institute concluded with a ceremony attended by ARC Federal Co-Chair Earl F. Gohl and ORNL Associate Lab Director Jim Roberto. Gohl praised the summer science institute, noting that “it is through programs and camps such as this that we invest in the future of America and begin to excite young scientists and engineers who will someday solve our nation’s most critical issues.” During the ceremony, the students and teachers gave presentations and demonstrations of their projects.
In addition to the institute, ARC, ORNL and ORAU hosted a Middle School Science Camp for 25 students from 11 Appalachian states. These students also presented their research projects at a closing ceremony, which focused on solar energy, biofuels, and wind.
The Appalachian Regional Commission is a unique federal-state partnership established by Congress in 1965 to bring Appalachia into the mainstream of the American economy. Through development of the 3,090 mile Appalachian Development Highway System and a range of development programs in areas such as education, training, health care, telecommunications, entrepreneurship, job creation and basic infrastructure, ARC programs help reduce isolation and improve the lives and economic opportunities of the 24 million people living in 420 counties across 13 states that make up Appalachia.
Oak Ridge National Laboratory is managed by UT-Battelle for the Department of Energy’s Office of Science.
Oak Ridge Associated Universities (ORAU) provides innovative scientific and technical solutions to advance research and education, protect public health and the environment, and strengthen national security. Through specialized teams of experts, unique laboratory capabilities, and access to a consortium of more than 100 major Ph.D-granting institutions, ORAU works with federal, state, local, and commercial customers to advance national priorities and serve the public interest. A 501(c)(3) nonprofit corporation and federal contractor, ORAU manages the Oak Ridge Institute for Science and Education (ORISE) for the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE).