"The Upanisad says – “Isavasyam Idam Sarvam – All that is here is the divine”. Hence treat nature with reverence!"
Vedanta refers to that part of the Veda known also as the Upanisads. It is a philosophical tradition that is concerned with Self realization, through which one understands the ultimate nature of the Self, God and Creation.
The study of prasthana-trayi is the classical form of study of Vedanta in the Vedic teaching tradition . The learning of the scriptures is based on the commentary of Adi Shankaracharya on the prasthana-trayi. The three components of study are: the ten Upanisads, the Bhagavad Gita and the Brahmasutras,.
The Upanisads are considered the essence of all the Vedas and the philosophy in the Upanishads describe the one absolute reality Brahman as the truth of the Self, God and Creation.
The Bhagavad Gita is considered to be an "Upanisad" in the Vedantic tradition. The text is given in the Mahabharata epic and plays a significant role in the learning tradition of the Vedic scriptures.
The Brahmasutras of sage Vyasa is based on the Upanishads. They are cryptic statements of Vedantic philosophy which have been elaborately commented upon by Adi Shankaracharya, a highly revered master in the lineage of Vedantic teachers of the tradition.
Adi Shankaracharya, a prominent link in the lineage of the teaching tradition of Vedanta, has written commentaries in Sanskrit on the prasthana-trayi. Since the contents of the above works are often found in enigmatic language, they have been open to various interpretations. Several scholars have interpreted the Upanisads, the Bhagavad Gita and the Brahmasutras according to their own understanding. Adi Shankaracharya made significant contribution in giving extensive commentaries on the prasthana-trayi texts. His interpretations revealing the intent of the texts in Advaita, the vision of Oneness inspite of the seeming duality in the creation, has brought great revival and hope in the lives of millions of spiritual aspirants around the globe.
Panini, considered to be the father of linguists, gave the concept of meta-language and the human civilization a great work of 4,000 cryptic statements (sutras) called the Ashtadhyayi, which reveals the mechanics of the Sanskrit language. This system of grammar, produced over 5000 years ago, stands to this day unmatched in originality and analytical subtlety.
Swami Siddhabodhananda is an erudite scholar of classical Sanskrit language and a respected teacher of Vedanta and Sanskrit for over three decades. His Vedanta teachings through the prasthana-trayi texts as well the classical Paniniyan Sanskrit classes, have trained hundreds of spiritual seekars for the past twenty years, many of whom are teachers of Vedanta and Sanskrit in India and abroad. These teachings were offered by him in 3 year residential Vedanta and Sanskrit courses in India and USA.
Today, for global outreach with the help of modern communications, Sri Swamiji is currently available to teach the prasthana-trayi to spiritual seekars. The teachings will be offered globally to small groups of people through Skype classes as listed below. Kindly contact us for details regarding registration of these free online classes, which are being offered as a Service to the Vedantic Tradition.
Purna Vidya offers Interactive Web-teachings of Swami Siddhabodhananda through
Copyright to purnavidya.org Developed by Tishansoft Consultancy