10 Holiday Tips for Kids
Each year, December brings a month filled with holidays and celebrations complete with a variety of gift giving traditions, and—to the glee of kids, parents and teachers alike—school vacations. Before you enjoy the break from school, make sure you check out our list of holiday tips to keep you and your family safe and healthy this holiday season. You can also get holiday tips for grown ups at USA.gov and in Spanish at GobiernoUSA.gov.
Give Gifts From the Heart
Do you need gift ideas? Don't feel pressure to spend a lot of money. The best gifts show the person that you know them well and like them a lot. Visit this cool Gift Giving Guide for a list of low-cost ways to give great gifts.
With Santa Tracker you can follow Santa on his Christmas Eve journey in Google Maps or Google Earth. Explore YouTube videos and photos from each place Santa visits and track his route to watch him fly around the world.
Choose Tradition Over Material Things
Make this holiday season more about your family and less about material things. Instead of creating a wish list of gifts you would like, try to help your family understand the spirit of giving by focusing on family traditions.
Learn the Mysteries of Winter Weather
Holiday weather can be the most fun part of the season. Whether it's snowing, raining, or sleeting, you can have fun while you learn about winter weather. Discover the combination of ingredients that's necessary for a winter storm to develop.
Eat and Stay Healthy During the Holidays
During the holidays, yummy food and tasty treats are everywhere. It would be easy to let healthy eating habits slide, but holidays can still be healthy. Visit Kids.gov for some tips to help you and your family stay on track with good eating habits. And don't forget to wash your hands with soap and water for 20 seconds. This will help you from spreading germs.
Have More Fun Making Dinner
Dinner with your family during the holidays is always fun, but helping get everything ready for the big meal can be a lot of fun too. You can help plan the menu, set the table, and lend a hand in the kitchen. Get more ideas on how you can help make your holiday dinner even more special at Kids.gov.
Go Green and Help Save Our Planet
The holidays are a time of celebration but that doesn't mean we have to be wasteful. Green can be your holiday color and you can help save our planet. Visit Green Your Holiday Scene to get smart ideas on how you and your family can go green this season.
Be a Smart Shopper
During the holiday season there are lots of great sales, but just because you see it doesn't mean you have to buy it. Following the crowd can be expensive. Instead, invent your own style. You don't have to always own the same things as everybody else.There are ways of getting what you want without paying a lot for it. Find out what kind of spender you are and get more tips on how to shop smart.
Help Others by Donating to a Charity
The holidays are a time of giving and receiving. Talk to your parents or teachers about giving a donation to a charity. Yes, you can give money but there are lots of ways you can help others. By giving your time and energy, you could help raise money or become a volunteer. No matter what you are interested in, there's probably a charity that helps support something you think is important. For more ideas on how you can get involved, visit Kids.gov.
Keep Your Pets Safe During the Holidays
There are lots of fun things going on during the holiday season. You may have decorations, plants, and foods that usually are not around the rest of the year. Some of these holiday items can be harmful to your pets. Visit Kids.gov for advice on how you can protect your pets.