High-Risk Pregnancy - Fetal Movement Counting
What is fetal movement counting?
Fetal movement counting, often called kick counting, is a way a mother can help monitor the movements of her unborn baby by counting the number of kicks in a certain time period.
By 20 weeks gestation, most women are able to feel their baby's movements. But, movements vary in frequency, strength, and patterns depending on the maturity of the fetus. Generally, most fetuses have circadian (biologically timed) activity rhythms and tend to be more active in the evening hours, beginning as early as the second trimester. Hiccups are quite common, and a fetus may be more active about an hour after the mother eats due to the increase in blood glucose (sugar) in the mother's blood.
Fetal movement is one indicator of fetal health. Contrary to a common myth, it is not normal for a fetus to stop moving with the onset of labor. Although the average number of kicks is about four to six per hour, each fetus and mother are different. Each woman should find the usual pattern and number of movements for her individual pregnancy. A change in the normal pattern or number of fetal movements may indicate the fetus is under stress.
How is fetal movement counting done?
Consult your physician about the importance of fetal movement counting for your individual pregnancy.
Set aside the same time each day to do the counting. After a meal is often a good time.
Write down the number of times you feel the baby kick or move in one hour. After several days, you may find the baby usually moves about the same number of times per hour - this becomes your baseline number.
If your baby is not moving as much as usual, or takes longer to move in the usual length of time, or has stopped moving, call your physician right away. Other testing can be done to check the condition of the baby.
Click here to view the
Online Resources of Pregnancy, Birth, and Baby Center
Disclaimer - This content is reviewed periodically and is subject to change as new health information becomes available. The information provided is intended to be informative and educational and is not a replacement for professional evaluation, advice, diagnosis or treatment by a healthcare professional. © 2009 Staywell Custom Communications.