- Landscape Standout
- Brilliant Fall Colors turning yellow, orange, and red
- Deer Resistant: Seldom Severely Damaged
- Grows 60' to 75' high with 40 to 50' spread
- Zones 3 to 8
- Can't Ship to: AK, AZ, HI
Zones 3 - 8
The Sugar Maple can be expected to grow in the zones shown in color in the arborday.org zone map.VIEW MAP
The Sugar Maple falls into the following type(s): Ornamental Trees, Shade Trees
60' - 75' High
The Sugar Maple grows to be 60' - 75' feet in height.
40' - 50' Spread
The Sugar Maple has a spread of about 40' - 50' at full maturity.
Slow to Medium Growth
This tree grows at a slow to medium growth rate. [More about this.]
This maple does well in full sun, partial shade.
Deep, well drained, acidic to slightly alkaline soil
This maple has oval, rounded shape.
The Sugar Maple tree is one of America's most loved trees. Here is a tree that lives to serve! Perhaps it is best known for its syrup, or Syrop as the French explorers called it when they found Native Americans enjoying this spring delight. Today, about two million gallons of the liquid gold support an important rural industry in the United States. Its gifts include shade and fall beauty that are unparalleled in park and home landscapes. Finally, as one last service during its sojourn on earth, Sugar Maple as firewood has few rivals - it splits easily, gives off an enormous amount of heat, produces few sparks, and ends in fine, rich ashes that pioneers turned into soap but today can enrich gardens.
Sugar Maples are commonly browsed by white-tailed deer, moose, and snowshoe hare. Squirrels feed on the seeds, buds, twigs, and leaves.
The wood of the Sugar Maple tree has always been highly valued for furniture because of its beauty, and for products ranging from flooring to bowling pins thanks to its extreme hardness. During the 2001 baseball season, Barry Bonds switched from the traditional Ash wood baseball bat to one made of Maple and hit 73 home runs, a new record! In 1663, chemist Robert Boyle informed the Europeans about the tree in the new world that produced a sweet substance and John Smith was among the first settlers who remarked about the Native American's sugar processing and the fact that they used the product for barter. It has been used for medicine because of its bone-building phosphates that enhance calcium retention.
Prefers moist soil conditions but has moderate drought resistance.
This trees leaves are 3 to 5 inches across with 5, or rarely 3, distinctive lobes. Autumn coloration is a striking red and yellow.
This tree produces two winged seeds on a single stem, each approximately 1-1/4 to 1-1/2 inches long.
The Sugar Maple is a large, round, majestic tree that will serve as a landscape standout.
|Spring Shipping||Fall Shipping|
When you order trees from The Arbor Day Foundation, your order is guaranteed to arrive in a good, healthy condition or we'll replace them at no charge. Your trees will be shipped at a suitable time for planting.
Each tree is guaranteed to grow, or we'll replace it at one half the original price, plus shipping and handling.
The benefits of bare-root trees
Our trees are delivered with natural bare roots which have been dipped in hydrating gel prior to shipment to keep the roots moist and healthy. As their abundant, fibrous roots aren't confined by a container, bare-root trees get off to a more vigorous start compared to containerized roots which typically need more time to adjust to transplanting. Bare-root trees typically surpass the size of larger containerized trees in only a few years.