Stay connected with NASA's human exploration activities in and beyond low Earth orbit.
From the time of our birth, humans have felt a primordial urge to explore -- to blaze new trails, map new lands, and answer profound questions about ourselves and our universe.
Find reports, briefings and materials from Human Exploration and Operations committees, conferences and forums.
Informing and educating the public about NASA's plans for a new era in space exploration. Find educational materials, visit traveling exhibits, request a NASA speaker and more.
Leadership and management of NASA space operations related to human exploration in and beyond low Earth orbit.
NASA's Commercial Crew Program partners shard plans to launch U.S. astronauts to low-Earth orbit from Space Coast during a National Space Club ...› Read More
NASA's Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter is yielding information about the radiation environment humans will encounter as they venture into deep space.› Read More
Astronaut Dan Burbank recently returned to the Kennedy Space Center and spoke about his experiences during five months aboard the International Space ...› Read More
06.06.13 - NASA's Orion crew module successfully passed its static loads tests on Wednesday.
06.06.13 - NASA has entered into a partnership agreement with Craig Technologies to maintain an inventory of unique processing and manufacturing equipment for future mission support at the agency's Kennedy Space Center in Florida.
05.06.13 - NASA Associate Administrator Robert Lightfoot reported on the space agency's current and future initiatives during an employee briefing on June 4.
06.14.13 - Deputy Administrator Lori Garver and other senior NASA officials will discuss the progress being made on NASA's mission to capture, redirect, and explore an asteroid June 18.
06.06.13 - After a month of being poked, prodded and pressurized in ways that mimicked the stresses of spaceflight, NASA's Orion crew module successfully passed its static loads tests on Wednesday.