Support us | Visit us | Contact us
08 August 2012Title:Grey parrots use inferential reasoning based on acoustic cues aloneAuthors:Christian Schloegl, Judith Schmidt, Markus Boeckle, Brigitte M. Weiß, and Kurt KotrschalJournal:Proceedings of the Royal Society B
Research suggesting that grey parrots can reason about cause and effect from audio cues alone- a skill that monkeys and dogs lack- is presented in Proceedings of the Royal Society B today.Christian Schloegl and his team at the University of Vienna, let six parrots choose between two containers, one containing a nut. Both containers were shaken, one eliciting a rattling sound and the other nothing. The parrots preferred the container that rattled, even if only the empty container was shaken. When the parrots were played a recorded noise, but the container was not shaken, they did not choose it. This suggests that grey parrots understand the causal link between nut, shaking and noise, which is otherwise only mastered by great apes, but not by monkeys or dogs.More importantly, they also use the absence of noise during the shaking of the empty container to infer that this container does not contain a nut. This correct conclusion, from only one container being shaken, suggests that the parrots are making a two-step deduction. First, the presence and absence of noise has to be connected to the presence or absence of the reward, respectively. This information must then be used to deduce that the absence of noise in one container is predicting the presence of the reward in the other container.
So how do parrots compare to other animals? In this task, only three-year-old human children and the great apes were instantaneously successful and managed to use the absence of noise to infer that the reward is located in the alternative container. Dogs, monkeys and baboons are unable to make this inference.
Surprisingly, the performance of the birds was sensitive to the shaking movement: they were successful with containers shaken horizontally, but not with vertical shaking resembling parrot head-bobbing. Thus, grey parrots seem to possess ape-like reasoning skills, but their reliance on these abilities is influenced by low-level interferences.
Learn about our mission to expand the frontiers of knowledge.
Explore our annual science exhibition
Researchers have found that applause spreads like a 'disease’ though an audience, with applause duration often not connected to the quality of the performance, as reported in Journal of the Royal Society Interface today.
Sir Paul Nurse, President of the Royal Society, responds to a statement from the G8 science ministers, which was issued following the first joint ministers and science academies meeting to be held under the G8.
The Royal Society will play host today to the first ever G8 joint science ministers and national science academies meeting.
For a full archive please see the news pages.
Latest press releases about our activities.
Announcements about articles in our journals.
There are about 1,450 Fellows and Foreign Members.
We have had 350 years at the heart of scientific progress.
Contact the Society's press team.