'Vedic Science is the science of Veda. 'Veda' means pure knowledge and the infinite organizing power that is inherent in the structure of pure knowledge. Pure knowledge is the state of awareness in which consciousness knows itself alone, when awareness is completely self-referral, when awareness has nothing other than itself in its structure. This state of pure knowledge, when knower, known, and process of knowing are in the self-referral state, is that all-powerful, immortal, infinite dynamism at the unmanifest basis of creation.
'This is Vedic Science: all about the knower, the known, and the process of knowing; all about consciousness, both in its self-referral, self-interacting state, and as it expresses itself in the infinite variety of the whole creation— that performance of Nature which goes on and on eternally in all spheres of time—past, present, and future. The knowledge of this most basic principle of life—the self-interacting dynamics of consciousness is the science of pure knowledge, the Science of Veda.
'Human awareness can identify itself with this most basic, self-referral value of consciousness in the state of Samadhi, or Transcendental Consciousness. This state is easily gained and most naturally enjoyed through Transcendental Meditation. The functioning of transcendental pure consciousness is the functioning of Natural Law in its most settled state.
'The conscious human mind, identifying itself with this level of Nature's functioning, gains the ability to perform in the style with which Nature performs its activity at its most fundamental level. Completely identified in Transcendental Consciousness with the full potential of Natural Law, the human mind is a field of all possibilities, spontaneously functioning in harmony with all the Laws of Nature and able to accomplish anything. This is how human life will be cultured through Vedic Science.
'What is the difference between Vedic Science and modern science? Through its objective approach, modern science reveals that which is perceived, the object. The subject, the perceiver, remains separate from it. Modern science investigates the field of the known, but it does not touch at all the field of the knower and the spontaneous process of knowing.
'Vedic Science is a complete science, which extends and fulfils the objective approach of modern science by incorporating the knower and the process of knowing into the field of investigation. It provides a complete and comprehensive knowledge of the Unified Field of all the Laws of Nature, which can be described as the unified state of the knower, the known, and the process of knowing. Vedic Science also describes the sequential mechanics through which this three-in-one structure of the Unified Field gives rise to the infinite range and diversity of Natural Law displayed in the universe.
'The knowledge of the Unified Field has been discovered by modern science during just the last few years, but complete knowledge of the Unified Field has always been available in the Vedic Literature. Today Quantum Physics has glimpsed the details of the Unified Field and is locating its three-in-one structure. This is precisely the three-in-one structure of the self-referral state of consciousness.
'Credit must be given to modern science because its objective approach has now uncovered the reality of pure subjectivity. The world of scientists should know, however, that the objective approach comes to an end there. Many more discoveries may be made on the surface, relative levels of existence, but the goal of Physics has been reached.
'Today the most advanced level of modern science needs a complete approach to investigation, which includes the two other values of knowledge—the value of the knower and the value of the process of knowing. All three values are uncovered in their totality in Vedic Science.
'If progress is to continue, a shift is required from the science of only one category to a total science. Vedic Science is that total science. It uncovers the knowledge of the total potential of Natural Law in its completeness and brings human awareness in tune with those fine creative impulses that are engaged in transforming the field of intelligence into the field of matter.
'The approach of Vedic Science is such that the knowledge gained enlivens that most fundamental value of consciousness from where all thoughts and actions emerge. Therefore, the very methodology of gaining knowledge through Vedic Science is such that as one gains the knowledge of Natural Law on the intellectual level, one begins to live that Natural Law in daily life in a most spontaneous way. This is the basis of the practical application of Vedic Science.
'Vedic Science is applied through the Technology of the Unified Field. We speak of the Unified Field in connection with Vedic Science because of the similarity between what has been discovered by Physics and what exists in the self-referral state of human consciousness. The Technology of the Unified Field is a purely scientific procedure for the total development of the human psyche, the total development of the human race. This is the time when objective, science-based progress in the world is being enriched by the possibility of total development of human life on earth, and that is the reason why we anticipate the creation of a Unified Field-Based Ideal Civilization.'
Maharishi's Transcendental Meditation
'My Transcendental Meditation is a simple, natural, effortless procedure whereby the mind easily and naturally arrives at the source of thought, the settled state of mind—Transcendental Consciousness—pure consciousness, self-referral consciousness, which is the source of all creative processes.
'This process can be likened to a river which naturally and effortlessly flows onto the ocean and gains the status of the ocean.
'Transcendental Meditation is practised for 15 to 20 minutes in the morning and evening, while sitting comfortably with the eyes closed. During this technique the individual's awareness settles down and experiences a unique state of restful alertness; as the body becomes deeply relaxed, the mind transcends all mental activity to experience the simplest form of awareness—Transcendental Consciousness—where consciousness is open to itself. This is the self-referral state of consciousness.
'The experience of Transcendental Consciousness develops the individual's latent creative potential, while dissolving accumulated stress and fatigue through the deep rest gained during the practice. This experience enlivens within one's awareness creativity, dynamism, orderliness, and organizing power, which results in increasing effectiveness and success in daily life.
'Transcendental Meditation can be easily learnt by anyone. People of all levels of intelligence, belonging to all ages, belonging to all cultures, religions, and educational backgrounds in countries throughout the world practise the technique. [Since the beginning of the Maharishi's Worldwide Transcendental Meditation Movement in 1957, over four million people have learnt Transcendental Meditation and forty thousand teachers of Transcendental Meditation have been trained throughout the world by Maharishi.]
'The Transcendental Meditation Programme is the most direct way for the fulfilment of the supreme philosophy of life, where the individual lives life in full enlightenment, and where the individual breathes life in Cosmic Reality.
'As the practical aspect of the supreme philosophy of life, my Transcendental Meditation is most natural, and as such it is universally applicable for the well-being of the individual and society as a whole.
'Transcendental Meditation renders all aspects of life according to Natural Law. Its application in the fields of politics, economy, religion, and culture of every country is so rewarding that it has started to bring a new wave of excellence to lead the present civilization to the height of perfection.
'The benefits of Transcendental Meditation are so many and so great that it has been our delight to launch a programme for the complete transformation of life on earth—Heaven on Earth. How is Transcendental Meditation able to accomplish this overall enrichment of life?
'Firstly, Transcendental Meditation is the Technology of Consciousness, which is the most basic element of life - the home of all the Laws of Nature. Transcendental Meditation unfolds the creative genius of the self-referral state of intelligence—the home of all the Laws of Nature—and inspires the Laws of Nature to uphold all thought, speech, and action: support of Natural Law increases in daily life with regular practice.
'Secondly, it eliminates the most basic cause of all stress and strain. Everyone lives his life through the cycles of routine work, whether he is a student, a working adult, or retired—the whole population is living life through routine work, and routine work in daily life does not provide an opportunity for the full expression of Creative Intelligence.
'This lack of opportunity to display creativity causes frustration and becomes the basis of all anti-social behaviour.
'Transcendental Meditation helps the awareness to transcend boundaries and go beyond the field of limitations; this is how Transcendental Meditation, providing the opportunity to create unboundedness, infinity, eternity, satisfies the inner creativity and inner genius of life by providing an opportunity for the full expression of Creative Intelligence.
'The daily opportunity for the individual's awareness to go beyond boundaries (through Transcendental Meditation) neutralizes the rigidity caused by the boundaries of the daily routine.
'Thirdly, the marvel of Transcendental Meditation is that both of these above-mentioned values—the blossoming of creativity, and dissolution of stress and strain—are achieved in one stroke.'
The TM-Sidhi Programme Including Yogic Flying
'The TM-Sidhi Programme is an advanced aspect of Transcendental Meditation. It trains the individual to think and act from the level of Transcendental Consciousness, greatly enhancing the coordination between mind and body, and developing the ability to enliven Natural Law to support all avenues of life to fulfil one's desires.'
'Yogic Flying is a phenomenon created by a specific thought projected from Transcendental Consciousness, the Unified Field of Natural Law, the field of all possibilities. This is the simplest state of human consciousness, self-referral consciousness, which is easily accessible to anyone through Transcendental Meditation, and is enlivened through the TM-Sidhi Programme, which leads to Yogic Flying.
'Yogic Flying demonstrates perfect mind-body coordination and is correlated with maximum brain wave coherence (EEG), indicating maximum orderliness and integration of brain functioning. Even in the first stage of Yogic Flying, where the body lifts up in a series of short hops, this practice gives the experience of bubbling bliss for the individual, and generates coherence, positivity, and harmony for the environment.
'Regular practice of Yogic Flying leads the individual mind to enjoy control of Nature's central switchboard, from where Natural Law governs the life of everyone and administers the entire universe from within the intelligence of every grain of creation.
'From this level of the total potential of Natural Law the individual can command all channels of Nature's infinite creativity and the invincible organizing power of Natural Law. Just as an order from the Prime Minister commands the total authority and resources of the nation for its implementation, similarly, any intention projected from the Unified Field of Natural Law commands the infinite organizing power of Natural Law for its immediate fulfilment.
'The practice of Yogic Flying provides a practical demonstration of the ability to project thought from the Unified Field of Natural Law, and develops the ability to act spontaneously in accord with Natural Law for the fulfilment of any desire. The phenomenon of Yogic Flying proves that through my Transcendental Meditation and TM-Sidhi Programme, anyone can gain the ability to function from the simplest form of his own awareness and can develop mastery over Natural Law.
'My TM-Sidhi Programme provides a direct entry to the full blossoming of the creative genius of everyone; it is a master key to open the field of higher states of consciousness, where one naturally lives life supported by the evolutionary power of Natural Law.
'All parents, all teachers, and all governments should make these programmes available to the growing youth in order to save them from problems and suffering in life through the support of Natural Law.
The Source, Course, and Goal of Vedic Mathematics
'Vedic Mathematics is the mathematics of Veda, the systems and procedures available in the structure of the Veda and Vedic Literature through which order emerges and sustains the orderly universe.
'Vedic Mathematics is a dynamic quality of Veda, embedded in eternal silence. This is what gives spontaneity and automation to the entire field of order—the eternally evolutionary field of Vedic Mathematics.
'Vedic Mathematics is inherent in the structure of pure knowledge, the Veda. It is the absolutely precise organizing power inherent in the structure of pure knowledge, the Veda.
'Vedic Mathematics, we can say, is the sovereign ruler of the universe; it is the commander of Natural Law. Its SOURCE is within its own holistic value, available in the holistic sound, (A), the first letter of Rk Veda, from where the stream of pure knowledge, pure creativity—total knowledge, total creativity, total organizing power of Natural Law—emerges.
'The COURSE of Vedic Mathematics is the unbounded field of the ever-expanding universe within the self-referral consciousness (Atma) of everyone.
'The course of Vedic Mathematics is within its own fullness, within its own unbounded range of infinity—within the spontaneous, orderly theme of evolution, in the dynamic relationship between infinity and its point.
'The whole course of Vedic Mathematics is available in the order of expression of the first syllable of Rk Veda, (Ak), and in the whole course of the Veda and Veda Literature, which has been expressed in the ever-expanding universe.
'The course of Vedic Mathematics is through the structuring dynamics of the Vedic Literature—the orderly evolution, the sequential and simultaneous evolution, of the Vedic Text.
'The GOAL of Vedic Mathematics is to express WHOLENESS, perfection, and order. Just as the course of Vedic Mathematics is within its source, so the goal of Vedic Mathematics is within its course, maintaining order at every level of creation and at every stage of evolution of the ever-expanding universe, from point to infinity.
'The absolute order displayed in the universe is the marvel of Vedic Mathematics, which gives custody over Natural Law, mastery over Natural Law, to the Vedic Mathematician, bestowing on him the sovereign authority over the order that prevails in the universe—the custody of invincibility—the lively potential of the source, course, and goal of Vedic Mathematics within the simplest state of his self-referral consciousness.' [The self-referral state of consciousness is the state in which consciousness is open only to itself—Transcendental Consciousness, the Self awake in its own unmanifest nature.]
Vedic Mathematics is Brahm Vidya, Atma Vidya, Veda Vidya
'To really know the whole range of Vedic Mathematics amounts to knowing the entire process of creation and evolution and gaining mastery over Natural Law. For this the direct path is my Vedic Science and Technology, which lays open the finest fabrics of totality—Brahm Vidya—which enlivens Brahm in Atma—the actualization of the supreme level of awakening with all possibilities awakened in:
'Brahman Consciousness—Unity Consciousness [unity of the knower, process of knowing, and the known]—which enables individual life to be spontaneously lived on the level of Cosmic Life, has the custody of the total potential of the organizing power of Natural Law—Ritam-bhara-pragya—which is fully awake in the infinite organizing power lively in the structure of the Veda.
'This whole range of Vedic Mathematics amounts to enlivening the Self—Atma—through the different frequencies of the Vedic Literature, for Brahm to blossom from within it.
'Vedic Mathematics is the field of Brahm Vidya on the ground of Atma. Vedic Mathematics is the science and technology of precision and order, which maintains the integrity of Unity and at the same time spreads diversity within it.
'Vedic Mathematics is a divine field of pure intelligence, which is simultaneously both pure knowledge and its infinite organizing power.
'Vedic Mathematics is the basis of the Vedic Technology through which the fibres of the self-referral level of intelligence construct the sound and form of the Vedic Text; they are the mechanics that transform pure intelligence into Creative Intelligence—the mechanics that transform Atma into Brahm and declare Ayam Atma Brahm—this Self is Totality.
'Vedic Mathematics is Brahm Vidya, Atma Vidya, Veda Vidya—it is knowledge of Brahm (Totality), it is knowledge of Atma, it is knowledge of Veda—it is knowledge of pure knowledge and its infinite organizing power; it is the unfoldment of the Self from within the Self.
'The total range of Vedic Mathematics is available in the example of a seed growing into a tree, and a tree in turn growing into the same seed from which it originates. From seed to seed is the whole range of Vedic Mathematics—from Self to Self is the range of Vedic Mathematics.
'A Vedic Mathematician knows: "My self-referral state of consciousness is the whole range of Vedic Mathematics; your self-referral consciousness is the whole range of Vedic Mathematics; all this (the whole universe) is the whole range of Vedic Mathematics." The absolute order that is eternally maintained in the universe is the expression of Vedic Mathematics lively within the Self of everyone, and within every grain of creation.'
Vedic Mathematics is a Field Completely beyond Mistakes
'Vedic Mathematics does not make mistakes; it is flawless and faultless because its home is in self-referral consciousness—Parame vyoman.
'All streams of knowledge studied today in modern science must be studied in terms of Vedic Science in order that the knowledge of modern science can be spontaneously utilized in all the different aspects of daily life and living.
'Modern Mathematics is the field of steps, whereas Vedic Mathematics is the field of pure intelligence that gets what it wants instantly without steps. It is the field of infinite correlation, the field of simultaneity of all steps, because it functions in the frictionless field of infinite correlation—the field of self-referral intelligence.
'In Vedic Mathematics all steps are synthesized to promote the result without the need for going through the steps and stages to arrive at the goal. Vedic Mathematics is a spontaneous revelation, it is not a step-by-step derivation.
'Vedic Mathematics is a field completely beyond mistakes—MIS-TAKES. Vedic Mathematics is ALL-RIGHT-TAKE, no MIS-TAKE, because it is the display of absolute, fully awake intelligence, the state of enlightenment. Its cosmic status is displayed in the absolute order of the infinite creativity that spontaneously maintains diversity of the universe.'
Vedic Mathematics is the Conductor of Karma
'The marvel of Vedic Mathematics is seen not only in its infinite capacity to produce whatever is required, but also in maintaining the record of infinitely complex fields of variations in the field of action between the action (the field of Karma) and its consequence—the mathematical precision between action (Karma) and its results—'As you sow, so shall you reap'. Vedic Mathematics is the conductor of Karma.
'Vedic Mathematics sees every action creating so many influences, influencing everything in the universe, and precisely evaluates, records, and delivers the due result to the doer.
'Vedic Mathematics is the natural organizing power inherent in the nature of consciousness; it is the organizing intelligence in the performance of Yagyas (Vedic Procedures to produce the desired effects), counteracting infinitely complex effects of past Karma, which is again the proof of its transcendental nature.'
Vedic Mathematics is the Natural Organizing
'It is Vedic Mathematics that maintains integration and promotes the holistic value of life—perfect health and long life—in the field of Ayur-Veda.
'And again, it is the Vedic Mathematics involved in designing the metre, the melodies of Gandharva Veda, that neutralizes negative influences in the physiology and environment, and restores balance and harmony.
'And again, it is the Vedic Mathematics in the field of Dhanur-Veda that upholds perfect precision and order in the infinite complexities of activity of the ever-expanding universe.
'And again, it is the Vedic Mathematics at the basis of the influence on physical structures in the field of space, time, direction, and causation, etc., which constitutes Sthapatya Veda—Vedic Architecture.
'And again, it is the absolute mathematical precision and order of Vedic Mathematics that promotes the spontaneous evolution of form from the name, and the name or sound from the level of pure intelligence, or pure consciousness.
'The path to become expert in Vedic Mathematics is the path to gain full enlightenment—pure knowledge—self-referral consciousness—Brahman Consciousness, for which the standard prescription is:
'Vedic Mathematics is that one field of knowledge which fulfils the purpose of education by developing the total creative genius of the individual, giving him the ability to be always spontaneously right and automatically precise so that his action, supported by Natural Law, is always effortlessly fulfilling.
'My Vedic Technology of Consciousness, Transcendental Meditation, is the blissful exercise of Vedic Mathematics, and Yogic Flying habituates the mind to float in the bubbles of bliss, developing the ability to accomplish anything—the characteristic quality of a Vedic Mathematician.'
Links for Maharishi's Vedic Science:
Links for Maharishi's Technologies of Consciousness:
Maharishi's Transcendental Meditation®
For information on where to learn Maharishi's Transcendental Meditation in countries not listed below, please visit: www.transcendental-meditation.globalgoodnews.com/07-tm-learning.html.