how can we travel through time
Okay, you will need the following.
1. A space shuttle that can achieve light speed.
2. An oak wood slingshot.
3. A piece of rock that's heavier than feather yet lighter than a marble, make sure it's as round as possible.
If you don't have a space shuttle, then you will need at least a small air craft. Before performing the next few steps, make sure you are in the center of the Bermuda Triangle on a leap year Wednesday around lunch time.
Okay, so if you have the space shuttle, leave earth, and accelerate until light speed is achieved. At this point ready your slingshot, with the rock inside the sling pulled back at full strength. Normally the cosmic speed limit is the speed of light. So at this point you should be going as fast as physically possible. If you haven't burst into flames yet, this is a good sign. Now, since you're going faster than anything in the universe, time has slowed down inside the the ship. This in effect, is the police officer to insure the speed limit. The faster you go, in effect, the slower you go! But that's why you have the sling shot. Okay, so, though time has slowed down for the slingshot as well, no one has ever bothered to fire a sling shot at light speed before, so lets just assume that this actually works to break the speed of light. So you're going faster than the speed of light. In theory instead of time slowing, you are now going so fast, it is running backwards. Travel the the time period of your choice. Though I must now alert you that you are stuck in the past. As their is no feasible way to travel forward in time. So please shoot your great grandfather, to reset the scenario. Thank you for your time.
EJ my boy, What great talent you have. Mom is so proud of you!
I have a possible "somehow" for you.
In non-quantum non-diigital spacetime your time would be frozen and the slingshot would never be fired but quantum, rounding errors (that allow FTL quantum tunelling and black hole evaporation or Hawking radiation)yon would likely allow a FTL jump turning you into a giant tachyon travelling backwards in time.
"The Grandfather Paradox" is one of many thousands involved in the issue of time travel. For example, if we could rewind the hands of time, go back, and shoot Hitler while he was a mere corporal in the Bavarian Army in WWI, would we have prevented WWII?
Clearly, no. Somene else who was just enough like Hitler would have stepped in to fill Hitler's place. Destiny would still be fulfilled for a cause that we may flinch to consider.
En Espanol, "Que sera, sera." What will be, will be. We may speculate all we wish, but until the Lord determines that we are sufficiently wise to handle our own destinies with any skill, we will not learn to do what only He has done to date.
Gromwald, There is no such thing as time travel. Forget about the quantums. You are where you are at this moment. No going back.
Gromwald, until you widen your POV to include all rational thought, you will not understand why God has placed the limits on us that He wisely has placed.
You do not give an infant a loaded rifle. But when the infant is a trained Marine twenty years later, you would have no rational cause for concern that he had been issued a powerful rifle. You would expect him to use it on your behalf, to subdue an enemy force. If he failed to do so, he would be charged with dereliction of duty.
So it is with time. Until we have matured past the games of atheists, we will not be mature enough as a species to move forward the next increment.
Sparky's Mom, I sometimes wonder about thyme travel. What if we could travel in thyme? Could we go back and prevent oregano cin--namon? Perhaps deal with Rosemary's Baby. Or possibly, develop sage wisdom that gives the spice to life.
Perhaps we have not yet reached the season of our maturity. Should we just salt these ideas away?
You each have great points! Thanks Anna! I thought about the whole time freezing aspect, but most everything at that level is pure speculation, so I bent the rules a little.
Rocmike, with the killing Hitler scenario I would say this. I would say that even if time travel is possible, I would think that it would be impossible to change anything. Say for instance, you do go back and kill Hitler. Then, Hitler never existed, so you never felt the need to kill him, thus never went back in time to kill him, thus creating a loop. Anything you go back to change, would stop you from going back to change it! Because after you've made your alterations, there would be no more reason to go back and change them. Thus when the time line catches up to the present, you wouldn't have to go back in time, meaning there was no one there to kill Hitler. Thus resetting the order of things, back to the way they naturally occurred. Becuase you couldn't have gone back without a reason. I would say that in the unlikely event of the invention of time travel, you could only be the proverbial fly on the wall. Watching and not interfering. Thus leaving the you that left, with a reason to go when the timeline caught up. If that makes any sense.
Rocmike3, I think we sage soon enough. We should not curry up and want to see what the future is like. We just bay leaf well enough alone. Dill we meet again.
Dr. Rocmike3: Hahahahaha!
EJ, The Piano Man: Pretty heavy thinker.
ASM: Also funny.