Simply begin typing or use the editing tools above to add to this article.
Once you are finished and click submit, your modifications will be sent to our editors for review.
While traveling in Europe in 1850, Downing entered into a partnership with the English architect Calvert Vaux, and upon their return to the United States the two men designed a number of estates, both houses and grounds, in New York’s Hudson River valley and Long Island. By now recognized as the foremost American landscape designer of his day, Downing was commissioned in 1851 to lay out the...
...Olmsted was appointed superintendent of New York City’s projected Central Park. A competition was held to select a new plan for the park, and Olmsted collaborated with the young British architect Calvert Vaux in developing the successful design. In 1858 he became chief architect of the park, and from then until 1861 he worked assiduously in one of the first attempts in the United States to...
contribution to landscape design
...century, when one hears of André Parmentier, a Belgian, who worked on Hosack’s estate at Hyde Park and then of A.J. Downing, a successful protagonist of the gardenesque, who was succeeded by Calvert Vaux and Frederick Law Olmsted (the latter the originator of the title and profession of landscape architect), the planners of Central Park (begun 1857) in New York City and of public parks...
development of Central Park
...recently transformed from a sleazy strip to a centre of tourism. At Columbus Circle visitors may enter Central Park, some 840 acres (340 hectares) of greenery created by Frederick Law Olmsted and Calvert Vaux in the mid-19th century to serve as the “lungs” of the city and defended with vigour against all commercial encroachment. The Upper West Side is filled with brownstone blocks...
history of urban planning
...civilizing effect on the working classes, who were otherwise consigned to overcrowded housing and unhealthful workplaces. New York’s Central Park, envisioned in the 1850s and designed by architects Calvert Vaux and Frederick Law Olmsted, became a widely imitated model. Among its contributions were the separation of pedestrian and vehicular traffic, the creation of a romantic landscape within...
What made you want to look up "Calvert Vaux"? Please share what surprised you most...