Russia – Watch out for Loads of Historic Heritage and Natural Treasure
Russia is the world’s largest country and is admired for offering cultural traditions belonging to various centuries and something that can’t be simply described with the word called tourism. This part of the Earth has every flavour of what a tourist can desire for.
The history of Russia starts more than 35,000 years ago. The nomadic tribes of pastoralists were the first ones to settle down in the region. Greek traders, the Huns and the Turkic Avars were among those who inhabited the region in the 8th century BC. The people who belonged to the Slavic Tribes are considered to be the ancestors of modern day Russians. After the Slaves, the Kievan Rus' state ruled the region till the mid of the 13th century. With the weakening of this state, the rulers from Vladimir-Suzdal, Galicia-Volhynia, Poland and Lithuania and the Mongols and the Novgorod became powerful in various parts of the region.
From the 14th to the 16th century, the Duchy of Moscow became influential in the country and Russian Tsardom became powerful. The Russian Empire emerged as the supreme power in the 17th century and it defeated other European powers like Sweden and France. However, the country soon faced what can be called the biggest event of human history, the Russian Revolution. Participation in the First World War and creation of USSR, the first socialist state of the world under the leadership of Vladimir Lenin were the events that followed. Other important parts of the 20th century Russian history are the industrial development and participation in the World War II. USSR disintegrated in to 15 independent countries in 1991.
Some of the popular cities of Russia include Moscow, Irkutsk, Kazan, Saint Petersburg, Sochi and Vladivostok. Moscow, the capital city of Russia, is well-known for being an adventurous sports site for the tourists. Makaryev Monastery in Nizhny Novgorod and Hermitage Museum in Saint Petersburg are the world famous places for tourists. Kizhi Island on Lake Onega and Lake Baikal are among other popular tourist sites in the country. Trans-Siberian railway is of course the most important tourist attraction offered by the country. A number of cultural centres, historical sites and beautiful landscapes are available in abundance in all parts of Russia.
Apart from Trans-Siberian railway, the dependable bus links and domestic flights can be used to move from one part of the country to another. Boats and cars are other convenient modes of moving between different points in the country. A good guide is to have some cash handy to pay for your travel.
Places of Entertainment:
Russia is one of the bets place sin the world to take part in adventurous activities like white-water rafting, mountaineering, hiking, kayaking and so on. Some of the world’s best nature reserves can be explored as entertainment venues of Russia. Apart from this, one can find ultimate fun and enjoyment at night clubs and bars. Restaurants and bars are located in all parts of Russia to offer unparalleled menus of foods and drinks.
Budget hotels, youth hostels, bed & breakfast, guesthouse, motels, inns, home stays and holiday apartments make best accommodation option in the country.
The official currency of Russia is rubble (RUB) and one rubble equal to 100 kopeks. Coins can be found in the denomination of 1, 5, 10 and 50 kopeks and 1, 2 and 5 rubbles. The banknotes are available as 5, 10, 50, 100, 500, 1000 and 5000. Check the news and internet for the latest exchange rates.
Russia group accommodation | Cheap hostels & budget hotels