VELS curriculum information
The VELS Design, Creativity and Technology domain learning focus
The VELS Design, Creativity and Technology domain standards and progression points
provides support resources for the DCT domain.
Teachers notes on linking LOTE and DCT
Linking LOTE and Design Creativity Technology
Suggestions for teachers planning tasks and units of work which incorporate knowledge from the Design, Creativity and Technology domain.
From the UK Design and Technology teachers' association, a discussion on the links between language and literacy and technology. These notes refer to English literacy, but the principles can be applied to LOTE study as well.
From the Industrial Technology and Design Teachers' association, a discussion of what students can learn about technology and a simple summary of the steps in a design process.
Sample tasks and units of work with links to DCT
A sample multi-domain unit for Level 3, produced by the VCAA, about puppet making. It can be adapted for LOTE study and for other levels.
An example of a DCT assessment task at Level 3, with sample teaching materials and student responses. This information may be useful to indicate the kind of language students can be learning in connection with a 'making' task.
An example of a DCT assessment task at Level 4, with sample teaching materials and student responses. This information may be useful to indicate the kind of language students can be learning in connection with a 'making' task.
Some ideas about a series of activities centred on puppet making (with a German focus) from Bayswater PS.
From the Victorian technology teachers' association, ideas for a unit of work centred on making dragon masks and lanterns for Chinese New Year. Can be adapted to include LOTE activities.
These are a set of units of work for Technology, based on UK curriculum for primary schools. They are ideal as models for cross-curricular learning opportunities, including LOTE study.
Contact: Languages Online Team ()
Created on: Friday, February 8th, 2008 | Page last updated: Monday, 16th January 2012