Blood Oxygen Monitors
Blood Oxygen Monitors are useful for people who have or who wish to monitor a condition related to blood or respiratory disease at home. Along with blood pressure, it is common for doctors to measure your blood oxygen levels. Anyone with respiratory or cardiac problems, especially chronic obstructive pulmonary disease will be used to having their blood oxygen levels taken. Typically, this is done by using an oxygen saturation monitor or finger oximeter.
Blood oxygen monitors check the oxygen saturation of your blood and changes in blood volume in the skin. As well as monitoring the amount of oxygen, the heart rate can also be monitored. Blood oxygen monitors are useful in any setting where a patient's oxygenation is unstable. Because of their simplicity and speed, blood oxygen monitors are of critical importance in emergency medicine and are also very useful for diagnosis of some sleep disorders such as apnoea and hypopnea. A fingertip oximeter is even used for pilots operating in a non-pressurised aircraft above 10,000 feet where supplemental oxygen is required. Before blood oxygen monitors were developed, many complicated blood tests needed to be performed to get the same results.
A fingertip oximeter is also useful for those whose oxygen levels may decrease with intensive exercise. Some people with heart problems or related conditions, need some form of oxygen saturation monitor at home. Portable and battery-operated, a finger oximeter is ideal for home blood-oxygen monitoring. The finger oximeter is both convenient and non-invasive. Find the right solution for you with Alvolution.
£49.99 (Incl. VAT)Free Delivery
The pulse oximeter will check blood oxygen saturation level and pulse rate in the comfort of your own home. A finger pulse monitor, or finger heart rate monitor is an important home health device for anyone needing to manage respiratory conditions, such as Emphysema, Asthma, Bronchitis and Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD).