How can toys help develop my baby's senses?Your baby's development from birth to six months is rapid, and he will enjoy discovering and exploring his new environment. The right toys for his age can help him on this mission of discovery.
At birth your baby's vision will be fuzzy. He will be able to focus on objects about 20cm (7.9in) to 30cm (11.8in) away from his eyes. If you are playing with your baby during his first month, keep your face no more than 30cm (11.8in) from his, so he can see your expressions. If you show him a toy, hold it at this distance from his face.
Your baby's hearing is well-developed at birth. Your baby will turn his head towards you when he hears the sound of your voice. His hearing also helps him locate to a noisy toy.
In his first few months your baby will most appreciate toys he can look at and listen to. Choose toys from a range that has been designed to be visually appealing.
Toys won't just enhance your baby's physical development. Once he's able to join in with simple games with you, play will hone his cognitive, creative and social development skills too.
Your baby has a powerful instinct to grasp from birth, but won't start to use this skill until he's about three months old. Toys are a great incentive for your baby to perfect his grasping skill. If you dangle an enticing toy within his reach, he will want to grab it.
By the time your baby is about five months old, he'll start to explore toys by putting them in his mouth. Your baby has more control over his tongue and lips than his hands and fingers at first. In fact, his mouth has more nerve endings per square millimetre than any other part of his body. Different textures and shapes will fascinate him.
By six months your baby may be able to sit up, which will give him a whole new perspective on the world. Lots more toys will come into his field of vision!
What features should I look out for in a toy?Your baby's first toys are more likely to be a hit if they have the following features for him to respond to:
- Sound. Your baby has been able to hear clearly from birth. Until his eyesight is fully developed, he will use sound to get a sense of where an object is. Rattles, wind chimes or musical mobiles are all great.
- Bright colours and high-contrast patterns. High-contrast black, white and red toys help your baby pick out differences in shapes and patterns in the early weeks. As he gets older he will appreciate brightly-coloured toys.
- Movement. During his first three months your baby is likely to love toys that move. Your baby’s eyesight is still developing and he can see a moving object more easily than a stationary one.
- Dangling toys. Toys dangling from the arch of a play gym are great until your baby can sit up. Reaching for toys will help develop your baby's grasping skills.
- Touchy-feely toys. Toys or fabric books with different textures are great for exploring. The difference between soft and scrunchy to touch will help stimulate your baby's senses.
How will I know which toys my baby will most enjoy?Knowing which toys your baby will love can be trial and error. It can help to know which toys have proved a hit with other babies of the same age. BabyCentre parents share their tips.
"My daughter loves her activity centre. It was an instant success. She will happily sit in it for ages and bounce away to her heart's content. It has plenty of toys that she can spin, rattle and chew on. It takes up a lot of room, but it's worth it."
"I bought a door bouncer when my son was about three months old and had good head control. It has been excellent for giving him a bit of stimulation at that awkward age when he can't do much else and isn't quite sitting up."
"My little one loves anything with tags on. One of his teddy bears has a washing label on the bottom and he will sit for ages fiddling with it. He also has a tag blanket. I thought it was odd when my friend raved about it but I can see why now!"
"My daughter Lily has a big inflatable ring that she sits in. It's great because she can't sit up yet and the ring gives great support. I fill it with some of her toys and it keeps her amused for hours."
"My daughter loves things that she can bang together, rattle or that have different textures. For example, she loves playing with an empty wet wipe wrapper because it crinkles. I have a basket that I put loads of everyday objects in that she can explore. It keeps her amused for ages."
"We have quite a few fabric and board books. My little boy loves the different textures of the fabric books or staring at brightly coloured pictures in a board book. One particular toy he likes is a fabric star that plays twinkle, twinkle, little star. It also has flashing lights and a teething ring on it. There's plenty to entertain him."
"We have a lovely play gym that my daughter lies on. At only a few weeks old she would reach for the various colourful toys and smile at them. She would stare at the lights for ages. It became a godsend for me during the first few months as it seemed the only time she wasn't crying was when she was under the gym. It kept her occupied for at least 20 minutes at a time so I could get things done."
"We have a few rattles, which are great in the early months. For tummy time we have a mat with scrunchy leaves. My son loves to rub his face on them. When the leaves make a crinkly noise he goes quiet and frowns as if to say, 'what on earth was that?' So cute!"
"It's all about sensory toys at the moment. My little boy was given a toy moose that scrunches, squeaks and rattles. It's brightly coloured and really nice to look at. It will attach to his buggy and car seat so I can take it wherever we go without worrying about it being dropped."
"We have a few rattle-type toys that we wave in front of our little one when he is on his play mat. When he has his nappy off we run the toys up his tummy and over his face so he can feel the different textures."
"Our little girl loves her cot mobile. I hadn't planned on getting one but picked one up on impulse. If I'd have known how much she would enjoy it I would have bought a much nicer one than I did!"
"One of the best buys I've made was a toy arch. It has a mirror, crackles, rattles and squeaks. It attaches to our pram, car seat and bouncy chair. My daughter loves it!"
"We have a bouncy chair that vibrates and plays music. It seems to instantly settle my son and comes with a toy arch so he has something to bat at when he's bored."