This blog did not yet exist when the Skin exhibition was held in London as an invitation to reflect on our most overlooked organ. Our skin protects us from external aggressions, enables us to feel and transmits cultural characteristics.
Skin is a philosophical journey to the skin through images, the earliest anatomical illustrations, works by contemporary artists (e.g., biological jewellery made from epithelial cells) and scarifying, tattoos and other cultural expressions. The exhibition also explains how dermatology came into being as a medical specialty in the 19th century. The curator of the exhibition, which, fortunately, can still be visited online, was Javier Moscoso, a science historian and philosopher with the Spanish Advanced Research Council (CSIC). Although readers may find some of the images very graphic, we strongly recommend a visit to the exhibition website.
Deodorants and antiperspirants have become indispensable in the daily hygiene of both men and women. How do components like aluminium chlorohydrate and alum stone (potassium alum) act to eliminate the odours caused by sweat?
Aluminium chlorohydrate essentially reduces perspiration by plugging the pores of the skin with astringent salts that make it difficult for the odour-causing bacteria to multiply. Alum stone, on the other hand, exerts a powerful bactericidal action but, since the pores are not obstructed, the skin perspires as normal. Read more
We tend to associate dry skin with heat and with typical summer activities. But the skin is no better hydrated in winter, as the colder air is also drier. Our face and hands suffer the consequences.
Sunbathing and swimming in the sea and the swimming pool are normal summer activities, and we are fully aware that we need to protect and hydrate our skin. But what about winter? We should be careful not to drop our guard, because low humidity in winter causes one of the most common skin disorders: dry skin. This disorder does not distinguish between ages or sexes, as it is based on a particular feature of winter weather. Read more