Physical Sciences: Year In Review 2007Article Free Pass
- Space Exploration
- Contributors & Bibliography
- Space Exploration
- Contributors & Bibliography
Most physicists accepted that an external reality exists, independent of observation. This belief, however, ran counter to some of the predictions of quantum mechanics. The famous Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen (EPR) “thought experiment” sought to demonstrate that if the predictions of quantum mechanics were correct, it was necessary for all real objects to be connected by some type of instantaneous action at a distance (nonlocal action)—which suggested to Einstein that quantum mechanics was incomplete. In 1972, however, John Clauser carried out an experiment that was equivalent to the EPR thought experiment and that vindicated the quantum-mechanical result; that is, the world could not be both “real” and “local.” Simon Gröblacher and colleagues from the University of Vienna investigated the issue and in 2007 reported on experiments that ruled out a whole class of real nonlocal theories. The result made the discussion of what physicists meant by “reality” yet more complex.
For information on Eclipses, Equinoxes and Solstices, and Earth Perihelion and Aphelion in 2008, see Table.
|Jan. 3||Perihelion, approx. 0:001|
|July 4||Aphelion, approx. 8:001|
|March 20||Vernal equinox, 05:481|
|June 20||Summer solstice, 23:591|
|Sept. 22||Autumnal equinox, 15:441|
|Dec. 21||Winter solstice, 12:041|
|Feb. 7||Sun, annular (begins 1:381), visible along a path beginning in West Antarctica and extending into the far southern Pacific Ocean; with a partial phase visible in most of Antarctica, southeastern Australia, New Zealand, and the southwestern Pacific Ocean.|
|Feb. 21||Moon, total (begins 0:351), the beginning visible western Asia, Europe, Africa, the Atlantic Ocean, South America, and eastern North America; the end visible in western Africa, western Europe, the Atlantic Ocean, South America, North America, and the eastern Pacific Ocean.|
|Aug. 1||Sun, total (begins 8:041), visible along a path beginning in northern Canada and extending through northern Greenland, the Arctic Ocean, central Russia, and northern China; with a partial phase visible in northeastern North America, Greenland, the far northern Atlantic Ocean, the Arctic Ocean, northern Europe, and most of Asia.|
|Aug. 16||Moon, partial (begins 18:231), the beginning visible in the far western Pacific Ocean, Australia, most of Asia, eastern Europe, the Indian Ocean, and Africa (except the western part); the end visible in western Asia, Africa, Europe, the Atlantic Ocean, and South America.|
|1Universal time. Source: Source: The Astronomical Almanac for the Year 2008 (2006).|
A host of new findings about the solar system’s planets were made in 2007, including a confirmation that the innermost planet, Mercury, has a liquid core. Before 1974, when the Mariner 10 spacecraft detected a weak magnetic field around Mercury, geophysicists had thought that the planet was a completely solid body. Although the strength of the magnetic field was only about 1% that of Earth’s, its presence suggested that the core might not be solid, because the convective motion of molten core material was a possible source of the field. One way to test for the presence of a fluid interior was to look for small variations in the planet’s rate of spin. During 2002–06 a team of researchers led by Jean-Luc Margot of Cornell University, Ithaca, N.Y., directed high-power radar beams toward Mercury and analyzed the reflected signals. In 2007 the team announced that the radar signals revealed a wobble in Mercury’s spin. Though the wobble was a mere 420 m (1,380 ft), it was greater than what it would be if Mercury’s interior was completely solid. One possible explanation for the persistence of a liquid core was that the planet’s metallic core might contain sulfur, which would reduce the core’s melting point.
The New Horizons spacecraft, which was to rendezvous with the dwarf planet Pluto in the year 2015, flew past Jupiter on Feb. 28, 2007, for a gravitational boost on its long journey. During the flyby the spacecraft made observations of Jupiter and its moons and ring system. Detailed images of the ring system did not reveal any embedded moonlets larger than about 1 km (0.6 mi). Astronomers expected to see such objects if the ring system had been built from the debris of shattered moons. The spacecraft’s route took it along the tail of Jupiter’s magnetosphere, and New Horizons found pulses of energetic particles flowing along the tail modulated by Jupiter’s 10-hour rotation rate. The spacecraft also studied a major volcanic eruption on the moon Io, found global changes in Jupiter’s weather, observed the formation of ammonia clouds in the atmosphere, and—for the first time—detected lightning in the planet’s polar regions.
In orbit around Saturn, the Cassini spacecraft continued its study of the planet and its satellites. Cassini’s visual and infrared mapping spectrometer provided the first complete image of a cloud feature that appeared as a hexagonal pattern around Saturn’s north pole. The 25,000-km (15,500-mi) wide feature was believed to extend about 100 km (60 mi) below the tops of the clouds that bordered it. On the basis of a Cassini flyby of the spongy-looking moon Hyperion, scientists computed that the moon’s density was only about one-half that of water. Cassini data confirmed that the surface had frozen water and indicated that there were deposits of hydrocarbon substances, which suggested that Hyperion had all of the chemical ingredients, if not the physical conditions, for life.
In late October, Comet 17P/Holmes—a normally dim periodic comet that orbits the Sun between Jupiter and Mars—suddenly brightened by a factor of up to one million to become an object visible to the unaided eye. Within a day its outer layers had expanded to give it the appearance through binoculars of a circular disk about the angular size of the Moon. The comet had had two similar outbursts 115 years earlier, when English amateur astronomer Edwin Holmes discovered it. The most likely explanation for the outbursts was that a layer of nonvolatile material that coated the surface fractured suddenly, releasing underlying volatile material.
What made you want to look up "Physical Sciences: Year In Review 2007"? Please share what surprised you most...