Interesting health information about cats:
- High Rise Syndrome
- Ten Good Ways to Keep Your Home
Your Kitty Safe from High Rise Syndrome
With summer here, many urban dwellers are eagerly opening their apartment
windows to enjoy the weather--not realizing that they could be putting their
animal companions at risk. Windows without screens pose a real danger to small
pets, particularly cats, who can fall out. Unfortunately, this type of accident
can be fatal--and so prevalent in cities that it's been given the name of
"During the summer months, we see approximately 3-5 cases a week at our
animal hospital in New York City," says ASPCA president and CEO, Dr. Larry
Hawk. Urban pet owners are advised to install screens on all windows, and
consider the following tips to keep your animal companions safe this summer
|Cats have the incredible ability to focus their attention on
whatever interests them. A bird or other animal viewed from an open window
can be distracting enough to cause them to lose their balance.
|It's a misconception that Kitty won't be injured if she falls
from a one- or two-story building. She may actually be at greater risk than
when falling from higher altitudes, as the shorter distance will not give
her enough time to adjust her body to fall correctly.
|Cats can slip through childproof window guards, so screens are a
|When cats fall from high places, they don't land squarely on
their feet. Instead, they land with the feet slightly splayed, which can
cause head and pelvis injuries.|
For more information on high-rise syndrome, please
visit ASPCA online.
Back to Top
Ten Good Ways to Keep Your Home
SAFELY STORE TOXIC SUBSTANCES:
Take a close look at the areas in your home where you store prescription and over-the-counter medications.
Don't forget to look for items such as vitamins and
health and beauty products. Are these areas accessible to your cat? Are all products stored in childproof
HIDE AND WRAP ALL ELECTRIC CORDS:
The dangers of electricity to your cat are very real and very dangerous. Electrical cords are tempting for
cats. They seem the perfect item to chase, but soon chasing may lead to chewing. Also, cats who pull on
an electrical cord may bring an appliance down on top of themselves.
CHECK THE SAFETY OF TALL FURNITURE:
Make sure it's sturdy or attached to the wall to keep it from toppling when a cat tries to jump on it. Cats
can be crushed when furniture falls during a jump attempt.
SECURE GLASS OBJECTS:
Breakable objects can easily be knocked over. Remember that your cat has an amazing jumping ability. Make
sure breakable objects are completely out of your cat's reach.
Tapestries and other wall hangings are very attractive to cats. If your cat has claws, she might try to tear
objects off the wall and end up hurting herself. Try to remove these objects that tempt your cat.
CHECK YOUR WINDOWS:
All your windows should have secure screens. Your cat loves to look out the window. If she sees something
she'd like to chase, she won't be able to resist. Make sure your window screens are always closed and
are strong enough to keep your cat inside, especially if you live above the first floor.
KEEP TOILET LIDS DOWN:
Cats are uncannily attracted to the cold water of the toilet bowl. Not only is it a gross habit, but also a
dangerous one. The lid could come down while your cat is drinking.
PUT AWAY PLASTIC BAGS AND 6-PACK HOLDERS:
These items are hazardous to your cats because they might want to chew on them. Also, there is a chance for
suffocation. Other items that could harm your cat include yarn and ribbons, which can become lodged in
your cat's throat.
NEVER GIVE MEDICINE WITHOUT YOUR VET'S ADVICE:
It's very tempting to try to ease your kitty's pain with human medication. However, Tylenol and aspirin can be
deadly to your cat. Always visit the vet if you think your cat is in pain.
BLOW YOUR HORN:
If you have an outdoor cat, she might snuggle up in your car engine for the warmth. To prevent a disaster, bang
on your hood and honk your horn every time before you start your car.
Back to Top
Page updated 07/30/02