Whenever he began to look into any mathematical problem something would begin to happen in the space between his two eyebrows. Both his eyeballs would turn upwards, centering on that spot. In yoga, that space is described as the third-eye point. It is called the third eye because if this eye becomes activated, it is possible to see events and scenes from different realms in their entirety. It is like looking out of your house through a small hole in the door, and suddenly, when the door opens, you see the whole sky. There is a space between the two eyebrows where there is a small aperture which sometimes opens – as in the case of Ramanuja. His eyes rose to his third eye while solving a problem. Neither Hardy could understand this phenomenon nor would other Western mathematicians understand it in the near future.
I will tell you about another event in connection with the wearing of the vermilion mark, so that you will be able to understand its relationship to the third eye.
Edgar Cayce died in 1945. Forty years before that, in 1905, he fell sick, became unconscious and remained in a coma for three days. The doctors had lost all hope and said that they could not find any way to bring him back to consciousness. They thought that his unconsciousness had become so deep that perhaps he would never come out of it. Every kind of medicine was tried, but there were no signs of his regaining consciousness.
On the evening of the third day the doctors announced that they could do nothing more, and that he would die within four to six hours, or if he lived, he would have brain damage – which would be worse than death – because as time passed the delicate veins and cells of his brain were disintegrating. But suddenly Cayce started to speak even though he was in a coma. The doctors could not believe it: Cayce’s body was unconscious, but he was speaking! He said that he had fallen from a tree, that his backbone was injured, and that was why he was unconscious. He also said that if he was not treated within six hours, his brain would be affected and he would die. He suggested some herbal medicine which he should be given to drink, and said that he then should recover within twelve hours.
The names of the herbs which he requested were not likely to have been known to Edgar Cayce, and at first the doctors thought what he was saying was just part of his brain damage, because the substances he had suggested were not known to cure a condition such as his. But because Cayce had specifically mentioned them they thought they should try them. These substances were acquired, and given to Cayce: he fully recovered within twelve hours.
After he became conscious and when the incident was related to him, Cayce could not remember suggesting any such medication; he neither knew the names of the medication nor recognized them. But this event in Edgar Cayce’s life was the beginning of a rare happening. He became an expert in suggesting medications for incurable diseases; during his life he cured some thirty thousand people. Whatever prescription he gave was always right; without exception, every patient who tried his medication was cured. But Cayce himself was not able to explain it. He could only say that whenever he closed his eyes to look for some treatment, both his eyes would turn upwards as if pulled towards the middle of his two eyebrows. His eyes became fixed there and he forgot everything; he only remembered that after a certain point he became oblivious to his surroundings, and until he arrived at that point, the treatment would not come to him. He suggested some wonderful remedies, two of which are worth understanding.