June 25, 2009
Members of Congress
You have, no doubt, seen the recent advertisements in the Metro stations on or near Capitol Hill that were purchased by the Pew Commission on Industrial Farm Animal Production. While the ads may be engaging, they are misleading and contain information that is scientifically untrue. For instance:
- SaveAntibiotics.org claims farm animals are "hogging our antibiotics," consuming up to 70% of antibiotics when they are not sick. In fact, there are 30 times as many animals raised for food in this country as there are human beings, and pound for pound, human use of antibiotics is 27 times more than that used in livestock.
- The Pew ads also purport that the farm animals are drug dependent, and that antibiotics are used to offset overcrowding and bad sanitation. In fact, animals will get sick regardless of the type of housing or management system in which they are kept. Therapeutic antibiotic treatments are essential in protecting the food supply as well as animal health and welfare.
- The ad campaign alleges that human antibiotics are fed daily to animals in feed and accuses the veterinary medical profession of "misuse." To equate the use of "human antibiotics" to "misuse" is entirely misleading. There are only a few antibiotics available to veterinarians that are not in the same class as human antibiotics, which leaves the veterinarian few options. Therefore, in order to effectively treat diseases, the veterinarian must use an antibiotic that is the same or similar to one used in humans. Treatment of groups of animals requires a route of administration that is both effective and efficient. Thus, oral administration or "feeding" of antibiotics can be the most humane and efficacious of the few therapeutic options available in veterinary medicine.
I am writing on behalf of the American Veterinary Medical Association (AVMA) to express grave concerns with the allegations in the advertisements and the recommendations offered by the report issued by the Pew Commission on Industrial Farm Animal Production.
As a not-for-profit association established to advance the science and art of veterinary medicine, the AVMA is the recognized national voice for the veterinary profession. The Association's more than 78,000 members represent approximately 86% of U.S. veterinarians, all of whom are involved in a myriad of areas of veterinary medical practice including private, corporate, academic, industrial, governmental, military, and public health services.
In reviewing the Pew Report, the AVMA identified the points addressing antimicrobial resistance, the environment, and animal welfare as the most pertinent to veterinary medicine. While we believe there is value in some of the recommendations offered by the Pew Commission, we assert that many of the Commission's sub-points have significant shortfalls and lack in comprehensive idea development or in how the Commission would execute a new plan or program.
In addition, the AVMA understands that the Pew Commission's process for gaining technical expertise in the technical reports was biased and did not incorporate the findings and suggestions of a significant number of participating academicians. We caution readers that we found disparities within the report, potentially due to the lack of incorporation of differing interpretations and conclusions offered by subject matter experts.
In the near future, we will be forwarding to you our in-depth response to the Pew Commission's Final Report, as well as an Executive Summary. We hope that our suggestions will offer thoughtful insight into what we, as veterinarians, assert are critical research and programmatic needs as next steps in promoting the optimal health and welfare of our nation's animals and people.
In the meantime - and in light of the misguided advertisements on the Metro - we felt it critical to inform you of our dismay with the continued propagation of untruths meant to scare the American public that could ultimately compromise the safety of our nation's food supply.
Please feel free to contact Dr. Ashley Shelton at 202.289.3210 should you need any additional information or explanation of the AVMA's comments.
W. Ron DeHaven, DVM, MBA
American Veterinary Medical Association