Do you want to "help people"? Then you need to understand how society works - and sometimes doesn't work as well as it could. How do people relate to each other within groups? How do people interact within their cultures and environments? What can we learn from our ancestors? How does working for change, whether in one person's life, or in social policy, have an impact on society?
Sociology seeks to answer these questions by studying society and human social interaction.
Our liberal arts degree in sociology provides a solid foundation for the future. The unifying focus of the department is the study of community in local and global contexts. You have numerous opportunities to study social phenomenon in the city of Dayton and apply your knowledge and skills in internships and service-learning.
As a sociology major, you will explore human interaction ranging from brief two-person discussions to the most enduring features of culture and world civilizations. You'll gain invaluable experience both in and out of the classroom in order to understand how socialization and social positions such as race, class, gender, religion and economic status shape the lives of individuals and groups.
You may also choose to concentrate your studies by earning a minor in anthropology or social work. Anthropology studies the hierarchical relationships between "us" and "them", and how "the other" has been produced through a long history of colonialism and imperialism that is persistent today, even though in different forms. Social work develops your skills to understand how individuals, families, groups and communities are empowered to thrive within society. Both of these minors position you for graduate study to prepare for a career in social work or as an anthropologist.
To prepare you for work in our global society, you will also complete a language requirement. You may satisfy this requirement by taking a proficiency examination, completing an intermediate-level language course or participating in an approved education abroad experience.
For more information, please visit the Department of Sociology, Anthropology and Social Work website.
Program requirements can be found in the online Catalog. Simply select the area of study and click "Explore".
A variety of opportunities are available to students majoring in sociology. Whether you're curious what career opportunities await you; what internships, research projects or student clubs are available; or who your professors will be, we can help you find the answers.