American British White Park History
American British White Park cattle were introduced to Great
Britain by the Romans in 55 B.C. and ran wild until the 1700's,
when they were domesticated. The name "White Park" comes
form large, game preserve like enclosures in which these
cattle were kept. During World War II, Churchill issued an
order to burn and slaughter all crops and cattle if the
Germans invaded England. Five cows and one bull were
shipped by British White Park breeders to the United States
as a safety precaution. Following the war, these cattle were
not returned to England, and most ended up in Illinois.
The breed possesses black ears, nose, eyes, and legs which
tends to dominate over other color patterns when crossbred.
The breed running wild for nearly two mellenia has
self-eliminated hard calvers, poor mothers, and lack of
hardiness. Birth weights are low, yet growth rates and mature
sizes are comparable to Hereford, Angus, and Shorthorn
cattle. Pigmentation around the eyes virtually eliminates
American British White Park (ABWP) Traits:
Healthy, Hardy, And Long Lived
All factors which reduce the overall cost of ownership and
improve the bottom line.
Lean And Fast Growing
ABWP cattle can satisfy the consumer's demand for lean beef
and satisfy the producer's demand for fast growing livestock.
ABWP cattle grow well on almost any forage.
ABWP cattle are extremely docile. They are easy to work and
can be moved simply by leading them with a feed bucket.
ABWP cattle have small uniform udders. New calves have no
problems grasping and nursing due to oversized udders.
Udders dark in pigment prevents sunburn and various
problems common to other breeds. ABWP's produce
nutritionally rich milk getting new calves off to the best start.
Records of birth kept by existing ABWP breeders prove that
in general losses are very small when compared to to other
popular breeds. ABWP calves birth sizes range from 74 lbs to
80 lbs with 76 being about average.
Pink Eye And Heat Resistance
Black to dark pigmentation helps keep pink eye and eye
problems due to sun at bay. Yet white hair coloration helps to
reflect heat, thus aiding in their natural heat resistance.
ABWP cattle are naturally polled so injuries and losses due to
dehorning are eliminated. ABWP cattle should not be
confused with the horned Ancient White Park cattle.
ABWP conception rates are high and first calf heifers
conceive easily. Cows often remain in herds until they are
fifteen or sixteen years old. This is an economic factor that
cannot be overlooked by the commercial cowman. High
percentage calf crops start with conception and ABWP cows
excel in conception rates.
ABWP cows have maternal instincts far superior to the
average cow. Cows that don't claim their calves are an
unknown problem in this breed. First calf heifers claim their
calves and get them started faster than any other breed of
American British White Park Cattle