Q: Someone told me that a long time ago the presidential candidate who didn't win was chosen instead as the vice president and that combined the two parties and made it so it had to be a kind of working relationship. I'd never heard of this but thought it was a great idea. Is it true? If so, when did this change? - A.C., Fayetteville
A: It does sound great - in theory.
Then there's reality.
Why would the powerful guy (or gal) charged with running the country feel compelled to work with someone who was so much less powerful?
Though vice presidents have in modern times been given roles in the executive branch, their only constitutionally prescribed job is running the Senate - and taking over in the top job if something happens to the president.
Meanwhile, why especially would a president want to work with a veep who was pushing an opposing agenda?
In the past, many presidents who didn't care for or trust their vice presidents, even though they ran together on the same ticket, froze them out of policy- and decision-making.
Others largely ignored their veeps.
During his two presidential terms, George Washington seldom consulted John Adams, who famously complained to his wife that the vice presidency was "the most insignificant office that ever the invention of man contrived or his imagination conceived."
In 1796, Adams, a Federalist, won the presidency in the only U.S. presidential election in which candidates from opposing tickets outright won the top two spots.
Thomas Jefferson, a Democratic-Republican, became his vice president. Jefferson spent much of that time working against policies advocated by Adams and the Federalists.
The prospect of opponents occupying the top two offices became less likely in 1804, when the Twelfth Amendment was ratified.
The amendment changed the process of the electoral vote so electors cast two separate votes - one for president and one for vice president. Before, they'd cast two votes for president. Whoever got the most won. Whoever got the second-most was vice president.
The amendment was prompted by the electoral tie in the 1800 election between Jefferson and Aaron Burr, both Democratic-Republicans. Neither man would step aside, and the House of Representatives went through 36 votes before it managed to award the election to one of them - Jefferson, of course. Burr, who later became infamous for fatally shooting Alexander Hamilton in a duel, became vice president.
Live Wire seeks to answer questions of general interest and consumer topics within two weeks. Initials are used to identify questioners when names are given. Contact Live Wire via Live Wire's Facebook page, at email@example.com or at 486-3516.