Stephanie Cook Osheim, 36, was told years ago that she might never be able to get pregnant. But the Bossier City, Louisiana, resident is now a happy, stay-at-home mom with a 2-year-old daughter and a brand-new baby, born in August. “All my doctors told me it was unlikely that I’d conceive,” says Osheim, who was first treated for the serious gastrointestinal (GI) disorder Crohn’s disease in 2000.
In fact, infertility is a little-discussed but increasingly recognized aftermath of several serious GI diseases that affect millions of American women and men. These include not just Crohn’s, but ulcerative colitis and celiac disease as well. What all three have in common is a tendency to greatly reduce the amount of nutrients that the body absorbs; doctors suspect that the extreme weight loss and malnutrition that can result is what eventually causes problems with getting pregnant.
“If your body mass index becomes too low, you stop having periods, setting the stage for infertility problems,” explains Cynthia Yoshida, M.D., a spokesperson for the American Gastroenterological Association (AGA) and author of the book No More Digestive Problems (Bantam, 2005). If treatment includes drugs or surgery, these can add their own fertility threats.
In Osheim’s case, it’s no wonder her doctors were pessimistic about her chances of conceiving and having a healthy pregnancy. By the time she and her husband decided to try to have a baby in 2003, Stephanie’s body had gone through the wear-and-tear of septic shock, anemia, and malnutrition, not to mention the fact that two-thirds of her large intestine had been removed (she now wears a colostomy bag). “I was skin and bones after my surgery, but I managed to get my period back, and I put some weight on,” she says. “While my GI specialist told me that it probably would be tough for me to get pregnant due to all the trauma my body had been through, I’m living proof that even women with severe GI disease can get pregnant and have a baby.”
Celiac disease is a common but often undiagnosed autoimmune disorder that manifests in vague GI symptoms ranging from bloating to cramping diarrhea, all resulting from an allergic reaction to gluten, which is found in most wheat products, rye, barley, oats, and many other foods. Since the symptoms of celiac disease aren’t necessarily debilitating, women may not know they have it, although the problem is estimated to affect an estimated 2 million people, or one in 133 Americans. (Celiac disease should not be confused with irritable bowel syndrome, which can also cause cramping, abdominal pain, bloating, constipation, and diarrhea but has no effect on fertility or pregnancy.)
“A woman might be embarrassed to tell her doctor that she has to go to the bathroom several times a day, or has had to pull over on the road to get to the bathroom in time,” says Maria T. Abreu, M.D., director of the Inflammatory Bowel Disease Center, Mt. Sinai School of Medicine in New York City, who is also a spokesperson for the AGA.
One thing experts are sure about: Celiac disease impacts fertility in a roundabout way, because sufferers are unable to absorb food. “This malabsorption of nutrients and vitamins causes suppression of the hormones that stimulate the ovaries to ovulate,” Dr. Abreu says. “If you have celiac disease, you might not have normal periods. You also might eat, but you don’t gain weight.” The treatment for this condition is completely dietary; people with celiac disease must avoid gluten and pay careful attention to balancing their nutrient intake.
Anyone who is experiencing consistent stomach pain, gas, bloating, loose stools, cramping diarrhea, irregular periods, or weight loss should talk to a physician. A simple antibody test can determine whether the symptoms are due to celiac disease or the more benign irritable bowel syndrome (IBS). The test may be especially important for women who are having symptoms and are having a hard time getting pregnant.
“If you are diagnosed with celiac and adhere to a gluten-free diet, you’ll reverse everything, including your ability to get pregnant,” says Dr. Abreu.
Robynne Chutkan, M.D., assistant professor of gastroenterology at Georgetown University in Washington, D.C., and founder of the Digestive Center for Women, agrees, noting that “once celiac disease is treated, patients are usually able to get pregnant on their own.”
If you have Crohn’s disease or ulcerative colitis (sister diseases collectively known as inflammatory bowel disease or IBD), you’ll know it. You likely have severe abdominal pain along with severe chronic diarrhea. You may also have rectal bleeding. What many patients—and even some doctors—don’t know is that if you’re planning to get pregnant now or in the future, the type of treatment you receive can make a difference to your fertility.