Parents, Grandparents & Caregivers,
you for visiting our website. Below we have listed just a few of
the resources that we feel you may find particularly interesting.
Feel free to browse all of the resources that we have found to be
useful in the development of our programs by clicking
Why Are Children Fascinated With Fire?
It's the question we hear most often when parents, teachers and caregivers want to understand children's fireplay: Why are children so fascinated with fire? Find out in this article from Prevention 1st.
When Is My Child Ready to Use the Stove or Oven?
Like so many parenting questions, there is no one-size-fits-all answer, but this article will tell you what things to consider, and why.
Recommended Children's Books on Fire and Fire Safety
The non-profit injury prevention organization Prevention 1st compiled this list of recommended books for their program After the Fire: The Teachable Moment.
Plan and Practice a Home Fire Drill
This website, created by Prevention 1st, provides information about why and how to plan and practice a home fire drill and maintain working smoke alarms.
play safe! be safe!®
award winning fire safety program developed by BIC Corporation with
Fireproof Children Company and other fire safety and child development
The multi-media kit includes a 20-minute DVD, the Keep
Away!/Alejate card game, activity boards and a Resource Book.
It is designed especially for young children, and teaches
four important lessons in fire safety: My Friend the Firefighter;
Stop! Drop! And Roll!; Crawl Low Under Smoke; and Safe for Play!
Available in English (English and Spanish DVD & activities) and French.
play play safe! be safe! games online or to learn about
play safe! be safe! workshops visit: http://www.playsafebesafe.com/
play play safe! be safe! games in Spanish, visit http://www.ninossegurosninoscontentos.com.
play play safe! be safe! games in French, visit http://www.jsuisprudentjsuiscontent.com
download an order form for a play safe! be safe! kit click
here or contact us for more information.
Child Outlet Safety www.childoutletsafety.org
In the U.S., an average of seven children per day are treated in emergency rooms for injuries due to contact with electrical outlets. This website provides information about outlet safety and tamper-resistant receptacles.
Academy of Pediatrics www.aap.org
American Academy of Pediatrics’ TIPP (The Injury Prevention
Program) age related safety sheets provide safety and unintentional
injury prevention information pertinent to each developmental stage.
TIPP also has webpages devoted to fire safety in the home. See especially
the safety section of the site’s You & Your Family page.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention--Protect the Ones You Love
Protect the Ones Your Love: Child Injuries Are Preventable is dedicated to sharing information on the steps parents can take to make a positive difference. Links to information on for prevention of burns, drownings, falls, poisonings and road traffic injuries.
National Association of State Fire Marshals www.firemarshals.org
NASFM published “Children are No Match for Fire,” a fire safety/prevention book for children ages 3-6. The book addresses several safety issues, including the dangers of matches, lighters, candles, sparklers, and grills, and the importance of learning and practicing Stop, Drop, and Roll.
National SAFE KIDS Campaign http://www.safekids.org/
National SAFE KIDS Campaign’s mission is “Protecting
Children From Their Number One Killer…Unintentional Injury.”
Take special notice of the site’s safety tips addressing top
causes of unintentional injury in young children including fire
& burn, with printable checklists in English and Spanish. SAFE
KIDS also offers resources designed specifically
for teachers including an activity book and pedestrian safety kit.
Street Workshop http://www.sesameworkshop.org/
Sesame Workshop develops educational content for all forms of media.
Their work is grounded in research on children's developmental needs
and the ways in which children perceive messages in the media. Their Health and Wellness Initiatives include lead poisoning prevention and safe roads for kids.
Fires’ Juvenile Firesetting Intervention Resource Site offers
resources for parents and professionals of all disciplines including
articles of interest to those working with juvenile firesetting
behavior, a parent/teacher resources page, contact information for
juvenile firesetting programs across the country and a resource
exchange page allowing the reader to ask questions, share experiences
and learn from others.