|Written by Lacy Boggs Renner|
Campbell’s Soup recently announced that it would remove BPA (Bisphenol A) from the lining of its soup cans as soon as it finds a workable alternative. But the announcement serves as a reminder that until the rest of the food world follows suit, we as consumers need to be aware of the sources of BPA in our lives. More and more studies are listing BPA as a highly toxic substance—especially for young children and pregnant women. So we’ve gathered a handful of easy ways to help get the BPA out of your diet—and out of your life!
Avoid Canned Soups, Pastas and Tomatoes
Studies have shown that canned pasta, canned soups and canned tomatoes have the highest amounts of BPA—probably because the acidity of these foods causes the chemical to leech out of the can’s lining. Eliminating these foods from your diet or switching to products packaged in glass or boxes will go a long way to cutting out some major sources of BPA.
Drink Soda from Glass
If you must indulge in the occasional soda, choose those fabulously retro glass bottles. Sodas in plastic bottles and cans can contain BPA in the plastic or the lining of the can.
Choose Powdered Infant Formula
Every single U.S. manufacturer of liquid infant formula use a BPA-based lining on the metal portions of their containers. Choose powdered formula, because the BPA in the cans (if it exists) is less likely to be transfered to the formula, which is then also diluted with water. In addition, use a certified BPA-free or glass bottle and skip the plastic bottle liners.
Know Your Numbers
Plastics with the numbers 3 and 7 are the ones to watch out for and are most likely to contain BPA. Switch to glass or metal when you can, and when you must use plastics, look for soft or cloudy-colored (not clear) plastics, which don’t usually contain BPA.
Nuke the Microwave
Never use plastic containers when heating food in the microwave, as heating plastics containing BPA causes the chemical to leech out into the food. Opt for glass or ceramic when re-heating. Better yet, opt for a microwave-free life.
Sweat It Out
Studies have shown that exercise can help rid the body of toxins like BPA—yet another reason to incorporate a good workout into your daily routine!