(Original post by tarek1)
These are basically a list of everything you need to know for AQA unit 4. If you can answer all these questions, then you should be good for the exam, providing the structure is good. I've done the same thing for Unit 3 so have a look on that thread.
Measure of economic growth.
What is the PPB curve.
What is the economic cycle.
How to generate economics growth, (supply and demand side factors)
How to improve physical capital.
Factors that increase activity/ productivity in the economy.
Factos that reduce the productivity rate.
What are the drawbacks of using GDP as a measure of living standards.
Alternatives to national income, NI.
Is economic growth sustainable.
Explanations of the economic cycle.
What is the multiplier effect.
How to measure inflation.
Limitations of CPI.
Causes of inflation.
Explain the quantity theory of money, and state the formula.
Types of deflation.
How to measure unemployment.
Types of unemployment.
Causes of unemployment.
Drawbacks of unemployment, (social and economic costs)
Benefits of unemployment.
What are the demand side factors to reduce unemployment.
What are the supply side factors to reduce unemployment.
What is the phillips curve and explain why the Long run phillips curve is vertical.
What is the Non accelerating inflation rate of unemployment.
What is stagflation.
Reasons for taxation.
Types of taxation.
What is Adam Smith's law of taxation, 'cannons of taxation'.
Benefits and drawbacks of indirect taxation.
Types of government expenditure.
What are balanced budget, budget deficit and budget surplus.
What is the fiscal stance and draw the graph.
Explain the term public sector net cash requirement.
Benefits and drawbacks of a budget deficit.
What are the main fiscal rules.
What are the limitations of the fiscal policy.
What are the two main types of money.
What effects demand for holding money.
Types of assets.
Types of interest rates.
What are the main functions of money.
What are the main objectives of the Central bank.
What are policy indicators and instruments.
Types of exchange rate systems.
Benefits and drawbacks of floating exchange rate system.
Factors that effect the exchange rate.
What is foreign direct investment.
What is Hot Money.
What is a fixed exchange rate system.
Types of fixed exchange rates.
Benefits and drawbacks of a fixed exchange rate.
What is the difference between the current account and the financial account.
What are the three main components of the financial accounts.
Does a current account deficit matter.
What policies are used to deal with a deficit in current account.
Explain the J-curve.
Policies to control and current account surplus.
What are the factors that have contributed to globalisation.
Benefits and drawbacks of globalisation.
What are the needs and wants of developed and developing countries.
What is the Marshall Lerner condition.
Arguments for and against international trade restrictions.
Types of restrictive trade practices.
What is the structure of the EU.
Why was the EU formed.
What is the single market.
What are the benefits and drawbacks of the single market.
How to increase EU integration.
What is trade diversion, deflection, and creation.
What are the benefits and drawbacks of expanding the EU.
What are the benefits and drawbacks of Uk joining the single currency EURO.
If there is a question someone doesn't understand then just quote the question and it can go up for discussion.