This is Planet Earth!
Last week, we talked about the little things people can do to make the world a greener place. Today, we’re taking that a step further to tell you about some organizations that are looking to clean up the earth on a much larger scale.
Earthwatch Institute: This international nonprofit has been around for four decades focusing on areas such as climate change, the ocean and unsustainable resource management. Earthwatch offers volunteers the opportunity to join expeditions alongside scientists all over the world – no experience required! Volunteers pay to be a part of the expedition, helping to fund the work.
The Earth Organization: Rehabilitating the Earth is at the core of the Earth Organization’s message. South African conservationist Lawrence Anthony founded the organization after he initiated the rescue of animals from the Baghdad Zoo during the Iraqi War. Since then the Earth Organization has helped with cleanup of the Gulf of Mexico oil spill, a UN resolution to protect wildlife, and implemented an environmental education curriculum for schools.
Earth Communications Office: With a little help from Hollywood, ECO uses “the power of communications to help improve the global environment.” ECO makes environmental messages that have been seen by over one billion people in 100 countries. The video messages have covered a variety of topics including climate change, the health of the ocean and over-consumption. Morgan Freeman, Gene Hackman and Patrick Stewart have narrated various messages. ECO says the aim is to inspire people to “take a more active role in protecting our home.”
Children of the Earth United: Developing green lifestyles doesn’t happen overnight and Children of the Earth United aims to instill green habits in kids early on. Through education, the nonprofit helps kids “develop a greater understanding and respect for animals, plants, water, soil, air and energy systems.” Children of the Earth United is also focused on recycling, green homes and introducing kids to eco-careers.
Earth911.com: Recycling is at the root of this company. It offers an online recycling directory that tells people where they can go to recycle all kinds of different products all around the country. A user simply types in the product they wish to recycle and then a zip code or address, and Earth911 will tell them where to find the nearest recycling center that accepts that particular product. The website is also a one stop center to find out about all kinds of green news and tips.
Whether it be something as simple as using Replenish or taking part in an expedition to study the effects of global warming, people around the world have joined the Green Movement. We’re proud to be a part of the solution and we hope that more and more people will get involved in the cause. After all, this IS Planet Earth… and it’s the only one we have.