A urine pH test measures the acidity of urine.
See also: Acid loading test
pH - urine
A urine sample is needed. For information on collecting a urine sample, see: Clean-catch urine sample
Your health care provider may tell you to stop taking certain drugs that can affect the results of the test.
Eat a normal, balanced diet for several days before the test.
The test involves only normal urination, and there is no discomfort.
This test measures how acidic your urine is. Your doctor may order this test to check for changes in your body's acid levels.
It may be done to see if you are at risk for kidney stones. Acidic urine is associated with xanthine, cystine, uric acid, and calcium oxalate stones. Alkaline urine is associated with calcium carbonate, calcium phosphate, and magnesium phosphate stones.
Your doctor may also order this test if you need to take certain medications. Some medications are more effective in acidic or alkaline environments. For example, streptomycin, neomycin, and kanamycin are more effective in treating urinary tract infections when the urine is alkaline.
The normal values range from 4.6 to 8.0.
Normal value ranges may vary slightly among different laboratories. Talk to your doctor about the meaning of your specific test results.
A high urine pH may be due to:
A low urine pH may be due to:
The test also may be performed to investigate:
There are no risks.
Urine pH can be affected by various factors after collection such as leaving the urine standing in an uncovered container. Bacteria usually increase the pH as they break down urea in the urine to ammonia.
Bazari H. Approach to the patient with renal disease. In: Goldman L, Ausiello D, eds. Cecil Medicine. 23rd ed. Philadelphia, Pa: Saunders Elsevier; 2007:chap 115.
Review Date: 8/7/2009
The information provided herein should not be used during any medical emergency or for the diagnosis or treatment of any medical condition. A licensed physician should be consulted for diagnosis and treatment of any and all medical conditions. Call 911 for all medical emergencies. Links to other sites are provided for information only -- they do not constitute endorsements of those other sites. Copyright ©2010 A.D.A.M., Inc., as modified by University of California San Francisco. Any duplication or distribution of the information contained herein is strictly prohibited.
Information developed by A.D.A.M., Inc. regarding tests and test results may not directly correspond with information provided by UCSF Medical Center. Please discuss with your doctor any questions or concerns you may have.