Do all children love to tell stories? I know my daughter does. She can come up with some pretty involved tales all starting with the phrase, "Once upon a time."
Storytelling helps with literacy development. Preschoolers that actively tell stories enlarge their vocabularies while also increasing their language and comprehension skills. Although my daughter does pretty well telling stories without any prompting, I've noticed that her stories become more elaborate when she is supplied with visual aids.
eeBoo produces an award-winning product called Tell Me a Story Creative Story Cards. The cards are part of their early learning literacy series. Meant for ages 3 and up, the deck of 36 beautifully illustrated cards assist children in creating their own stories. An endless number of stories are possible by placing any number of the cards in any order. Short stories, long stories, kids create a new story every time they shuffle the deck. The whole family can make a game out of the cards, by taking turns picking cards and telling a story together. Parents and teachers will find the cards useful as an aid in their own storytelling.
eeBoo offers four different sets: Circus Animal Adventures, Fairy Tale Mix-Up, Mystery in the Forest and Little Robots Mission. eeBoo sent us our own set of Mystery in the Forest to review. The pictures in our set feature all sorts of mysterious scenes and characters, from squirrels, a raccoon and a bird to a crown-wearing lady and a treasure chest. Land, sea, forest, meadow, castle, sky...so many settings for an intriguing mystery. Sized small at about 4" x 5", the cards pack easily in a bag, perfect for travel and come in a sturdy sliding tray box. Because the set is priced reasonably at $9.95, we plan on buying a few of the other sets for more storytelling possibilities. I imagine you can even mix the sets together and make up some pretty wacky stories!
My daughter has a pretty awesome imagination, and I've really enjoyed listening to her tell me some excellent stories. I've been particularly pleased because the set encourages her to speak her mind and become a little more vocal, skills that she needs to practice before she starts school next fall.
Win a set! eeBoo has kindly offered to give away (1) deck of Tell Me a Story Cards to a Brimful Curiosities reader.
To enter, visit www.eeboo.com and leave a comment with the name of another eeBoo product you'd like to own.
• For contact purposes, if you are a non-blogger or your email is not accessible in your blog profile, please leave a valid email address within the comment section.Three more ways to gain extra entries (Maximum total entries is 4):
• Contest is open to US only
• Contest ends on Monday, June 22th, 2009 at 11:59 PM CST.
• Winner will be chosen at random
1st extra entry: Follow Me! or subscribe by email or RSS reader
2nd extra entry: Blog about this contest then post your link in the comment section.
3rd extra entry: Follow me on twitter (iambrimful) and tweet about the contest.