American Heritage® Dictionary of the English Language, Fourth Edition
- v. To whine; whimper.
Century Dictionary and Cyclopedia
- To peep or pipe plaintively, as a chick.
- To cry as a complaining child; whine; whimper.
- To utter in a whining or querulous manner: with out.
GNU Webster's 1913
- v. To cry like a chicken.
- v. To whimper; to whine, as a complaining child.
- v. cry weakly or softly
- Perhaps from French piauler, of imitative origin. (American Heritage® Dictionary of the English Language, Fourth Edition)
“In truth, the Hawaiians not unfrequently applied the term pule to compositions which we moderns find it hard to bring within our definitions of prayer.”
“Oia ka pule kauoha a Kahalaomapuana i ko lakou Akua.”
“Ia manawa a ke Alii e hoolohe ana i ka pule a ka Makaula, ike mai la o”
“a pau, aole mea nele, nolaila, e pule oukou i ke Akua, a e pule no hoi wau i ko'u Akua, a ina i mana na pule a kakou, alaila, e halawai hou ana no kakou ma keia hope aku.”
“The Danish verb 'pule' is slang for 'fuck' with strong connotations of harshness.”
“Alongside the canoe, still in the water and peeling off the grisly clinging thing, the incorrigible old sinner burst into the pule of triumph which had been chanted by countless squid-catching generations before him:”
“In every life you have only done what you have only ever done in this life: snivel and cower and pule and whine.”
“So your plan is to snivel and cower and pule and whine behind pretenses about “proof”?”
“She could skin the ordinary kahuna lapaau (medicine man) when it came to praying to Lonopuha and Koleamoku; read dreams and visions and signs and omens and indigestions to beat the band; make the practitioners under the medicine god, Maiola, look like thirty cents; pull off a pule hoe incantation that would make them dizzy; and she claimed to a practice of kahuna hoenoho, which is modern spiritism, second to none.”
“There is no mention of an Air Force anywhere in the Constitution, but I note that you do not pule and whine about what a terrible violation of the Constitution that branch of the armed services amounts to.”
These user-created lists contain the word ‘pule’.
Words formed in imitation of the sound of the things they signify.
Whimpering, wailing words...
Down in the dumps, feeling blue? Here, then, is a list for you...
My favorite words
I imagine most of these will be Anglo-Saxon, not likely to crop up in the average day's conversation, and thus excellent for Scrabble. ("most" is too common, likewise "will" and even "crop", in an...
Words taken from Infinite Jest by David Foster Wallace.
All the words from the Grandiloquent Dictionary.
946 of these 2700 words do not yield any results in six different dictionaries, hence many of them might be misspellings.
my favorite voiceless bilabial plosive.
Looking for tweets for pule.