In previous articles, we discussed the types of rashes and how you can treat them. But as the old adage goes, ‘prevention is better than cure’. By taking certain measures, you can start protecting yourself from rashes instead of waiting for the rash to appear first. Here’s what you can do:
If you have gotten a rash from a poisonous plant in the past, find out all you can about the plant, what it looks like and where it grows. That way you can avoid coming in contact with it unintentionally. Also, when you’re outdoors on a camping trip or a walk through the woods, make sure you wear long sleeved tops and pants. The more your body is covered, the less likely it is to rub against poisonous plants.
If you get rashes because of certain bug bites, use an insect killer to make your home and workplace a bug-free zone. Apply an insect repellant ointment to your skin before going outside for maximum protection.
Allergic or irritant contact dermatitis
Many people are allergic to substances like certain metals (nickel is an oft-cited irritant), bubble baths or products that are made from certain ingredients. If that’s the case with you, make a conscious effort to avoid the particular irritant. Stop wearing nickel jewelry and say goodbye to bubble baths.
Eczema and other dry skin conditions require particular care. For starters, you can stop using soaps as they can drain the moisture from your skin and make it dry and parched. Use clean liquid based cleansers and moisturizers instead. Creams, lotions and sunscreen should be a part of your regular skin regime. Also, take cool showers instead of hot baths or showers. Hot water showers and baths can do substantial damage to your skin over time and reduce the existing moisture content.
Remember to apply moisturizer when your skin is wet. It shouldn’t be dripping wet but there should be enough water on your skin for the moisturizer to capture and retain it. Using moisturizing products on dried and parched skin isn’t as effective. Again, prevention is better than cure. Your skin is less likely to become dry and itchy if you use moisturizer to prevent the conditions- not treat them.
Red and itchy skin and bad sunburns can happen to any of us if we are exposed to the sun long enough. However, these problems are especially frequent if your skin is already photosensitive and has a history of sun-related rashes. Always use sunscreen before you go out to protect your skin from the harmful effects of sunlight.