Eccentric projection literally means a projection off-centre from where it normally is. It is reserved almost exclusively in reference to sensation, and as such is the usual erm used to describe the occurrence when the location a sensation is at, is different to the point where the sense organ is located.
Below, we offer a selection of links from our resource databases which may match this term.
Related Dictionary Entries for Eccentric projection:
Resources in our database matching the Term Eccentric projection:
Results by page 
An interactive projection system, building on the virtual keyboard, offers a second type of augmented reality display for the smartphone - Enlarged projection onto any surface.
The virtual laser keyboard first appeared in mid 2005, and is a product of machine vision and projection technology. The emitter itself is about the size of a small mobile phone, and so can be discretely attached to any handheld device.
In mid December 2008, Nokia designer and human behavioural researcher Jan Chipchase posed the question on what the skyline of our towns and cities would look like under the tinting of augmented reality displays, filtering systems, and projection technologies.
Industry News containing the Term Eccentric projection:
Results by page
In the last few years, head-up displays (HUDs), which project information onto the driver's view of the road, have started appearing in a few high-end cars. But a more compact kind of projection device, small enough to fit inside a rearvie...
Mountain View, Calif. ? It?s summertime and the Terminator is back. A sci-fi movie thrill ride, ?Terminator Salvation? comes complete with a malevolent artificial intelligence dubbed Skynet, a military R.&D. project that gained self-awarene...
The "Immersive Dome" puts viewers at the heart of the action and lets them actively participate. Instead of the conventional surround sound, a three-dimensional aural experience awaits visitors. At IBC, the trade show for the electronics ...
LOS ANGELES ? NTT Cyber Solutions Laboratories will demonstrate a new approach to perception technology at the Siggraph 2004 Conference and Expo this week that untethers the virtual-reality experience from gloves and wires.
Surface is a 30-inch diagonal screen that that can read thousands of touch inputs at once, allowing multiple people to interact with items at once. It tracks taps using a set of cameras mounted underneath the rear-projection screen. Cameras...