Colorado State Capitol Virtual Tour
Acanthus -A thistle-like plant (common to the warm Mediterranean region) whose narrow and pointed-lobed leaves, when stylized, form the characteristic decoration of the Corinthian and Composite Orders of columns.
Arch - curved structure used as a support over an open space.
Architrave - beam resting directly on the tops of columns; the bottom section of the entablature.
Baluster - any of the singular posts of a railing.
Balustrade - row of columns supporting a railing.
Bracket - A supporting member designed to carry a projecting weight. Sometimes shaped like an inverted "L" often very decorative.
Coffer - decorative sunken panel in a ceiling or dome.
Colonnade - series of columns set at regular intervals.
Column - cylindrical support consisting of base, shaft and capital.
Corinthian - the most elaborate of the three orders of Greek architecture, distinguished by a bell-shaped capital with a design of acanthus leaves.
Cornice - the top section of the entablature; a horizontal molding projecting along the top of a building or wall.
Cupola - a small dome or similar structure on a roof.
Dome - roof formed by a series of rounded arches or vaults on a round or many-sided base.
Doric - the oldest architectural style of ancient Greece; characterized by simplicity of form; fluted, heavy columns and simple capitals.
Entablature - a horizontal superstructure supported by columns and composed of architrave, frieze and cornice.
Entasis -The very slight convex (curving out) curve used on columns to correct the optical illusion of concavity (curving in) which would result if the sides were straight.
Frieze - the horizontal band forming the middle section of the entablature; usually decorated with sculpture.
Ionic - Greek style of architecture characterized by ornamental scrolls on the capitals.
Lantern - open structure on a roof or in a tower or dome that admits light and air.
Parapet - a low wall or railing on a balcony or bridge.
Pediment - a low-pitched gable or decorative triangular piece on the front of a building above a doorway or portico.
Pendentive bracket - vaulting area that serves to connect an angle of a square area enclosed by four arches with a dome resting upon the arches.
Pilaster - a rectangular support projecting slightly from a wall, treated architecturally as a column.
Portico - a porch or covered walk consisting of a roof supported by columns.
Rotunda - the round hall or room surmounted by a dome.
Vault - an arched chamber.
Vestibule - small entrance hall of a building.
Return to Capitol Building Site Page
Return to Table of Contents for Capitol Virtual Tour
last modified June 20, 2003