Television Violence and Children
Cesarone, Bernard, Childhood Education
Recent ERIC documents and journal articles that discuss topics related to television violence and children are summarized in this column. For details about ERIC and ordering ERIC documents, please see the information following these abstracts.
PS026610, PS026611, PS026612
NATIONAL TELEVISION VIOLENCE STUDY. Volumes 1, 2, and 3. Margaret Seawell, Ed. 1997. 568 pp., 424 pp., & 368 pp., respectively. (Not available from EDRS; write Sage Publications, Inc., 2455 Teller Road, Newbury Park, CA 91320; 805-4990721; E-mail: firstname.lastname@example.org.) The National Television Violence Study (NTVS), begun in 1994, was a three-year effort to assess violence on television. The project enlisted the help of media scholars, at four university sites, who conducted a content analysis of violence in television shows and music videos, analyzed the role of television's self-imposed violence ratings and advisories, and studied the effectiveness of anti-violence public service announcements. Each volume presents the research findings from one year of the project. The results show that the portrayal of violence on television likely contributes to the learning of aggression, across all genres and channels (i.e., network, cable, public). Furthermore, despite all the public attention given to the issue, television's portrayal of violence did not change during the three years of the study.
TELEVISION VIOLENCE: Content, Context, and Consequences. ERIC Digest. Amy Aidman. 1997. 2 pp. (Available from ERIC/EECE and EDRS; also available at: http://ericeece.org/pubs/digests/1997/aidman97.html.) This digest reports recent findings on television violence, including the effect of certain plot elements in portrayals of violence, various high-risk factors in televised violence, and predicted effects of viewing violent television shows in conjunction with specific plot elements. The digest discusses a ratings system that has been developed by the television industry, in collaboration with child advocacy organizations, to help parents determine the …
Questia, a part of Gale, Cengage Learning. www.questia.com
Publication information: Article title: Television Violence and Children. Contributors: Cesarone, Bernard - Author. Journal title: Childhood Education. Volume: 75. Issue: 1 Publication date: Fall 1998. Page number: 56+. © 2009 Association for Childhood Education International. COPYRIGHT 1998 Gale Group.
This material is protected by copyright and, with the exception of fair use, may not be further copied, distributed or transmitted in any form or by any means.