Avian Influenza A (H5N1) Virus Vaccine
What is Avian Influenza A (H5N1) Virus Vaccine?
AVIAN INFLUENZA A (H5N1) VIRUS VACCINE may help lower the risk of getting a type of flu called the bird flu. The vaccine is not available through your doctor. The government will have vaccine available in case a flu pandemic occurs.
What should I tell my health care provider before I take this medicine?
They need to know if you have any of these conditions:
Guillain-Barre syndrome or other neurological problems
immune system problems
low blood counts, like low white cell, platelet, or red cell counts
an unusual or allergic reaction to Avian Influenza A (H5N1) Virus Vaccine, eggs, thimerosal, gelatin, other medicines, foods, dyes or preservatives
pregnant or trying to get pregnant
How should this medicine be used?
The vaccine is for injection into a muscle. It is given by a health care professional in a clinic, pharmacy, prescriber's office, or other health care setting.
Contact your pediatrician or health care professional regarding the use of this medicine in children. Special care may be needed.
What if I miss a dose?
This does not apply.
What drug(s) may interact with Avian Influenza A (H5N1) Virus Vaccine?
chemotherapy or radiation therapy
medicines that suppress your immune function like etanercept, anakinra, infliximab, or adalimumab
steroid medicines like prednisone or cortisone
Tell your prescriber or health care professional about all other medicines you are taking, including non-prescription medicines, nutritional supplements, or herbal products. Also tell your prescriber or health care professional if you are a frequent user of drinks with caffeine or alcohol, if you smoke, or if you use illegal drugs. These may affect the way your medicine works. Check with your health care professional before stopping or starting any of your medicines.
What should I watch for while taking Avian Influenza A (H5N1) Virus Vaccine?
Report any side effects to your doctor or health care professional that do not go away within 3 days. Call your health care provider if any unusual symptoms occur within 6 weeks of receiving this vaccine.
Remember that the vaccine reduces your risk of getting a type of the flu but may not prevent your chance of getting it completely. The vaccine will not protect against colds or other illnesses besides the flu. Ask your health care professional about immunization for other family members.
What side effects may I notice from receiving Avian Influenza A (H5N1) Virus Vaccine?
Side effects that you should report to your prescriber or health care professional as soon as possible:
allergic reactions like skin rash, itching or hives, swelling of the face, lips, or tongue
fever over 102 degrees F
pain, tingling, numbness in the hands or feet
unusually weak or tired
Side effects that usually do not require medical attention (report to your doctor or health care professional if they continue or are bothersome):
pain, tenderness, redness, or swelling at the injection site
Where can I keep my medicine?
This drug is only given in a hospital or clinic and will not be stored at home.