Posted By Melissa Bartell on January 5, 2010
Administrative note: Because of the length of Roberto’s piece, we’ve hidden part of it behind a “more” tag. Please click on the link at the bottom of the post to read the entire essay.
Today at work, conversations summated about the meaning of happiness. A quick survey of some of my coworkers and Facebook pals, detailed that happiness is realizing that you have what you need. Another person quoted the Beatles song is a “warm gun,” spiritual sharing. Others justify happiness by using the word ‘me’, some by the luck of finding money in an old jacket pocket; some are not able to answer. By acquiring the certainty that you are loved, accepted, provided for and protected by someone completely powerful, completely good and all wise, all valid statements; perhaps, individualistic in essence. However, perhaps we are forgetting or do not know what happiness really means.
Aristotle defines happiness as a non-measureable outcome, not measured by money or goods, but by a person who has a balance between reason and desires with moderation. Still an individualistic thought. Aristotle emphasizes every activity has a final cause, the good at which it aims. The good of human beings must essentially involve the entire proper functions of human life. This movement must be an activity of the soul that expresses genuine virtue. The theories and opinions related to happiness embarked on an empty glass that is never filled by conditions and intrinsic worth of our society.
We are changing into a society of acceptance and no fighters of believers of progress. We are emerging into deep thoughts of empty actions. The world is changing around us and we are letting the world pass us by without actions. How can we define happiness if the world is rushing our lives through empty paths without progress and meaning? We have to stop the circle of non-sense and look around.
We want change; however, we lack efforts to enlighten others and teach others so change can start the fruit of development. Acceptance is not an option. We cannot let the world interact next to us instead of us participating in the changes our hearts demand to enlighten happiness. The truth is unknown and the consequences are high. Speak up and let the world know of your beliefs; it is time to speak up and require society to maintain the spark. Happiness cannot be defined because society has grown into an empty stomach of growling consequences of our actions. What we do affects others, what government does affect souls, spirits, and beliefs of a global market; that cannot be happiness. Lives are destroyed to make other lives ‘happy’; that cannot be happiness. People have to die to enhance the liberalism of societies; that cannot be happiness. The congruency of countries to hate and betray to enhance their enrichment for materials sacrificing small souls; that cannot be happiness. The power of religion imposing guilt to enhance the opportunities to meet God; that cannot be happiness. The condemning of so-called ‘unvirtuous’ souls for sexual attraction; that cannot be happiness. The growing of envy and hate that we as a society have to condemn and kill to maintain dignity; that cannot be happiness.
Happiness is not just a simple word in the dictionary. Happiness is not just the definition of a philosopher to maintain congruency among dialects and societies. Happiness is a diverse and dichotomy of beliefs and meaning depending on the individuals’ soul, spirit, past, present, and future outcomes. Happiness is what people believe they are entitled to obtain just to be humans within a society or culture. Happiness embraces equity and is a symbol of community; a community full of love and faith that search to enhance the well-being of others through justice, compassion, and open hearts.
During the holiday, it is time to commence a new paradigm of remembrance in which society grows together as community without lines of differences and attainments of hate and make an improved definition of happiness. It is time to remember our pioneers of love such as Gandhi, Martin Luther King Jr., Jehovah, Jesus, Buddha, Maoma, or whomever you believe was placed in this planet to spread the words of community love. To fight for what happiness really is, to enhance the lives coming behind us and prepare the path of their lives with seeds for continued cultivation. Let us learn and capture the events of society to enhance our spirits, our souls, and our own independence into a community. Let us learn to enhance the bright movements and colors of our planet and conserve the beauty of that magnificent space that caresses our bodies every morning when we wake up. Let us regenerate the synergy of love for others, regenerate life and influence with our words, actions, and thoughts. Let us make a decent contribution to the real meaning of happiness through cultural sensitization, learn from community needs, from the vulnerability of the souls and the intelligence of humanity. Let us share the abundant fruit of our hard work into social justice and fight for what is right.
Love must be part of happiness. If love is missing from one’s spirit, soul, or life, happiness is an incomplete redundant word in the dictionary. Let us move, discover, and fulfill the life of others by spreading and teaching happiness. As Aristotle said, “happiness is the meaning and the purpose of life, the whole aim, and end of human existence.” Our experiences of happiness will integrate our souls and spirits when our purpose of life and human existence is shared with others’ souls.