European social movements improve the well-being of men and women but need further analysis through a gender-sensitive lens. Taking an international and cross-disciplinary perspective, this book examines the impact of European social movements on gendered political and material well-being. Insights from history, politics, sociology and gender studies help identify how social movements have been instrumental in changing individual well-being through participation and empowerment. These movements have contributed to collective well-being thanks to victories in health, sexualities, political recognition and access to material goods.
The contributions pay particular attention to the role of women activists in social movements varying from unions and religious movements to the women's movement itself. The settings range from 19th century Catalonia to Switzerland and Poland, including studies on European transnational movements today and their impact on global gendered well-being. The authors consider how gender has been important in defining the goals, strategies and outcomes of social movements. Thanks to the international spread of contributions a comparative record can be examined. Together the authors provide unique and concrete illustrations of the role of collective action and the participatory process on transforming women and well-being in European societies. The book provides essential insights for students and scholars working on social and women's movements, European well-being and welfare, and transnational action.
Contents: Preface; The impact of social movements on gendered well-being in Europe, Alison E. Woodward, Jean-Michel Bonvin and Mercè Renom; Part I The Transformation of Political and Material Well-Being and Power: Mercè Renom and Alison E. Woodward; Subsistence movements in 18th-century Catalonia: material and political aspects in gendered food protests, Mercè Renom; Money matters: the impacts of class and gender on the first wave of women's movements financing strategies, Pernilla Jonsson and Silke Neunsinger; Working women an 'de-unionization': the struggles for autonomy, Conchi Vilar, Mònica Borrell, Carles Enrech, Juanjo Romero-Marín and Jordi Ibarz; Second wave feminism and the capability approach: the Swiss case, Sylvie Burgnard; Anti-modernist utopia in 'new Europe': protest, gender and well-being, Andrea Petö. Part II The Transformation of Intimate Citizenship: Bodies, Personal Capacities and the Intimate Conditions of Life: Jean-Michel Bonvin; Gender family policies and democracy in Eastern Europe after 1989, Jacqueline Heinen; Dutch women's health care movement and the transformation of the welfare state in the Netherlands 1975–2005, Berteke Waaldijk; Redefining well-being through actions: women's activism and the Polish state, Magda Grabowska and Joanna Regulska; Not quite women: lesbian activism in Portugal, Ana Maria Brandão; We can't have men giving birth! (but we do). The impact of the Belgian transgender movement on the well-being of transgender persons in Belgium, Joz Motmans; Intimate citizenship and gendered well-being: the claims and interventions of women's movements in Europe, Sasha Roseneil, Isabel Crowhurst, Tone Hellesund, Ana Cristina Santos and Mariuya Stoilva. Part III The Transformation of Political Fora and Spaces: Making a Place for Global Issues and the Transformation of Women's Well-Being Beyond Borders: Alison E. Woodward; Women's mobilization in conflicts over female Muslim covering: an opportunity for the well-being of women?, Leila Hadj-Abdou; Minority inclusion, self-representation and coalition-building: the participation of minority women in European women's networks, Lise Rolundsen Agustín and Silke Roth; Care economies and collective well-being in contemporary European feminist organizing, Wendy Harcourt; Conclusion: the role of social movements in transforming well-being, Alison E. Woodward, Jean-Michel Bonvin and Mercè Renom; Index.