Image 1: Hancock Monument. This is the monument to Union Maj. Gen. Winfield S. Hancock. The monument to the left of the Hancock Monument is the 1st Pennsylvania Light Artillery, Battery B marker.
Hancock was the commander of the II Corps, but he was sent ahead of his corps by Major General George Meade to take over command of the Union forces at Gettysburg after Meade learned that Reynolds had been killed. Maj. Gen. O. O. Howard was in charge of the Union forces at the time and was senior to Hancock. He reluctantly handed over control of the Union forces to Hancock and both men planned the defense of Cemetery Hill.
Image 2: Battery B, 1st Pennsylvania Light Artillery Monument. The picture looks out to the east, roughly in the direction of Benner's Hill. The gatehouse and the Hancock monument are in the opposite direction of this picture.
Image 3: A cannon, sitting beside the Battery B, 1st Pennsylvania Light Artillery Monument. This cannon, seen to the left of the monument in the above image, looks out towards Benner's Hill.
Image 4: Battery F & G, 1st Pennsylvania Light Artillery Monument. The monument in the foreground is to batteries F and G of the 1st Pennsylvania Light Artillery. Behind and to the right of this monument is the equestrian statute to Maj. Gen. Hancock (see above). On the far right is the 14th Indiana Infantry monument. In the background you can see the Evergreen Cemetery gatehouse (see below).
Image 5: Evergreen Cemetery Gatehouse. One of the most famous buildings on the battlefield, the gatehouse dates to the time of the battle. Hard fighting occurred near the front of the building on July 2, 1863. Artillery was posted in front and to either side, of the gatehouse.
Image 6: Howard Monument. This is the monument to the one armed Union Maj. Gen. Oliver Otis Howard. In the background is the monument to Battery I, 1st New York Light Artillery.
Howard was the commander of XI Corps. He took over command of all Union forces when he arrived on the battlefield after Reynolds had been killed. He was later superceded by Hancock. Howard's forces had retreated to this hill from their positions north of the town in an apparent rout, but they fought well in the hard fighting for Cemetery Hill on July 2, 1862.
Image 7: 4th Ohio Infantry Monument. This monument sits along the Baltimore Pike. In the centre background (partially obscured by the tree on the left) is Culp's Hill. The monument in the background (above the cannon on the right) is the Battery L, 1st New York Light Infantry monument.
Image 8 : Battery L, 1st New York Light Infantry Monument. In the background is Culp's Hill.
These photographs were taken with a Nikon F-601 autofocus SLR, using a Nikkor 24mm - 50mm f2.8 wide angle zoom lens or with a Sigma 150mm - 300mm telephoto zoom lens. The images were captured on Kodak Gold 200 film.