Elements of Interior Design
by Jeanette Joy Fisher
What are the elements of interior design?
Interior designers study
the elements or principles of interior design from many perspectives.
Traditional studies include the history of furnishings emphasizing period
architectural and furniture design styles. Today, interior designers study
socially responsible design, environmental or green design, along with Feng
Shui and India's holistic design
Design Psychology exceeds "traditional" interior design practice by considering
the effects of interior design elements on our five senses, as well as our emotions.
Rather than decorating to impress or to follow a certain style, you can choose
specific lighting, color, patterns, and other design elements to support your
happiness and well-being.
Design Psychology includes an understanding of both physiological and
psychological effects of interior design elements. For instance, our pituitary gland
releases tranquilizing hormones when we view sky blue. Knowledge of
physiological effects of color can be applied to home makeovers to ensure a
room uplifts, calms, or energizes.
Our physiological reaction to design elements leads to our psychological
response. We all know that a trickling waterfall not only looks pretty, but
relaxes those nearby. But do you know that certain lighting choices make you feel
irritable, while other lighting decisions comfort? You know that colors
influence your emotions. Are you aware that undulating patterns uplift the spirit,
while some geometric patterns cause anxiety?
Design Psychology you can help you choose
interior design elements to bring about emotional support in your home
makeover. You encourage happiness based on the way your senses-- vision,
hearing, touch, smell, and even taste--react to specific choices of interior
Your Home for Happiness with Design Psychology
Design Psychology Elements
- First, learn
about lighting -- the most important factor in residential design.
- Next, use
colors appropriate to the natural setting, lighting, and desired emotional
response. This takes you one step further than color psychology.
- Then think about reactions to patterns already in the space and add
harmonious patterns based on nature; patterns proven to make people happy.
design elements in your home also come into play -- sounds, accessories,
furnishings and arrangements for comfort.
Once you understand how your home decorating choices influence your emotions, you can follow your own
inspiration and creatively employ design elements.
Just as master artists study the physical body and anatomy, your background
knowledge in Design Psychology prepares you with underlying theory. Equipped,
you're ready to makeover your home for joyous living.
Copyright © 2006 Jeanette J. Fisher. All Rights Reserved.
Join our Teleclasses
and get expert help with your home makeover project.
Home Decorating Articles