On this page:
The word subsidy and its family (subsidiary, subsidies, subsidise, subsidised, subsidises, subsidising) are included in the Academic Word List by Dr. Averil Coxhead, which contains the 570 most frequent word families used in academic texts from a variety of subject areas, of interest for students that learn the words most needed to study at tertiary institutions.
|Play/pause||Buy footage||Find more|
Definition of the noun subsidy
What does subsidy mean as a name of something?
noun - plural: subsidies
- a grant paid by a government to an enterprise that benefits the public
- example: a subsidy for research in artificial intelligence
- lexical domain: Possessions - nouns denoting possession and transfer of possession
- more generic word: grant = any monetary aid
- more specific terms:
Alternative definition of the noun subsidy
- financial support or assistance, such as a grant
- antonym: tax
- [dated] money granted by parliament to the British Crown
Printed dictionaries and other books with definitions for Subsidy
Click on a title to look inside that book (if available):
Since a subsidy is a direct interference into a market, it can have a distorting effect. It is this distortion that needs to be analyzed to measure its impact and if the subsidy is an effective use of resources. The distortion can be described to act in ...
Singapore's Approach to Economic Resilience by Hui Ying Sng, Wai Mun Chia
An additional criterion for receiving an SDF subsidy is that trainees must achieve at least 75% attendance rate. Furthermore, trainees must sit for all examinations if the course leads to certification. There are three shortcomings of the SDF: 1.
Essays on Public Choice (2007)
by Mohammad Reza Mirhosseini
The subsidy is an inefficient way to redistribute oil revenues: Economists believe that, due to pollution and many other negative externalities, gas must be taxed rather than subsidized. Nevertheless the governments have often been under ...
As required by law, the Low-lncome Subsidy is a means-tested public benefit. In order to apply and qualify, Medicare beneficiaries generally must meet both an income and asset test. ln 2006, the maximum income to qualify for the LIS was $ l4 ...
A Proposal for Linkage by Sanjay Reddy, Christian Barry
In what follows, we shall assume for expository simplicity that the entity administering the wage subsidy is the government of the developing country in which production occurs. If it is not possible to neutralize fully the cost-raising impact of ...
by Michael Shally-Jensen
The sugar subsidy program also is highly beneficial to the industry producing high fructose corn syrup, the sweetener used in many soft drinks. It should not be surprising that Washington lobbyists for corn refiners are highly effective advocates ...
The Encyclopedia of Adoption (2007)
by Christine A. Adamec, Laurie C. Miller
In fiscal year 2001, 39,135 children in the United States received an adoption subsidy. Major adoptive parent groups, such as the North American Council on Adoptable Children in St. Paul, Minnesota, have long supported the adoption ...
Encyclopedia of Finance (2006)
by Cheng-Few Lee
Net duration, interest subsidy, and value loss of prefunded bonds Pre-tax Interest Subsidy 1⁄4 (rpfBpf)(rpf À res) per year (1 þ rpf)nÀ1 Value loss 1⁄4 (rpf Bpf )(rpf À res) Empty cell represents the improbable case of rpf < rz. Zero-coupon and ...
Political Dictionary (1846)
Forming a Work of Universal Reference, Both Constitutional and Legal
SUBSIDY, from subsidium, a Latin word signifying aid or assistance. " Subsidies," says Lord Coke, " were antiently called auxilia, aides, granted by act of parliament upon need and necessity ; as also for that originally and principally they were ...
Marine Affairs Dictionary (2004)
Terms, Concepts, Laws, Court Cases, and International Conventions and Agreements by Niels West
Differential Subsidy Program; Fisheries Obligation Guarantee; Jones Act; Operating Differential Subsidy Program; Vessel Subsidy)...
shipbuilding subsidy program from 50 % to 35 % of total costs.
Encyclopedia of Homelessness (2004)
by David Levinson
The subsidy types are the following: • Individual subsidy, which gives individuals access to housing on existing property or property not located in a project approved by a provincial housing development board • Project-linked subsidy, which ...
by Kenneth J. Blume
received a $425,000 subsidy from the British government to transport ...
by Donald Rutherford
subsidy. (H2). A negative tax, a payment by the government to a firm or household.Inmost casesthese are payments to a firm to reduce the costofthelabour orcapital it employs. Subsidies can distort the pattern of production and, if used for a ...
Online dictionaries and encyclopedias with entries for Subsidy
Click on a label to prioritize search results according to that topic:
Photos about Subsidy
Click on an item to view that photo:
If you need related images for an article or a report, you can download stock photos:
Video language resources about Subsidy
Click on an item to play that video:
- Subsidy Meaning
Video shows what subsidy means. Financial support or assistance, such as a grant.. Money granted by parliament to the British Crown.. Subsidy Meaning.
- Osama Tayyab star asia news, subsidy meaning
- Merah Putih Coalition Criticized for Insistence on Fuel Subsidy Cut Explanation
- VOCABULARY IN 20 LANGUAGES = anti subsidy proceeding
- Prabowo's Merah Putih Coalition Demands Explanation on Fuel Subsidy Cuts
- VOCABULARY IN 20 LANGUAGES = interest rate subsidy
- VOCABULARY IN 20 LANGUAGES = building subsidy
- Affordable Care Subsidy Description
View more videos about Export subsidy.
See also the pronunciation examples of Subsidy!
Quotes about Subsidy
Scrabble value of S1U1B3S1I1D2Y4
The value of this 7-letter word is 13 points. It is included in the first and second editions of the Official Scrabble Players Dictionary.
Share this page
Go to the usage examples of Subsidy to see it in context!