What wipe word means?
“Wipe” word means
deleting file so they could never be undeleted or recovered. Note:
simple Windows deletion doesn’t wipe your file (even if you press
shift + del).
What is better, QuickWiper or Shred Agent?
Both programs are
different in functionality. Let me explain: Shred Agent - it's a
program that running automatically when Windows starts (you can find
it in your system tray) and makes deletion secure and prevents
information leakages in real time. So it's not required for you to
monitor each file that you delete - Shred Agent doing it in
QuickWiper - it is a program that help you to wipe and make
impossible to recover already deleted files and protect your privacy
by clearing in one click Internet Explorer's cookies, history, cache
records and typed URLs, temporary and recent files.
Both programs have such feature as "wipe free disk space". It means
that free space on your hard disk drive will be wiped and it makes
impossible to recover any previously deleted file it's not depend if
it was deleted yesterday or months ago. Also, I can say that Shred
Agent uses a more reliable wipe free space algorithm, than
I can un-delete wiped file?
it's impossible. So please, be careful when wiping files.
is wipe free space option?
function overwrites all previously deleted files.
should use it for two reasons:
wipe previous deleted files. You had been deleting files before
you have started using QuickWiper;
wipe temporary files. Some programs (such as MS Office) create
temporary files, which contain your sensitive information. The program
deletes such a files and you cannot point QuickWiper to delete it.
- Use wipe free space.
Files are still recoverable after wipe free
space, what the problem might be?
There might be two
reasons of the problem:
1) You have some file protected utility running (for instance,
Norton Recycle Protection);
2) Close all programs that might access hard disk while wiping;
Make sure you are not running any file recovery service while wiping
process. For instance, if you have Norton recycle protection
installed the you will not be able to wipe files or free space
When QuickWiper wipes free space it creates large temporary file
that places it's information on free space occupied by deleted
wipe free space function can do any harm?
as it overwrites only previously deleted files and use safe way to do
If I lost my registration code for QuickWiper
There is a key code
recovery form available at our
You will need to enter your email address to recover key code.