Health care is all over the news these days, as the Obama administration struggles to expand coverage and reform an ailing system. Amid all the talk, it is easy to forget the roll of Medical Researchers, whose hard work allows us to diagnose potentially deadly diseases and then undergo many of those hotly-debated life-saving operations. Years of research and technological leaps have given today's doctors the eyes and tools that were never even imagined years ago. The world of petri dishes and micrographs of cancers, bacteria, and viruses are far from the experience of most people, but such things are just another day at the office for many Medical Research Scientists.
These days, medical illustration has gone digital. Where artists once drew by hand, many now use graphic design programs to create detailed images of the human body. Such programs offer an amazing range of tools that artists can use to create their own particular style of computer illustration. Contemporary illustrators also benefit from the better raw visuals available in the medical industry. The superior imaging machines being used by doctors and researchers give illustrators a better look inside living bodies. As always, these artists have the unique advantage of being able to improve on the raw images that come from such sources. They can give us a clear and truly beautiful look at neural pathways, kidneys, the skeletal system, or a hip replacement -- from any angle we like. And such artists can use their imagination to create conceptual drawings of, say, a brain on psychedelics or a person suffering from schizophrenia.
Parts of the United States have had the wettest and coolest summer on record, reminding us of the way in which even mild weather trends can affect us. When severe weather hits it can be, as we all know, devastating. Unfortunately, with global warming, we will see more of these extreme storms in the future. In 2007, USA Today reported that the number of hurricanes that develop each year has more than doubled over the past century. It quotes a report published in the Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A that claims average hurricane numbers jumped sharply during the 20th century, from 3.5 per year in the first 30 years to 8.4 in the earliest years of the 21st century. Over that time, Atlantic Ocean surface temperatures increased .65 degrees, which experts call a significant increase. With climate change, we can expect hurricanes, floods, droughts, and other meteorological effects to be worse and more frequent than in the past. We are Science Source, specializing in images of weather. See the devastating effects and unnerving beauty of blizzards, floods, hurricanes, tornadoes, supercells, and hail storms, as well as other meteorological phenomena.