NEW YORK Mon Jul 28, 2014 4:34pm EDT0 Comments Tweet Share this EmailPrint Related Topics Health »
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - People who run in their spare time, even if it’s not very fast or very far, tend to have a lower risk of dying from heart disease or from any cause than non-runners, according to a new study.
The study was large but was observational, meaning the researchers asked participants about their running habits rather than randomly assigning them to running and non-running groups. So they cannot conclude that running, and not other differences between participants, was responsible for the lower risks.
It’s difficult to use more rigorous randomized controlled trials to look at outcomes like death, because that takes so long to track, said lead author Duck-chul Lee, from the College of Human Sciences at Iowa State University in Ames.
He said the current study is the largest on this topic, but it would still be useful to conduct randomized trials to look at the effects of running on blood pressure and cholesterol, for instance.
The researchers studied more than 55,000 generally healthy adults between ages 18 and 100. Participants answered questions about their physical activity habits over the past three months, including running speed, duration and frequency. Some were not runners at all; the rest were divided into five groups based on how much they ran each week.
The researchers then tracked the participants using their medical records for an average of 15 years.
About 3,400 people died during that time, including roughly 1,200 from cardiovascular causes, including heart disease and stroke.
At the start, runners were more often male, younger and leaner. Compared to non-runners, people who ran at all were 30 percent less likely to die during the study period and 45 percent less likely to die from cardiovascular disease.
Runners had a reduced risk of death even if they ran for less than 51 minutes or less than six miles per week, and even if they ran at a pace slower than six miles per hour, according to results published in the Journal of the American College of Cardiology.
View the Original article