When I first saw this video March 15, at the UCLA retreat at the UC Irving conference center I too was surprised that safety glasses were used rather than goggles. There was no discussion on the use of the safety glasses making the exchanges here interesting.
What follows are a few simple questions that people can ponder.
1 Are you the person with the ultimate responsibility on the students or employees safety? If your are that person, then what would you recommend? If you are not that person, then place yourself in that position and think about your response?
2 Student A at university 1 is required to wear goggles in a chemistry lab. Student B at university 2 is permitted to wear safety glasses in an identical chemistry lab as Student A.
Student A asks the professor why (s)he must wear these goggles when her friend can wear safety glasses. How do you respond?
Student B asks the professor why they can wear glasses when her friend must wear goggles. Is this experiment unsafe? How do you respond?
3 When the risk assessment was performed for this class or the work being performed, was the type of eye protection considered? Was the experience of the occupants, current and future, considered? Were risky behaviors considered?
4 Is the loss of vision in one or both eyes worth the increased risk of wearing more attractive and a little more comfortable safety glasses?
5 Fogging and comfort are frequent excuses for not wearing goggles. I think that more effort needs to be done in evaluating anti-fogging solutions and other types of goggles or safety shields. Safety shields could be suitable for students wearing prescription eyeglasses.
6 Do you really trust the person next to you with your eye sight?
Think about these scenarios and others you may consider.
Here is a new safety video from UCSD called Splash Zone. It was produced by Dr. Haim Weizman.
All the best,
Environment, Health & Safety, CCHO
Chemical Safety Officer
University of California, San Diego
Office phone: (858) 822-1579
Cell phone: (858) 583-3257
Mail code: 0089
Previous post | Top of Page | Next post