State regulators say they want to provide natural areas, in addition to power plants, to protect manatees from the cold.
Before settlers ditched and drained Florida, more water bubbled up from beneath the ground to feed rivers and streams or seeped slowly into creeks from soggy wetlands. Warmed by the Earth, that water kept manatees alive during the chilliest days of winter.
But Florida's development upended that natural system. Now the endangered manatees, aquatic cousins to the elephant, rely largely on people's demand for electricity to get them through the winter.
Power plants provide the only source of warmth in many of the state's diminished waterways, attracting manatees by the hundreds during cold snaps. Yet state wildlife regulators say power plants are not manatees' best insurance plan, because they can fail suddenly, may close temporarily or have to be remodeled.
Hundreds of manatees died during the last two years — two of the coldest winters on record — but even more would have perished if even one power plant failed. The need is so critical that Florida Power & Light is spending $250,000 a year to keep water warm for manatees at its Cape Canaveral plant while a new operation is being built there.
Thinking long-term, the Florida Fish and Wildlife Conservation Commission is looking to the state's remaining natural areas — including one in North Port — to provide permanent manatee protection during cold days.
Successfully preserving natural warm areas hinges on limiting the amount of water people take from the spring-fed rivers for drinking water, agriculture, recreation and other uses.
But a separate agency, the Southwest Florida Water Management District, determines how much water can be taken from rivers and streams, through regulations called minimum flows.
Flows in almost every spring in the state are declining, but not quite enough to significantly put manatees in danger now, said Ron Mezich, a biological scientist with the FWC. The pressure on those resources is increasing, however.
"We're in pretty good shape. That's why we're pushing for these minimum flows to get set now rather than later so we don't lose more flow than necessary," Mezich said.
Need for warmth
Manatees require warm water to survive the winter. When water temperatures fall below 68 degrees, the large animals swim inland, finding refuge in spring-fed creeks and rivers where water temperatures are higher.
This year's mild weather made the winter easy for the big mammals. Only nine so far this year have been found dead from cold stress, even after a few days of near freezing weather.
The story was different in 2010 and 2011, when prolonged freezes took an enormous toll. Wildlife rescuers found about 400 dead manatees, with the likelihood that many more died out of sight.
Those large numbers, for a population of animals estimated at about 5,000, raised questions among FWC staff and manatee advocates about whether there are enough natural warm sites for manatees to gather.
Although hundreds of manatees congregate at power plants to shelter from the cold, a failure of the plant or a reduction in its heat generation could lead to a deadly situation. Manatees also tend to survive better at natural sites, manatee advocates say.
"Certainly manatees are most protected at natural warm water sites and we've seen that in the last few winters," said Katie Tripp, director of science and conservation with Save the Manatee Club. "The cold stress in and around the springs has been lower than it has been around power plant waters because it's natural."
Once the water district sets a minimum flow, it puts a limit on how much water developers, farmers or other industries can take from the river or its surrounding aquifers.
In the Homosassa, Chassahowitzka and Crystal rivers north of Tampa, springs keep 72-degree water constantly flowing. During cold days, hundreds of manatees pack into those rivers, making them among the most important refuges in the state.
To protect them, the water district was originally supposed to set minimum flows for the Crystal River in 2010 and the other two rivers in 2011.
"We're a little bit delayed relative to our original schedule," said Doug Leeper, the water district's chief environmental scientist. He blamed the delay on the complexity of the river systems and the large number of "stakeholders."
Among the most contentious is the Chassahowitzka. The district proposed that the river could handle an 11 percent reduction in flow without significantly harming wildlife, including manatees. Residents protested, appalled at any flow reduction.
The district is not allowed to set a minimum flow that would cause significant harm, a subjective threshold.
Leeper said the district is in talks with residents but any proposed minimum flow has to be approved by the governor-appointed board that manages the water district. Pressure comes from both sides: residents and those who may want to tap the river's water in the future.
"Those pressures don't necessarily influence the scientific basis for minimum flows, but they can come into play when political bodies, such as the governing board, decides not to implement minimum flows," Leeper said.
On the northeast coast of Florida, where Blue Spring also draws hundreds of manatees, pressure from water suppliers near Orlando is threatening flow rules already in place.
"There's some push back to allow more pumping of groundwater in that area," Mezich said.
Flow protections for Blue Spring, set in 2008, came after a lengthy battle, Tripp said. The rules require flows to increase so that the spring can host more manatees in the future.
Maintaining water flow is one part of the equation in protecting wintering manatees. Another is improving access to warm water.
Of the 22 small and large natural springs across the state, more than half have barriers that impede manatees, according to a 2006 assessment by the federal Marine Mammal Commission.
North Port's Warm Mineral Spring is one. Known as a refuge for tourists seeking a soothing dip in Florida's only true warm spring, it also could host manatees if they could get there.
The spring seeps into Salt Creek, a shallow and narrow tributary that runs straight through a neighborhood before it empties into the Myakka River.
There are weirs and low tides to navigate, limiting the number of manatees the creek can hold. Still more than 70 manatees at a time have packed the creek during cold weather.
The FWC is researching ways to make the creek more accessible, possibly by dredging parts of it, if water flows from the spring are sufficient.
Salt Creek and Warm Mineral Spring does not attract as many manatees as other refuges, but it is a critical site because it is the only natural warm water area in Southwest Florida.
"It's important," Mezich said. "In the long term it's very important."