“We realize the importance of our voices only when we are silenced.” “One child, one teacher, one book, one pen can change the world.” “When the whole world is silent, even one voice becomes powerful.”
Pakistani activist for female education and the youngest-ever Nobel Prize laureate.
The way you vote, the way you live, the way you protest, the pressure you bring to bear on your government, has an impact way beyond your borders. That is your privilege, and your burden. J.K. Rowling
From Harvard Commencement Speech, 2008
British novelist, screenwriter and film producer best known as the author of the Harry Potter fantasy series.
As long as you keep a person down, some part of you has to be down there to hold him down, so it means you cannot soar as you otherwise might.
Singer, delegate to the United Nations Human Rights Committee, "goodwill ambassadress" for the U.S. Department of State, Civil Rights activist, singer at the 1963 March on Washington for Jobs and Freedom in 1963, recipient of numerous awards and honors including; Presidential Medal of Freedom in 1963, the Kennedy Center Honors in 1978, the National Medal of Arts in 1986, and a Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award in 1991.
The drums of Africa still beat in my heart. They will not let me rest while there is a single Negro boy or girl without a chance to prove his worth.
Mary McLeod Bethune
American educator, stateswoman, philanthropist, humanitarian and civil rights activist best known for starting a private school for African-American students in Daytona Beach, Florida.
The emotional, sexual, and psychological stereotyping of females begins when the doctor says, "It's a girl."
American politician, educator, author. 1st black woman elected to the United States Congress. 1st black candidate for a major party's nomination for President of the United States. 1st woman to run for the Democratic Party's presidential nomination.
If you have only one smile in you give it to the people you love.
American poet, memoirist, and civil rights activist. She published seven autobiographies, three books of essays, several books of poetry, and was credited with a list of plays, movies, and television shows spanning over 50 years. Source: Wikipedia