If you are looking for reliable information on nutrition, you're in the right place. Here you will find practical information impartial science-based and written by a professional and experienced dietitian.
1 - Eliminate Gluten
We have been bombarded with pro-wheat marketing campaign for years, but research and clinical experience teaches us that the gluten is not good for health. It causes inflammation, is linked to brain disorders and addictive.
2 - Good fats
Your body needs omega-3 daily for brain function, hormone production, metabolism, and more! If you buy fish oil, it is essential that they be certified free of mercury and dioxins and purified. A good source of fat may come from walnuts, almonds, macadamia nuts, pecans, pumpkin seeds, nut butters, avocados, egg yolks, oil, extra virgin olive oil, organic butter, oil coconut for cooking more heat, grape seed or use of sesame oil.
3 - Love vegetables
Most enzymes, antioxidants, minerals and fiber from vegetables, dark green or bright color. We suggest that you eat vegetables at every meal. When properly prepared, the vegetables are a delight and if for you, prepare vegetables is a real headache when it is time to review your report with the vegetables. Falling in love vegetables starts with the choice of main course and the amazing diversity of vegetables, then shopping, then the preparation and ends with the tasting of this delicious home-made. We believe that once the habit of preparing meals with fresh vegetables, you can not do without and vegetables will quickly become your new best friends.
4 - Protein
The decision of whether to eat meat is personal. Our experience has taught us that most people feel better in the long run when they consume animal protein. We need protein for the functioning of almost everything, including weight loss, immune system, metabolism, brain, hormones and energy. The protein requirement increases with the psychological and physical stress, exercise, pregnancy ... The best sources of protein are fish low in mercury, organic chicken, turkey, beef or eggs. You can also eat quinoa (grain containing more protein) instead of white rice, pasta, oatmeal, etc.. Nuts, lentils, legumes are recommended as part of your daily protein intake, but does not completely replace animal protein. You can also drink a smoothie of whey protein per day for breakfast or snack. And where possible, get food from animal farms that maintain high ethical standards and standards of good nutrition.
5 - Digestion
Your intestine is where food meets your body and magic-digestion, absorption and elimination of waste-occurs or not. If your digestion is a problem, it's time to restart. Invest in some dietary supplements (ie, fiber, glutamine, probiotics) and choose foods that will help your digestive system. Pineapple, papaya, Kim Chi, fresh yogurt, sauerkraut are certainly among our top choices to improve the digestive system. Antimicrobials such as garlic, coconut oil and oregano are also excellent for digestive health in general.
6 - Forget the "junk food"
Artificial ingredients contained in the junk food contribute to increased toxicity in the body. While your body is capable of removing a certain amount of food, most people consume excessive amounts of toxins in their food. The result is illustrated by a chronic smelly breath, bad body odor, itching skin, acne, fatigue, increased allergies, headaches and a slowed metabolism, all resulting in a weight gain. Junk food affects your immune system, which contributes to cancer and autoimmune diseases. Toxins produce free radicals that break the blood vessels contributing to the imbalance in cholesterol and increases your chance of having heart disease. Not to consume little or hydrogenated oils, MSG, aspartame, sucralose, artificial colors and flavors, salt, preservatives, gluten and most other ingredients you do not know the names.
7 - Re-mineralize your H2O
Our ancestors drank water from a mineral-rich soil. Today, most of the water we drink are devoid of minerals or contain small amounts. The result, our body lacks minerals! Choose more mineralized water to compensate for this deficiency and make it a habit to drink at least 8 glasses of water or herbal tea, fresh fruit juice (1 glass per day), iced green tea or white tea hot green or white, coconut water every day to maximize your health, your energy, your endurance and your athletic performance!
8 - Take a Break
Coffee causes fatigue of the adrenal glands, intestinal problems, hormonal imbalances and low energy. Challenge yourself to eliminate or reduce your intake of coffee, at least for a while. If the abandonment of coffee gives you headaches, start by switching to organic. Some alternatives to coffee green tea, maté, ginger tea or cocoa milk house (mix of almond milk or coconut milk, cocoa powder, real vanilla and syrup agave).
9 - Mollo on sugar!
Seriously, sugar is one of the greatest enemies of good health. Only buy or do not eat foods containing sugar syrup or corn. Be aware that companies use derivatives to enhance the flavor of food. Instead of buying candy and cookies, start making your own goodies or buy your own health products that use Stevia, Xylitol, fruit juice, agave juice or vegetable glycerin instead of syrup corn, glucose, fructose and other high glycemic. This will reduce the risk of developing diabetes, weight gain and minimize hormonal imbalances!
10 - A good balance
You do not need to turn you into a guru of health or a skilled reader of nutrition. Check what you can (like when you go shopping, your way of cooking, where you eat, what brands you buy, and what supplements you take) and do not take everything literally, enjoy a flexibility and above all leave room for pleasure, you will avoid to feel in a situation of failure if you succumb to your old habits.