Forest Smiles – The Best Dentist in Lynchburg, VA
Most people believe that they have the perfect dental hygiene routine, but they are wrong. The good news is that it is never too late to make some changes and keep your teeth healthier than ever.
Brushing your teeth in the right way
Brushing your teeth in a proper way is one of the simplest ways to keep your teeth clean and healthy. In order to brush the teeth in the right way, just put the bristles of the toothbrush at a 45-degree angle at the gum line. The bristles must treat the tooth surface and the gumline. The tooth’s external surface is brushed up and down and back and forth. Keep in mind that you have to be gentle and careful. The internal side of the gums and teeth is cleaned in the same way. In the end, don’t forget to brush the surface of the tongue and the mouth’s roof. This is where bad bacteria like to dwell.
It would be perfect to brush the teeth at least twice a day. Experts recommend using mouthwash after every meal in order to clean acids and bacteria.
Many people think that flossing is not something that people have to do, but the truth is that flossing can save you from a lot of trouble. This is a procedure that is performed after brushing. Regular flossing can help people eliminate food leftovers and other dangerous compounds that can’t be eliminated with the help of a toothbrush. The bristles can’t reach these areas and mouthwash and rinsing are ineffective in cases like this too. Floss your teeth once a day preferably before bedtime.
If you want to take proper care of your teeth, stop smoking right away. By doing this, you will significantly reduce the chances of developing oral cancer and different periodontal issues. In addition, you will eliminate possible negative effects caused by the chemicals found in tobacco like bad breath for instance. Many people use coffee or take candies to cover bad breath but this is causing, even more, problems.
Stay away from coffee, soft drinks, and alcohol
All these drinks are rich in phosphorus. This mineral is actually good for the teeth, but when there is too much of it, it lowers the level of calcium. That’s why these drinks lead to dental health problems like tooth decay and gum disease. In addition, most of these drinks have additives and sugar that are bad for the teeth and your health in general.