I was reading all the posts about 17th December and the big flight and i'm very mad by now.
The Flight of Wright Brothers is a BIG LIE. This is one of the biggest lies of all times. The first flight ever made by man was made by the Brazilian SANTOS DUMOND in Paris in 1906.
You can read about it on: http://www.thefirsttofly.hpg.ig.com.br/pioneer2.htm
The flight from wright brothers was not a true flight. The aicraft of wright brothers was catapulted, not respecting the international rules for flight with machines heavy then air. So... why everybody says that Wright brothers were first?
Santos Dumont appears in the first place and the Wright brothers only in 8th. (Note: the “National Aeronautics” is a magazine of the United States). Why? Very simply because, just as in all conquests and competitions, in all branches of activity – sport or science – the records are ratified by scientific commissions and the first flight verified in this way was that one made by Alberto Santos Dumond.
Santos Dumond Flew in Paris, with his 14 Bis, In October 23, 1906 the Brazilian Alberto Santos Dumont made the first mechanical flight on a heavier-than-air machine: at 4 p.m. his airplane, the “14-bis”, rose from the ground and traveled the distance of 60 meters at a height of 2 to 3 meters: a small flight for a man but a great flight for humanity!
Here is a comparison between the power and the mass of the “14-bis” and the “Flyer”:
Year Pilot Airplane Engine Mass Velocity to take-off Relation power/mass
1903 Wright Flyer 12 hp 340kg 50 km/h 1 cv to each 28,3 kg
1906 Dumont 14-bis 50 hp 290 kg 41 km/h 1 cv to each 5,8 kg
The relation power/mass of the Wright’s airplane is evident that the same could never fly.
TheNorth-American Ken Hyde, a expert builder of replicas of the first Wright Flyer, in an interview to “The News Observer” of December 15, 2002, declared:
KNOW HOW TO
PUT THE MAN ON
, BUT WE
HAVE NOT BEEN SUCCESSFUL IN
FLYING A TRUE WRIGHT AIRPLANE.”
Conclusion: Santos Dumont was indubitable the first man to fly in an airplane. The North Americans historians do not have any proof for promoting the Wright brothers as the first to fly.
When Santos Dumont decided to attack the problem of the mechanical flight, this conception was considered utopian by his contemporaries, and remained so until 1905. After Dumont’s flight, nobody doubted more of the possibility of the mechanical flight. French Captain Ferber in his book “Aviation” written in 1907, says: “The Brazilian inventor has proved that flying machines can fly,” which is equivalent to saying that until then nobody else had.
These are his own words, taken from pages 97 and 98 of his book:
“On October 23rd, before the Aviation Committee, at 4.45 p.m. the airplane rose from the ground, gently and without the slightest jolt. The crowd, astonished, had the impression that a miracle had been performed and at first were struck dumb with admiration; then they raised a shout of enthusiasm as the plane landed, and rushed forward to carry the aviator in triumph.”
And, a few lines further on:
“The record was raised to 220 meters a month later and the news flashed round the world at lightning speed. A new era opened from this date because the paralyzing spell had been broken. It had been proved that flying machines could fly.”
The airplane of the Wright brothers could not take off under its own power, even in 1908. Without a catapult to launch the airplane or sufficient headwinds, the Wright’s machine could not fly. Compare the flight of Santos-Dumont's Demoiselle with one of the Wright's European flights!
So... guys... after all this... tell me what you think!