Bread vs pasta: what's healthier?
Who wins in the battle of the carbs.
Bread and pasta are often seen as ‘carbs to be avoided at all costs’, however, Joel Feren, accredited practicing dietitian and spokesperson for the Dietitian’s Association of Australia warns to be careful of that judgement.
Like all things, energy intake needs to be controlled but it’s an important part of your diet none the less.
When looking at which is a better option, there are some slight differences which see bread come out on top.
“One cup of cooked pasta is a serve and its kilojoule energy content is a little bit higher than a serve of bread which tends to be two slices. In terms of carbohydrate content, we have 42g of carbohydrate in the cup of pasta and about 30g in a serve of bread.”
However, Feren adds that pasta is a low GI energy source. “This means it’s broken down over a longer period of time so it’s actually going to sustain us.”
So, while yes, these are high-energy, high-calorie foods – they’ll keep us nice and full for a while, stopping snacking.
“I think the main thing is that people tend to over eat pasta. Patients I meet in private practice will have a bowl of pasta and that’s all they’ll eat as a meal. I’ll ask, where’s the protein coming from? It’s also about getting enough vegies and salad.”
If you measure out one cup of pasta it isn’t a lot, so be sure to bulk out your meal with meat and fresh vegies.
As for the type of pasta, opting for a wholemeal option will get you a bit more fibre.
“You can also get ones that are fortified with extra protein and there is also a good one with a special time of fibre called beta glucan that helps reduce cholesterol. It’s the same type of fibre found in oats.”
Okay, so pasta’s not bad at all, but what about bread?
“I think bread is vilified,” says Feren. “It’s actually jam packed full of different vitamins, minerals, fibres and phytonutrients, which are plant-based chemicals.”
“The Australian government brought in a ruling that all breads need to be fortified with iodised salt, or at least made with it because a lot of young children have issues meeting their iodine requirements, as well as pregnant women.”
Without iodine your thyroid will be affected, as well as the neurodevelopment of a pregnant woman’s foetus.
“I think, for those that exclude bread unnecessarily, they’re potentially missing out on those valuable nutrients.”
You can have your bread or pasta without guilt. “I generally just recommend that people stick to one sort of carbohydrate with their meals. Don’t have garlic bread with your pasta. Always make sure that you get a side salad and some protein as well.”