Xerxes is a famous opera series which has been divided into three various acts by the renowned opera composer named George Frideric Handel. The first time the performance of this opera show took place was on the 15th of April in 1738 in London in the United Kingdom. This beautiful Italian based libretto was created by an anonymous person. Silvio Stampiglia then adapted it into his own version under the same name in 1694 by Giovanni Bononcini. Later it was found that Silvio Stampiglia had based his libretto from the one Nicolo Minato created and had been set in 1654 by Francesco cavalla
The narrative of this remarkable opera has been based in Persia which is the modern day Iran on the global map. The time period of the narration is set in 480 BC and with a loose knot is associated on Xerxes I of Persia. Even though when you watch the libretto being performed live you will notice that there is slight reference to Xerxes I of Persia. The opera had been originally performed by a castrato and currently it is being sung and performed by countertenor, contralto or mezzo-soprano. While the common title of the opera is Xerxes in the English language, yet the unique Italian name of the opera was Serse. The curtain raiser aria of the opera by the name of "Ombra mai fu" has been performed by Xerxes which is that to a tree (or Plantanus orientalis) is based on one of George Frideric Handel’s most famous harmonies and is mostly performed in a unique ensemble of an orchestral assortment which is called as Handel’s "largo", even though in the score it is called "larghetto".
By late 1737, Handel had been commissioned by the King’s Theatre to write a total of two unique and fresh operas. The first opera that he wrote was known as Faramondo and was showcased on the 3rd of January in 1738. As the first opera gained success, Handel began his work on Xerxes. The first act of his second opera’s composition took place during 26th of December 1737 and 9th of January in 1738. By the 25th of January the second part of the opera was prepared and the third one was completed on the 6th of February. By the 14th of February in 1738 Handel added a few of his finishing touches to one of the most famed opera’s to-be and presented it live to an audience at the King’s Theatre on the 15th of April in 1738. The first performance of the opera was a roaring success.
For the next 200 years, the opera seemed to have totally vanished from all theatres. However, it marveled in its debut modern restoration on the 5th of July in 1924 in Gottingen in an adaptation by Oscar Hagen. In a span of two years, the opera had been performed at various venues over ninety times in 1926 and in fifteen different German cities. From thereon, the word of the success of this opera caught on and people started flocking at the venues that it was being displayed at. In the words of Winton Dean, George Handel’s Xerxes is one of the most acclaimed opera for the modern day audiences’ right after the famous opera of Giulio Cesare. If you are a fan of watching live opera shows then this is one of the greatest opera’s to watch. Book your Xerxes tickets today and experience one of the most amazing opera’s ever.
In November 2010, the opera was produced for a dramatic stage event at the CIM (Cleveland Institute of Music). This show had been directed by the founder and artistic director of Cleveland Opera by the name of David Bamberger. Harry Davidson conducted the opera. It was instantly a critically acclaimed successful show and people from all age groups thoroughly enjoyed the show.
The opera is all set to come to be staged at a fantastic venue near you. This is without a doubt a great time for you to get your Xerxes tickets and experience a mind blowing performance that will be truly memorable for you.