The Coursework Option requires you complete an additional natural science course and independent study in lieu of a research project, which is a requirement of the Research Option.
All science-related coursework is tailored for teachers and focuses on how you can incorporate lessons into your own classroom.
Education courses (9 credits)
Develop a foundation in research, curriculum development, and policy. EDRM 602 and EDUC 660 are required for the M.N.S.E. degree. Students select either EDUC 619 or NSCI 612; students cannot receive credit for both courses for the M.N.S.E. degree.
- EDRM 602 – Action Research (3 cr.)
Gain the knowledge and skills to plan and implement school-based research to improve teaching and learning.
- EDUC 619 – Curriculum Development (3 cr.)
Examine historical traditions, curriculum philosophies, best practice instructional theories, contemporary curriculum issues, standards practices, and backward design theory.
NSCI 612 – Myth Busters: Science/Controversy/Evaluation (3 cr.)
Skepticism and the scientific method are critical to modern scientific practice. Throughout history there has always been an uneasy relationship between science and culture as science as a human activity is influenced by culture and vice versa. The course weaves science philosophy, methodology, and history with social and cultural contexts.
- EDUC 660 – Advanced Methods – Science and Math Instruction (3 cr.)
Gain the knowledge and skills to improve the teaching of science, technology, engineering, and mathematics in grades K-12.
Natural science courses (18 credits)
Expand your knowledge in a specific science discipline.
NSCI 619 – Physics for Science Educators (3 cr.)
Materials and energy transduction for grade 6-12 science teachers, with emphasis on optics, acoustics, and electromagnetism. A Science Lab Kit is utilized during this course.
NSCI 620 – Chemistry for Science Educators (3 cr.)
Theoretical and experimental chemistry for grade 6-12 science teachers, with emphasis on water chemistry. A Science Lab Kit is utilized during this course.
NSCI 630 – Spectroscopy for Science Educators (3 cr.)
Theory and applications of spectroscopy for grade 6-12 science teachers. A Science Lab Kit is utilized during this course.
- NSCI 640 – Energetics for Science Educators (3 cr.)
Production and use of energy for grade 6-12 science teachers, with emphasis on chemical and biological systems. A Science Lab Kit is utilized during this course.
NSCI 650 – Pollution and Environmental Biology for Educators (3 cr.)
Biological consequences of energy production and consumption for grade 6-12 science teachers. A Science Lab Kit is utilized during this course.
NSCI 660 – Evolutionary Biology for Educators (3 cr.)
Processes and patterns of evolution, including the four mechanisms of evolutionary change and how that change creates the complex biodiversity of the world.
STAT 511A – Design and Data Analysis for Researchers I (4 cr.)
Statistical methods for experimenters and researchers emphasizing design and analysis.
Visit the course descriptions page and the science lab kits page for expanded science course information.
Independent study (3 credits)
Focus on an advanced area of interest.
- NSCI 695 – Independent Study for MNSE (3 cr.)
Independent study immerses you in the primary scientific literature in biology, chemistry, or physics, and allows you to further tailor the degree toward your preferred science discipline. This study can be completed during any semester throughout the degree, and involves weekly meetings (in-person or at a distance) with your research advisor. Advisors are graduate students with regular faculty appointments in the Departments of Biology, Chemistry, or Physics. It does not require access to CSU or another research institution.