Instagram is a great way to share your vacations, passions, and sense of humor, but your account may be broadcasting something else as well: your mental health status. Turns out, the way depressed people see the world is reflected in the type of photos they choose to take and share on social media. These differences can be picked up by a new artificial intelligence program, helping the computer recognize which users are showing signs of depression, according to new research from Harvard University's Andrew Reece and the University of Vermont's Christopher Danforth. The strangest part? It turns out the computers are better at recognizing this human emotion than actual humans are.
The researchers gathered 44,000 Instagram photos from 166 different users — some of whom had been diagnosed with depression while the rest were mentally healthy — and asked normal people (i.e. not psychologists) to analyze the pictures; they also ran the snaps through their computer program. The people ranked the pictures according to emotion, but the machine used a complex algorithm to examine the photo's color, composition, saturation, number of people, and even the type of Insta filter used. The machine was able to pick out the depressed people with a much higher degree of accuracy than the real people.
What gave the depressed user away? As you might guess, the pictures of people with depression were darker hued, had more blues and grays, and were less bright, suggesting a bleaker outlook. But there were some surprises. The more comments a post received, for example, the more likely the poster was depressed — yet the more likes a post got, the less likely the poster was depressed. (The study didn't say what it meant if you get a lot of likes and comments.) The choice of filter was also a big clue, with "Valencia" being the most popular among non-depressed individuals and "Inkwell" being the top pick for depressives.
And then there were the number of people in the photo. Those suffering from depression were surprisingly more likely to post more pictures of faces, but the number of people in each shot was lower, perhaps indicating a smaller social circle.
But don't go playing amateur psychologist on your friends' Insta accounts for now. Study authors Reece and Danforth cautioned that none of this is meant to treat or even to diagnose depression — yet.
"We foresee a more mature version of this tool being used more in the context of screening and assessment, rather than treatment," they told the Daily Dot. "The algorithm we used looks for complex, systemic patterns across many data points to infer clues about individual psychology. If someone posts a dark, bluish photo to Instagram, it shouldn't necessarily be a red flag — that person could just like photos of whales or blueberries."
Fair enough! Whales and blueberries are pretty awesome.