Veterinary students endure several years of education and training before obtaining their Doctor of Veterinary Medicine degree -- which bestows a DVM designation -- and subsequently a license to practice. If you want to become a veterinarian, you will need to complete a number of educational requirements and gain some hands-on experience to familiarize yourself with the medical care of animals.
High School Preparation
High school education should consist of mathematics courses in addition to science courses such as biology and chemistry. Completing as many math and science courses as possible at the high school level will strengthen your education in preparation for veterinary-related college courses. While in high school, enhance your veterinary education with an after-school or summer job at an animal hospital, farm, pet store, research lab, stable, veterinary clinic or zoo. Volunteering at local animal rescues, animal shelters, humane societies or veterinary clinics also would give you further education and first-hand experience in animal care.
If you plan to attend college, you do not need to major in a veterinary-related field or obtain a bachelor's degree to gain admittance into a veterinary school, but you must complete a certain number of undergraduate credits before attending a school with accreditation from the American Veterinary Medical Association. Exact requirements can vary. Contact an accredited veterinary college to find out the coursework you need to complete for admission into that college. While a veterinary college may not require a 4.0 GPA for admission, high grades may boost your chances. Most veterinary colleges require applicants to take the Graduate Record Examination, called GRE, with some also mandating the Biology GRE. Rather than the GRE, some schools use the Medical College Admission Test or Veterinary College Admission Test. Contact your veterinary school of choice to find out the exam you must take.
Veterinary colleges require students to take three years of classroom, clinical and laboratory work. Classroom studies include subjects such as normal animal anatomy and physiology, immunology, parasitology, and pharmacology. You also will learn about preventing disease, diagnosing medical conditions, and treating animals. Aside from science courses, you also may learn business-management and career-development aspects of running a successful veterinary practice. Your fourth and final year in a veterinary medicine program will include clinical rotations in a veterinary hospital or medical center. Upon successfully completing the program, you will earn your DVM degree.
Once you have your DVM degree and have performed a sufficient number of clinical hours, you will work toward obtaining your license to practice veterinary medicine. After applying for and passing the North American Veterinary Licensing Examination, find out any additional licensing requirements of the state in which you intend to work as a veterinarian. Once you have your license, you may want more professional experience via internships or residency programs before starting your own practice.
- David De Lossy/Photodisc/Getty Images