Any of various supposed therapeutic uses of music
Music therapy is the clinical and evidence-based use of music interventions to accomplish individualized goals within a therapeutic relationship by a credentialed professional who has completed an approved music therapy program. Music therapy is an allied health profession and one of the expressive therapies, consisting of an interpersonal process in which a certified music therapist uses music and all of its facets—physical, emotional, mental, social, aesthetic, and spiritual—to help clients to improve or maintain their health. Music therapists primarily help clients improve their health across various domains by using music experiences to achieve treatment goals and objectives. It is considered both an art and a science, with a wide qualitative and quantitative research literature base incorporating areas such as clinical therapy, biomusicology, musical acoustics, music theory, psychoacoustics, embodied music cognition, aesthetics of music, and comparative musicology. Referrals to music therapy services may be made by other health care professionals such as physicians, psychologists, physical therapists, and occupational therapists. Clients can also choose to pursue music therapy services without a referral.
U.S. National Library of Medicine
The use of music as an adjunctive therapy in the treatment of neurological, mental, or behavioral disorders.
The numerical value of music therapy in Chaldean Numerology is: 7
The numerical value of music therapy in Pythagorean Numerology is: 5
Sample Sentences & Example Usage
She attributes a lot of her healing to the music therapy that she received during treatment.
I think more hospitals will start offering music therapy as the research foundation is growing, and there has been good research.
For children experiencing emotional neglect, music therapy can provide them with a chance to be heard and responded to in a safe, fun, and non-threatening context.
Engaging in music therapy with a trained therapist offers (parents) the chance to learn new skills in responding to children, and practice them in a live and real way.
Images & Illustrations of music therapy
Translations for music therapy
From our Multilingual Translation Dictionary
Get even more translations for music therapy »
Find a translation for the music therapy definition in other languages:
Select another language:
Discuss these music therapy definitions with the community:
Word of the Day
Would you like us to send you a FREE new word definition delivered to your inbox daily?
Use the citation below to add this definition to your bibliography:
"music therapy." Definitions.net. STANDS4 LLC, 2017. Web. 27 Jun 2017. <http://www.definitions.net/definition/music therapy>.