Moving to Renewable Heat Technologies: the Renewable Heat Incentive
Dependent as we are on fossil fuels to power our homes, streets and businesses, they are a finite...
In The Restaurant Starting Blocks with McDonald’s: New Consultancy Project
To receive a word-of-mouth recommendation is to be trusted to do a good job. This was certainly the...
Helping Organisations To Become ESOS Compliant By December Deadline
The December 2015 deadline for the government’s compulsory Energy Savings Opportunity Scheme...
Expanding With IKEA: New Order & Collection Point Developments
In early 2015 we were given the opportunity by global furniture giant IKEA to partner with them on...
Is LED Lighting Always the Answer?
One of the most important aspects to Synergy’s building and engineering services consultancy is...
Display Energy Certificate (DEC)
Display Energy Certificates (DECs) show the actual energy usage of a public building (the Operational Rating) and allow the public to see the energy efficiency of a building. This is based on the energy consumption of the building as recorded by gas, electricity and other meters. The DEC should be displayed at all times in a prominent place clearly visible to the public. A DEC is always accompanied by an Advisory Report that lists cost effective measures to improve the energy rating of the building.
DECs are only required for buildings with a total useful floor area greater than 500 m2, that are occupied by a public authority or an institution providing a public service to a large number of people, and are frequently visited by members of the public. DECs are valid for one year. The accompanying Advisory Report is valid for 7 years
Widely seen as a vital tool in driving energy efficiency in buildings, DECs are currently required only in buildings occupied by the public sector over 500 m2. Evidence is already emerging of the value of DECs in those buildings, with many achieving substantial year-on-year reductions in energy costs and improvements to their ratings